                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CYCLICAL BEHAVIOR OF PRICES AND
              QUANTITIES IN THE AUTOMOBILE MARKET


                      Olivier   J. Blanchard

                         Angelo Melino



                     Working Paper No. 1325




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 1984




We thank Alan Zekelman for research assistance, the National
Science Foundation, the Sloan Foundation and the University of
Toronto for financial assistance. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1325
                                               April 1984




                    Cyclical Behavior of Prices and
                  Quantities in the Automobile Market



                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper has a simple goal, that of understanding the joint behavior

of prices and quantities in a particular market. More precisely, it examines

whether we can find decision problems for suppliers and buyers, together with

a market equilibrium structure, which are consistent with the observed price

and quantity time series. Because of the relative homogeneity of the

product, of the size of the market, end of the quality of the data, the

market chosen is the automobile market.

     The first conclusion we reach is that this goal is difficult to achieve.

The behavior of prices appears inconsistent with simple ——   competitive,
monopolistically competitive or monopolistic —— market structures. Prices

appear, in a well defined sense, to be too "sticky".

     We then consider potentiai. explanations and extensions. None appears

completely satisfactory. In particular, the introduction of costs of

changing prices does not seem able to explain the joint behavior of prices

and quantities.



          Olivier J. Bianchard                    Angelo Melino
          Dept. of Economics                      Institute for Quantitative
          M.I.T.                                     Analysis
          Cambridge, MA 02139                     1O rreorge Etreet
          (617) 2—RQ1                             Toronto ON M5S141
                                                   (16 Q7P—641
     This paper examines the dynamic behavior of prices and quantities in the

automobile market. The macroeconomic tradition has been to estimate reduced form

equations, that is price and quantity equations. Research on prices and research

on quantities have however proceeded largely independently and, as a result,

variables explaining prices are sometimes different from variables explaining

quantities. It appears more useful to focus on the supply and demand schedules

themselves, or even, to borrow an expression coined by Sargent [1983], to go

beyond supply and demand and to determine what decision problems for suppliers

and buyers are consistent with the observed price and quantity time series.

     Although our interest is ultimately in macroeconomic fluctuations, we have

decided to study a particular market. Only by looking at a market in which a

relatively homogeneous product is traded can we have some hope of using a

reliable specification and reliable data on prices and quantities. The

automobile market, or more precisely the North American market for American

automobiles, is such a market: good data on production and sales as well as

decent data for prices are available monthly for a long period of time.

     As automobiles are durable goods, both sides of the market face

intertemporal decision problems. Consumers must decide not only whether to

purchase a car or not, but also when to purchase it. Faced for example with a

decline in prices, they have to assess whether the decline is temporary, in which

case they will change the timing of their purchases, or whether it is permanent.

Suppliers must decide not only how much to sell, but also how much to produce.

Faced with a decline in demand for example, they have to assess whether it is

temporary, in which case they may not change their production schedule much, but

use inventories instead, or whether it is permanent. Section I formalizes the
                                                                           2




decision problem of consumers and shows its implications. Section II does the

same for suppliers.

     We then characterize market equilibrium. The structural model, derived from

the first order conditions of consumers and suppliers tells us that current

production, sales and prices depend on three sets of variables: they depend on

exogenous variables, on lagged state variables, such as the stocks of cars held

by suppliers and by consumers, and on their own   expected   values in the following

period. Thus, to perform estimation, we must first derive a reduced form

expressing production, sales and prices as a function of the state variables, and

of current and lagged exogenous variables. This is done in Section III under the

assumption of rational expectations.

     Not only does the model tell us which current and which lagged variables

enter the reduced form, it has also strong implications for the signs of the

coefficients. Thus it tells us how to look at the time series properties of

prices and quantities, and what to look for. Unconstrained reduced forms are

estimated and presented in Section IV. Most qualitative implications of the

model are confirmed except one: There is substantial serial correlation in the

residuals of the price equation, thus evidence of what is usually referred to as

"price stickiness". This suggests to us two possibilities. The first is that

the model is correctly specified but that our price series is a mediocre proxy

for the correct price series. The second is that the model is incorrectly

specified, that the serial correlation hides the role of prices as lagged

dependent variables and that firms really face some form of costs of adjusting

either nominal prices, real prices, or mark ups. The rest of the paper examines

these two possibilities.
                                                                         3




     Section V considers the case of measurement error. We may either drop the

price equation and do estimation using only quantity equations, or we may assume

that the measurement error is uncorrelated with exogenous variables and lagged

disturbances, and keep the price equation allowing for measurement error. We

perform estimation for both cases. In the first case, dropping the price

equation prevents us from learning about absolute convexities of the various

components of cost and utility (heuristically, about the absolute slopes of

demand and supply curves), but we can still learn about their relative

convexities. The structural estimates we obtain are reasonable, and for the most

part, consistent with previous studies. In the second case, if we keep the price

equation, we can learn about absolute convexities. The estimates imply

implausibly small convexities (heuristically, implausibly flat demand and supply

curves); this is how the model "explains" the weak effect of state and exogenous

variables on prices.

     In Section VI, we consider the alternative possibility that prices are

correctly measured and do indeed adjust more slowly then predicted by the initial

model. We want to see whether the presence of costs of adjustment for prices

could explain the behavior of prices and quantities. Of course, even if they

did, this would clearly leave open the issue of what these costs really stand for

as physical costs of changing prices appear to be very small. As suppliers are

now price setters, we cannot characterize the equilibrium as competitive. Thus

we characterize suppliers as time consistent monopolists. Section VII estimates

the modified model. Perhaps not surprisingly, this model suffers from a problem

opposite to that of the original model. As lagged prices are now state

variables, we can explain the price equation satisfactorily .   The model however

implies an effect of lagged prices on both sales and production which does not
                                                                      4



appear in the data. Section VIII summarizes what we have and have not learned

and shows some implications of our estimated structural parameters.
                                                                            5




Section I. The Behavior of Consumers
    We formalize the automobile market as a market in which consumers buy only

American cars and in which suppliers, that is producers and dealers, sell cars

only in America. We also assume initially that the market is competitive. The

adequacy of these assumptions for the sample period we consider will be discussed

in Section IV.

    Each consumer faces each period a discrete choice, that of buying or not

buying a car. As we do not want to formalize this discrete choice problem, we

formalize the behavior of a fictional aggregate consumer. He maximizes the

expected present value of utility and his decision problem is stated as follows:2


     max E ('u+tQt) ,                  < 1     where


                          +                    +
              Ao(Ct,          Ai(Xt,               A2(S,   E2t)
     AOc >0,A0cc<0;Alx>0,Alxx<0;A2s <0,A2ss<0
subject to:

          =
              0X
              S,
                   +          and

     At+i = p(A +              -        - c)
where
        C is consumption, excluding car services, which will, for short, be

        referred to as "consumption".

              is the stock of cars, and by appropriate normalization, the flow of car

     services.

     S is the quantity of cars purchased.

              is the relative price of cars in terms of C.
                                                                         6




          is income.

    At is financial wealth.

          is equal to both (i+rY1 and (1+6)1, where r is the interest rate

     and 6 the subjective discount rate.

                  are disturbances; each is the sum of three components, a
    C0,   E, c2
     deterministic time trend, a deterministic seasonal and a white noise

     disturbance.

          is the information set at time t.

    What are the main characteristics of this decision problem?

     First, utility is additively separable in time. We exclude interest rate

effects, as we assume that the interest rate is constant and equal to the

subjective discount rate.

     In each period, utility is the sum of three components. The first two give

the utility derived from consumption (c) and car services (x), respectively;

marginal utility is a decreasing function of each. The third captures costs of

adjustment. Although it is not clear what costs of adjustment a consumer

actually faces, there is substantial evidence of slow adjustment as would be

implied by costs of adjustment (see for example Bernanke [1981] for estimation of

a model similar to this one, also for automobiles but using panel data). For

convenience, we formalize them as a negative utility of purchases, rather than as

a cost in the budget constraint. Marginal disutility is an increasing function

of the quantity of cars purchased (s).

     Finally, the consumer faces two accumulation equations. The first is for

the stock of cars and assumes constant exponential depreciation. Empirical
                                                                                            7


evidence   (Wylcoff [1973]) suggests that the depreciation rate is higher in the

first year than in later years; we have not taken this into account. The second

is the accumulation equation for financial wealth.

       We allow for disturbances in each of the three utility terms. They,

together with supply disturbances will allow us to justify the presence of

trends, seasonals and disturbances in the reduced form.



First order conditions

       Deriving the first order conditions at time t and rearranging gives two

conditions:

                           E
       A0 (ci, c0) =           [
                                   A0   (c+1, t+1)        ]

and:




                                                                                        I
       A1 (xi,   c1)   +
                           A2      (x   - ex1,   c2) -   eE   [   A          -
                                                                                 ext,   c) I
                       = Pt A0 (ce, c0) - 8E [ Pt÷i A0 (c÷1,

       The first condition is the standard one: As the interest rate, in terms of

C, equals the discount rate, the level of C must be such that there is no

expected change in the marginal utility of consumption.

       To understand the second one, consider first the case where A2 is

identically equal to zero. Consumers choose a stock                   so as to equalize marginal

utility of car services to the user cost. The user cost is defined as the

difference between the current price in terms of marginal utility of consumption,

and the expected price, also in terms of marginal utility and allowing for

discounting and depreciation. If the marginal utility of consumption is

constant, the user cost is simply P —            9E               .   In   the presence of
                                                                                      8



adjustment costs, the desired stock depends not only on the user cost but also on

itself lagged and itself expected one period ahead.



Linearized first order conditions

      As we want to have a linear model, in order to solve it under rational

expectations, we have to linearize the first order conditions. We linearize

around sample mean values. Deviations from sample means are composed of both

deterministic (trend and seasonal) and stochastic components. Let the same

letters as before denote now the stochastic components of the variables, so that

St for example is now the stochastic component of car purchases.                 Let us also

ignore, for the moment and for notational simplicity, the deterministic

components in the linearized first order conditions.

      Define:


      a1         Ai/A0c; a2 E _A2 /A0; a0                   -P (i-0) A0/A0

                    (+A1 Lit +    Aa   C2t —        (i-e) A0 c0t)/Ao
we have:

                +                      -            -                        =
(1)   (a1           (1+ 02)a2)Xt           ®a2Xti       0a2 E(Xt+iIQt)
                                             + EE              +
                                                                   a0C
                                                                         +


            =         -
      St         Xt       ext_i
      The parameters a0, a1 , a2 are all positive and measure the curvature of each

of the three components of utility. Equation (i) tells us that the stock depends

on itself lagged and itself expected next period, on the user cost, on the level

of consumption and on a composite disturbance term, which as structural

disturbances are white, is also white. The "structural" parameters of the
                                                                          9




consumer problems are therefore (e,   , a0,   a1, a2). Heuristically, the level of

(a1, a2) determines the elasticity of demand to price. More precisely, equation

(i) implies that doubling (a1, a2) will simply halve the size of the response of

purchases to prices, but leave the shape of the dynamic response unchanged. The

shape of this dynamic response depends on the ratio of a1 to a2.
                                                                                 10




Section II. The Behavior of Firms3



     For the sample period we consider, American automobiles are produced by four

companies, organized in ten divisions. In each division, manufacturers produce

the cars and do not hold substantial inventories; inventories are held by

dealers.

     Because of data limitations, in particular the absence of reliable price

series at the division or the company level, we aggregate all divisions together.

Furthermore, we assume that for each division, there is a shadow competitive

market between dealers and producers. As a result, we formalize suppliers as one

firm taking both production and sales decisions. This firm maximizes the

expected present value of cash flows and its decision problem is stated as

follows:


     max E(                k2)       ,    < 1   where:


            PtSt —     WtBo't              —Bi t—t—1          B2(It_i_   b3St,


     B0y >0, BOyy>0

     oB1/o(Y-Y1)          B1
                                     0 as Y -          0; B1> 0


                                         0 as I— b3S     0; B2..> 0
     oB2/o(11—B3S)             B2.


     b3 > 0



subject to:

                   +
     It =   It_i       Yt_ St
                                                                            11




where the new symbols introduced are:

         the production of cars

         the (producer—dealers) inventory of cars

         the real wage

0' 2 are disturbances. Each is the sum of three components, a
deterministic trend, a seasonal, and a white noise disturbance.

     Cash flow is the difference between revenues and costs. There are three

types of costs. The first, B0, is the standard convex cost of production,

multiplied by the real wage. The second, B1 ,   is   a convex cost associated with

changes in the level of production. The third, B2, is a convex cost of being

away from target inventory; target inventory is assumed to be a linear function

of sales, with marginal desired inventory to sales ratio of b3. These three

types of costs have been found to be important in previous studies (Blanchard

[1983]). The first two costs imply that, ceteris paribus, the firm would prefer

a constant level of production and thus tend to stabilize production. The third

cost implies that, ceteris paribus, the firm would prefer to adjust production so

as to maintain a constant marginal inventory to sales ratio. This creates an

accelerator effect of sales on production and thus tends to destabilize

production.

     Firms face one accumulation equation, giving the behavior of inventories of

new cars. It is assumed that cars do not depreciate until they are sold t

consumers.
                                                                              12




First order conditions.

       Define    as the lagrange multiplier associated with the accumulation

equation at time t.            is a shadow price of inventories and is therefore, under

our assumptions about dealers and producers, the price at which dealers purchase

cars from producers. Deriving the first order conditions at time t gives three

conditions:
                                                                         =
       WtB(Yt1ot)
                      +
                          B1   (Yt-Yi,it)- E
          + b3B2±(It 1_b3St,r)2t) =

          = - E [B2(I_b3St+i,12t+i)!Qtl + E [x+1IQ]

       The first equation characterizes production. Consider the case where there

are no costs to changing production, so that B1           0. Then production is such       $


that   the marginal cost equals the shadow price of inventories. If B1 is differen

from zero, then production depends also on itself lagged and itself expected one

period ahead. The second condition characterizes sales.          Sales must be such that

the sum of the price and the marginal cost of being away from target inventory

equals the shadow price. The last condition characterizes the dynamics of this

shadow price of end of period inventory. The shadow price equals the expected

discounted marginal benefit (which can be positive or negative) of having that

level of inventory at the beginning of the next period, plus the expected

discounted value of the shadow price next period.



Linearized first order conditions.

       We now linearize these first order conditions around the sample means.       If


we now define:
                                                                                               13




                          E B1;
       t
             V B; b1                 b2        B2..; b B
                  y -B
             —WB OOt lilt +bB r
                            322t
         E   - b3Bii2t

we have, after elimination of                 and linearization, and ignoring again, for

notational convenience, deterministic components:

(2) (bi(l+)+bo)Yt —         biYt   r b1E [+1]          Pt_ bW+ b2b3(It 13S)+ t
(3)                                       +
                                              b2b3(Ii_b3S)
                                                                 =   E [+1±]         —     +



      The parameters b0,b1,b2 are all positive and measure the curvature, or

convexity of each of the three components of costs. b is also positive and

measures the sample mean marginal cost of production. As                       and       are linear

combinations of structural disturbances which have white noise stochastic

components, they also have white noise stochastic components. The elimination of

the shadow price X. from the first order conditions makes equations (2) and (3)

more difficult to interpret.

      The "structural" parameters of the firm's problem are therefore

(p,b,b0,b1, b2,b3). Heuristically, the level of (b0,b1,b2) determines the


elasticity of supply with respect to prices; more precisely, equations (2) and

(3) implies that doubling (b0,b1 ,b2) will halve the size of the response of sales

and production to prices, leaving the shape of the dynamic response unchanged.

This shape depends on b3 and the ratios of b0 and b1to b2.
                                                                         14




Section III. Market equilibrium, structural and reduced forms.

     Given market equilibrium, and given income for consumer8, real wages for

firm8, and disturbances, our model allows us to solve for the behavior of car

sales, car production, car prices, and consumption of non—car services. We shy

away from estimating the complete model and characterize only the behavior of car

sales, production and prices, given consumption of non—car services, real wages

and disturbances. (Taking consumption (C) as given raises econometric issues to

which we shall return.)

     Market equilibrium is then characterized by the three linearized first order

conditions, equations (1) to (3), and the two accumulation equations for stocks, X

and I. If b1 is different from zero, which we shall assume, the system can be

written in the following matrix form:



     xt                       xt_1

     It                       It-i



                              ____      +
                                                 rc1 + D
                    A                        B       J


                  (6x6)                     (6x2) LWtJ (6x3)
  ES+i t
  E(Y+ilQt)

  E(Pt+iIQt)


     The elements of the matrices A, B, D depend on the structural parameters,

namely cxO,; a0,a1,a2,b0,b1,b,b2,b3). The matrices are given in Appendix A.

The first two equations are the accumulation equations; the third is simply the

identity ''      introduced   for convenience. The next three equations are the

first order conditions, which give (S,Yt,Pt) as functions of their expected
                                                                                  15




value in the next period, of the state variables X1, I_' '.-1' of the current

values of C., W, and of the disturbances '                   We shall refer to this

matrix system as the structural form of the model. To do estimation, we must now

solve it to obtain an observable reduced form. We proceed in two steps.

Derivation of the reduced form.

     The first step is to derive (St,Y,Pt) as functions of the state

variables (X1,I1,Yi) of current and expected future va1ueof C, Wand of

current disturbances. This is done as follows (this part relies on Blanchard—

Kahn [1980]):

Partition A, B, D such that:


                                                                            0
                A11            A12                  B1

                (3x3)          (3x3)                (3x2)                 (3x3)
                                         B =                 ,   D   =

                A21            A22                  B2                     D2

                (3x3)          (3x3)                (3x2)                 (3x3)



and assume that the information set          includes at least current and lagged

values of all variables in the above matrix system.

     Let fl and J be the eigenvector and the eigenvalue matrices associated with

A. Order the diagonal elements of J by increasing absolute value. Partition J

and fl conformably to A so that:

                                                                     12
             p121       rAil      A121   -               1

     L21     22j        LA21      A22J         L0     2J     L21

     If   (C,W) follows a stationary process, (s,Y,P) will follow a stationary

process if and only if A has exactly three roots on each side of the unit circle.

We know that this condition holds in this case because the market solution is
                                                                               16




equivalent to the solution of a central planning problem (this equivalence will

not hold when we extend the model; whether the condition holds will then become

an empirical question). In this case, the solution is given by:


      St                   xt_1                                      C
             =
()    Yt         2221      't-i         22 0J22iBi+fl22B2                       l)
                                                                         t+i
      Pt                   Yt—1




                 22 22 D2 t
                                  cYt




     The next step is to solve for the unobservable expectations of future C and

W. We make the following joint hypothesis: (1) The information set             includes

only current and lagged values of the variables in the structural form. (2) Ct

and W are uncorrelated with current and lagged disturbances

     We   know that this joint hypothesis cannot be exactly correct. In

particular, we know that consumption will in general depend on the utility

disturbances, c'        £2, of which     is a linear combination. Whether this

implies a large correlation between C and      depends on the relative size of the

variances of the c's and the consumer "structural" parameters. We shall maintain

the hypothesis because it might hold approximately and is convenient. We shall

however test the exogeneity of (C,W) with respect to (s,Y,P). Rejection of

exogeneity would imply rejection of the joint hypothesis.
                                                                                          17




        Under the joint hypothesis, the projection of                       and W.tOn   is the same

as the projection on current and lagged values of C and W. We assume that

(ci, w) has a kth order autoregressive bivariate representation, which we write

directly in quasi—first order form:

Define            =
                      [c,       w] and             =
                                                       {cI.:.. tk+11
then:


                                            H1 ... Hk             t1        U
                                                        o         .
                                                                            a
                                    =                                   +


             't-k+1                                               t-k
or using more concise notation:



then:
                 =H             +
                                             t     =
                                                       [i   0..




        E                 )   =E        t+i't = H'
Replacing in (4) gives the following observable reduced form:

(6)
            St
                      =
                              22 2i         't-l
                                                        _220J221B1+ H22B2)o       H')

            Pt                              Yt-1




                               —1

                          — I122J2 1121D2

                                                   tt
The observable reduced form gives (S,Y,P) as a function of (xt1,I1,Y1),

current and lagged values, up to (k-i) lags, of Cand W, and of white noise

disturbances. What are the restrictions imposed by the model?
                                                                           18




      If, as we assume, there are no restrictions on the contemporaneous

covariance matrix of structural disturbances, then there are no restrictions on

the contemporaneous covariance matrix of the disturbances of the reduced form.

      We have, for notational convenience, ignored the deterministic components.

They are however present in the reduced form. Again, our assumption that

disturbances may have different trends and have unconstrained seasonal components

implies that the structural model imposes no restrictions on trends or seasonals

in the reduced form.

      The restrictions of the model are on the coefficients of (x1 '_

and       The coefficients on the state variables are function only of the set of

structural parameters, a (3 ,9; a0,a1 ,a2,b,b0,b1 ,b2,b3). The coefficients on

current and lagged C and W depend on both a and H. This dependence is clearly a

complicated one.



From reduced form to structural parameters: identification.

      Given the non-linearity of the mapping from structural parameters t the

reduced form, we must discuss the issue of identification. Parameters of H, that

is of the (c,w) process, are clearly identified, as (5) can be estimated

directly. We shall assume values for e and    of .98 in both cases. The issue

is thus identification of (a0,a1,a2,b,b0,b1,b2,b3). This was studied as an

example in another paper on identification (Blanchard [1982]) and the results are

reported here:

      All parameters in (a0,a1,a2,b,b0,b1,b2,b3) are almost always identified (the

rank condition may not be satisfied if some of them have value of zero). This

remains true for all parameters except a0 and b if coefficients on current and

lagged C and W are left unconstrained.
                                                                        19




     If we ignore the price equation and estimate only the production and sales

equations, b3 is still identified but (a0,a1,a2,b,b0,b1,b2) are identified only

up to a scale factor. That is, two markets in which these parameters differ only

by a scale factor will, if we limit ourselves to quantities, be observationally

equivalent. A lower scale factor corresponds to "flatter demand and supply

curves": it will imply less movement in prices but will not affect the behavior

of quantities.
                                                                              20




Section IV.   Evidence   from the Reduced Form



     Before   turning to the reduced form   evidence,   we briefly describe the data,

describe our treatment of deterministic components and test for exogeneity of C

and W.

The Data

     Our assumption that endogenous and exogenous variables follow stable

stationary processes is justified only in the absence of major changes in market

structure. Thus, we start the sample period in 1966—i, after a major

reorganization in production, and end in 1979-12, before (or at least not long

after the beginning of) the large increase in the share of imports.

     As production is rather arbitrarily distributed between the U.S. and Canada,

we must look at North America as a whole.5 Our production and sales series are

thus for North America. Our theoretical model ignores the possibility that cars

may be sold outside of America. In fact, during the sample period, sales outside

of America averaged 1 .8 of total sales, with no apparent trend in this ratio.

Thus, in our empirical work, we do not explicitly include these sales; we treat

them as if they were sales to American consumers.

     As we do monthly estimation, we need monthly series for the other variables.

These series are however available for the U.S. and not for Canada. We therefore

use U.S. series as proxies for American series. The price series is the new car

price component of the CPI, constructed by BLS, which attempts to measure the

transaction price rather than the list price; in particular it takes into account

dealer concessions, either in the form of discounts or over—allowance of trade—

ins; the deflator we use to get a relative price is the PCE deflator.
                                                                           21




     C is personal consumption expenditures; although C is conceptually

consumption of non—car services, we have preferred to make no adjustment to the

series, as no simple adjustment is available. Finally, I is the automobile

industry real wage, in terms of the PCE deflator.

     A detailed description of the data and data sources is given in appendix B.



Deterministic components

     All equations, those of the reduced form and those describing the (c,w)

process have unconstrained seasonal dummies and time trends. Time trends are

assumed to be cubic in time. Sales and production display practically no time

trend. The cubic term is important only for the price series: Relative prices

steadily decline until approximately 1973 and their trend value appears constant

since then.

     There is one additional component that was not considered in the model but

appears in the data: there were four major strikes during the sample period. A

complete treatment would formalize when and how they were anticipated; we stop

short of doing this and simply allow for dummies for all months of each strike,

as well as for the month preceding and the month following each strike.

Coefficients on these dummies are of some interest and are reported in appendix

B.




Exogeneity tests

     Ye have seen that under the joint hypothesis of the last section, C and    I
should   be exogenous with respect to (s,Y,P). More precisely, the joint

hypothesis implies G(L) = 0 in:
                                                                                    22




                        =   H(L)            +   G(L)    'i—i    + u

                  LWd               Lw-i]              LP1J
       We consider lag lengths of 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and consider two test statistics.

The first is the likelihood ratio test statistic X = T                £n ( R /           )
and the other is X'         CT-K)    An ( 'R                   I) where K is the number of

coefficients in each equation of the unconstrained model. It has been suggested

that if K is large in relation to T, X' is more reliable (Nelson and Schwert

[1983]). We find X to be significant at all lag lengths, X' to be insignificant,

except marginally at lag length of 4. Relying on X', we decide to maintain the

assumption of exogeneity. Detailed results and a further discussion of the

properties of X and X' are given in Appendix C. Based also on likelihood ratio

tests, we choose a lag length of 4 to characterize the process for (C,W).6



Reduced form evidence

       Table 1 gives the reduced form regressions for (s,y.p), each of them

estimated by OLS. Given the assumption of a lag length of 4 for (c,w), the

reduced form includes current and up to 3 lagged values of C and W. The

coefficients on state variables depend only on structural parameters and thus,

the model strongly suggests signs for these coefficients7 .             The coefficients on

the exogenous variables are functions of both the structural parameters and the

parameters of the (C,w) process; the model still suggests likely signs, on the

sums   of   coefficients on C and W for example.
Table    1.       Unconstrained reduced form estimation.       Original model.

                                                                     3                  3

                                                           C                     W                R2      SSR    D.W.
                                X_1      I_       Y_1               i=1   C             i=1
                                                                                              W
S       mean:       7.72        -.03      .00      .25     6.3      -1.2         .00    .00       .89     28.7   1.65

      (oLs)                     (.01)    (.04)    (.05)    (i.o)              (.02)

Y       mean:       7.74        -.03     -.32      .41     3.0           .4   -.01      .08       .88     64.5    1.98

      (oLs)                     (.01)     (.06)   (.08)    (1.5)              (.04)



P       mean:       87.48      —.15      —.07      .14    -2.3           .1      .27    .18       .99    110.1     .73

      (oLs)                    (.02)     (.08)    (.10)    (1.9)              (.06)

                                                                                                                 (p)   —
(p)                            -.12      -.22      .15      -.6      1.3         .10    .20       .99     44.7     .80

      (oLs)                    (.04)     (.10)    (.07)    (1.17)             (.04)
                           —
      Mean                     379.2     19.48    7.74      7.44              112.73

Is the sign consistent            with predictions of the model?


              S                 Yes       ———      Yes      Yes

              Y                 Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes                   Yes

              P                 Yes       Yes      No       No                    Yes


Period of estimation: 1966—5 to 1979—12                              Monthly dummies, strike dummies, t,t2,t3.
                                                                         24



     Consider first the two quantity equations. The signs on the coefficients of

the state variables are all consistent with the model. High producers'

inventories depress production and increase sales, both tending to reduce the

initial high level of inventories. High consumers' inventories depress both

purchases and production. High levels of production in the previous month

increase production this month, because of costs of changing production; they

also lead firms to increase sales. The signs of the sums of coefficients on

consumption are also consistent with the model: Higher consumption leads to

higher sales and production. Real wages have no noticeable effects on either

sales or production.

     The price equation is however in substantial contradiction with the model.

Consumers' and dealers' inventories decrease the price, an effect consistent with

the model. The effect of lagged production, as well as the effect of consumption

are inconsistent with the model. The main problem is however the low Durbin-

Watson, indicative either of serial correlation unexplained by the model, or of

misspecification.

     Table 1 presents us with a problem and a puzzle. The problem is the

inconsistency of the price equation with the model. The puzzle is the

inconsistency of estimated price and quantity equations. How can there be serial

correlation in the price but not in the quantity equations? How can high values

of lagged production lead to both higher sales and an increase in the price of

cars? We can think of three possible explanations, which we consider in turn

before turning to structural estimation of the models implied by two of them.
                                                                         25




How to reconcile observed price and quantity behavior?

     The first possibility is to allow for serial correlation in the structural

disturbance teruis. Although this would in general lead to serial correlations in

all reduced form equations, combinations of structural parameters and serial

correlation coefficients may produce serial correlation only in the price

equation.8 We do not find this extension particularly attractive. "Explaining"

serial correlation in prices by unexplained serial correlation of disturbances

does not appear useful. We do not consider this direction further.

     The second is suggested by the consistency of the quantity equations with

the model. It is simply that prices are measured with error. This is clearly an

easy way out br not a totally convincing one. The price series is carefully

constructed. It responds as we expect t lagged consumers' and dealers'

inventories, and it responds quite strongly, as appendix A shows, to events such

as strikes. We nevertheless consider this direction in the next section.

     The third starts from the premise that serial correlation may hide the role

of the lagged price as a dependent variable. The lagged price could be a state

variable if firms face or perceive costs of adjusting prices. We explore this

direction in sections VI and Vu.9
                                                                         26



Section V. Structural Estimation

       Efficient estimation implies joint estimation of the process generating

(c,w) (equation (5)), and of the constrained reduced form characterizing the

process generating (s,Y,p) (equation 6). Since both the parameters in the

covariance matrix and the deterministic components are unrestricted we can

concentrate the likelihood function in the usual fashion. The concentrated

likelihood function depends on the 16 parameters of H and the 8 structural

parameters (e0,a1 ,a2,b,b0,b1 ,b2,b3). Joint estimation is still difficult and we

use the 2—step method which is simpler but less efficient. We estimate H in

equation (5) by OLS and then replace H by the estimated H in equation (6). The

second step implies therefore maximization over the 8 structural parameters only.

One disadvantage of this method is that the reported standard errors would be

correct only if H was known exactly, and will therefore understate the true

standard errors. Also, likelihood ratio tests of the overidentifying

restrictions imposed by the structural model will be biased towards rejecting

these restrictions.



In this section, we carry out estimation under the assumption that prices are

measured with error.



Estimation without the price equation

       As explained in our earlier discussion of identification, dropping the price

equation implies that the structural parameters (a0,a1,a2,b,b0,b1,b2) are

identified only up to a scale factor. We therefore choose the normalization

   =   1.   The results are reported in table 2.

       The upper part reports the constrained and unconstrained reduced forms; the
Table   2.      Estimation of structural model using only quantity equations.

Implied reduced form                                                                    3                              3
                                                                                 C                      w
                                     x_1                         Y_1                   1=1
                                                                                             C                     1=1



                                                  .00         .25              6.3     -1.2        .00            .00                               .120
S   unconstrained               -.03                                                                                                        [.175
                                (.01)            (.01)       (.05)             (1.0)              (.02)
                                                                                                                                        =
                                                               .10                     —    .1     .01            .00               L               .393
    constrained                 -.03              .10                          4.4                                                          [.120
Y                               -.03             —.32          .41             3.0          .4    -.01            .08                       E.215   .124
    unconstrained
                                                                                                                                        =
                                (.oi)            (.06)       (.08)             (1.5)              (.04)

    constrained                 -.02             -.24          .43              2.6    -    .1     .04            .00                               .443
                                                                                                                                            [.124

           =           —                                                   =           (x'— 15)// 30        =    5.7
                                             ;
      X                              61.80          (k —   15)/I     30         8.5
               _2(LR       L)
      X        likelihood ratio test statistic

      X'       modified likelihood ratio test statistic




Estimated structural parameters

                                                                                                                            b
                                a0           a1             a2              b0         b1         b2             b3

                               2.01          .007          2.20            .00         1.00       .20            .13        .003
                               (.95)       (.003)          (1.03)         (.00)
                                                                                        '        (.07)          (.35)      (.078)

                           *    by normaiization
                                                                          28



unconstrained reduced form is repeated from table 1. The model is formally

rejected with high confidence: The likelihood ratio test statistic, and the

modified likelihood ratio test statistic are respectively 8 and 5   standard

deviations away from their mean under the null hypothesis. Looking at the

coefficients however, we see that the structural model is able to replicate them

quite accurately: rejection does not come from any single source.1° Our own

conclusion is that the model provides an adequate explanation of the behavior of

quantities.

     The lower part gives the estimated structural parameters which underlie the

constrained reduced form. It is difficult to say just by looking at them whether

they are reasonable. We shall study their implications for the dynamic behavior

of S and Y in the last section. We may already say that they are reasonable and

consistent with existing estimates. The parameters for consumers imply large

costs of adjustment but a substantially larger impact of temporary rather than

permanent changes in prices. Supply parameters can be compared to those in

Blanchard [1983]. Like those, they show no apparent convexity of the cost

function but substantial convexity in costs of changing production. The

convexity of the cost of being away from target inventory is higher, but the

desired marginal target inventory to sales ratio is smaller in the present

study.1 1




Estimation with the price equation, allowing for measurement error.

      If we assume that the measurement error is uncorrelated with current and

lagged values of C and W as well as with lagged disturbances, we can do

estimation keeping the price equation but allowing for serial correlation in the

price equation. We assume that the measurement error leads to an AR(1)
Table   3.   Estimation of structural model with measurement error in the price equation



                            x1               i_        1             c                       w             w
                                                                            i1                       lal

S   unconstrained          -.03              .00       .25        6.3       —1.2             .00    .00                        .175       .120       .000
                           (.01)         (.01)        (.05)       (1.0)                    (.02)
                                                                                                                          P
                                             .10                            —                       .01                        • 1   20
    constrained            -.03                        .09        4.4             .2         .07                                          .393       .010

Y unconstrained           —.03          -.32           .41        3.0            .4        -.01      .08                       .000       .010       • 264
                          (.oi)         (.06)         (.08)       (1.5)                    (.04)

    constrained           —.02          —.24              .43     2.7        -.1             .05     .00                       .216       .125   —   .006

P unconstrained           —.12          —.22           .15         —.6       1.3            1.0      .20        .80   =        .125       .442       .021
                           (.04)        (.10)         (.07)      (1.17)                     (.04)

    constrained             .00           .00             .00        .00      .00            .00     .00        .95           - .006      .021       .343

                                                       =                               =
X                                ;                                               50
                  = 100.32                     f5o
                                     (x-25)/                10.7 ;(x'-25)//                9.7


Estimated    structural     parameters


                          a0            a1           a2         b0         b1              b2                  b
                                                                                                    b3
      1o                  1.87          .007         2.05        .00       .86             .18      .16        .00
                                                                       30



disturbance in the reduced form price equation. The results are reported in

table 3.

     The estimates of coefficients in the quantity equations of the constrained

reduced forms are nearly identical to those given in table 2. Why this is, is

clear from the price equation. Prices are entirely "explained" by the serially

correlated disturbance and thus give no additional information.

     To both fit quantity equations and find no effect of state and exogenous

variables on prices, the model must assume "extremely flat supply and demand

curves". The structural parameters tell us that this is indeed the case. Their

relative values are very similar to those reported in table 2. Their absolute

values however are very small and highly implausible.

     To summarize, dropping the price equation altogether gives reasonable

estimates of relative convexities. Keeping it and allowing for measurement error

does not however allow us to explain the behavior of prices.
                                                                              31




Section VI. Costs of adjusting prices

    The alternative interpretation of the results in table 1 is that serial

correlation in the price equation hides the role of lagged prices as state

variables.

        Three explanations have been suggested in the literature for "price

stickiness", or the apparent effect of lagged prices on current prices. The

first is that there truly are transaction costs (Mussa [1976]), and thus costs to

changing nominal prices. The second is that changes in prices, presumably real

prices, are costly because they lead to unfavorable reactions by consumers. The

third is that, because of oligopolistic behavior, all firms agree not to change

their markups in the face of fluctuations in demand. Each of these three

approaches requires a different formalization. The last two have not however

been formalized, and indeed appear difficult to formalize. Thus our approach,

following Rotemberg [1982], is simply to introduce convex costs of adjusting

nominal or real prices, or mark ups and to see whether such costs can explain the

data.

        Given our introduction o costs of adjusting prices, we have to give up the

assumption that the market is competitive. We assume that all firms act as a

single monopolist; allowing for monopolistic competition instead would make

little difference. This introduces an additional complication: even in the

absence of costs of adjusting prices, a monopolist selling a durable good faces a

problem of time consistency. (This problem was examined by Bulow [1982]). We

assume that the monopolist chooses a time consistent solution, that at any point

of time, he chooses a sequence of current and anticipated prices so as to

maximize its market value. In turn we assume that consumers understand the rule

followed by the monopolist so that the resulting equilibrium is a rational

expectation equilibrium.
                                                                            32



Characterization of the Maximization Problems

      Because the algebra involved is somewhat complicated, it is useful to

describe briefly how we derive the reduced form associated with the time

consistent solution of the maximization problem.

      We first solve for consumers' demand as a function of their lagged stock as

well as of current and expected prices. We then solve for the first order

conditions of the monopolist who takes as given this demand function. If the

monopolist is time consistent, it will each period satisfy the first order

conditions for the first period of his current maximization problem.

      Thus the set of first period first order conditions of the monopolist,

together with the first order condition of the consumer gives us the structural

form of the model. This structural form is then reduced to an observable form by

the same steps as in Section III. The reader uninterested in technical details

can turn directly to the reduced form.

      We first derive the demand function. The consumer problem is the same as in

Section I and thus the linearized first order condition is still:

            + (1                                                        =
      (a1        g2)a2)            X - Ga    X_1 - Oa2       E(Xt+i I

                           +       E         ) + a0C          +


       It   is convenient to reparainetrize it as:

                                                                   =
(7)    (1 + _1) X - 1a1 X1 -                        E(Xt+i   I)
                     a2            e(P+1     1Q1)   + aC     +

      where a,1 is the smallest root of:
        2 -
              ((a1
                      +   (i   +
                                   G2)a2)   / Ga2) a +       =Q

and
      a2 (Oa2)
                                                                                                             33




      This reparametrization allows for an easy factorization which gives the

demand function:


(8) X =                            + a2           a E                 +           +           )   +



(9)   St =    x   -
                      ex1
The maximization problem of the monopolist is now:


max B (
                      ri.. Q.),
                                                  < 1   ,   where:

                          —
                              ex1)          _WtB0(Yt, ii)            _B1(Y_

          _B2(I1 —             b3S 2t —                 B4(Pt_ P_1'

      All derivatives are as before and


      B4 E 6B4/o(P-P1)
                                            0 as (p-P1)              0 ;      B > 0
subject to

      It =    It—i
                      +
                              't       X, +   ex1                    and

          =
                  1a1X1
                                   +
                                       a2
                                            i=0
                                                        B             +
                                                                          ePt÷i   +
                                                                                      a0C+.   I       + a2

The objective function is the same as in Section II, except for the convex cost

      of adjusting real prices. For notational simplicity, we introduce

explicitly only costs of adjusting real prices: costs of adjusting nominal prices

or mark ups lead to additional cost terms and the extension to these cases is

straightforward. The firm faces two constraints, the accumulation equation and

the demand function; S has been eliminated using (9)

      Let X., X1 be the Lagrange multipliers associated with the accumulation

equation and the demand equation respectively. The linearized system of first

order conditions can be written in the following form (if a2, b1, b2, b3 are

different from zero and if b3 different from unity, a condition we shall assume

t be satisfied):
                                                                                34




          Yt                                    Yt-1

          It                                    It-i

          Pt                                    Pt-i
                                                                I—
                                                        + B             +   disturbances


          E(X+1                                 Xxt             L]
                                                xit
          E(Yt+1

          E(Pt+1                                Ft

          E(Xt+1    I                       —



     First     order conditions and matrices A and B are given in appendix A. The

matrices A and B depend on the structural parameters which are now (,
                                                                              a0,a1
for the consumer after our reparametrization and (e, p,       b, b0, b1, b2, b3, b4)
for the firm, where b4 B4 is the degree of convexity of the cost of adjusting

prices.

     This structural form implies that if there exists a unique stationary

solution, it is such that (x,
                                     xj, t'   t' X) depends on the state variables

                   E'_1' X1), current and expected values of C and W and current
disturbances. Such a solution will exist if and only if four roots of A are

inside and five roots of A are outside the unit circle; in the present case, we

cannot know a priori whether this condition will be satisfied.

     This structural form has been derived under the assumption of costs of

adjusting real prices. If there are instead costs of adjusting mark ups, that is

price—wage ratios, the structural form has as forcing variables not only C and

  but also              and E (W+1     as in deciding the current mark up firma take

into account the lagged mark-up which depends on lagged wages and the expected
                                                                                    35




mark—up next period which depends on the expected wage. If there are costs of

adjusting nominal prices, the structural form has as forcing variables C, W,

                 and E              where      is the price level. The reason is again

that nominal prices, which depend directly on ' depend also on the lagged and

the expected price levels.

        Because the price level appears in one of the three cases, we include it in

the information set, which includes therefore current and lagged values of C, W

and IP. Following the same steps as in Section III gives the following reduced

form:


         r Sti
(10)           Y.        =111       'ti
                                                      +   (disturbances)

         L          ]
                                    Pt-i
           =
                {' Wt Pt               t                  '




        The reduced form includes also two equations for X.                   As X. and X
                                                         it and Xxi;
                                                                     .
                                                                                    it      xt
are however unobservable, we do not use these two equations. We have also

replaced X on the right hand side of (10) by S, using S =                  — GX1,     so that

the system (10) is more easily compared to the system (6) in Section III. The

matrix fl1 depends only on the structural parameters (,          0,   a0, a, a2, b,
                            The matrix fl2 depends on both structural parameters and on H,
b1, b2, b3, b4, ).
the matrix characterizing the joint process of (C, W, P). The reduced form is

similar to that of the original model, except for the lagged real price P1,

which is now a state variable and thus appears in all three equations, and for

the presence of the current and lagged price level.
                                                                          36




Section VII. Costs of adjusting prices. Empirical Evidence



     Consider first the results from unconstrained estimation of the reduced

form; the results are reported in the first three lines of Table 4a. The state

variables X1, I and        have effects of the expected sign on sales, production

and prices; this represents an improvement in comparison to the original model.

The state variable P1 has a strong effect on P but no significant effect on the

two quantities S and Y. Turning to the exogenous variables, the sign of the sum

of coefficients on consumption is as expected in the quantity equations, but not

in the price equation. The wage appears to play a role only in the price

equation. Finally the price level appears to be significant in the sales and

price equations. We cannot tell from this reduced form if this is because it

helps predict future consumption and real wages, or because there are costs to

adjusting nominal prices. The large negative coefficient in the price equation,

which implies that an increase in the price level is associated with a decrease

in the real price of cars suggests that the second explanation might be more

plausible.

     The main characteristic of this estimated reduced form is the significant

presence of lagged prices in the price equation but not in the quantity

equations. The question is therefore whether there is a set of structural

parameters which can generate such a result.

     The rest of Table 4a gives the answer to this question. It gives the

implied reduced form from structural estimation under the assumption that there

are costs of adjusting real prices. The answer is very clearly negative. The

modified likelihood ratio test statistic is more than ten standard deviations

from the mean under the null hypothesis. The results of structural estimation
Table 4a.     Estimation with costs of adjusting real prices.                   Implied reduced forms.


                                                                  C                        w             ip
                           x_1          i_       Y_1       P_1                                   1w_            Ip_i

                    S      -.06        - .01     .27      - .07    6.8        -2.4         .0     .0     .49    - .58   .158   .110    .012
                           (.oi)       (.04)    (.05)     (.05)   (1.1)                (.0)             (.21)
Unconstrained
Reduced             Y      -.04        — .32     .38       .11     4.1         .6      -.04       .04    .44    —.52           .366    .015
Forin                      (.02)       (.06)    (.08)     (.07)   (1.7)                                 (.32)

                    P      -.02        -.05     - .03      .77     1 .8        .87         .12    .0    —.55     .54                    .267
                           (.02)       (.05)    (.o'r)    (.06)   (1.4)                (.04)            (.28)


Constrained         S      -.16         .10         .03   —.49     3.4         .35         .05    .01   -.83     .48    .558    .426    .045
Reduced
Form                Y      -.09        -.30         .37   -.28     1   .4      .23         .03    .00   —.55     .32            .688    .031

                    P      -.03        -.19      -.10      .84         .4      .08         .01    .00   —.19     .12                    .334


Table   4b.    Structural parameter estimates


    Consumer:       a0                         2          (a1)         (a2)

                    1.76         .96           1.57         .00        .66



    Producer        b             b0           b1          b2          b3
                     .00      .00              47.2       21.2         .00           209
                                                                                                                                         'N
                                                                         38



under the alternative assumptions that there are costs of adjusting nominal prices

or mark—ups are nearly identical and are not reported. The models are unable to

explain the large effect of lagged prices on current prices without at the same

time implying a large negative effect of prices on both sales and production.

These results cast substantial doubt on the ability of costs of adjusting prices

to explain the joint behavior of prices and quantities.

     The structural parameters associated with structural estimation are reported

in Table 4b. Given the lack of success of the models in explaining the data, we

shall not spend time to discuss them in detail. The parameters characterising

consumer behavior are quite similar to those obtained earlier. The parameters

characterising producer behavior are quite different. Not surprisingly, given

the price equation, they show a very high cost to changing prices.
                                                                          39



Section VIII. Summary and Interpretation


     Our empirical results allow for two quite different conclusions. If we are

willing to believe that the serial correlation in the price equation, as reported

in Table 1, is due entirely to measurement error, then it appears that we have

found a satisfactory model of the automobile market. If we believe, however,

that prices are correctly measured, then we are at a loss to provide an

integrated explanation of observed movements in both prices and quantities.

     Assuming that prices are badly measured, what do we learn from the

structural coefficients reported in Table 2?

     Consider first the parameters that characterize the consumer's problem.

Holding prices fixed, a permanent increase in consumption, say C, will generate

a steady state increase in the desired stock of cars, X, given by

                              a
               tx = ___________________
                          +
                     a1

     Our parameter estimates imply that a permanent increase in real personal

consumption expenditures of $10 billion, holding prices fixed, will lead

consumers to increase their desired stock of automobiles by a little under a

quarter million cars. This translates into a permanent increase in sales of

about 45,000 cars a month. Assuming an average car price of $3,000 (in 1972

dollars), we would estimate that about one sixth of any permanent increase in

consumption would be allocated to new car purchases.

     The estimated value of a2 indicates that consumers act as if they faced

substantial costs of adjustment. Figure 1 describes the response of new car

purchases due t the permanent increase in consumption described above, holding

prices fixed. A little less than one half of the difference between initial
                                                                                                                            4o

 PARTIAL EQUILIBRIUM RESPONSE OF SALES TO A PERMANENT INCREASE IN CONSUMPTION
          S
        1.5


        1.1


        2.1


        1.5


        e..

        0.5


        0.7


        0.$


        0.5


        0.
        0.3


        0.2
              C           S        10        IS        20        25        30         35   0       15        50   55   50
                                                                        MOHIII

                  2

GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM RESPONSE OF (s,v,P) TO A PERMANENT INCREASE IN CONSUMPTION

    Iii
   1.?
                          S
    1.1


   1.0

   0.1

   0.5




   0.1

   0.5

   0.-

   n.


   0.2

   U. 1


   e. o
          0           5       IC        15        20        25        30         35            5        50
                                                                      N0TM
                                                                         41




stocks and the new steady state value is resolved in the first year. It takes

almost five years to complete 95% of the adjustment.

     Consider now the parameters which characterize the firms' problem. The

estimated cost parameters indicate that although it is costly to change the level

of production, the long-run average cost curve is essentially flat. Deviations

of inventories from desired levels are costly, and on the margin dealers like to

have 113 more cars on their lots in anticipation of a 100 car increase in sales.

     Figure 2 describes the general equilibrium response of sales, production and

prices to a permanent $10 billion dollar increase in real consumption.

     Prices increase temporarily to offset the costs of adjusting production to

meet the higher level of sales. As output stabilizes at a new and higher level,

these costs of adjustment dissipate and prices fall back to their original level

since marginal costs are constant.

     Sales jump less than the partial equilibrium model predicts, since consumers

anticipate the declining pattern in prices and postpone their purchases somewhat.

In the long run, they face essentially constant prices, so the steady state

stocks and purchases of automobiles are virtually identical to those predicted by

the partial equilibrium model.

     Production jumps immediately in response to the higher demand but does not

peak until almost one year later. The amplitude of the production response is

greater than that of sales, reflecting the need to restore inventories to their

new steady state value. In the long run, production increases by just enough to

match the steady state increase in sales.
                                                                                          42




Appendix A

Structural fonn of the original model:
                                     -
  rxt

  It                          It-l

  Yt                          Yt-l
                    = A                       + B                   +
   E(St+i j)                  S                            C              D



   E(Yt+i Ia),                                             w.

  LEt+l I)                                                                     at   -
   A =   —FK,      B =    -FAG,   D =        -F      where F, K, G are given by:

    r
           1              0              0             0              0              O
           0              1              0             0              0              0,
F 0                       0              1             0              0              0,
                          0              0                            0
        —(a1+a2)                                     ®8a2
           o                             0                            0              -8
                    8b2(l-b3)                       8b2b3(b3-l)
           0              0              0             0
                                                                     8b1
    L

          -o              0              0            -l              0              0

           0             -l              0             1             -l              0

K 0                       0              0             0             -l              0

                          0              0             0              0             -l
          0a2
           0                             0                            0              1
                     b2b3                            -b2b3
           0                                                                        -l
                    —b2b3            -b1              b2b3        b1(l+8)+b0
              43




 0    0
          -
      0

tO    0

      0
 a0
 o    0

 0    b
                                                                                              44




 First order conditions for the time consistent monopolist (Section VI):


 Vt :     WtBOY(Vt ot +                       Bi(Yt_Yti it
          -       E    [ B1Y(Yt+1 -             't'      it+i't = xit

          xit =        —E                                       —
                                     B21(It_b3(Xt+i                 OX), 2t+l1't] E [X+1lc]
                                                     —
          (Xt_ eXti) - a2Xxt                             B4

          +           E [ B4(Pt+i -                                       o
                                                 Pt' t+i)1 ] =
          -                               -
 X. :         b3B21                           b3(Xt_      oXi), 2t
          +
                      b3E [ B2(It_ b3(Xt+i -                   eXt),      2t+it
          =
                       - x1t)        -   e      CE                   -E


                      xt +   i E xt+it
                  -          -
                                         +X          -
                                                         eX1
                                                               =



 AX :     a1 X1                  +       (1 +    8la )         X -        E   [Xt+iI] =


              2              +GE                              + a0 C +

        Note that to solve for the first order conditions of the firm, we

use as a constraint the demand function and not the FOC of consumers. Once

the FOC are derived, it is however more convenient to use the FOC of consumers,

equation (7), to write and solve the structural model. Linearizing the above

FOC, the structural form can be written as:
                                                                            45




   Yt                               vt-i

   It                               It-i

   Pt                               Pt-i
                       =    A                                        + (disturbances)
   X                                X1                      c.
   E(Xt+i                           Axt
                                                        r
                                                        L
                                    xit


   E(P+1c)

   E(Xt+iI )                        X

   A =   -F   K, B =   -F       G, where F, K, G are:



  ro          0         0           0       0       0            0
                                                                      _Gc2
              0         0           0       0       0            0      0        0

  10          0         i           0       0       0            0      0        0

F=:O          0         0           1       0       0            0      0        0

   o          o        0            0       0       0            0               0
                                                                       b4
   0
          -eb3b2
                       0            0                            0     -®        ®b     b2
   o          0        0            0       0       0                   0        0
                                                             b1
                       0            0       0
   o
            -b2                                                  0      0
                                                                                 b3b2
   0          1        0            0       0       0            0      0        0
                                                       97




                                                        (9÷i)

  0     0    0    0    0    0         0          1-           0

0=)     0    0    0    0    0         0           0          1-

  0     0        o-         0         0                       L
                                            (÷L)q-
  0          0        1—   1-         U
       3qq                                        I.




        0    0    0    0    t.                    0           0
  tq                             (1q(9+1)+0q)-
  0     0    0    0    0   1-         0           0
                                                            oqq-
  0    1-    0   0-    0    0        1-          0            1




        0    0   0     0   0          0          0            o

        0    0   0     0   0        q-           0            o
                                                                       47




 Appendix B. Data sources and construction.

 Sales and production.

       Production data, Y, for U.S. and Canada are obtained by aggregation

 of divisions (not including Checkers Motors and Volkswagen of America), from

 Wards Automotive Reports, weekly, 1965-1979.

       Sales data, U.S., from same source

       Sales data, Canada, from Statistics Canada CANSIM # D 2369

       Sales outside of U.S. and Canada, from Statistics Department, Motor

Vehicle Manufacturers Association of the U.S., Inc. Detroit.

       Sales, S, are defined as the sum of the three.


Inventories.

      Consumers' inventories, X, are computed using the accumulation equation,

with 0 =   .98.   Level chosen so that there is no trend. The choice of 0 =   .98
(monthly) implies an annual depreciation rate of .78 which is consistent with

the average rate found from studying prices of used cars.

      Producers-Dealers inventories, I, computed using the accumulation

equation. Benchmark described in Blanchard [1983].

      Throughout the paper, quantities of automobiles are expressed in units

of 100,000 vehicles.


Prices, Consumption and Wages:

      Price, CPI component for new cars, from BLS. (Description in BLS 3400B,

414, 1-3); normalized to equal 100 in 1972: 7.


Wage, Production worker average hourly earnings, in $, SIC 3711, deflated by

      PCE implicit deflator, from BLS; normalized to equal 100 in 1972:7.
                                                                                48




Consumption, constant dollar personal consumption expenditures, U.S. expressed

         on an annualized basis in units of 100 billion 1972 dollars.




Coefficients on strike dummies        in 5, Y, P equations of Table 1.



                    S            V       P                      S           V          P


August 1967       —.17     —1.53       —.76    August 1970    -.73        -.77        .26

Sept.             -.13     -1.56      -.57     Sept.          -.84       -1.47        .44
Oct.              -.65                2.85*    Oct.           .94                    5.10*
Nov.              -.01     - .93      2.73*    Nov.                                  6.76*
                                               Dec.           -.81         .83       475*
Sept. 1969        1.15*        1.13   -1.78
Oct.              -.33     - .03       1.55    August 1976    -.22        1.05        .52

Nov.              -.14     - .31       1.65    Sept.          -.55       -1.06        .59

Dec.               .94          .90    1.19    Oct.           -.70                   2.30*
                                               Nov.           -.15         .35       1.62


*:      t statistic above 2.
                                                                                                49




Appendix C.                 Exogeneity tests.

The test is                 G(L) = 0     in



                        =                                                     +
                               H(L)                     + 0(L)

          :
                   ]
                                                                 [SiT
The two test statistics are


x = (T         n (I) ,                        x'   =
                                                       (CT-K)    9.n( RuD
where T is the number of observations, K the number of parameters in each

equation in the unconstrained case and q the number of restrictions. For
                                  1/2
large q, (x-q)/(2q)                     is approximately normal (0, 1). The results of

exogeneity tests for various lag lengths are reported in table Cl. All tests

were conducted over the sample period 1967:1 to 1979:12.                              If the lag length

is 9. ,       we       have T = 156,      K = 32       + 5. and q =   69.



Table C 1.              Exogeneity tests of (C, W).

Laglength:                              (X-q)/(2q)"2                        (x'-q)/(2q)2
              4                               5.6                                     2.6
              6                               5.7                                     1.8

              8                               7.4                                     1.7

              10                              7.3                                      .6

              12                              8.2                                 -    .2


          Since the two asymptotically equivalent test statistics suggested very

different conclusions, we investigated the actual small sample distribution

of A and A'. Taking the least squares estimates (under H0: 0(L) =                               0)for     a


lag length of 4 to be true parameters, 500 independent artificial samples of
                                                                           50




164 observations were generated. We conditioned in each case on the actual

four initial values. The average value of (x-q)/(2q)"2 turned out to be

1.9, and our value of 5.6 was exceeded 8 times, that is 1.6% of the time.

The ) approximation to the distribution of x was poor but the approximation
to the distribution of A' was good. These results led us to base our inferences

on A'.   It   is of some   interest   to note that the acceptance of exogeneity of

(C, W) does not appear to reflect low power of the test procedure. Taking

the least squares estimates in the unconstrained case, for a lag length of 4,

as the true parameter values, a further 100 independent samples were generated.

The statistic (x-q)/(2q)'"2 averaged 13.5 and never fell below 8.80.
                                                                           51




                                       FOOTNOTES



1 We have in mind price equations, as summarized for example in the Eckstein

[1970] volume, and standard consumption, investment and inventory equations. To

define estimated price equations as reduced forms may be unfair to the intent of

that research, which usually interprets these as implicit supply schedules.



2 We prefer to write the initial problem in general rather than quadratic form,

and   then   to linearize the first order conditions. We find the presentation of a

decision problem more intuitive if done in this way. An alternative is to start

with a quadratic specification. As the estimated model is linear in both cases,

the issue is one of presentation, not of substance.



  This section borrows heavily from a previous paper (Blanchard [1983]) which

studied the supply side in detail. The reader is referred to that paper for a

more complete description of the industry and a more complete discussion of the

formalization of the decision problem of suppliers.



  We need to know the value of 0 to construct the X series. We could in

principle estimate .      Numerous recent papers indicate that obtaining accurate

estimates of      is difficult. Our choice of .98 for   is arbitrary. Values of

between .95 and 1.00 would affect estimates of other structural parameters very

little.



5This idiosyncratic allocation of production is due to the Canadian Automobile

Agreement of 1965.
                                                                          52




6 The first order condition for consumption (which we do not use) implies that

the projection of C on lagged C and I should have zero coefficients on all

variables other than C lagged once. We have not imposed this constraint on the

bivariate regression.



  We cannot however prove that these signs are implied by the model.



8 In the standard model where demand and supply are functions of the current

price and a disturbance, a flat supply curve, a steep demand curve and a serially

correlated supply disturbance could for example generate serial correlation in

price but not in quantity.



  An extension of the initial model which would not help solve the puzzle would

be the relaxation of the assumption of a competitive market to allow suppliers to

act either as time consistent or time inconsistent monopolists; this would lead

t the same specif'ication of the reduced form as in Table 1.



10 Note that, although an increase in real wages increases cost and thus would

tend -to decrease sales and production, the effect of W is positive on both S and

Y in the constrained reduced form. This is because high values of W imply higher

values of C in the future, this leading to higher anticipated demand, to higher

sales and production.



   We do not know why the results of the two studies differ. They share the same

specification of the supply side and the same normalization b1 = 1.    The previous
                                                                        53




study is partial equilibrium, and does estimation at the division rather than the
industry level. Thus the difference could be due either to the use of mediocre

instruments in the first study, or to aggregation problems in the second study.
                                                                          54


                                     REFERENCES



Bernanke, B. "Permanent Income, Liquidity and Expenditure on Automobiles:
          Evidence from Panel Data." National Bureau of Economic Research
          W.P. 756, September 1981.


Blanchard, 0.J. "The Production and Inventory Behavior of the American
          Automobile Industry." Journal of Political Economy, 91—3,
          (June 1983): 365-400.

       ——   "Identification in Dynamic Linear Models with Rational Expectations",
            mimeo, January 1982.

       —— and C. Kahn, "The Solution of Linear Difference Models under Rational
            Expectations", Econometrica, 48-51, (July 1980): 1305—1313.


Bulow, J. "Durable Goods Monopolists" Journal of Political Economy, 90-2,
          (April 1982): 314—332.


Eckstein, 0. (ed.) The Econometrics of Price Determination (Washington, D.C.:
          Federal Reserve Board, 1972).


Mussa, M. "Sticky    Prices and Disequilibrium Adjustment in a Rational Model
            of the Inflationary Process", mimeo, 1978.


Nelson, C.R. and G.W. Schwert. "Tests for Predictive Relationships Between
          Time Series Variables: A Monte Carlo Investigation," Journal of the
          American Statistical Association, 77, (March 1982): 11—18


Rotemberg, J. "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output", Review of
          Economic Studies, Vol XLIX (4), no 158: 517—532


Sargent, T.J. "Beyond Demand and Supply Curves", American Economic Review,
          72(7), (May 1982): 382-387.


Wykoff, C. "A User Cost Approach to New Automobile Purchases", Review of
          Economics and Statistics, Vol XL(3) no 123, (July 1973): 377—390.
