AGENCY CONFLICTS, INVESTMENT, AND ASSET
               PRICING

             Rui Albuquerque
               Neng Wang

          WORKING PAPER 13251
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                AGENCY CONFLICTS, INVESTMENT, AND ASSET PRICING

                                          Rui Albuquerque
                                            Neng Wang

                                        Working Paper 13251
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13251


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




We thank an anonymous referee, an anonymous editor, Cam Harvey (Editor), Mike Barclay, and Denis
Gromb (Gerzensee discussant) for detailed and helpful comments. We also thank Heitor Almeida (WFA
discussant), Ravi Bansal, Geert Bekaert, Harjoat Bhamra (UBC/Bank of Canada conference discussant),
Andrea Buraschi, Murray Carlson (AFA discussant), Gian Luca Clementi, Bob Hall, Ping He (FMA
and NBER discussant), Arvind Krishnamurthy, John Long, Jianjun Miao, Suresh Sundaresan, Ross
Watts, seminar participants in Boston University, Columbia, Faculdade de Economia do Porto, the
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and New York, Fuqua (Duke), HEC Paris, HEC Lausanne, ISCTE,
Olin School of Business (Washington University), The Portuguese Catholic University, Simon Graduate
School of Business (University of Rochester), Stern School of Business (NYU), University of Maryland,
Univeristy of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign, University of Wisconsin (Madison), Universidade Nova
de Lisboa, Wharton, the World Bank, and participants at the 2004 SED (Florence), 2005 CEPR/ Gerzensee,
2005 WFA (Portland), UBC/Bank of Canada conference (2005), 2005 FMA (Chicago), 2006 AFA
(Boston) and NBER, and 2006 Wegmans conferences for comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Rui Albuquerque and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Agency conflicts, investment, and asset pricing
Rui Albuquerque and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 13251
July 2007
JEL No. E44,G1,G3,O4

                                             ABSTRACT

The separation of ownership and control allows controlling shareholders to pursue private benefits.
We develop an analytically tractable dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to study asset pricing
and welfare implications of imperfect investor protection. Consistent with empirical evidence, the
model predicts that countries with weaker investor protection have more incentives to overinvest, lower
Tobin's q, higher return volatility, larger risk premium, and higher interest rate. Calibrating the model
to the Korean economy reveals that perfecting investor protection increases the stock market's value
by 22 percent, a gain for which outside shareholders are willing to pay 11 percent of their capital stock.

Rui Albuquerque
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
ralbuque@bu.edu

Neng Wang
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
It is widely accepted that governance problems are of …rst-order importance in many countries

(La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1998, 2000a)). Corporations in many countries are

run by controlling shareholders whose cash ‡ow rights in the …rm are substantially smaller than

their control rights (La Porta et al. (1999)). For example, controlling shareholders may ac-

quire complete control with cash ‡ow rights signi…cantly lower than 50% via dual-class shares,

pyramid-ownership structures, or cross-ownership (Bebchuk, Kraakman, and Triantis (2000)).

The separation of ownership and control allows controlling shareholders to pursue private ben-

e…ts at the cost of outside shareholders. The size of private bene…ts depends in large part on

the extent of investor protection and corporate governance safeguarding outside investors.1 La

Porta et al. (2002), Claessens et al. (2002), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Gompers,

Ishii, and Metrick (2003), among others, document how imperfect investor protection lowers

…rm value.

   Investor protection in‡uences not only …rm value as emphasized in the literature, but also

equilibrium interest rates, asset returns, and welfare costs. Intuitively, agents’ consumption

and savings decisions and …rms’cost of capital are fundamentally linked in general equilibrium,

which depends in turn on …rms’production and investment decisions and the extent of agency

con‡icts. However, to date little theoretical research has been devoted to formulating equilib-

rium asset pricing implications of agency con‡icts. Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) present a

static model with risk-neutral agents and determine the interest rate in general equilibrium. In

this paper, we present one of the …rst dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models to study

the implications of imperfect investor protection for risk sharing and asset pricing. We therefore

provide one of the …rst quantitative frameworks to assess the magnitudes of both the loss of

investor welfare and the reduction in market value due to imperfect investor protection.
   We introduce two new features into a standard production-based equilibrium asset pricing

model. First, we assume that output ‡uctuations arise from shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency

of investment (Keynes (1936)), i.e. investment-speci…c technology shocks. This assumption is

motivated by the growing literature that emphasizes the important role of investment-speci…c

technology shocks as a source of aggregate volatility (Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man

(1988), Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), and Fisher (2006), among others). Second,

in our model, …rms’ investment decisions are made by self-interested controlling shareholders

who extract private bene…ts from outside shareholders (Berle and Means (1932) and Jensen

and Meckling (1976)). We embed the con‡ict of interest and the implied heterogeneity between

controlling shareholders and outside shareholders in an equilibrium setting.

   To isolate the e¤ects of our assumption of investment-speci…c technology shocks on real

investment and asset prices, we …rst consider a benchmark economy with no con‡icts of interest.

Under perfect investor protection, the controlling shareholder rationally pursues no private

bene…ts (because of in…nite marginal cost of stealing) and thus he behaves in the interest

of outside shareholders. Our benchmark model is the extension of representative-agent asset

pricing models such as Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985) (henceforth, CIR). As in CIR and other

investment models, investment increases the capital stock on average. However, in our model

the investment-speci…c technology shocks make the representative agent less willing to invest in

capital: The amount of capital in the next period depends stochastically on how new investment

merges with the existing capital. A risk-averse investor dislikes the volatility in output induced

by investment and hence lowers investment, ceteris paribus. This makes the newly invested

capital less desirable than the installed capital. As a result, Tobin’s q is larger than unity. In

contrast, in the CIR model Tobin’s q is equal to unity. This technological speci…cation is a




                                                2
key di¤erence between our benchmark model and the seminal CIR model. To the best of our

knowledge, ours is the …rst model predicting Tobin’s q to be larger than unity in an equilibrium

framework à la CIR without technological frictions such as adjustment costs or investment

irreversibility.

    When investor protection is imperfect, a con‡ict of interest arises between the controlling

shareholder and outside shareholders. The controlling shareholder values private bene…ts more

under weaker investor protection and is able to derive greater private bene…ts in larger …rms

(Baumol (1959), Williamson (1964), and Jensen (1986)). Thus, the controlling shareholder has

stronger incentives to invest under weaker investor protection, ceteris paribus. However, with

shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment, more investment means higher volatility of

capital accumulation, which is undesirable. In equilibrium, we show that the e¤ect induced by

the extraction of private bene…ts dominates. This leads to the prediction that weaker investor

protection implies more investment and more volatility, ceteris paribus.

    The controlling shareholder’s incentives to pursue private bene…ts and distort investment

under weaker investor protection imply a lower dividend payout, ceteris paribus. Tobin’s q

(from the outside shareholders’perspective) is lower, re‡ecting both the extraction of private

bene…ts and investment distortions by the controlling shareholder. These predictions are in

line with La Porta et al. (2000b), who …nd that corporate payouts are lower in countries with

weaker investor protection, and La Porta et al. (2002), Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) and

Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), who …nd that …rm value increases with investor protection.

    Our model also predicts that the equity risk premium is higher in countries with weaker

investor protection. The equilibrium equity premium is proportional to the variance of output.

The higher investment under weaker investor protection increases both the volatility of capital




                                               3
accumulation and that of output and hence increases the equilibrium risk premium. This pre-

diction is consistent with the cross-country evidence in Hail and Leuz (2004) and Daouk,Lee,

and Ng (2004), who establish a positive link between excess returns and various investor protec-

tion variables. Harvey (1995) shows that emerging markets display higher return volatility and

larger equity risk premia. Since emerging market economies have on average weaker corporate

governance, these papers supply additional evidence in line with our theory.

   Finally, the model predicts that countries with weaker investor protection have a higher

interest rate. The intuition is as follows. Weaker investor protection generates a greater in-

centive to invest and hence higher future output. Predicting higher output, agents’consump-

tion smoothing motive leads them to borrow, which raises the interest rate. However, higher

investment also makes capital accumulation more volatile and implies a stronger desire for pre-

cautionary savings, which lowers the interest rate. Because the former e¤ect dominates, the

interest rate is higher under weaker investor protection. The higher interest rate and the higher

cost of capital (sum of the interest rate and the risk premium) have equilibrium feedback e¤ects

discouraging investment, ceteris paribus. We show that the agency channel e¤ect (of overinvest-

ing to pursue future private bene…ts) is stronger than the cost of capital e¤ect in equilibrium.

Therefore, the equilibrium investment-capital ratio and the interest rate both decrease with

investor protection. We …nd evidence in support of our interest rate prediction using data in

Campbell (2003).

   We present a calibration of the model that allows us to assess the quantitative signi…cance

of improving investor protection. Speci…cally, we calibrate the model to the United States and

South Korea to match estimates of the two countries’private bene…ts. The model predicts that

moving to a perfect investor protection regime leads to a stock market revaluation of 2:49%




                                               4
in the United States and 21:96% in Korea. The welfare implications of such improvements in

investor protection are very large. Outside investors in the U.S. and Korea are willing to give

up, respectively, 0:38% and 11:17% of the capital stock they own to move to perfect investor

protection. This represents $43 billion of U.S. market capitalization and $4.7 billion of Korean

market capitalization. On the other hand, the U.S. and Korean controlling shareholders are

willing to give up 2:1% and 8:4% of their capital stock to maintain the status quo, respectively.

We show that these welfare numbers are robust to di¤erent calibrations.

   These calculations suggest signi…cant wealth redistribution from controlling shareholders to

outside shareholders by enhancing investor protection, particularly for Korea. Of course, the

political reform necessary to improve investor protection is by no means an easy task, precisely

because of the signi…cant wealth redistribution that would follow. After all, the controlling

shareholders and incumbent entrepreneurs are often among the strongest interest groups in the

policy making process, particularly in countries with weaker investor protection.

   Lastly, we test two new empirical predictions that result from our speci…cation of investment-

speci…c technology shocks and the equilibrium solution: A positive association between the

investment-capital ratio and the variance of GDP growth and between the investment-capital

ratio and the variance of stock returns. We construct measures of the long-run investment-

capital ratio and test our hypotheses on a cross-section of 40 countries. We provide evidence

consistent with both hypotheses, controlling for other sources of volatility.

   The paper that is most closely related to ours is Dow, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2005)

(henceforth, DGK). They study the e¤ects of agency con‡icts on equilibrium asset prices and

investment by integrating managerial empire building as in Jensen (1986) into an otherwise

neoclassical CIR-style asset pricing model. DGK analyze the manager-shareholder con‡ict in




                                                5
…rms with dispersed ownership.2 As a result, because managers’ wealth has zero measure in

aggregate, DGK do not need to model their consumption and portfolio allocation decisions. In

contrast, we study the agency con‡ict between controlling shareholders and outside sharehold-

ers. Because controlling shareholders in many countries claim a signi…cant share of aggregate

wealth, we therefore model the controlling shareholders’consumption and portfolio allocation

decisions jointly with the outside shareholders’consumption and portfolio allocation decisions

and derive equilibrium implications for risk sharing, welfare redistribution, and various equi-

librium prices and quantities. The two models also di¤er in the production technology. DGK

assume that capital accumulation follows the process given by CIR and hence they predict To-

bin’s q to be unity, independent of agency con‡icts. In contrast, we assume investment-speci…c

technology shocks, and predict that Tobin’s q is larger than unity (even under perfect investor

protection) and increasing with investor protection. Our model therefore provides an explana-

tion for the evidence that countries with weaker investor protection observe higher risk premia

and larger volatility. DGK and our model do share a common and key prediction; namely,

that …rms overinvest. However, to endogenize the degree of overinvestment DGK endow share-

holders with a costly auditing technology, while we use an exogenously speci…ed cost function

for private bene…ts to model the degree of investor protection. Finally, with respect to prefer-

ences, DGK assume that investors have logarithmic preferences whereas we allow controlling

and outside shareholders to share any degree of constant relative risk aversion.

   We design our heterogenous-agent model with the objective of delivering a complete charac-

terization of both resource allocation (over time and across shareholders) and equilibrium asset

pricing that can be reconciled with empirical evidence. In order to achieve this objective in a

parsimonious setting, we follow La Porta et al. (2002) and Lan and Wang (2006) and model




                                               6
investor protection by adopting a simple convex cost function for the controlling shareholder’s

pursuit of private bene…ts.3 The alternative is to model agency con‡icts via a contracting ap-

proach. Castro, Clementi, and MacDonald (2004) study a two-period overlapping generations

model where entrepreneurs can abscond with revenues and project …nanciers are constrained by

this agency friction. They focus on equilibrium implications for the interest rate and economic

growth. However, they do not analyze welfare implications and asset pricing predictions for the

risk premium, Tobin’s q, and volatility.

   It is worth noting that there is also a growing literature on optimal dynamic contracting in

corporate …nance. However, these models are often cast as a single …rm contracting problem

and produce no asset pricing implications. Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004) and DeMarzo

and Fishman (2006) study the e¤ects of …nancing constraints and agency con‡icts on real in-

vestments. These models generate underinvestment, rather than overinvestment, because the

degree of underinvestment becomes an incentive alignment tool between the investors and the

manager. In our model, overinvestment arises because of the pursuit of private bene…ts by

the controlling shareholder. This is likely to be the dominant issue for larger …rms around the

world whereas the underinvestment implied by these contracting models is potentially more im-

portant for smaller …rms. DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) formulate a continuous-time dynamic

contracting problem and provide an optimal capital structure implementation that alleviates

the friction arising from outside investors not being able to observe the cash ‡ows generated by

the …rm.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the model and

states the main theorem. Section II discusses the model’s solution under the benchmark with

perfect investor protection. Section III characterizes the equilibrium outcome and provides




                                               7
intuition for the model’s solution. Section IV gives the model’s main predictions for the e¤ects

of investor protection on investment and asset prices. Section V provides a calibration and

supplies quantitative predictions on the value of improving investor protection. Section VI

presents empirical evidence on two of the model’s new predictions and Section VII concludes.

The Appendix contains technical details and proofs of the theorem and propositions.



I.   The Model

The economy is populated by a continuum of two types of agents, controlling shareholders and

outside shareholders, identi…ed with subscripts “1” and “2,” respectively. Outside sharehold-

ers are all identical. All …rms and their respective controlling shareholders are assumed to

be identical as well and subject to the same shocks. This assumption substantially simpli…es

our analysis because we do not need to keep track of the controlling shareholders’holdings in

other …rms. Thus, without loss of generality, we analyze the decision problems of a representa-

tive controlling shareholder and a representative outside shareholder. All agents have in…nite

horizons and time is continuous.


A.   Setup

Production and Investment Opportunities.            Firms are all-equity …nanced. Output is

produced via a constant returns to scale technology hK (t), where h is the productivity level

and K (t) is the …rm’s capital stock. We assume that the capital stock evolves according to



                           dK(t) = (I (t)    K (t)) dt + I (t) dZ(t);                        (1)




                                               8
where I (t) is investment,   > 0 is the depreciation rate,   > 0 is a volatility parameter, Z (t) is

a Brownian motion, and K (0) > 0.

   The capital accumulation speci…cation (1) is a continuous-time version of Greenwood, Her-

cowitz, and Hu¤man (1988), which is based on Keynes’ (1936) argument that production is

subject to shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment. Equation (1) is di¤erent from the

traditional speci…cation of shocks to total factor productivity (TFP). Our motivation for this

choice of speci…cation is three-fold. First, quantitatively speaking, these shocks play an impor-

tant role in the economy. Identifying shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment with shocks

to the relative price of investment goods, Greenwodd, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997, 2000) doc-

ument that these shocks account for 60% of post-war U.S. growth (Greenwood, Hercowitz, and

Krusell (2000)) and 30% of output ‡uctuations in the post-war U.S. period (Greenwood, Her-

cowitz, and Krusell (1997)). Using an econometric approach that relaxes the identi…cation in

Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), Fisher (2006) shows that 50% of U.S. ‡uctuations

are accounted for by shocks to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment.4 Second, the standard

technology shock speci…cation implies that recessions are caused by a TFP decline, that is, tech-

nical regress, which has met substantial skepticism among macroeconomists (Romer (2006)).

Third, the assumption of investment-speci…c technological change is analytically convenient to

work with.5 The capital accumulation process (1) in our paper and those in CIR and Sun-

daresan (1984) are subject to shocks, unlike the conventional speci…cation. However, unlike in

CIR and Sundaresan (1984), where uncertainty of capital accumulation is proportional to the

level of capital stock K, here uncertainty of capital accumulation is proportional to the level of

investment I. We will show that this di¤erence has an important implication for Tobin’s q in

Section II.




                                                9
Imperfect Investor Protection and Private Bene…ts.                The controlling shareholder owns

a …xed fraction   < 1 of the …rm.6 Following Shleifer and Vishny (1997), La Porta et al. (2002),

and the literature on investor protection, we also assume that the controlling shareholder is fully

entrenched and has complete control over the …rm’s investment and payout policies. We refer

readers to Bebchuk, Kraakman, and Triantis (2000) for details on how control rights can di¤er

from cash ‡ow rights (via dual-class shares, pyramid-ownership structures, or cross-ownership)

and to La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) for evidence that control rights are often

concentrated.

   Building on Johnson et al. (2000) and La Porta et al. (2002), we model private bene…ts

via a stealing technology.7 The controlling shareholder may “steal” a fraction s (t) from gross

output hK (t) by incurring a cost in the amount of



                                         (s; hK) =       s2 hK:                                    (2)
                                                     2


The parameter     is a measure of investor protection.8 A higher        implies a larger marginal cost

 shK of diverting cash for private bene…ts and hence stronger investor protection. Later we

impose a parametric region for     to ensure an interior solution for the stealing level s(t). We

choose the quadratic cost formula (2) for simplicity, but the model’s intuition carries over to

other convex cost function speci…cations.

   Investment I (t) equals output hK (t) net of dividends D (t) and private bene…ts extracted

by the controlling shareholder s (t) hK (t). Thus, we have



                               I (t) = hK(t)    D(t)       s(t)hK(t):                              (3)




                                                10
   To summarize, we have introduced two key assumptions into the model: (i) The capital

accumulation technology (1) subject to investment-speci…c technological shocks; and (ii) the

controlling shareholder’s private bene…ts technology (2). Below we show that the interaction

of these two assumptions generates the key results and insights of our paper.


Controlling Shareholder.       The controlling shareholder has lifetime utility over consumption

process C given by
                                        Z       1
                                                        t
                                    E               e       u(C(t))dt ;                              (4)
                                            0


where u(C) is constant relative risk averse (CRRA) utility, that is,


                                            1
                               u(C) =                   C1       1 ;      > 0:                       (5)
                                        1


The rate of time preference is     > 0 and              is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion. The

scale-invariance property of CRRA utility proves useful in keeping our model analysis tractable

(as in Merton (1971), for example).

   Let M (t) denote the time-t cash ‡ow to the controlling shareholder. It includes both the

dividend component D(t) and the private bene…ts component, and is given as follows:



                         M (t) = D(t) + s(t)hK(t)                   (s(t); hK(t)):                   (6)



Let C1 and W1 denote the controlling shareholder’s consumption and wealth processes, respec-

tively. We assume that the controlling shareholder can invest in the risk-free asset but cannot

trade in the risky asset. This implies that his tradable “liquid”wealth equals his risk-free hold-

ings: W1 (t) = B1 (t). Let r(t) be the risk-free interest rate at t. The controlling shareholder’s



                                                        11
wealth evolves according to



                              dW1 (t) = (r(t)W1 (t) + M (t)        C1 (t)) dt;                              (7)



where we assume that W1 (0) = 0.

   In summary, the controlling shareholder chooses fD (t) ; s (t) ; C1 (t) : t            0g to maximize

his lifetime utility de…ned in (4) and (5), subject to the capital accumulation process (1),

‡ow-of-funds equations (3) and (6), his wealth accumulation process (7), and a transversality

condition speci…ed in the Appendix, with …rm investment fI (t) : t                 0g, …rm capital stock

fK (t) : t    0g, and liquid wealth fW1 (t) : t      0g being determined by (3), (1), and (6)-(7).

   In solving his optimization problem, the controlling shareholder takes the equilibrium inter-

est rate process fr(t) : t     0g as given.


Real and Financial Assets.           Without loss of generality, we may denote            K   and   K    as the

drift and volatility processes for the equilibrium capital accumulation process



                              dK(t) =   K (t)K   (t) dt +    K (t)K   (t) dZ(t):                            (8)



Similarly, we may write the equilibrium processes for dividends D and …rm value P as



                             dD(t) =     D (t)D (t) dt   +    D (t)D (t) dZ(t);                             (9)

                             dP (t) =    P (t)P   (t) dt +   P (t)P   (t) dZ(t);                           (10)



where    D   and   P   are the corresponding equilibrium drift processes, and         D   and       K   are the

equilibrium volatility processes. There is also a risk-free asset available in zero net supply. Both


                                                    12
the outside shareholders and the controlling shareholder may trade the risk-free asset. Later

we solve for the drift processes     K,   D,   and    P,   the volatility processes   K,   D,   and   P,   and

the equilibrium interest rate r. While         K,    D,    P;   K,   D,   P,   and r can be stochastic and

path dependent, in Section III. we show that all these processes are deterministic and constant

in equilibrium. As we discuss later, this result depends on the assumptions of constant returns-

to-scale production technology, linearity of the stealing technology in K; and CRRA utility,

among others.


Outside Shareholders.        Outside shareholders have the same preferences given in (4) and

(5), evaluated at the consumption process C2 (t). Each outside shareholder solves a standard

consumption-asset allocation problem similar to Merton (1971). Unlike Merton (1971), in our

model both the stock price and the interest rate are endogenously determined in equilibrium.

   Let ! (t) be the fraction of wealth invested in equity at t. Let              (t) denote the time-t risk

premium, which is given by     (t)        P   (t) + D (t) =P (t)     r (t). Following Merton (1971), each

outside shareholder accumulates his wealth as follows:



         dW2 (t) = (r(t)W2 (t)       C2 (t) + ! (t) W2 (t) (t)) dt +       P (t)! (t) W2 (t)dZ(t);         (11)



with W2 (0) = 0. The outside shareholders’risk-free holdings are B2 (t) = (1               ! (t)) W2 (t).

   Each outside shareholder chooses fC2 (t) ; ! (t) : t            0g to maximize his lifetime utility func-

tion subject to the wealth dynamics (11) and a transversality condition speci…ed in the Ap-

pendix. In solving this problem, each outside shareholder takes the equilibrium dividend, …rm

value, and interest rate processes as given.




                                                     13
B.     Equilibrium: De…nition and Existence

We de…ne the equilibrium in our economy and state the theorem characterizing the equilibrium.


De…nition 1 An equilibrium has the following properties:

     (i) fC1 (t) ; s (t) ; I (t) ; D (t) : t   0g solve the controlling shareholder’s problem for a given

interest rate process fr(t) : t          0g;

     (ii) fC2 (t) ; ! (t) : t        0g solve each outside shareholder’s problem for given interest rate

fr(t) : t    0g ; stock price, and dividend payout stochastic processes fP (t) ; D (t) : t          0g;

     (iii) the risk-free asset market clears (i.e., B1 (t) + B2 (t) = 0):



                                  W1 (t) + (1     ! (t)) W2 (t) = 0; for all t ;                          (12)



     (iv) the stock market clears for outside shareholders that is



                                 1       = ! (t) W2 (t) =P (t); for all t ; and,                          (13)



     (v) the consumption goods market clears, in that



                     C1 (t) + C2 (t) + I (t) = hK (t)         (s (t) ; hK (t)) ; for all t :              (14)



     Condition (v) states that the available resources in the economy, hK                 (s; hK), are either

consumed or invested in the …rm. The amount diverted, shK; is a transfer from the …rm to the

controlling shareholder, but the cost of diversion,           (s; hK), is a dead-weight loss.

     In general, in heterogeneous agent models such as ours, one needs to keep track of the

dynamics of the wealth distribution, namely the evolution of (W1 (t) ; W2 (t)), in addition to


                                                        14
standard state variables such as the capital stock K. It turns out that the endogenously

determined wealth distribution does not complicate the equilibrium analysis in our model. The

following theorem provides a complete characterization of the equilibrium. We will provide

intuition for the equilibrium in Section 3. The proof is relegated to the appendix.


Theorem 1 Under Assumptions 1 to 5 listed in the Appendix, there exists an equilibrium with

the following properties. The outside shareholders have zero risk-free asset holdings (B2 (t) = 0)

and invest all their wealth in equity, with ! (t) = 1. Outside shareholders’ consumption equals

their entitled dividends:

                                           C2 (t) = (1         ) D (t) :                                      (15)


The controlling shareholder also holds zero risk-free assets (B1 (t) = 0). He diverts a constant

fraction of gross revenue:
                                                           1
                                             s(t) =                 :                                         (16)


The controlling shareholder’s consumption C1 (t) and the …rm’s investment I(t) and dividends

D(t) are proportional to the …rm’s capital stock K(t), in that C1 (t) =K (t) = M (t) =K (t) = m;

I(t)=K(t) = i, D(t)=K(t) = d. In equilibrium, we have



        m =       [(1 + ) h      i] > 0;                                                                      (17)
                                   "     s                                                         #
                1 + (1 + ) h     2                2( + 1)       2 ((1   + )h             (1   ))
         i =                           1     1                                                         > 0;   (18)
                   ( + 1) 2                                       [1 + (1 + ) h   2 ]2


        d = (1         )h     i > 0;                                                                          (19)



where    = (1       )2 = (2   ). The equilibrium dividend process (9), the capital accumulation

process (8), and the stock price process (10) all follow geometric Brownian motions with drift



                                                      15
and volatility coe¢ cients given by



                                         D   =    K   =       P   =i           ;             (20)

                                         D   =    K   =       P   =i :                       (21)



The equilibrium value of the …rm is P (t) = qK(t), where q is Tobin’s q and is given by


                                                      2           1
                                             1                             1
                                   q=   1+                h                    2i
                                                                                    :        (22)
                                              2   d                   1


The equilibrium interest rate is


                                                              2 i2
                               r=       + (i      )                       ( + 1) :           (23)
                                                              2


   The key insight behind the results of our model is that no trade occurs between controlling

shareholders and outside shareholders in equilibrium. We leave a detailed discussion of the

result to Section III. Before delving into an analysis of the model’s predictions, we …rst discuss

the model’s results under the benchmark model of perfect investor protection.



II.    Benchmark: Perfect Investor Protection

In the benchmark model of perfect investor protection, the cost of diverting any positive amount

of bene…ts is in…nite. Therefore, the controlling shareholder optimally pursues no private ben-

e…ts (s = 0). (We denote the equilibrium variables in the benchmark model with an asterisk.)

Since there is no con‡ict of interest, the …rst-best outcome is obtained in equilibrium, and

investment and Tobin’s q depend only on the preference and technology parameters (such as



                                                  16
the volatility parameter    that captures investment-speci…c technology shocks).

     When one unit of capital is purchased and invested in the …rm, the total capital stock of the

…rm increases by one unit on average. However, the exact amount by which capital increases is

subject to uncertainty whose volatility is proportional to the amount of investment I, as seen

in the di¤usion term in (1). The corresponding …rst-best Tobin’s q is


                                                 1
                                       q =        2
                                                          > 1;                                  (24)
                                             1        i


where i is given by (18) with    = 0. First, note that Tobin’s q is equal to unity in a deterministic

environment ( = 0). Intuitively, capital accumulation is deterministic without adjustment

costs, and the production function has constant returns to scale. More generally, in equilibrium

Tobin’s q is larger than unity when capital accumulation is subject to shocks ( > 0) and

investors are risk averse ( > 0). This investment risk is systematic and is priced in equilibrium

by risk-averse investors. As a result, it drives a wedge between the prices of newly purchased

capital and installed capital.

     It is worth comparing our model to the CIR model. The capital accumulation process

in CIR is subject to shocks whose volatility is proportional to the capital stock K: dK =

(I     K) dt+ KdZt . While capital accumulation is stochastic, investment increases the capital

stock in a deterministic fashion. Therefore, there is no immediate investment risk, and no wedge

exists between the values of newly invested capital and installed capital. As a result, Tobin’s q

is equal to unity in CIR. To sum up, whether the volatility of capital accumulation is a function

of capital stock K (as in CIR) or depends on new investment I (as in our model) has important

implications for Tobin’s q. To the best of our knowledge, our neoclassical equilibrium model

à la CIR is the …rst to generate Tobin’s q larger than unity in the absence of technological


                                                 17
frictions such as adjustment costs or investment irreversibility. Thus, unlike Abel and Eberly

(1994) and Hayashi (1982), who use adjustment costs to make Tobin’s q larger than unity, the

investment-speci…c technology shocks in the capital accumulation process and the investor’s

risk aversion jointly generate q > 1 in equilibrium. Our work therefore provides a view on the

determinants of q, complementing the adjustment cost-based investment literature.

     Having set up the benchmark, we next turn to the setting with imperfect investor protection.



III.     Understanding the Equilibrium Solution

In this section, we provide intuition for the model’s no-trade equilibrium.9 We show that (i)

both the controlling and the outside shareholders …nd it optimal not to trade the risk-free asset

under the conjectured dividend and price processes, (ii) the conjectured price processes clear

the markets, and (iii) the conjectured dividends are consistent with the production decisions

of controlling shareholders.


A.     The Controlling Shareholder’s Optimization Problem

Under the conjecture that the controlling shareholder holds zero risk-free bonds at all times

and cannot trade his “inside shares,” we have C1 (t) = M (t). The controlling shareholder’s

problem then essentially becomes a resource allocation problem. He chooses the …rm’s capital

accumulation, dividend payout, and private bene…ts to maximize his own utility.

     Let J1 (K) denote the controlling shareholder’s value function. The controlling shareholder’s

optimal payout, D, and diversion, s, decisions solve the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation


                                                                    2
                     J1 (K) = max u(M ) + (I         K) J10 (K) +       I 2 J100 (K) ;       (25)
                               D;s                                  2



                                                18
where the optimization is subject to (6) and (3).

   The left side of (25) is the ‡ow measure of the controlling shareholder’s value function. The

right side of (25) gives the sum of the instantaneous utility payo¤ u(M ) and the instantaneous

expected change of his value function (given by both the drift and di¤usion terms). The

controlling shareholder’s optimality implies that he chooses dividend policy D and stealing

fraction s to equate the two sides of (25). The …rst-order conditions with respect to dividend

payout D and diversion s are:



                                             2
                                  M              IJ100 (K) = J10 (K);                                 (26)



and

                                                  2
                       M    (hK       shK)            IJ100 (K) hK = J10 (K) hK:                      (27)


   Equation (26) describes how the controlling shareholder chooses the …rm’s dividend and in-

vestment policy. The model has the usual trade-o¤ that an additional unit of dividend increases

consumption today (valued at M        ), but lowers consumption in the future by lowering invest-

ment (valued at J10 (K)). In addition, increasing dividends generates an extra bene…t by reducing

the volatility of future marginal utility (valued at          2 IJ 00 (K)).   This risk aversion/volatility
                                                                  1


e¤ect comes from: (i) The concavity of the value function due to risk aversion (J100 (K) < 0), and

(ii) the fact that investment increases the volatility of capital accumulation because of shocks

to the marginal e¢ ciency of investment (see equation (1)).

   Equation (27) describes the trade-o¤s associated with the choice of private bene…ts. The

bene…ts associated with an incremental unit of stealing arise from increased current consumption

and lower volatility of future marginal utility. The marginal cost of stealing arises from lower



                                                   19
investment and future consumption. Substituting (26) into (27) gives the optimal stealing

s(t) =       (1       ) = : Intuitively, the stealing fraction         is higher when investor protection is

worse (lower ) and con‡icts of interest are larger (smaller ).

     We now turn to the outside shareholder’s problem.


B.     Outside Shareholder’s Optimization

To continue with the implications of our no-trade conjecture, we will suppose and then verify

later that in equilibrium the risk premium and interest rate are constant. Then, the outside

shareholder solves a standard Merton-style consumption and portfolio choice problem. The

investor optimally allocates a constant fraction ! of his total wealth to equity, where



                                               !(t) =       2   :                                      (28)
                                                            P



Intuitively, ! increases in the expected excess return , but decreases in risk aversion                 and

volatility   P.


     In the conjectured no-trade equilibrium, the outside shareholder also needs to hold all his

wealth in equity (! = 1). Using (28) and imposing equilibrium yields



                                                    2           2 2
                                              =     P   =        i :                                   (29)



The …rst equality is the standard equilibrium asset pricing result where the equity premium is

equal to the product of the investor’s coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion and the instantaneous

variance. The last equality states that the equity premium               increases in the investment-capital

ratio i (see (21)).



                                                    20
C.     Intuition Behind the No-trade Equilibrium

Under the no-trade conjecture, the outside shareholder’s total wealth consists of his equity hold-

ings. Each share of equity o¤ers both the outside shareholder and the controlling shareholder

dividends at the rate dK, where the dividend-capital ratio d is given in (19). In addition, the

controlling shareholder receives a perpetual ‡ow of private bene…ts of control. To be speci…c,

the net payo¤ rate (dividends plus net private bene…ts) per equity share to the controlling

shareholder is:
                            m                                       1        2
                                K = (d + ( + ) h) K =          d+                h K:                          (30)
                                                                        2

     Equation (30) shows that for each unit of dividends that the outside shareholder receives,

the controlling shareholder receives a total payment in the amount of 1 + 1                        2   h= (2    d)

units. This constant proportionality between payments to the outside shareholder and the

controlling shareholder gives rise to identical growth rates of dividends and of the net payo¤ to

the controlling shareholder between any two dates and any two states. Because in the no-trade

case we have C1 (t) = M (t), it follows that the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) between

time s and t < s for the controlling shareholder is given by


                             0 (C (s))
                      (s t) U    1             (s t)   M (s)                (s t)       D(s)
                  e                       =e                        =e                         :               (31)
                           U 0 (C1 (t))                M (t)                            D(t)


Similarly, under no trade, the MRS between time s and t < s for the outside shareholder is

equal to
                                           0 (C (s))
                                    (s t) U    2            (s t)   D(s)
                                e          0
                                                       =e                           :                          (32)
                                          U (C2 (t))                D(t)

Combining (31) and (32) allows us to conclude that the marginal rates of substitution for the

controlling shareholder and the outside shareholder are equal under the no-trade conjecture.


                                                       21
Therefore, both controlling shareholders and outside shareholders have the same risk attitudes

toward securities such as the risk-free asset in equilibrium. However, controlling shareholders

and outside shareholders disagree in terms of the …rm’s investment decisions, as we show in

Section IV. Because outside shareholders only receive their pro rata share of dividends from

the …rm, if they were able to run the …rm, they would choose the …rst-best investment rule.

Instead, controlling shareholders are able to extract private bene…ts of control in addition to

…rm dividends, which generates an investment distortion.

   In our model, the controlling shareholder is required to hold an underdiversi…ed position

in his own …rm and may trade only the risk-free asset to smooth his consumption. Therefore,

he needs to solve an incomplete markets (self-insurance) problem, which admits no closed-form

solutions for the consumption rule and the value function when utility is of the CRRA type

(Zeldes (1989)). Moreover, in general, the equilibrium analysis of incomplete markets with

production is rather complicated. In our model, the controlling shareholder’s optimality and

the equilibrium resource allocations and prices are all solved in closed form and are well de…ned

because of the speci…c structure of the optimization problems. The following assumptions or

properties of the model are useful in delivering the analytically tractable no-trade equilibrium:

(i) A constant return to scale production and capital accumulation technology as speci…ed in

(1); (ii) optimal “net” private bene…ts that are linear in the …rm’s capital stock (arising from

the assumptions that the controlling shareholder’s bene…t of stealing is linear in s and his cost

of stealing is quadratic in s); and (iii) the controlling shareholder and the outside shareholder

have identical and homothetic preferences. The built-in linearity implies that in equilibrium

the economy grows stochastically on a balanced path. As such, in the remainder of the paper

we focus on variables scaled by capital stock, that is, the investment-capital ratio i = I=K and




                                               22
the dividend-capital ratio d = D=K.



IV.       Equilibrium Investment and Asset Pricing Implications

First, we analyze equilibrium investment and capital accumulation. Then, we discuss the

model’s equilibrium implications for …rm value, the interest rate, return premium, volatility,

and the dividend yield.


A.     Real Investment

Proposition 1 The equilibrium investment-capital ratio i decreases in investor protection

and the controlling shareholder’s cash-‡ow rights    , which di=d < 0 and di=d      < 0, respec-

tively.


     Under weaker investor protection, the controlling shareholder diverts a higher fraction

of output in each period. Since a larger fraction of a bigger pie is worth more, the rational

controlling shareholder values a larger …rm more under weaker investor protection. This leads

to more investment as investor protection weakens.

     However, faster capital accumulation induces higher volatility in capital accumulation and

output. This leads to a higher equilibrium risk premium and hence discourages investment to

some extent. In a model like ours, we can show that the private bene…ts incentive is a …rst-order

e¤ect, and the investment-induced volatility/risk aversion e¤ect is of second-order impact.10 In

summary, our model predicts that weak investor protection induces overinvestment relative to

a perfect investor protection benchmark. Similar intuition applies for the comparative statics

result with respect to ownership, .




                                               23
   There is a rich supply of empirical evidence on overinvestment and empire building in the

U.S. Harford (1999) documents that U.S. cash-rich …rms are more likely to attempt acquisitions,

but that these acquisitions are value decreasing as measured by either stock return performance

or operating performance.11 Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003) document that one dollar

of cash holdings held by …rms in countries with poor corporate governance is worth much less

to outside shareholders than that held by …rms in countries with better corporate governance.

Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) and Philippon (2004) document that U.S. …rms with low

corporate governance have higher investment.

   The overinvestment-governance link …ts the evidence not only in developed economies, but

also across emerging market economies. A strong indicator that …rms in Korea and Thailand

overinvested is the documented volume of nonperforming loans prior to the East Asian crisis

in 1997 (25% of GDP for Korea and 30% of GDP for Thailand; see Burnside, Eichenbaum,

and Rebelo (2001)).12 China is another example of a country with a very large volume of

nonperforming loans in the banking sector. Allen, Qian, and Qian (2004) show that China has

had consistently high growth rates since the beginning of economic reforms in the late 1970s,

even though its legal system is not well developed and law enforcement is poor. Our paper

argues that the incentives for insiders to overinvest can at least partly account for China’s high

economic growth despite weak investor protection.13

   Finally, note that the controlling shareholder’s incentive to overinvest in our model derives

solely from pecuniary private bene…ts. In reality, controlling shareholders also receive nonpe-

cuniary private bene…ts in the form of empire building or name recognition from managing

larger …rms. The pursuit of such nonpecuniary private bene…ts exacerbates the controlling

shareholder’s incentive to overinvest (see also Baumol (1959), Williamson (1964), and Jensen




                                               24
(1986)). Also, controlling shareholders are often founding family members with a desire to

pass the “empire” bearing their names down to their o¤spring (Burkart, Panunzi, and Shleifer

(2003)). Incorporating these nonpecuniary private bene…ts would increase the degree of over-

investment and amplify the mechanism described in our paper.

     We next compute …rm value from the perspectives of outside shareholders and controlling

shareholders.


B.     Tobin’s q and Controlling Shareholder’s Shadow (Tobin’s) q

Proposition 2 Tobin’s q increases with investor protection                       and with the controlling share-

holder’s cash ‡ow rights, with dq=d > 0 and dq=d > 0, respectively.


     Intuitively, both outright stealing and investment distortions lower …rm value, as measured

by Tobin’s q. Stronger investor protection mitigates both stealing and investment distortion.

As a result, Tobin’s q is higher.

     Empirical evidence largely supports the predictions in Proposition 2. La Porta et al. (2002),

Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004) …nd a positive

relationship between …rm value and investor protection. The incentive-alignment e¤ect due to

higher cash ‡ow rights is consistent with empirical evidence in Claessens et al. (2002) on …rm

value and cash ‡ow ownership.

     We now turn to the controlling shareholder’s (shadow) …rm valuation P^ . Using the equi-

librium MRS, we evaluate the controlling shareholder’s cash ‡ow stream M=                               (per share) as

follows:
                                      Z   1
                             1                                    M (s)              1
                  P^ (t) =       Et           e   (s t)
                                                          M (s)           ds =           2i
                                                                                              K (t) :            (33)
                                      t                           M (t)          1




                                                             25
Thus, we may interpret q^, given below, as the controlling shareholder’s shadow Tobin’s q:


                                                         1
                                             q^ =            2i
                                                                  :                                   (34)
                                                    1


     We make two observations. First, it is obvious that q^ is higher than q , which is Tobin’s

q under perfect investor protection as given in (24). By revealed preferences, the controlling

shareholder can always set the investment-capital ratio to i and steal nothing s = 0, which

would imply q^ = q = q . If instead he chooses s > 0 and distorts investment i > i , it must be

the case that q^ > q . Second, using Proposition 2, we have q > q for …rms under imperfect

investor protection. Combining these two results, it follows that shadow q is larger than the

…rst-best Tobin’s q, which in turn is larger than Tobin’s q; q^ > q > q. This shows that

there is a the value transfer from outside shareholders to controlling shareholders when investor

protection is imperfect. However, outside shareholders are rational in the model and hence pay

the fair market prices for their shares.


C.      Risk-Free Rate

The equilibrium interest rate r given in (23) is determined by three components: (i) The dis-

count rate ; (ii) an economic growth e¤ect,         (i        ); and (iii) a negative precautionary savings

term,     2 i2   ( + 1) =2. In a risk-neutral world, the interest rate must equal the subjective dis-

count rate       in order to clear the market. This explains the …rst term. The intuition for the

second term, the growth e¤ect, is that a higher net investment-capital ratio (i                  ) implies

that more goods are available for future consumption, raising the demand for current goods.

To clear the market, the interest rate increases. This e¤ect is stronger when the agent is less

willing to substitute consumption intertemporally, which corresponds to a lower elasticity of


                                                    26
intertemporal substitution 1= , or a higher . The intuition for the precautionary e¤ect is that

a high net investment-capital ratio increases the riskiness of …rms’cash ‡ows and makes agents

more willing to save. This preference for precautionary savings reduces current demand for

consumption and decreases the interest rate. The next proposition describes how the interest

rate changes with investor protection.


Proposition 3 The interest rate decreases in investor protection        and ownership      if and

only if 1 >   2(   + 1) i.


   Weakening investor protection has two opposing e¤ects on the equilibrium interest rate.

Both e¤ects result from investment being higher under weaker investor protection. First, the

economic growth e¤ect leads to higher interest rates. Second, the precautionary savings e¤ect

leads to a lower interest rate. The growth e¤ect dominates the precautionary e¤ect if and only

if 1 >   2(   + 1) i. As demonstrated in the Appendix this condition is satis…ed for su¢ ciently

low , h, or    , and holds in all our calibrations below.

   As a simple assessment of the empirical validity of Proposition 3, we use the long-run

average interest rate data in Campbell (2003) and separate the countries into civil law countries

(those with weaker investor protection) and common law countries (those with better investor

protection) following La Porta et al. (1998). Consistent with the model, the average real interest

rate for the sample of common law countries is 1:89% per year and statistically smaller than

the average real interest rate for the sample of civil law countries of 2:35% per year. Obviously,

a caveat is in order as these unconditional means do not control for other characteristics such

as default risk or liquidity.

   We next turn to the predictions on volatility, risk premium, and the expected return.




                                                27
D.     Volatility, Risk Premium, and Expected Return

Proposition 4 Return volatility     P,   risk premium , and the expected return all decrease in

investor protection   and ownership      .


     Recall that Proposition 1 shows that weaker investor protection generates incentives to

invest. Because investment generates volatility in the capital accumulation process (through

investment-speci…c technology shocks), the rate of capital accumulation becomes more volatile

under weaker investor protection. With the economy on a balanced growth path, the return on

…rm equity is also more volatile under weaker investor protection (recall that P (t) = qK (t)).

     The equilibrium risk premium is given by



                                                 2       2 2
                                             =   P   =    i :                                    (35)



Hence, a larger volatility (due to greater investment) implies a higher equity risk premium in

equilibrium. The expected return on equity is given by the sum of the interest rate r and the

risk premium . Since both r and the risk premium                decrease in investor protection , the

expected return on equity also decreases with the degree of investor protection.14

     There is evidence in support of Proposition 4. Hail and Leuz (2004) …nd that countries with

strong securities regulation and enforcement mechanisms exhibit lower cost of capital than coun-

tries with weak legal institutions. Daouk, Lee, and Ng (2004) create an index of capital market

governance that captures di¤erences in insider trading laws, short-selling restrictions, and earn-

ings opacity. They model excess equity returns using an international capital asset market

model that allows for varying degrees of …nancial integration. Consistent with Proposition 4,

they show that improvements in their index of capital market governance are associated with



                                                 28
lower equity risk premia. Harvey (1995) shows that emerging markets display higher volatility

of returns and larger equity risk premia. Bekaert and Harvey (1997) correlate their estimated

conditional stock return volatilities with …nancial, microstructure, and macroeconomic vari-

ables and …nd some evidence that countries with lower country credit ratings, as measured by

Institutional Investor, have higher volatility. Since emerging market economies and countries

with worse credit ratings have on average weaker corporate governance, this empirical evidence

is consistent with our theory.

   We now brie‡y provide a characterization of the dividend yield. Let y be the equilibrium

dividend yield: y = D=P = d=q: We have the following proposition.


Proposition 5 The dividend yield is given by



                                                            2 2
                                 y=   +(    1) i             i    :                         (36)
                                                        2


The dividend yield decreases (increases) with the degree of investor protection    when     > 1

( < 1).


   Weaker investor protection gives rise to a higher investment-capital ratio, but also a more

volatile dividend-output process. As we discuss earlier, the e¤ect of investor protection on

growth (via incentives to “steal and overinvest”) is stronger than the e¤ect on volatility (via

precautionary savings). Therefore, whether the dividend yield y increases or decreases in   only

depends on the sign of       1. For logarithmic utility investors ( = 1), the dividend yield is

constant and equal to the investors’subjective discount rate . This is the standard result: The

logarithmic investor does not have an intertemporal hedging demand (Merton (1971)). When

  > 1, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (1= ) is less than unity, implying that the


                                              29
income/wealth e¤ect in consumption is stronger than the substitution e¤ect. As a result, the

net impact of strengthening investor protection (increasing ) enhances …rm value by a greater

percentage than it does for dividends. Therefore, the dividend yield y decreases with         when

 > 1. For      < 1, the substitution e¤ect is stronger and the opposite result holds.

     Next , we quantify the e¤ects of imperfect investor protection using our analytically tractable

framework.



V.      Quantifying the E¤ects of Investor Protection

In this section we …rst provide a calibration of the parameters. Then, we calculate the impli-

cations on stock market revaluation and wealth redistribution if investor protection were to be

made perfect.


A.     Calibration

Our model is quite parsimonious for a heterogeneous-agents equilibrium model, having only

seven parameters. As a result, the calibration procedure is easier, more transparent, and also

more robust. Indeed, we show that our main quantitative results on stock market revaluation

and welfare bene…ts from enhancing investor protection are e¤ectively unchanged under vari-

ous moment calibrations, provided that we match the empirically documented level of private

bene…ts of control.

     As is standard, some parameters are obtained by direct measurements conducted in other

studies. These include the risk aversion coe¢ cient        , the depreciation rate , the rate of

time preference , and the equity share of the controlling shareholder . The remaining three

parameters ( ; ; h) are selected so that the model matches three moments in the data.



                                                 30
   We calibrate the model to the U.S. and South Korea. Starting with the …rst set of parame-

ters, we choose the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion     to be 2, and the subjective discount

rate   to be 0:01 (Hansen and Singleton (1982)). The annual depreciation rate is set to 0:08.

These parameters are common to both the U.S. and Korea. We choose the share of …rm own-

ership held by the controlling shareholders to be    = 0:08 for the U.S. and     = 0:39 for Korea

(Dahlquist et al. (2003)), representing the percentage of overall market capitalization that is

closely held.

   For the second set of parameters, we calibrate the productivity parameter h, the volatility

parameter , and the investor protection parameter          so that the model matches (i) the real

interest rate, (ii) the standard deviation of output growth, and (iii) the ratio of private bene…ts

to …rm value, (^
               q   q) =q. The average U.S. real interest rate is set to 0:9% (Campbell (2003)).

The Korean annual real interest rate is set to 3:7%, obtained as the average annual real prime

lending rate in the period 1980 to 2000 using data from the World Bank World Development

Indicators (WDI) database. Using the WDI data set, we set the annual standard deviation

of output growth in the U.S. to 2% and that in South Korea to 3:77%. Finally, the ratio

of the dollar value of private bene…ts to …rm value (in the model and in Dyck and Zingales

(2004), this is equal to    (^
                             q   q) =q) is set to 0:2% in the U.S. and 8:6% in Korea.15 Using

our calibrated values for   , we have that (^
                                            q     q) =q is equal to 2:5% in the U.S. and 22% in

Korea, respectively. The resulting calibrated parameters are ( ; ; h) = ( :25; 2325; :0897) for

the U.S. and ( ; ; h) = ( :397; 28:44; :1187) for Korea. For both countries, these parameters

imply that the model matches all three moments exactly.

   The calibrated model implies a stealing fraction ( = (1         ) = ) of 0:04% for the U.S. and

2:14% for Korea, which is 54 times higher than that of the U.S. The ‡ow costs of stealing as a




                                                31
fraction of gross output ( (s; hK) =hK = (1                )2 =2 ) are 0:02% for the U.S. and 0:65% for

Korea, respectively. Note that under the calibration ownership concentration is much higher in

Korea than in the U.S., consistent with empirical evidence that ownership is higher in countries

with weaker investor protection (La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999)).16


B.    A Stock Market Analysis of Imperfect Investor Protection

Consider the hypothetical experiment of improving investor protection to the perfect benchmark

level ( = 1). Using our calibrated baseline parameters, the model predicts that moving to

perfect investor protection produces a U.S. stock market revaluation (measured by (q             q) =q)

of 2:49% and a Korean stock market revaluation of 21:96%. The dollar value of these stock

market revaluations can be obtained by multiplying the numbers above by the respective stock

market capitalization. Using the 1997 market capitalization values from Dahlquist et al. (2003),

the stock market revaluation results in an increase of $281 billion (i.e., 2.49% $11.3 trillion)

in U.S. stock market capitalization and $9.2 billion (i.e., 21.96% $42 billion) in Korean stock

market capitalization.

     These numbers suggest that agency con‡icts have a signi…cant e¤ect on …rm value. More-

over, the size of the stock market revaluation accompanying the improvement in investor pro-

tection matches closely the controlling shareholder’s private bene…ts of control. The following

approximation sharpens the intuition behind the determinants of the stock market revaluation:


                                 q       q   q^       q       2
                                                                  (i   i ):                        (37)
                                     q            q


The size of the revaluation is thus approximately equal to the ratio of the private bene…ts

to …rm value, (^
               q   q) =q, plus a term that re‡ects the di¤erence of the volatility/risk aversion


                                                      32
e¤ects under imperfect versus perfect investor protection. The latter term is economically

negligible compared with the …rst term (^
                                        q      q) =q for any reasonable calibration of volatility

and risk aversion. We conclude that the stock market revaluation calculation above is robust

to model parameters so long as the model is required to match the size of private bene…ts in

the economy (e.g., (^
                    q    q) =q = 22% in Korea). This result con…rms our earlier intuition that

the private-bene…ts e¤ect dominates the risk aversion/volatility e¤ect.

     We next measure the welfare cost of weak investor protection.


C.     A Welfare Analysis of Imperfect Investor Protection

One approach to quantify the net e¤ect of imperfect investor protection on the aggregate econ-

omy is to use a welfare criterion that weighs the utility levels of the controlling shareholder

and the outside shareholder. Because of the inherent subjectivity of this approach, we in-

stead compute measures of equivalent variations for the outside shareholder and the controlling

shareholder. Both measures quantify the wealth redistribution from outside shareholders to

controlling shareholders, and do not require us to make any subjective assumptions on welfare

weights.

     For the outside shareholder, we compute the fraction of capital stock (1    2)   that the out-

side shareholder is willing to give up for a costless and permanent improvement in investor

protection from the current level     to the …rst-best level of    = 1. We measure the wel-

fare e¤ects of changing investor protection as a fraction of the capital stock rather than the

wealth level because the latter involves a valuation that depends on the current level of investor

protection. The outside shareholder is indi¤erent if and only if the following equality holds:



                                      J2 ( 2 K0 ) = J2 (K0 );                                 (38)


                                                33
where J2 ( ) and J2 ( ) are the outside shareholder’s value functions in terms of capital stock

under the current level of investor protection       and perfect investor protection                = 1, respec-

tively, and K0 is the current capital stock level. Using the explicit value function formula for

J2 (K) in the Appendix, we obtain


                                                                     1
                                                d    y           1

                                          2   =                          ;                                    (39)
                                                d    y


where d and y are the dividend-capital ratio and the dividend yield, respectively.

        While the outside shareholder loses from weak investor protection, the controlling share-

holder bene…ts. For the controlling shareholder, we compute the fraction of capital stock

(   1     1) that he needs in order for him to voluntarily give up the status quo of imperfect

investor protection in exchange for perfect investor protection                   = 1. Therefore, we have



                                        J1 ( 1 K0 ) = J1 (K0 );                                               (40)



where K0 is the current capital stock level. Using J1 ( ) given in the appendix, we may solve

(40) and obtain:17
                                                                     1
                                                m        y       1

                                          1   =                          :                                    (41)
                                                m        y

The following proposition characterizes the comparative static properties of                    2   and   1   with

respect to investor protection .


Proposition 6 The outside shareholder’s utility cost is higher under weaker investor protec-

tion, with d 2 =d > 0: The controlling shareholder’s utility gain is higher with weaker investor

protection, with d 1 =d < 0. For any          < 1, 0 <       2   <1<         1.




                                                    34
    Outside shareholders are willing to give up a substantial part of the capital stock that they

own for stronger investor protection. Even for the U.S., outside shareholders are willing to

give up 0:38% of their capital stock if U.S. investor protection can be made perfect. In Korea,

outside shareholders are willing to give up 11:17% of their capital stock to adopt perfect investor

protection. The utility losses for outside shareholders associated with weak investor protection

are due to both stealing and investment distortions.

    Clearly, in terms of the percentage of their owned capital stock, Korean outside shareholders

value the enhancement of investor protection more than U.S. investors do. However, the total

welfare gain for outside shareholders from improving investor protection is much larger in the

U.S. than in Korea because of the much higher capital stock in the U.S. To express the welfare

gains in dollar terms, we compute (1     2 ) qK0 ,   where q is the value of Tobin’s q under the status

quo. The adjustment for q expresses the welfare gains as a fraction of the market value of the

capital stock as opposed to its book value. Our calculations show that outside shareholders gain

$43 billion (i.e.,   .38% $11.3 trillion) and $4.7 billion (i.e., 11.17% $42 billion) in the U.S.

and Korea, respectively, if investor protection can be made perfect. The total dollar value gain

for outside shareholders in the U.S. is about 10 times the gain for outside shareholders in Korea.

These calculations indicate that the bene…ts of improving investor protection are economically

signi…cant. Next, we show that our quantitative results on welfare costs are robust.

    Table I presents results from various calibrations of the model that depart from the above

baseline model calibration in the following way. With each new value of ,               ; or , we re-

calibrate , ; and h to ensure that the model matches the three moments used in the baseline

calibration (the real interest rate, the standard deviation of output growth, and the ratio of

private bene…ts to …rm value). The conclusion from Table I is clear. Provided that the model




                                                 35
is required to match empirically observed private bene…ts among other moments, the welfare

cost of imperfect investor protection to U.S. or Korean investors is quite robust across di¤erent

calibrations.



                                          [Table I here.]



   While we show that the utility gain from increasing investor protection is large for outside

shareholders, we do not view policy interventions to improve investor protection as an easy

task. This is not surprising, even if one ignores costly implementation, because improving

investor protection involves a di¢ cult political reform process that reduces the bene…ts to

incumbents. The resulting wealth redistribution is signi…cant with controlling shareholders in

the U.S. (Korea) losing about 2:1% (8:4%) of their capital stock when moving to the benchmark

case of perfect investor protection. Moreover, the controlling shareholders are less subject to

the collective action problem than outside shareholders are because there are fewer controlling

shareholders than outside shareholders, and the amount of rents at stake for each controlling

shareholder is substantial. Thus, incumbent entrepreneurs and controlling shareholders are

often among the most powerful interest groups in the policy making process, particularly in

countries with weaker investor protection. It is in the vested interests of controlling shareholders

to maintain the status quo, since they enjoy the large private bene…ts at the cost of outside

outside shareholders and future entrepreneurs.



VI.     Empirical Evidence

In this section, we empirically explore the following implications from our technological assump-

tions (equation (1)) and the equilibrium balanced growth solution (Theorem 1):

                                                36
Proposition 7 The standard deviations of GDP growth and stock returns are given by i.


     Speci…cally, we test whether (i) the standard deviation of GDP growth is positively cor-

related with the investment-capital ratio and (ii) the standard deviation of stock returns is

positively correlated with the investment-capital ratio. We control for other sources of uncer-

tainty that may arise from cross-country variations in .18


A.     Data

We use the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) annual real per capita GDP

for the 1960 to 2000 period to measure the volatility of GDP growth. All available data by

country are used to estimate the volatility of GDP growth. We measure the volatility of stock

returns by using the monthly return series from MSCI (starting in January of 1970 for some

countries). We restrict the sample to countries for which an MSCI index exists and the ratio of

market capitalization to GDP is at least 10% by the year 2000. Because the variable DCIVIL

is not available for Hungary, Morocco, Poland, and China, these countries are excluded from

the analysis, leaving 40 observations.19

     We estimate a country’s long-run average investment-capital ratio using aggregate data.

Because the model’s capital-GDP ratio is constant, that is, dY (t) =Y (t) = dK (t) =K (t), we

can use the capital accumulation equation (1) to obtain the long-run GDP growth rate (i      ):

Hence, the investment-capital ratio is the sum of the long-run mean of real GDP growth and

the depreciation rate , which is set at 0:08. Note that the premise of this procedure is that

of a constant capital-GDP ratio within a country, but not across countries. Following King

and Levine (1994), we estimate the long-run mean GDP growth rate using a weighted average

of the country’s average GDP growth rate and the world’s average GDP growth rate with the



                                              37
weight on world growth equal to 0:75. The weighting of growth rates is meant to account for

mean-reversion in growth rates. In spite of the balanced growth path assumption underlying

this estimate, King and Levine (1994) show that it produces estimates of investment-capital

ratios that well match those computed using the perpetual inventory method.

     We conduct our tests controlling for several variables that may directly or indirectly a¤ect

volatility. First, we control for measures of investor protection using a country’s legal origin

(DCIVIL = 1 for a civil law country and 0 for a common law country) and the anti-director

rights variable from La Porta et al. (1998) (ANTIDIR assigns a higher score for better investor

protection.) Second, we control for sources of volatility that can capture cross-country variation

in . As measures of aggregate uncertainty, we use the volatility of real exchange rate returns

(SDRER),20 and the degree of openness as given by the 1960 ratio of exports plus imports to

GDP (OPEN).


B.     Results

Figure 1 and columns (1) to (5) in Table II report the results for the relation between the

standard deviation of output growth and the investment-capital ratio. Figure 1 illustrates

a positive (unconditional) association as predicted by the model. Table II shows that the

signi…cance of this association survives the inclusion of control variables. Regression (1) in

Table II documents the association illustrated in Figure 1 (the coe¢ cient on I=K is 1:033

with a p-value of 0:002). The estimated coe¢ cient implies that 60% of the growth volatility

di¤erential between the U.S. and Korea may be explained by di¤erent investment-capital ratios

in these countries.21 In regressions (2) to (5), we add several controls for other sources of

volatility, one at a time. The coe¢ cients for the investment-capital ratio across regressions (1)

to (5) vary a little, but are all signi…cant. Controlling for the volatility of the exchange rate


                                                38
return (SDRER) contributes the most explanatory power (regression (4)), where the coe¢ cient

on SDRER has a p-value less than:001 and the regression displays an adjusted R2 equal to

0:441.



                                 [Figure 1 and Table II here.]



   Figure 2 and columns (6) to (10) in Table II present the results for the association between

the standard deviation of stock returns and the investment-capital ratio. (For an analysis of

conditional volatility, see Bekaert and Harvey (1997).) As predicted by the model, Figure

2 illustrates a positive (unconditional) association between these variables. Regression (6)

in Table II gives the numbers underlying the statistical association in Figure 2. (The slope

coe¢ cient is 2:288, with a p-value of 0:038.) This estimate implies that 31% of the stock return

volatility di¤erence between the U.S. and Korea is due to the di¤erent investment-capital ratios

in the two countries.22 In regressions (7) through (10), we add controls for other sources

of volatility, one at a time. The signi…cance of I=K remains despite some variation in the

estimated coe¢ cients, mainly when SDRER or OPEN are included in the regressions. Again,

adding SDRER contributes the most explanatory power (p-value < 0:001 and R2 = 0:312).



                                        [Figure 2 here.]



VII.     Conclusions

Corporate governance is a …rst-order issue in many countries where …rms are often run by

controlling shareholders. Much empirical work documents the e¤ects of imperfect investor

protection on private bene…ts and …rm value around the world. However, there is limited

                                               39
theoretical research on the e¤ects of investor protection on capital accumulation, asset pricing,

and welfare costs in an equilibrium context.

   We develop one of the …rst dynamic stochastic general equilibrium frameworks to study

the e¤ects of con‡icts of interest between controlling shareholders and outside shareholders

on welfare and equilibrium asset pricing when investor protection is imperfect. Despite the

con‡icts of interest and the heterogeneity of investment opportunities between the controlling

shareholders and outside shareholders, we are able to characterize the equilibrium asset prices

and resource allocation in closed form. The analytical formulae allow us to derive precise the-

oretical predictions on investment and asset prices and to generate new economic intuition on

the relevant economic mechanisms. The key insights are as follows. Weaker investor protection

implies higher levels of private bene…ts, which in turn produce stronger incentives for overin-

vestment. A larger level of investment induces higher capital accumulation volatility (due to

investment-speci…c shocks), which is priced in equilibrium via a higher risk premium. In equi-

librium, the agency channel (of pursuing private bene…ts) dominates the risk aversion/volatility

e¤ect. As a result, weaker investor protection leads to lower Tobin’s q, a higher interest rate,

higher volatility of asset returns, and a higher risk premium. These predictions are consistent

with existing evidence.

   Moreover, our model allows us to make quantitative statements on the signi…cance of weak

investor protection on investors’ welfare and market valuation. We show that strengthening

investor protection produces a signi…cant wealth redistribution e¤ect from controlling share-

holders to outside shareholders. Outside shareholders in Korea are willing to give up 11.2% of

their capital stock holdings, or $4.7 billion of current wealth, in exchange for perfect investor

protection. In the U.S., outside shareholders are willing to give up 0.38% of their capital stock




                                               40
holdings, or $43 billion of current wealth. Our quantitative results on welfare are quite robust

but hinge upon the empirically observed large private bene…ts of control, as reported by Dyck

and Zingales (2004). However, the political process to improve investor protection is naturally

di¢ cult because the political power of controlling shareholders and incumbent entrepreneurs is

much stronger than that of outside investors and future entrepreneurs.

   It is worth emphasizing that our key insights depend on the controlling shareholders’ in-

centives to overinvest and on the assumption of investment-speci…c technology shocks, but do

not depend crucially on the model’s analytical tractability. That said, our model does not

capture other prominent features of asset prices, such as time variation in risk premia and

volatility. Extending our paper to generate more realistic time-series properties of asset prices

is an interesting avenue for future research.

   Another limitation of our model is that all …rms and controlling shareholders are identical.

This restrictive assumption is made for analytical convenience. Allowing for heterogeneity across

…rms within a country permits the study of other interesting and important issues, such as cross-

sectional …rm equity returns. For example, the controlling shareholder’s risk sharing motives

and induced time-varying equilibrium wealth distribution will have additional e¤ects on welfare

and asset pricing. We think that the mechanism proposed here remains important in this more

general and complex setting, although the magnitudes of the mechanism are likely to change.

The …rm-homogeneity assumption naturally implies no dynamic interactions between …rms. In

a model in which capital is allocated across …rms and the funds available for investment are

scarce, overinvestment in one …rm with weaker governance suggests underinvestment in other

…rms. This generates additional welfare losses for the economy, in line with Rajan and Zingales

(1998), who provide empirical evidence that capital does not always ‡ow to its most productive




                                                41
use in countries with lower …nancial development.




                                             42
Appendix

   This Appendix contains the proofs for the theorem and propositions in the main text.

Throughout we make use of the following assumptions:


Assumption 1 :h >      + (1        ):


Assumption 2 :1        < .


Assumption 3 :2 ( + 1) [(1 + ) h                  (1     )]   2         1 + (1 + ) h   2 2:




Assumption 4 :(1        ) h > i.


Assumption 5 : + (         1) (i    )     (       1)i2 2 =2 > 0 :


   Assumption 1 states that the …rm is su¢ ciently productive and thus investment will be

positive for risk-neutral …rms under perfect investor protection. Assumption 2 ensures agency

costs exist and lie within the economically interesting and relevant region. Assumptions 3 and

4 ensure positive real investment and positive dividends, respectively. Assumption 5 gives rise

to …nite positive Tobin’s q and dividend yield. While we describe the intuition behind these

assumptions, obviously we cannot take the intuition and implications of these assumptions in

isolation. These assumptions jointly ensure that the equilibrium exists with positive …nite net

private bene…ts, investment rate, dividend, and Tobin’s q.


   Proof of Theorem 1. We conjecture and verify that the controlling shareholder’s value

function is given by
                                              1                     1
                               J1 (K) =                A1 K 1             ;
                                          1




                                                   43
where A1 is a constant to be determined. The …rst-order condition (26) gives



                                                                                   2
                                                  m           = A1 1                   i       ;                                      (A.1)



where m = M=K and i = I=K are the controlling shareholder’s equilibrium consumption-

capital ratio and the …rm’s investment-capital ratio, respectively. Substituting the stealing

function into (6) gives


                            1        2                                            1            2
            m= d+                        h=            (1      )h            i+                    h       =     ((1 + )h      i) ;   (A.2)
                                2                                                      2


where
                                                                    (1            )2
                                                              =
                                                                         2

is an agency cost parameter and d is the dividend-capital ratio. Substituting (A.1) and (A.2)

into the HJB equation (25) gives


                       1                          A1                                       2
           0 =                  m1                          + (i         ) A1            i2 A1
                   1                          1                                        2
                       A1                                                              A1                               2
                                                                    2
               =                ((1 + )h           i) 1                  i                 + (i                  ) A1       i2 A1 :
                   1                                                               1                                    2


The above equality implies the following relation:



                                                                                   2
                                          ((1 + )h                  i) 1                   i = y;                                     (A.3)



where y is the dividend yield and is given by


                                                                                  1                        2 2
                                    y=            (1         ) (i            )+     (1                 )       i :                    (A.4)
                                                                                  2

                                                                        44
We note that (A.3) and (A.4) automatically imply the following inequality for the investment-

capital ratio:

                                                         2      1
                                                  i<                :                                                  (A.5)


This inequality will be used in proving the propositions.

      We further simplify (A.3) and give the following quadratic equation for the investment-

capital ratio i:


                     +1      2 2                         2
                              i         1 + (1 + ) h          i + (1 + ) h             (1           )       = 0:       (A.6)
                     2


For     > 0, solving the quadratic equation (A.6) gives


                                     1            h                               p         i
                                                                            2
                             i=               2
                                                       1 + (1 + ) h                             ;                      (A.7)
                                   ( + 1)


where
                                                      2 ( + 1)      2 ((1   + )h            (1          )    )
                     2                  2 2
                 =       1 + (1 + ) h         1                                                                    :
                                                                    2 [1   + (1 + ) h           2 ]2



In order to ensure that the investment-capital ratio given in (A.7) is a real number, we require

that       > 0, which is explicitly stated in Assumption 3. Next, we choose between the two roots

for the investment-capital ratio given in (A.7). We note that when = 0, the investment-capital

ratio is

                                   i = [(1 + ) h         (1         )           ]= ;


as directly implied by (A.6). Therefore, by a continuity argument, for > 0, the natural solution




                                                         45
for the investment-capital ratio is the smaller root in (A.7) and is thus given by


                                  1               h                              p i
                                                                         2
                          i=                 2
                                                      1 + (1 + ) h                          :                       (A.8)
                                ( + 1)


We also solve for the value function coe¢ cient A1 and obtain


                                                   m               m1
                                       A1 =               2i
                                                               =         ;                                          (A.9)
                                                  1                 y


where y is the dividend yield and is given by (A.4).

   Next, we check the transversality condition for the controlling shareholder:



                                                      T
                                   lim E e                jJ1 (K(T ))j = 0:                                        (A.10)
                                  T !1




It is equivalent to verify limT !1 E e           T K(T )1          = 0. We note that


                                                                                            2 i2
     E e    T
                K(T )1    = E e         T
                                            K01       exp (1         )       i                      T + iZ(T )
                                                                                            2
                                                                                 2 i2       1
                          = e     T
                                      K01     exp (1           ) i                      +            2 2
                                                                                                      i    T   :
                                                                                 2              2


Therefore, the transversality condition will be satis…ed if              > 0 and the dividend yield is positive

(y > 0), as stated in Assumption 5.

   Now we turn to the optimal consumption and asset allocation decisions for the outside

shareholder. Let J2 (K) denote the outside shareholder’s value function in terms of the …rm’s

capital stock K. Under the no-trade equilibrium conjecture, we can verify that the outside




                                                          46
shareholder’s value function is given by


                             Z       1
                                                       1
           J2 (K0 ) = E                  e     t
                                                               [(1          ) dK(t)]1             1 dt
                                 0                 1
                             1                                          1     1               1                     1
                    =                    [(1           ) dK0 ]1                       =             A2 W01              ;
                         1                                              y                 1


where A2 = q (1     )1     =d : Following Merton (1971), we can conclude that the outside share-

holder’s consumption rule is given by


                                                                     2
                                               r(1         )          (1          )
                     C2 (t) =                                                 2       (1          ) qK (t) ;
                                                                     2 2      P



where we use W2 (t) = (1         ) qK (t) : The portfolio rule is reported in (28). The transversality

condition for the outside shareholder is



                                                               T
                                             lim E e               jJ2 (K(T ))j = 0:
                                         T !1




Recall that in equilibrium, the outside shareholder’s wealth is all invested in …rm equity and

thus his initial wealth satis…es W2 (0) = (1                         ) qK0 . Since the outside shareholder’s wealth

dynamics and the …rm’s capital accumulation dynamics are both geometric Brownian motions

with the same drift and volatility parameters, it follows immediately that the transversality

condition for the outside shareholder is also met if and only if the dividend yield y is positive,

as stated in Assumption 5.

   To complete the proof of the theorem, we also give the equilibrium interest rate and Tobin’s

q. In equilibrium, the outside shareholder’s consumption is C2 (t) = (1                                            ) D (t). Applying

Ito’s lemma to the outside shareholder’s marginal utility,                                               t C (t)
                                                                                          2 (t)   =e        2        , we obtain the




                                                                   47
following process for the stochastic discount factor:


                                      d 2 (t)                          dK (t)   2 i2
                                              =           dt                  +      ( + 1) dt:
                                       2 (t)                            K (t)   2


The drift of    2   equals       r 2 , where r is the equilibrium interest rate. Importantly, the implied

equilibrium interest rate by the controlling shareholder’s                                   1   and the outside shareholder’s       2   are

equal. This con…rms the leading assumption that the controlling shareholders and the outside

shareholders …nd it optimal not to trade the risk-free asset at the equilibrium interest rate.

     Tobin’s q can be obtained by computing the ratio of market value to the replacement cost

of the …rm’s capital. The …rm’s market value is (from the perspective of outside shareholders):


                                                                 Z     1
                                                  1                         2 (s)
                                 P (t) =                  Et                        (1           ) D (s) ds :
                                             1                     t        2 (t)



Using the de…nitions                         t C (t)                        t (yW
                              2 (t)   =e        2               =e                  2 (t))        , D (t) =K (t) = d, and W2 (t) =K (t) =

(1     ) q, we can rewrite P (t) as


                                             Z    1
                          d                                                                         A1
               P (t) =                  Et            e        (s t)
                                                                       K (s)1       ds = d             K (t) = qK (t) ;
                       K (t)                  t                                                    m1


using the conjectured controlling shareholder’s value function J1 (K).

     Therefore, Tobin’s q is given by


                                                                                                           2        1
           d         1                       d                          1                            1                      1
     q=                  2i
                                 =                                          2i
                                                                                    =    1+                     h               2i
                                                                                                                                     ;
          m     1                      d + ( + )h                 1                                   2   d             1


where the …rst equality uses (A.9), the second equality uses (17), and the third follows from

simpli…cation.


                                                                           48
     A constant q and dividend-capital ratio d immediately implies that the drift coe¢ cients for

dividend, stock price, and capital stock are all the same, that is,                        D    =    P   =    K    =i     , and

the volatility coe¢ cients for dividend, stock price, and capital stock are also the same, that is,

 D   =   P    =     K   = i. A constant risk premium               is an immediate implication of constant                   P,


constant dividend-capital ratio d, and constant equilibrium risk-free interest rate.


     Proof of Proposition 1. De…ne


                            ( + 1) 2 2                        2
             f (x) =                x        1 + (1 + ) h          x + (1 + ) h                     (1       ):          (A.11)
                              2


Note that f (i) = 0, where i is the equilibrium investment-capital ratio and the smaller of the

zeros of f . Also, f (x) < 0 for any value of x between the two zeros of f and is greater than or

equal to zero elsewhere. Now,



                                              1   2       1
                                         f            =       2
                                                                         (1        ):
                                                          2


Therefore, f            1     2   < 0 if and only if Assumption 5 is met. Hence, under Assumption 5,

i<       1     2.   Also, under Assumption 1, f (0) = (1 + ) h                             (1        ) > 0; which implies

that i > 0.

     Abusing notation slightly, use (A.11) to de…ne the equilibrium investment-capital ratio

implicitly as f (i; ) = 0. Taking the total di¤erential of f with respect to                                      and using the

implicit function theorem, we obtain


                                                             h 1     2i
                                         di   1
                                            =             2 i + ((1 + ) h          2
                                                                                       :
                                         d      1                             i)




                                                              49
At the smaller zero of f , i <           1    2.   Together with (1 + ) h                          i > (1         )h     i = d > 0, this

implies that di=d > 0.


   Proof of Proposition 2.                    We prove the result with respect to                                 . The case for the

controlling shareholder’s ownership                 is then immediate. Use the expression for the dividend

yield in (36) to express Tobin’s q as the ratio between the dividend-capital ratio d and the

dividend yield y. Di¤erentiating log q with respect to investor protection gives:


             d log q           1       d           di         d        dy
                        =            h
               d               y       d           d          y        d
                               1       d           di                            di                          di
                        =            h                   q (                1)            (        1) 2 i
                               y       d           d                             d                           d
                                 "                                                    1
                                                                                                                  #
                               1 1                  di          1            2                1      2
                        =                2
                                             h               1+                  h                       h+            > 0;
                               y                    d           2            d                 2    d


where the inequality uses          > 0 and di=d < 0.


   Proof of Proposition 3. Di¤erentiate (23) with respect to the agency cost parameter

to obtain:
                                             dr                   2                   di
                                                =        1            ( + 1) i           ;
                                             d                                        d

and note that di=d          > 0. Hence, the interest rate is lower when investor protection improves

if and only if 1 >     2(    + 1) i, or using (A.8), if and only if



                                                                                                     2
                                   > 2 [(1 + ) h             ( + 1) ((1               ) + )]             :



This inequality is always true if (1 + ) h                   ( + 1) ((1                ) + ) < 0; otherwise, it holds for

su¢ ciently low , h, or        .


   Proof of Proposition 4. Weaker investor protection or lower share of equity held by the


                                                                  50
controlling shareholder both lead to a higher agency cost parameter                                  . Proposition 1 shows

that a higher         leads to more investment and hence both higher volatility of stock returns

 2   =   2 i2   and higher expected excess returns               =          2.   To see the e¤ect of investor protection
 P                                                                          P

on total expected equity returns, we note that


                                     d        2 i2   +r          2                   2       di
                                                          =          i+1                 i      ,
                                              d                                              d


which is strictly positive under Assumption 5. Expected returns are higher with weaker investor

protection or a lower share of equity held by the controlling shareholder.


     Proof of Proposition 5.               We …rst use the equivalent martingale measure to derive the

formula for dividend yield. Adjusting for risk, the dividend process (under the risk-neutral

probability measure) is as follows:23



                                         dD(t) = gD(t)dt +              D D(t)dZ(t) ;
                                                                                         ~                          (A.12)



      ~
where Z(t) is the Brownian motion under the risk-neutral probability measure and g is the

risk-adjusted growth rate g =             D          =i              i2 2 . Therefore, …rm value is given by24


                                Z   1                                 Z     1
                                         2 (s)             ~t                        r(s t)              D(t)
                   P (t) = Et                     D(s)ds = E                     e            D(s)ds =        :     (A.13)
                                t        2 (t)                          t                                r g


In turn, the dividend yield y is given by y = r                    g.

     Di¤erentiating the dividend yield y with respect to                             , we obtain


                                    dy   di
                                       =    (             1) 1          2
                                                                            i 7 0 i¤          7 1:
                                    d    d



                                                              51
Note that the agency cost parameter               decreases with both investor protection and                 and

ownership . The proposition then follows.


      Proof of Proposition 6. Di¤erentiating log                2   with respect to          gives


                        d log    2       d log d      1 d log y
                                     =
                           d               d        1      d
                                         1 d ((1     )h i) 1                    2       di
                                     =                      +    1                  i
                                         d        d           y                         d
                                         11           1 q^ q di
                                     =        2
                                                 h              > 0;
                                         d            d q^ d


where the inequality uses di=d < 0 (from Proposition 1) and q^ > q. Because d 2 =d > 0 and

lim   !1 2   = 1, we have   2   < 1 for any       < 1. Di¤erentiating log           1   with respect to    gives


                            d log    1        d log m       1 d log y
                                         =
                               d                 d       1      d
                                                hd        1    2 i              di
                                         =           +
                                              m d            y        m         d
                                                hd
                                         =            < 0;
                                              m d


                                                  y
where we use d =d      < 0 and m =            1       2i   (implied by (A.3)). Because d 1 =d             < 0 and

lim   !1 1   = 1, we have   1   > 1 for any       < 1.




                                                           52
References




Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 1994, A uni…ed model of investment under uncertainty,

    American Economic Review 84, 1369-1384.


Albuquerque, Rui, and Hugo Hopenhayn, 2004, Optimal lending contracts and …rm dynamics,

    Review of Economic Studies 71, 285-315.


Albuquerque, Rui, and Neng Wang 2004, Corporate governance and asset prices in a two-

    country model, Working paper, University of Rochester.


Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian, 2005, Law, …nance and economic growth in china,

    Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 57-116.


Bae, Kee-Hong, Jun-Koo Kang, and Jin-Mo Kim, 2002, Tunneling or value added? Evidence

    from mergers by Korean business groups, Journal of Finance 57, 2695-2740.


Barclay, Michael, and Cli¤ord Holderness, 1989, Private bene…ts of control of public corpora-

    tions, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 371-395.


Baumol, William, 1959, Business behavior, value, and growth (Macmillan, New York).


Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, Reinier Kraakman, and George G. Triantis, 2000, Stock pyramids,

    cross-ownership, and dual class equity, in Randall K. Morck, ed.: Concentrated Corporate

    Ownership (University of Chicago Press).



                                            53
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey, 1997, Emerging equity market volatility, Journal of

    Financial Economics 43, 29-77.


Berle, Adolf A., and Gardiner C. Means, 1932, The modern corporation and private property

    (Harcourt, Brace & World, New York).


Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2002, Ferreting out tunneling:

    An application to Indian business groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 121-148.


Blanchard, Olivier J., Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1994, What do …rms

    do with cash windfalls? Journal of Financial Economics 36, 337-360.


Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi, 1997, Large shareholders, monitoring, and

    the value of the …rm, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 693-728.


Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Family …rms, Journal of Finance

    58, 2167-2202.


Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sérgio Rebelo, 2001, Prospective de…cits and the

    Asian currency crisis, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1155–1197.


Campbell, John Y., 2003, Consumption-Based Asset Pricing, in G. M. Constantinides, M.

    Harris and R. M. Stulz, eds.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Vol 1B (North-

    Holland, Amsterdam).


Castro, Rui, Gian Luca Clementi, and Glenn MacDonald, 2004, Investor protection, optimal

    incentives, and economic growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1131-1175.


                                           54
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Joseph Fan, and Larry Lang, 2002, Disentangling the incen-

    tive and entrenchment e¤ects of large shareholdings, Journal of Finance 57, 2741–2771.


Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, An Intertemporal general

    equilibrium model of asset prices, Econometrica 53, 363-384.


Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pinkowitz, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate gov-

    ernance and the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.


Danthine, Jean-Pierre, and John B. Donaldson, 2004, The Macroeconomics of delegated man-

    agement, Working paper, Columbia University.


DeMarzo, Peter M., and Michael J. Fishman, 2007, Agency and optimal investment dynamics,

    Review of Financial Studies, 20, 151-188.


DeMarzo, Peter M., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2006 Optimal security design and dynamic capital

    structure in a continuous-time agency model, Journal of Finance 61, 2681-2724.


Daouk, Hazem, Charles M. C. Lee, and David T. Ng, 2004, Capital market governance: Do

    securities laws a¤ect market performance? Working paper, Johnson Graduate School of

    Management.


Doidge, Craig, A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign …rms listed in the U.S. worth

    more? Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.


Dow, James, Gary B. Gorton, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2005, Equilibrium investment and

    asset prices under imperfect corporate control, American Economic Review 95, 659-681.


                                            55
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Private bene…ts of control: An International

    comparison, Journal of Finance 59, 537-600.


Fisher, Jonas D. M., 2006, The Dynamic e¤ects of neutral and investment-speci…c technology

    shocks, Journal of Political Economy 114, 413-451.


Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices,

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.


Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Hu¤man, 1988, Investment, capacity

    utilization and the real business cycle, American Economic Review 78, 402-417.


Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, 1997, The role of investment-speci…c

    technological change in the business cycle, European Economic Review 44, 91-115.


Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, 2000, Long-run implications of investment-

    speci…c technological change, American Economic Review 87, 342- 362.


Hail, Luzi, and Christian Leuz, 2004, International di¤erences in cost of equity capital: Do

    legal institutions and securities regulation matter?, Working paper, Wharton School.


Hansen, Lars P., and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables estima-

    tion of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 50, 1269-1288.


Harford, Jarrad, 1999, Corporate cash reserves and acquisitions, Journal of Finance 54, 1969-

    1997.




                                            56
Harvey, Campbell, 1995, Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets, Review of Financial

    Studies 8, 773-816.


Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation, Econo-

    metrica 50, 213-224.


Himmelberg, Charles P., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Inessa Love, 2002, Investor protection, own-

    ership, and the cost of capital, Working paper, Columbia Business School.


Jensen, Michael, 1986, The agency costs of free cash ‡ow: Corporate …nance and takeovers,

    American Economic Review 76, 323-330.


Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the …rm: Managerial behavior,

    agency costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.


Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman, 2000, Corporate gover-

    nance in the Asian …nancial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 471-517.


Keynes, John M., 1936, The General theory of employment, interest and money (Macmillan,

    London).


King, Robert G., and Ross Levine, 1994, Capital fundamentalism, economic development, and

    economic growth, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40, 259-292.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership

    around the world, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.




                                            57
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998,

    Law and Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2000a,

    Investor protection and corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2000b,

    Agency problems and dividend policies around the world, Journal of Finance 55, 1-33.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2002,

    Investor protection and corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.


Lamont, Owen, 1997, Cash ‡ow and investment: evidence from internal capital markets,

    Journal of Finance 52, 83-109.


Lan, Yingcong, and Neng Wang, 2006, Investor protection and investment, Working paper,

    Columbia University.


Lang, Larry, Rene Stulz, and Ralph Walkling, 1991, A test of the free cash ‡ow hypothesis:

    The case of bidder returns, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 315-336.


Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous time

    model, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.


Mueller, Holger M., and Thomas Philippon, 2006, Family …rms, paternalism, and labor rela-

    tions, Working paper, Stern School of Business.




                                           58
Pindyck, Robert S., and Andrés Solimano, 1993, Economic instability and aggregate invest-

    ment, in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds.: NBER Macroconomics Annual

    (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).


Philippon, Thomas, 2004, Corporate governance over the business cycle, Working paper, Stern

    School of Business.


Pinkowitz, Lee, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Do …rms in countries with poor

    protection of investor rights hold more cash? Working paper, Ohio State University.


Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American

    Economic Review 88, 559-586.


Romer, David, 2006, Advanced Macroeconomics, 3rd Ed. (McGraw-Hill).


Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of

    Finance 52, 737-783.


Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal

    of Financial Economics 66, 3-27.


Solow, Robert, 1960, Investment and technological progress, in Kenneth Arrow, Samuel Kar-

    lin, and Patrick Suppes, eds.: Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences (Stanford

    University Press).


Sundaresan, Suresh M., 1984, Consumption and equilibrium interest rates in stochastic pro-

    duction economies, Journal of Finance 39, 77-92.


                                            59
Uzawa, Hirofumi, 1969, Time preference and the penrose e¤ect in a two-class model of eco-

    nomic growth, Journal of Political Economy 77, 628-652.


Williamson, Oliver, 1964, The economics of discretionary behavior: Managerial objectives in

    a theory of the …rm (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cli¤s, NJ).


Zeldes, Stephen P., 1989, Optimal consumption with stochastic income: Deviations from cer-

    tainty equivalence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 275-98.




                                           60
                                           0.055          ARG

                                                                 PER              CHL
                                            0.05



                                           0.045                                                                 HK
        Standard deviation of GDP growth




                                                                                    BRA
                                            0.04              VEN
                                                                          GRE                                             SIN
                                                                                  TUR                    THA     KOR
                                                                    SA           POR      JAP
                                                                                                  ISR
                                           0.035                                    MEX                  MAL

                                                                                   IND
                                                                       FIN PHI
                                            0.03          NZ                                    EGY
                                                                                         IRE
                                                                             SPA

                                           0.025
                                                                                                PAK
                                                       SWIDEN
                                                                 CAN
                                                               ITA   COL
                                            0.02          SWE USA AUL
                                                        UK   BEL
                                                              NET
                                                              AUT
                                                      GER     FRANOR
                                           0.015
                                              0.102   0.104    0.106     0.108    0.11    0.112 0.114    0.116    0.118   0.12
                                                                             Inv estment-capital ratio

Figure 1: Scatter plot and linear …t of the volatility of GDP growth on the
investment-capital ratio across countries. See the text for country abbreviations.
                                              0.2


                                                                              TUR
                                             0.18
                                                           ARG
                                                                                  BRA
                                             0.16
        Standard deviation of stock return




                                                               VEN

                                             0.14



                                             0.12                                                       THA
                                                                                                                KOR
                                                                                          PAK
                                                                                                                HK
                                              0.1                  FIN PHI     MEX
                                                                          COL                           MAL
                                                               PER
                                                                                       EGY
                                                                             IND                                         SIN
                                             0.08               SA    GRE                 ISR
                                                                     NOR
                                                                 ITA        CHL
                                                           SWE
                                                           NZ          AUL
                                                         UK     FRA        POR
                                                                         SPA       JAP
                                             0.06      GER      AUT              IRE
                                                        SWIDEN BEL
                                                                NETCAN

                                                                     USA
                                             0.04
                                               0.102   0.104    0.106   0.108    0.11    0.112 0.114    0.116    0.118   0.12
                                                                            Inv estment-capital ratio

Figure 2: Scatter plot and linear …t of the volatility of stock returns on the
investment-capital ratio across countries. See the text for country abbreviations.
                                                  Table I

                         Welfare Costs of Imperfect Investor Protection




The table quanti…es the welfare cost to outside shareholders from an absence of perfect investor protection


under various calibrations. For the baseline case, we set      = 0:01,    = 2, and   = 0:08 for both U.S.

and Korea. To re‡ect di¤erent degrees of ownership concentration in the U.S. and Korea, we choose


  = 0:08 for the U.S. and     = 0:39 for Korea (Dahlquist et al. (2003)). Column 2 reports the results


under the baseline calibration. In columns 3 to 5, we recalibrate the values of the triplet ( ; h; ) to


match the real interest rate, the standard deviation of output growth, and the ratio of private bene…ts


to …rm value each time we change , , and . The remaining three parameters are the same as those


in the baseline case.




  Outside shareholders’ Baseline              Discount                   Risk          Depreciation

  welfare cost (1       2)    model            rate,               aversion,               rate,

                                           0.02        0.03        1            3      0.07        0.09

            U.S.               0.38%      0.38%        0.38%     0.39%      0.37%     0.38%        0.38%




           Korea              11.17%     11.17%     11.17%      11.32%      11.13%   11.17%     11.17%
                                                Table II


                     Investment-to-Capital Ratio and Aggregate Volatility




The table presents the regression results for (i) the volatility of real GDP growth and (ii) the volatility


of stock returns. Independent variables are the investment-to-capital ratio (I/K), the antidirector rights


index (ANTIDIR), a dummy for civil law countries (DCIVIL), the standard deviation of changes in the


real exchange rate (SDRER), and the ratio of exports plus imports to GDP (OPEN). Each cell reports


the coe¢ cient estimate from ordinary least squares regressions and below it the corresponding White-


corrected p-value on the null that the coe¢ cient is zero. All regressions include an intercept term and


use 40 (country) observations.
                      Standard Deviation                         Standard Deviation

Independent           of Real GDP Growth                          of Stock Returns

Variable       (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)         (5)    (6)     (7)      (8)     (9)    (10)

I=K           1.033   0.963   1.167   1.478    1.177     2.288   2.615    2.842   3.626   3.413

              0.002   0.005   0.000   0.000    0.001     0.038   0.027    0.006   0.000   0.004

ANTIDIR               0.001                                      -0.004

                      0.422                                      0.235

DCIVIL                        0.004                                       0.018

                              0.099                                       0.034

SDRER                                 0.137                                       0.413

                                      0.000                                       0.000

OPEN                                          -0.003                                      -0.021

                                               0.218                                      0.020

R2            0.133   0.126   0.148   0.441    0.123     0.049   0.056    0.087   0.312   0.104




                                              65
Notes


   1 There   are two layers of corporate governance determining the induced agency costs for

any given …rm, namely, there are country-wide regulatory and enforcement environment mech-

anisms, and …rms-speci…c corporate governance rule. This paper focuses on di¤erences in

imperfect investor protection at the country level.

   2 Danthine      and Donaldson (2004) study the manager-shareholder agency con‡ict and its

implications for the aggregate economy within a contracting environment.

   3 Lan   and Wang (2006) integrate imperfect investor protection as in La Porta et al. (2002)

into an otherwise standard intertemporal investment model with adjustment costs (Abel and

Eberly (1994)) and show that managers overinvest in order to increase future private bene…ts,

which further reduces …rm value. Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Love. (2002) consider a risk-

averse controlling shareholder, but use an exogenously given stochastic discount factor to study

the e¤ects of imperfect investor protection on the …rm’s cost of capital.

   4 The   formulation in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤am (1988) is a stochastic version of

Solow (1960). An alternative interpretation of (1) is as a stochastic installation function. In-

tuitively, how productive new investments are depends on how well they match vintages of

installed capital. Hence, (1) constitutes an extension of the deterministic installation function

analyzed in Uzawa (1969) and Hayashi (1982).

   5 Albuquerque     and Wang (2004) propose an international variation of the model analyzed in

this paper, using TFP shocks. In that paper, we obtain results similar to those obtained in this

paper. For example, the risk premium and the interest rate decrease with investor protection

in both papers.

   6 We    treat    as constant. We assume that the controlling shareholder cannot easily trade

his shares due to an adverse price impact. The assumption of constant ownership for the

controlling shareholders is consistent with La Porta et al.(1999), who empirically show that



                                                66
controlling shareholders’ownership share is quite stable over time.

   7 See   Barclay and Holderness (1989) for early work on the empirical evidence in support

of private bene…ts of control. See also Johnson et al. (2000), Bae, Kang, and Kim (2002),

Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan (2002), and Dyck and Zingales (2004).

   8 We    think of   as capturing the role of laws and law enforcement protection of minority

investors. However, it can be broadly associated with monitoring by outside stakeholders (see,

for example, Burkart, Gromb, Panunzi (1997)).

   9 The   standard way to analyze the equilibrium is to solve the optimization problems of both

the controlling shareholder and outside shareholder for postulated price processes, and then to

aggregate agents’demands to …nd the prices that clear the markets. This approach generates a

mapping whose …xed points are the equilibria of the model, but is computationally demanding

for heterogeneous-agent models such as ours.

  10 Mathematically,    we are able to show that the trade-o¤ between private bene…ts and lowering

volatility becomes linear-quadratic after solving an intertemporal optimization problem.

  11 See   also Lang, Stulz, and Walkling (1991), Blanchard, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1994),

and Lamont (1997).

  12 While   these local …rms bene…tted from government subsidies via, for example, a low bor-

rowing rate, a low borrowing rate by itself does not generate a large size of nonperforming

loans. Thus, while a subsidized borrowing channel encourages socially ine¢ cient overinvest-

ment, it does not imply overinvestment from the …rm’s perspective, given the subsidized cost of

funds. Our argument that …rms overinvest because of weak investor protection remains robust

even in the presence of other frictions such as government subsidies.

  13 While    we do not formally model state-owned enterprises in this paper, in practice these

…rms are not much di¤erent than the …rms with controlling shareholders as described in our

model. The cash ‡ow rights of the managers come from their regular pay, which in general

depends on …rm performance, and the control rights come from the government appointing the


                                                 67
manager.

     14 While   Proposition 3 for the interest rate requires a bit stronger condition, the result on the

expected equity return does not. To see this, it is immediate to show

                                                               1              2 2
                                    r+   =    + (i        )      (       1)    i :
                                                               2

Note that d (r + ) =d =              1   (    1)   2i   di=d and 1        (         1)   2i   > 0 for all admissible

parameters. Therefore, the net sign e¤ect of             on the expected return is the same as the e¤ect

of      on investment. From Proposition 1, we know that stronger investor protection curtails

investment and hence lowers expected returns.

     15 These   numbers coincide with the conservative lower bounds on private bene…ts reported in

Table III of Dyck and Zingales (2004). The highest estimates reported in Table III in Dyck and

Zingales (2004) are 4:4% for the U.S. and 15:7% for Korea, respectively. Barclay and Holderness

(1989) estimate that private bene…ts for the U.S. are 4% of …rm value.

     16 Shleifer   and Wolfenzon (2002), Burkart, Panunzi, and Shleifer (2003) and Lan and Wang

(2006) provide theoretical explanations for this cross-country empirical …nding. Mueller and

Philippon (2006) show that the quality of labor relations across countries also plays an important

role in determining the concentration of ownership, after controlling for cross-country variations

in protection for outside investors.

     17 By   applying L’Hopital’s rule to (40) around           = 1, we obtain the formula for                     for
                                                                                                               1

logarithmic utility:                          "                                      #
                                                         1 2              1  2
                                      m            D     2 D         D    2 D
                                1   =   exp                                              :
                                      m

Similarly, when         = 1, we have
                                              "                                      #
                                                        1 2               1  2
                                      d            D    2 D          D    2 D
                                2   =   exp                                              :
                                      d


     18 Note   that the investment-capital ratio is invariant to a …rst order with respect to . Mathe-


                                                        68
matically, the derivative of the investment-capital ratio with respect to   is approximately zero

when evaluated at realistically low values of     (i.e., di=d = 0 at   = 0). This means that our

model predicts that if all of the cross-country variation in the highlighted volatility measures

comes from variation in , then we should not be able to detect any association between the

volatility measures and the investment-capital ratio even if we do not control for      in the re-

gressions. Provided we …nd such an association, we can then reasonably conclude that it is not

solely due to cross-country variation in . Intuitively, in the model, cross-country variation in

only adds noise to the correlation between output growth volatility and the investment-capital

ratio because it makes the volatility numbers change without any corresponding movement in

investment.

  19 Univariate   regressions suggest that including these countries would not change the results.

The countries (and country abbreviations) are: Argentina (ARG), Australia (AUL), Austria

(AUT), Belgium (BEL), Brazil (BRA), Canada (CAN), Chile (CHL), Colombia (COL), Den-

mark (DEN), Egypt (EGY), Finland (FIN), France (FRA), Germany (GER), Greece (GRE),

Hong Kong (HK), India (IND), Ireland (IRE), Israel (ISR), Italy (ITA), Japan (JAP), Malaysia

(MAL), Mexico (MEX), the Netherlands (NET), New Zealand (NZ), Norway (NOR), Pak-

istan (PAK), Peru (PER), Philippines (PHI), Portugal (POR), Singapore (SIN), South Africa

(SA), South Korea (KOR), Spain (SPA), Sweden (SWE), Switzerland (SWI), Thailand (THA),

Turkey (TUR), the U.K., the U.S., and Venezuela (VEN).

  20 Following    the suggestions by Pindyck and Solimano (1993), we also try the volatility of

in‡ation and obtained similar results.

  21 The   investment-capital ratios in the U.S. and Korea are 0:107 and 0:117, respectively. The

annual growth volatility for are 0:0204 and 0:0377 for the U.S. and Korea, respectively. Hence,

we have 1:033      (0:117   0:107) =(0:0377   0:0204) = 0:6.

  22 The   investment-capital ratios in the U.S. and Korea are 0:107 and 0:117, respectively.

The standard deviations of stock returns are 0:0447 and 0:1195, respectively. Hence, we have

2:288   (0:117      0:107) =(0:1195   0:0447) = 0:31.



                                                 69
  23 Using   Girsanov’s theorem, the dynamics of the Brownian motion under the risk-neutral

probability measure are given by


                                     ~ = dZ(t) + ( =
                                    dZ(t)                 D ) dt:




  24 The   …rst equality in (A.13) is the standard asset pricing equation. The second equality uses
                                                                   ~ denotes the expectation
the pricing formula under the risk-neutral probability measure and E

under the risk-neutral probability measure. The last equality uses the dividend dynamics (A.12)

under the risk-neutral probability measure.




                                                 70
