                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  CONSENT AND EXCHANGE

                                           Oren Bar-Gill
                                         Lucian A. Bebchuk

                                        Working Paper 13267
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13267


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




We have benefited from the helpful comments of Barry Adler, Michal Barzuza, Omri Ben-Shahar,
Bernie Black, Hanoch Dagan, Chaim Fershtman, Clay Gillette, Ofer Grosskopf, Assaf Hamdani, Sharon
Hannes, Oliver Hart, Louis Kaplow, Lewis Kornhauser, Roy Krytner, Shai Lavi, Paul Mahoney, Zvika
Neeman, Dotan Oliar, Eric Rasmusen, Alan Schwartz, Steve Shavell, Chris Snyder, Kathy Spier, Rip
Verkerke, and workshop and conference participants at Harvard, NYU, Tel-Aviv University, the University
of Virginia, and the NBER. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the John M. Olin Center
for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Oren Bar-Gill and Lucian A. Bebchuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Consent and Exchange
Oren Bar-Gill and Lucian A. Bebchuk
NBER Working Paper No. 13267
July 2007
JEL No. C72,C78,D23,K10,K11,K12

                                                ABSTRACT

In some cases, the law permits a party that unilaterally provides a benefit to another party to recover
the estimated value of this benefit. Despite calls for expanding the set of cases to which such a restitution
rule applies, the law commonly applies a mutual consent rule under which a party providing another
with a benefit cannot obtain any recovery without securing the advance consent of the beneficiary
to the transaction. We provide an efficiency rationale for the undesirability of broad use of the restitution
rule by identifying significant adverse ex ante effects of the rule that are avoided by the consent requirement.
Even assuming that courts' errors in estimating buyer benefits would be unbiased, a restitution rule
would strengthen sellers' hand by providing them with a put option that they may but do not have to
use. As a result, the restitution rule would encourage inefficient market entry by low-quality sellers
that would not contribute to any efficient transactions but would be able to extract payments from
buyers seeking to avoid an exchange with them. Furthermore, the restitution rule would discourage
efficient market entry by some or all potential buyers of a good or service. Beyond the restitution rule,
we extend our analysis to show that similar adverse effects can also arise from other "pricing" rules
that provide buyers or sellers with call or put options to force an exchange at a judicially-determined
price.

Oren Bar-Gill
New York University School of Law
40 Washington Square South, 411B
New York, NY 10012
bargill@nyu.edu

Lucian A. Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
1.      Introduction
Exchanges – transfers of value from a “seller” to a “buyer” for a consideration –
commonly require the mutual consent of both sides to the exchange. So common
and familiar is the use of this mutual consent rule that economists take it for
granted. In some situations, however, the law allows a party to “force” an
exchange on another party.
       Under the "Restitution Rule," which is the focus of this paper, a “seller”
may elect to confer a benefit on another party – say, by transferring an asset or
providing a service – and thereby become entitled to a payment from the other
party equal to the value of the provided benefit. If the “buyer” declines to pay, a
court will intervene and force him to pay the estimated value of this benefit. For
example, if B’s ship is sinking and S’s ship carries it to shore, S would be entitled
to quantum meruit – the reasonable value of S’s services. And, if S builds a house
on an adjacent tract owned by B mistakenly thinking that the house is being built
on land owned by S, then S is again entitled to recovery for the benefit that he
conferred on B. Many other examples can found be in standard treatises on the
law of restitution (see, e.g., Palmer, 1995). 1
       Various legal scholars call for expanding the domain of the restitution rule
(e.g., Dagan, 2004, ch. 5; Porat, 2007). Nevertheless, restitution still remains the
exception, not the rule, and is generally applied only in cases in which
negotiations are impossible or very costly. Most exchanges are governed by the
mutual consent rule which requires a potential seller to get a potential buyer’s
consent to become entitled to any payment from the buyer. In these standard
situations, a seller that unilaterally confers a benefit on a buyer has no claim
against the buyer no matter how large the benefit is.
       Limiting the scope of the restitution rule to exceptional cases is often
defended on non-consequential grounds by appealing to the potential buyers’
autonomy and his “right to be left alone.” In this paper we seek to contribute to
the development of a consequentialist justification for limiting the use of the
restitution rule to exceptional cases rather than following the call to expand the
rule’s scope.
       Posner (2003), in his well-known treatise on law and economics, seeks to
provide an efficiency rationale for not using restitution based on ex post
1
  The restitution rule on which we focus refers to situations where a seller forces a trade
on a buyer. The use of this rule should not be confused with the use of the restitution
remedy. When a party breaches a duty toward another party, the restitution remedy would
force the breaching party to pay the other party an amount equal not to the other party’s
damages but rather an amount equal to breaching party’s gains from the breach.
Schankerman and Scotchmer (2001) studies the restitution remedy in the intellectual
property context from an ex ante perspective similar to the one used in this paper.




                                            2
considerations. Posner makes the common assumption that parties know better
than courts. He argues that when buyers and sellers can easily bargain the law
should encourage them to bargain by refraining from imposing exchanges upon
them in the absence of mutual consent. Mutual consent, secured through
bargaining, ensures that the exchange take place if only if it is ex post efficient. It
is not clear, however, that this ex post consideration provides a good basis for
opposing restitution. This is because the restitution rule does not prevent parties
from bargaining; it simply changes the background rule against which bargaining
takes place.
       In the hypothetical case of no transaction costs, a transaction would take
place if and only if it is efficient no matter what the background rule is. In
situations in which bargaining is possible but costly, the restitution rule would
have both disadvantages and advantages vis-à-vis the mutual consent rule. While
the mutual consent rule might be better at preventing inefficient transactions, it
might be worse at facilitating efficient transactions. Indeed, the analysis in
Kaplow and Shavell (1996) suggests that there are many situations in which
bargaining would be more likely to produce an ex post efficient outcome under a
restitution rule (or some other pricing rule) than under the mutual consent rule. 2
        Another ex post argument against the restitution rule is that it will involve
litigation costs as parties will turn to courts to determine the value of benefits
conferred unilaterally (on the effect of litigation costs on the optimal choice of
legal rules—see, e.g., Polinsky and Rubinfeld, 1988, Bernardo, Talley and Welch,
2000). However, the mutual consent rule may also involve litigation costs arising
from disputes about whether consent was in fact obtained and whether the process
producing it was valid. More importantly, under the restitution rule, parties will
not generally end up in court. Rather, the buyers’ knowledge that sellers can turn
to a court will lead buyers to pay the price that a court would be expected to set if
the issue were brought before it. In the absence of informational asymmetries
between parties, litigation can be expected to be avoided (see, e.g., Spier 2007;
accordingly, models that allow for a litigation outcome commonly assume
asymmetric information, see, e.g., Bebchuk, 1984, Reinganum and Wilde, 1986,
Spier, 1992).
        Whether or not an ex post analysis will ultimately identify significant
advantages of limiting the use of restitution to exceptional cases, our focus in this
paper is on the ex ante advantages of doing so. To focus on ex ante effects, we
study a setup in which a meeting between a buyer and a seller is bound to have an
efficient ex post outcome. In particular, we make the standard assumption that the

2
 A full ex post analysis should take into account not only whether a transaction would be
efficient relative to no transaction but also relative to having one of the parties transact
with another partner (see Levmore, 1985).




                                             3
cost and value of the transfer are commonly known to the parties and that
transaction costs are zero. Courts are assumed to have less information than the
parties themselves. They know only the distribution from which buyers and
sellers are drawn. Given courts’ information, the application of the restitution rule
will involve payment of estimated benefits based on averaging across types.
        Our analysis highlights that, even though courts are assumed to neither
over-estimate nor under-estimate buyer benefits, on average, the restitution rule
provides a significant advantage to sellers. Under the restitution rule, potential
sellers have a “put” option allowing them to unilaterally transfer an asset or
provide a service to another party and receive an exercise price equal to the court-
estimated value of the asset or service to the other party. (Under the mutual
consent rule, since potential sellers cannot unilaterally become entitled to any
payment, they can be viewed as having a put option with an exercise price of
zero.) While potential sellers may use the put option given to them by the
restitution rule when doing so would be to their advantage, they need not use it
when it is not in their interest to do so. As a result, the restitution rule transfers
value from the buyer side to the seller side of the market.
        Furthermore, the restitution rule produces ex ante efficiency costs,
distorting parties’ decisions whether to enter the market in two ways. First,
focusing on quality heterogeneity among sellers, the restitution rule induces entry
by inefficient, low-quality sellers. Under the mutual consent rule, only sellers that
can generate efficient exchanges will enter the market. Sellers that cannot be
party to an efficient transaction with at least some buyers will have no reason to
enter the market. In contrast, under the restitution rule, some inefficient sellers
will enter the market. Because a court will base its estimate on the average value
produced by sellers, it will overestimate the value of the benefit provided by a
low-quality seller in the event that he decides to confer this benefit on the buyer.
       Thus, the restitution rule provides such sellers with a credible threat to force
inefficient exchanges and get the judicially determined valuation from buyers.
The existence of this credible threat enables sellers to extract payments from
buyers wishing to avoid such inefficient transactions. This inefficient entry by
low-quality sellers reduces the average surplus generated from meetings between
buyers and sellers. This problem is especially significant in the likely common
situations where the supply of inefficient providers of a good or a service is large.
       Second, focusing on buyer heterogeneity, our analysis identifies another
inefficiency that arises under the restitution rule. Under the mutual consent rule,
buyers can never lose from an encounter with a seller. They can always withhold
consent and avoid a losing prospect. This is not so under the restitution rule,
which gives sellers the right to sue for a payment equal to the valuation of the
average buyer. Under the restitution rule, buyers with relatively low value will
expect to lose from participating in some efficient transactions as they will have




                                          4
to pay more than the good or service is worth to them. Consequently, some buyers
who would have benefited from a given good or service will not enter the market
at all and the efficient transactions in which they could have participated will be
lost.
       The effect of the restitution rule on buyer entry will be especially severe if
courts base the judicially-required payment not on the average value in the full
population of potential buyers but rather on the average value in the subset of
potential buyers who enter the market. Under this version of the restitution rule
the market would unravel: all buyers other than those whose valuation is at the
very top of the valuation distribution will elect not to enter the market. The result
we obtain in this case resembles the well-known unraveling result in Akerlof
(1970). The difference is that in our case the unraveling is caused not by
asymmetric information between buyers and sellers as in Akerlof’s lemon market
but rather by the informational disadvantage that courts have relative to the
transacting parties.
       While our analysis focuses on the restitution rule, we also consider other
pricing rules, i.e., rules that give the seller a put option to force the sale of a good
or service at a court-determined price. Whereas under the restitution rule the
option’s exercise price equals the (average) benefit to the buyer, different exercise
prices can be easily imagined. We show that any pricing rule will produce ex ante
effects of a similar nature (though possibly of different magnitude) as those we
identified for the restitution rule as long as the court-determined price is not so
low as to make the pricing rule practically equivalent to the mutual consent rule.
       We also extend our analysis to consider a “Seller Compensation” rule which
is used in some cases and enables a buyer to force an exchange on a seller for a
court-determined price. (Using the influential taxonomy proposed by Calabresi
and Melamed 1972, the seller compensation rule protects sellers only with a
liability rule rather than with a property right.) For example, B may moor B’s boat
at S’s dock in a storm even without the dock owner’s consent provided only that
B afterwards pays the resulting costs to S. While the seller compensation rule is
used in many cases, those are (as with the restitution rule) largely ones in which
transaction costs make negotiations impossible or very costly. We show that the
seller compensation rule has negative ex ante effects that are similar in nature to
those produced by the restitution rule but applying to the other side of the market
-- encouraging entry by some potential buyers that should not enter the market
from an efficiency perspective and discouraging entry by some potential sellers
that should enter the market from an efficiency perspective. 3
3
 When the forced exchange involves transferring an existing asset (rather than producing
an asset or providing a service), the “Seller Compensation” rule is equivalent to the
“Taking of Things” rule considered by Kaplow and Shavell (1996). They discuss several
problems with the rule including ones similar to those we model as well as others. Our




                                           5
      Before proceeding, we should note that although we identify certain
disadvantages that the restitution rule and other pricing rules have vis-à-vis the
mutual consent rule, we do not study the full universe of possible rules for
governing exchanges. In particular, we do not attempt to determine whether and
how the standard mutual consent rule could be improved upon by legal rules that
courts can practically apply. This is an important subject for future research, and
the issues we identify might be useful for such research.4
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our
framework of analysis. Section 3 focuses on buyer heterogeneity and derives the
ex ante demand-side costs of the restitution rule. Section 4 focuses on seller
heterogeneity and derives the ex ante supply-side costs of the restitution rule.
Section 5 analyzes a more general model, incorporating both buyer heterogeneity
and seller heterogeneity, where both efficiency costs are present. Section 6
considers two extensions: general pricing rules and the seller compensation rule.
Section 7 concludes.


2.      Framework of Analysis

2.1.    Sequence of Events

The model focuses on two groups of economic actors (individuals or firms):
potential buyers, Bs, and potential sellers, Ss. Buyers and sellers are assumed to
be risk neutral with a discount rate of zero. The sequence of events in the model,
which is illustrated in Figure 1 below, is as follows:




analysis of the Seller Compensation rule formalizes and extends some of the points mad
by their study.
4
  The mechanism-design literature shows that it is possible to obtain even first-best
efficiency under certain conditions. See, e.g., Fudenberg and Tirole (1991), ch. 7.
Achieving the first best, however, might require courts to apply mechanisms that are
more sophisticated than those currently used by legal systems. Our focus is on
understanding the comparative merits of some alternative approaches that legal systems
have considered and used.
     Our analysis also contributes to the contracting literature. Much of this literature has
focused on the process by which consent is obtained and on the remedies available when
consent is obtained (see, e.g., Polinsky (1983), Rogerson (1984), Katz (1990, 1993),
Schweizer (2006)). In contrast, we study why consent is at all necessary.




                                             6
       T = 0:   Buyers and sellers decide whether to enter the market.
       T = 1:   Buyers and sellers meet and bargain over a potential exchange.
       T = 2:   Payoffs materialize.

 Bs and Ss enter/exit           Bs and Ss meet and                Payoffs
     the market                      bargain                     materialize

                                                                                  T
           0                             1                            2

                          Fig. 1: The Sequence of Events


2.2.    Two Cases

The formulation used is sufficiently general to cover two cases. The term
exchange will be used to indicate one of two cases – (i) S transfers an existing
asset to B in return for a payment, or (ii) S produces a new asset and transfers it to
B in exchange for a payment. In both cases, if an exchange takes place, S gives up
a value of C, where in the existing asset case, C denotes the use-value of the asset
to S, and in the new asset case, C denotes the cost to S of producing the asset.
Also, in both cases, if an exchange takes place, B obtains the asset. Let V denote
the value of the asset to B. The surplus, which can be either positive or negative,
is: W = V – C.

       We shall now specify the assumptions we make at each of the three stages.


2.3.    T = 0: Entering the Market

At T = 0, buyers and sellers decide whether to enter the market. We assume that
buyers and sellers can costlessly enter the market, and will do so if and only if
they expect a strictly positive payoff. The model can be readily extended to allow
for positive entry costs. (Costly entry only increases the welfare costs of the
restitution rule.) The idea of entry into a market is clear in the context of well-
defined marketplaces, such as a farmers' market or a commodity exchange.
Decisions to enter a market are also well-studied in the industrial organization and
antitrust contexts. But our analysis also applies to more mundane scenarios where




                                          7
a person decides, for example, whether to start offering goods or services door-to-
door or via the mail or the internet. 5
         Since buyers and sellers do not know each other at T = 0, when they make
their entry decisions, they cannot contract about their entry decisions nor the rules
that will govern their future negotiations should they meet at T = 1.
        Buyers are heterogeneous with respect to the value they attach to the asset.
Specifically, we assume that the value of the asset to a buyer has a buyer-specific
idiosyncratic component, μ ∈ [0, μ max ] ; μ represents the buyer’s type. The
distribution of buyer types is characterized by the probability density function,
 f (μ ) , and the corresponding cumulative distribution function, F (μ ) . Let μ
                                                            μmax
denote the average buyer-specific valuation, i.e., μ =        ∫ μf (μ )dμ .
                                                              0
                                                                              We assume

that each buyer needs (at most) one unit of the good or service.
      Seller heterogeneity is introduced in Section 4. For now we assume that all
sellers are the same, producing or possessing an asset of a quality, q, that is
normalized to zero, i.e., q = 0. The value of the asset to a buyer is V = q + μ , and
for now, with q = 0, we have V = μ . We further assume that the cost to a seller of
producing the asset or parting with the asset is C, and that sellers have unlimited
capacity. We assume that V = μ > C , namely, that the average benefit to a buyer
is greater than the cost to a seller. It would seem that this condition is satisfied in
well-functioning markets. More importantly, as will be made clear below, this
assumption is necessary for a meaningful distinction between the mutual consent
rule and the restitution rule to be drawn.


2.4.    T = 1: Buyer-Seller Meeting and Bargaining

Sellers and buyers meet through a random matching process. Specifically, each
buyer is randomly assigned to one seller. (While our analysis assumes that each
buyer is matched with a seller only once, our main results hold when a buyer can
be matched with several sellers sequentially.) This random matching protocol
provides a simple formalization that covers markets where each buyer demands
(at most) one unit of the good or service and sellers have no capacity constraint
(as we assumed). Our analysis can be extended to other procedures that match
buyers and sellers.
5
  Our ex ante analysis focuses on participation – entry and exit – decisions. Similar
effects obtain when other ex ante decisions/investments (e.g., investments in search or in
hiding/self-help, and investments in enhancing the value of a potential transaction) are
considered.




                                            8
       At T = 1 the buyer and the seller observe V = μ . The court knows the
distribution f (μ ) , but does not observe the specific buyer type μ . In other words,
we adopt the standard assumption in the incomplete contracting literature that the
value of the asset to the buyer, V, and the cost to the seller, C, are observable to
the parties but not verifiable to a court. 6
       The assumption that C and V are both common knowledge, together with
the assumption that transaction costs are zero, ensure that the outcome will be ex
post efficient under any legal rule. That is, an exchange will take place if and only
if W > 0 – that is, if and only if V > C. While the outcome will be ex post efficient
regardless of the background rule, the legal rules will affect how the surplus (if
any) will be divided which in turn will affect ex ante decisions and ex ante
efficiency.
       We focus on the Restitution Rule (R Rule). Under the restitution rule, S may
give the existing asset to B, or produce the asset and give it to B, and thereby
become entitled—without B’s consent being required—to the court-estimated
value of V. Let Vˆ denote the court’s estimate. Given our assumption that V is not
verifiable and the court knows only the distribution of values, the court’s estimate
will equal the average value. There are two versions of the restitution rule,
depending on the nature of this average. Under one version of the restitution rule,
the R P Rule, the court’s estimate is based on the average value in the full
population of buyers: Vˆ = E [μ ] = μ . Under a second version of the restitution
rule, the R M Rule, the court’s estimate is based on the average value in the subset
of buyers who enter the market: Vˆ = E [μ μ ∈ Ω B ], where Ω B represents the
subset of buyers who enter the market.
      With imperfect information, there will be sometimes reason for the parties
to bargain. Having a “pricing” rule does not prohibit bargaining, it simply gives
one of the parties an option to act unilaterally. In the event that bargaining takes
6
  The no verification assumption can be relaxed. As long as verification is costly the
court's value estimate will be imperfect (though unbiased), and our main results will hold.
Our results depend on the assumed information structure, and specifically on the
informational advantage that parties enjoy vis-a-vis the court. We recognize, however,
that such an informational advantage does not always exist. It is not always the case that
courts estimate the benefit to the buyer based on a known distribution of types, when the
parties know the exact type. Rather, courts, attempting to ascertain the benefit to the
specific buyer, might make unbiased errors, e.g., based on evidentiary uncertainty, that
are not anticipated by the parties. Our results do not hold in such cases. It should be
emphasized, however, that these two categories of imperfect information – one where
parties know more than courts and the other when both parties and courts are similarly
uninformed – are not mutually exclusive. Our results hold as long as some imperfect
information of the former category is present.




                                            9
place, it will be assumed that S makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer with probability θ
and B makes a take-it-or-leave-it-offer with probability 1 − θ , with θ ∈ [0,1] . The
presence of the unilateral option, however, will affect what will happen if
bargaining fails and thus will shape the outcome. Specifically, when the party
without the option, B, makes the take-it-or-leave-it offer, the position of the party
with the option, S, is unambiguously improved by the existence of the option. On
the other hand, when S makes the take-it-or-leave-it offer the existence of the
option may either improve or worsen the position of S, if he cannot commit to
give up the option. We will assume that such a commitment is impossible to
make. The analysis is qualitatively similar under the alternative assumption, and
the welfare costs under the restitution rule only increase.
      We compare the restitution rule to the Mutual Consent Rule (MC Rule).
This is the familiar rule under which an asset will be transferred, or produced and
transferred, in exchange for a payment by B, if and only if both parties agree for
this to happen. To enforce this rule courts need to be able to verify only whether
transfer and payments occur and whether mutual consent was given. We assume
that courts have the requisite information. Under the mutual consent rule, if the
parties meet, it will be assumed, as before, that S can make a take-it-or-leave-it
offer with probability θ and B can make such an offer with a probability 1 − θ .
Accordingly, if a positive surplus W exists, S will make an expected gain of θW
and B will make an expected gain of (1 − θ )W .


2.5.   T = 2: Final Payoffs

If an exchange does not take place at T = 1, then B does not receive the asset and
S receives C, the use-value of his asset or cost-saving from not having to produce
a new asset. For convenience, we normalize the resulting payoffs to zero. Under
the restitution rule, even when an exchange does not take place B might still be
forced to “bribe” S not to impose an inefficient exchange. Let π denote the
amount of the bribe. Accordingly, B’s payoff will be WB = −π , and S’s payoff will
be WS = π .
      If an exchange takes place, B will pay S a price π and obtain the asset. In
this case, B will use the asset at T = 2 and obtain V. B’s payoff will be
WB = V − π . Correspondingly, S’s payoff will be WS = π − C . Of course, WB and
W S must add up to W – the total social surplus (if any) from the exchange both
when an exchange takes place (W > 0, WB + WS = W > 0 ) and when an exchange
does not take place (W = 0, WB + WS = 0 ).




                                         10
3.      Discouraging Buyer Entry

It is socially desirable for buyers to enter the market if the value they obtain from
the asset exceeds the seller’s cost. That is, buyers should enter the market if and
only if μ > C . This efficient outcome obtains under the mutual consent rule.
Under the restitution rule, low-valuation buyers expect to lose from an exchange
and thus do not enter the market, leading to a welfare loss. To focus on buyers’
entry decisions, we assume that the homogeneous sellers enter the market. 7
       Buyers’ entry decisions under the restitution rule and the resulting welfare
loss are stated in the following proposition.

Proposition 1: The restitution rule will deter some buyers with μ > C from
entering the market. In particular—
(a) Under the R P Rule, when the court’s estimate is based on the average value
in the full population of buyers, then in equilibrium buyers with μ ∈ [C , μ ] will
                                                               μ
not enter the market, leading to a welfare loss of ΔW = ∫ (μ − C ) f ( μ )dμ , as
                                                               C
compared to the MC Rule.
(b) Under the R M Rule, when the court’s estimate is based on the average value
in the subset of buyers who enter the market, then in equilibrium only buyers of
the highest type, μ max , enter the market, and the market effectively collapses. The
                                                                μmax
resulting welfare loss, as compared to the MC Rule, is ΔW =        ∫ (μ − C ) f (μ )dμ .
                                                                   C


Proof:
(a) We show that only buyers with μ > μ earn a positive payoff and enter the
market. Given the assumption that μ > C , there are three cases:
Case I: μ < C < μ . In this case, WB = −[(1 − θ ) ⋅ (μ − C ) + θ ⋅ (μ − μ )] or, after
some rearranging, W = −[(1 − θ ) ⋅ (μ − C ) − (μ − μ )] .
                            B                                   Since Vˆ = μ > C ,
(μ − C ) − (μ − μ ) > 0 ,
                       which also implies (1 − θ ) ⋅ (μ − C ) − (μ − μ ) > 0 (since
μ < C ). Therefore, WB < 0 .
Case II: C < μ < μ . In this case, WB = μ − μ < 0 .

7
  In terms of the model’s parameters, we are assuming that C < μ max . This assumption
guarantees that even sellers with q = 0 have a chance to generate a positive surplus
( q + μ > C )—a chance that would materialize when they meet a buyer with μ = μ max .




                                         11
Case III: C < μ < μ . In this case, WB = μ − μ > 0 .
Since only buyers with μ > μ enter the market, social welfare equals
       1
W R = ∫ (μ − C ) f ( μ )dμ . The welfare loss is:
       μ
       1                           1                μ
ΔW = ∫ (μ − C ) f ( μ )dμ − ∫ (μ − C ) f ( μ )dμ = ∫ (μ − C ) f ( μ )dμ .
       C                           μ                C

(b) Let μ denote the average value among buyers who enter the market.
               M


Generalizing from part (a), WB (μ ) > 0 if and only if μ > μ M . In equilibrium,
           [           ]
μ M = E μ μ > μ M . This condition is only satisfied when μ M = μ max and only
buyers of the highest type, μ max , enter the market. The welfare loss:
       μmax
ΔW =       ∫ (μ − C ) f (μ )dμ .
           C
                                                                                 ■

Remark: The intuition for this result is as follows:
(a) Under the R P Rule, buyers with below-average valuations expect to earn a
negative payoff and do not enter the market. Buyers with C < μ < μ anticipate a
positive surplus, but expect to pay a price—equal to the court’s estimate, μ —that
is higher than their valuation. Buyers with μ < C < μ anticipate a negative
surplus and expect to pay a bribe to avoid the inefficient transaction.
(b) Under the R P rule, we obtained an equilibrium where only above-average
buyers, i.e., buyers with μ > μ enter. This is not an equilibrium under the R M
Rule, because under this rule the court’s estimate will adjust upward to reflect the
higher average valuation among entering buyers. This upward adjustment stops
only when the average valuation in the market equals the valuation of the highest-
type buyer, μ max . This market unraveling resembles the unraveling result obtained
in Akerlof (1970). Interestingly, however, while Akerlof’s unraveling was the
result of asymmetric information between buyers and sellers, the unraveling in
our model follows from the court’s imperfect information. (Buyers and sellers
both have symmetric and complete information in our model.)




                                             12
4.        Encouraging Entry by Low-Quality Sellers

We now introduce seller heterogeneity. To focus attention on the supply-side
effect of the restitution rule, we assume that buyers are homogeneous and
normalize their valuation to zero, i.e., μ = 0 . The value of the asset to a buyer is
now a function of seller-specific quality, q ∈ [0, qmax ], i.e., V = q , where q
represents the seller’s type. We assume that the distribution of seller types is
characterized by the probability density function, k (q ) , and the corresponding
cumulative distribution function, K (q ) . Let q denote the average quality, i.e.,
     qmax

q=    ∫ qk (q)dq .
      0
                     We assume that V = q > C , so that the average benefit to a

buyer is greater than the cost to a seller. Under the R P Rule, the court’s estimate
is Vˆ = E [q ] = q . Under the R M Rule, the court’s estimate is Vˆ = E [q q ∈ Ω S ] ,
where Ω S represents the subset of sellers who enter the market.
      From a social welfare perspective, low-quality sellers who cannot possibly
generate a positive surplus should not enter the market. In particular, sellers with
 q < C should not enter the market. 8 Indeed, under the mutual consent rule these
low-quality sellers choose not to enter the market. Not so under the restitution
rule. We focus on sellers’ entry decisions, but it can be shown that the
homogeneous buyers will enter the market.
      Sellers’ entry decisions under the restitution rule and the resulting welfare
loss are stated in the following proposition.

Proposition 2: The restitution rule will induce sellers with q < C to enter the
                                                                  1
                                            K (C )
                                                        (q − C )k (q)dq , as
                                          1 − K (C ) C∫
market, leading to a welfare loss of ΔW =

compared to the MC Rule.

Proof:
We show that all sellers earn a positive payoff and enter the market. Given the
assumption that q > C , there are three cases:
Case I: q < C < q . In this case, WS = (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q − C ) + θ ⋅ (q − q ) or, after some
rearranging,     W = (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q − C ) − (q − q ) .
                       S                                        Since        Vˆ = q > C ,


8
  If the highest-quality seller has unlimited capacity, then in the first-best only the
highest-quality seller should enter the market.




                                           13
(q − C ) − (q − q ) > 0 ,
                        which also implies (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q − C ) − (q − q ) > 0 (since
q < C ). Therefore, WS > 0 .
Case II: C < q < q . In this case, WS = q − C > 0 .
Case III: C < q < q . In this case, WS = q − C > 0 .
Since     all   sellers    enter     the   market,    social      welfare     equals
       1                          1
W R = ∫ max(q − C ,0)k (q)dq = ∫ (q − C )k (q)dq . The welfare loss is:
       0                          C
                   1                  1                             1
ΔW =
         1
                ∫ (q − C )k (q)dq − ∫ (q − C )k (q)dq = K (C ) ∫ (q − C )k (q)dq . ■
     1 − K (C ) C                   C
                                                       1 − K (C ) C

Remark: The intuition for this result is as follows: Under the restitution rule,
low-quality sellers expect to extract bribes from buyers who wish to avoid
inefficient exchanges and thus enter the market (this occurs under both versions of
the restitution rule, the R P Rule and the R M Rule). When low-quality sellers
enter the market, the average value of an exchange is reduced. This results in a
welfare loss. 9



5.      Buyer Heterogeneity and Seller Heterogeneity Combined
We now study a general model that includes both buyer heterogeneity and seller
heterogeneity. We show that the two welfare costs identified in the preceding
sections remain in the general model. In this model the value of the asset to a
buyer is V = q + μ , where q and μ are follow the distributions defined in the
preceding sections. We assume that V = q + μ > C , namely, that the average
benefit to a buyer is greater than the cost to a seller. Under the R P Rule, the
court’s estimate is Vˆ = E [q + μ ] = q + μ . Under the R M Rule, the court’s


9
 Legal doctrine tries to minimize this problem by imposing implied warranties on sellers.
An implied warranty can be viewed as a minimal quality, q , that sellers must provide.
Such a rule presumes, however, that courts can verify quality or, at least, verify that
quality is below the q threshold. We assume that quality is not verifiable. Alternatively,
if courts can verify that quality is below the q threshold but cannot verify the exact
                                                               [        ]
quality level above the threshold, then our results apply in the q, qmax range.




                                            14
estimate is Vˆ = E [q + μ q ∈ Ω S , μ ∈ Ω B ] , where Ω S and Ω B represent the subsets
of sellers and buyers, respectively, who enter the market.
      From a social welfare perspective, buyers with μ > μ min = max(C − qmax ,0)
who can participate in an efficient exchange should enter the market, and sellers
with q < qmin = max(C − μ max ,0) who cannot possibly generate a positive surplus
should not enter the market. These efficient outcomes obtain under the mutual
consent rule, but not under the restitution rule.
      The parties’ entry decisions under the restitution rule and the resulting
welfare loss are stated in the following proposition.

Proposition 3: Under the restitution rule, buyers who could participate in
efficient exchanges will not enter the market and sellers who cannot create a
positive surplus will enter the market. In particular—
(a) Under the R P Rule, when the court’s estimate is based on the average value
in the full population of buyers, then in equilibrium all sellers will enter the
                                    [              ]
market and buyers with μ ∈ μ min , μˆ P will not enter the market, where μ̂ P
satisfies μˆ = μ + Pr (q < C − μˆ
                 P                  P
                                        )⋅ E [(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μˆ   P
                                                                          )             ]
                                                                       − C q < C − μˆ P .
                        M
(b) Under the R Rule, when the court’s estimate is based on the average value
in the subset of buyers who enter the market, then in equilibrium all sellers will
                                               [             ]
enter the market and buyers with μ ∈ μ min , μˆ M will not enter the market, where
 μˆ M ≥ μˆ P . When C < μ max , only buyers of the highest type, μ max , enter the
market, and the market effectively collapses.
(c) The welfare loss, as compared to the MC Rule, is ΔW i = ΔW1 + ΔW2i , where:
           K (qmin ) max max
                            μ   q

ΔW1 =                   ∫ q ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ represents the welfare loss
         1 − K (qmin ) μmin min
from                 inclusion      of                  low-quality              sellers,   and
          μˆ i   qmax

ΔW2i =    ∫ ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ , with            i ∈ {P, M }, represents the welfare
         μ min qmin

loss from exit by low-valuation buyers. Since μˆ M ≥ μˆ P , ΔW M ≥ ΔW P .

Proof: See Appendix.

Remark: The intuition for this result is as follows:
(a) The result reflects the two effects identified in propositions 1 and 2: low-
quality sellers inefficiently enter the market and low-valuation buyers
inefficiently decide not to enter the market. An interaction between these two




                                                   15
effects should also be noted: entry by low-quality sellers reduces a buyer’s
expected payoff from a meeting with a seller, thus increasing the restitution rule’s
inefficient deterrence of entry by low-valuation buyers.
(b) As in proposition 1, when the court’s estimate is based on the average value in
the subset of buyers who enter the market more buyers are deterred from entering
the market. However, unlike in proposition 1 it is not always the case that only the
highest-valuation buyers enter. The reason is that low-valuation buyers may meet
sellers with very high quality and receive a positive payoff. When there are
enough high-quality sellers, this reduces the magnitude of the entry deterrence
effect under the restitution rule.
(c) The welfare loss under the restitution rule reflects the two adverse effects
identified in propositions 1 and 2. The supply-side inefficiency is identical under
both the R P Rule and the R M Rule. The demand-side inefficiency is larger under
the R M Rule. Accordingly, the overall inefficiency is larger under the R M Rule.



6.      Extensions

6.1.    Other Pricing Rules

The preceding analysis focused on the restitution rule and compared this rule to
the prevailing mutual consent rule. We chose to focus on the restitution rule
because it stands as a real-world alternative to the mutual consent rule, at least
under certain conditions. The restitution rule, however, is only one example of a
pricing rule, i.e., a rule that gives the seller a put option to force the sale of a good
or service at a court-determined price. Under the restitution rule the option’s
exercise price equals the (average) benefit to the buyer. But rules setting different
exercise prices can be easily imagined.
      Our model can be extended to study a generic pricing rule with a court-
determined exercise price of P. The results stated in proposition 3 for the R P
Rule, which were derived assuming that the court sets an exercise price equal to
 q + μ , can be readily generalized to any court-determined exercise price P. 10 We
assume P > C, otherwise the pricing rule is effectively identical to the mutual
consent rule. This generalization is summarized in the following corollary.

10
  There is no meaning to the second version of the restitution rule, the R M Rule, when
the exercise price does not equal the average value of the asset. If P is set equal to some
multiple of the average value, then there can be meaning to a version of the R M Rule,
and the results stated in proposition 3 for the R M Rule could be generalized.




                                            16
Corollary 1: Under a general pricing rule with an exercise price P, buyers who
could participate in efficient exchanges will not enter the market and sellers who
cannot create a positive surplus will enter the market. In particular—
(a) All sellers will enter the market and buyers with μ ∈ [μ min , μˆ ( P)] will not
enter                 the               market,                        where                    μˆ ( P )
satisfies μˆ ( P) = P − q + Pr (q < C − μˆ ( P) ) ⋅ E [(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μˆ ( P) − C ) q < C − μˆ ( P)] ,
and μˆ ' ( P) > 0 .
(b) The welfare loss, as compared to the MC Rule, is ΔW ( P ) = ΔW1 + ΔW2 ( P ) ,
               K (qmin ) max max
                                  μ   q

where: ΔW1 =                ∫ q ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ represents the welfare
             1 − K (qmin ) μmin min
loss          from            inclusion        of         low-quality            sellers,          and
              μˆ ( P ) qmax
ΔW2 ( P ) =     ∫ ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ
              μ min qmin
                                                         represents the welfare loss from exit

by low-valuation buyers. The welfare loss is increasing in P, i.e., ΔW ' ( P) > 0 .

Remark: The proof of this result is a straightforward generalization of the proof
of proposition 3 and is therefore omitted. Similarly, the intuition for this result is
identical to the intuition provided for the result stated in proposition 3. The two
adverse effects of the restitution rule exist under the general pricing rule. The
magnitude of these adverse effects is increasing in the price P, since a higher
exercise price increases the value of the seller’s put option. The adverse effects
disappear only when P < C, but then the pricing rule effectively converges to the
mutual consent rule.


6.2.     The Seller Compensation Rule

We now turn to examine the seller compensation rule which is essentially the
mirror image of the restitution rule. The symmetry between the restitution rule
and the seller compensation rule can be demonstrated as follows. Under the
restitution rule the seller has an option to sell at the court-determined exercise
price (a put option). Under the seller compensation rule the buyer has an option
to buy/take at the court-determined exercise price (a call option). Under the
restitution rule the exercise price is equal to the court's best estimate of the benefit
to the buyer. Specifically, we assumed that this benefit has a seller-specific
component, quality (q), and a buyer-specific component, idiosyncratic valuation




                                                    17
( μ ). Given the court's imperfect information, its estimate equals the average
benefit.
       Under the seller compensation rule the exercise price is equal to the court's
best estimate of the cost to the seller. This cost clearly has a seller-specific
component. It can also have a buyer-specific component. Focusing on the
exchange of goods and services, a buyer specific component exists when the
buyer can force the seller to produce and deliver a good or a service according to
the buyer's specification. In addition, the presence of a buyer-specific component
is evident when we extend the analysis to the taking of more general entitlements,
e.g., when a polluting factory “takes” a resident’s entitlement to clean air—
perhaps the most commonly-studied real-world case where the seller
compensation rule is applied. In such a case, the extent by which the resident-
seller’s entitlement is infringed upon—the extent of the harm to the resident-
seller—generally depends on characteristics of the factory-buyer.
       It should now be clear that the ex ante distortions identified in our analysis
of the restitution rule have immediate equivalents under the seller compensation
rule. Under the restitution rule, low-valuation buyers would inefficiently choose
not to enter the market, potentially leading to the collapse of the market.
Similarly, under the seller compensation rule, high-cost sellers would inefficiently
decide not to enter the market, potentially leading to the collapse of the market.
And, under the restitution rule low-quality sellers would inefficiently enter the
market. Similarly, under the seller compensation rule, buyers with high-cost
demands or takers that significantly infringe upon a seller’s entitlement would
inefficiently enter the market.



7.     Conclusion

In this paper we provide an efficiency rationale for limiting the scope of the
restitution rule to a narrow set of cases as the law does. Focusing on ex ante
effects, we show that use of the rule in standard settings would lead to inefficient
entry by low-quality sellers and discourage efficient entry by some or all potential
buyers. Our analysis justifies the limited scope of the restitution rule and cautions
against expansion of the rule’s domain of application as urged by some legal
scholars. Our analysis and its normative implications extend to a broad category
of pricing rules, including both seller-option (put option) rules and buyer-option
(call option) rules.




                                         18
                                   References
Akerlof, George A. (1970), “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and
      the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 488-500.
Bebchuk, Lucian A. (1984), “Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect
      Information,” RAND Journal of Economics, 15, 404-415.
Bernardo, Antonio, Eric L. Talley, and Ivo Welch (2000), “A Theory of Legal
      Presumptions,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 16, 1-49.
Calabresi, Guido, and Douglas A. Melamed (1972), “Property Rules, Liability
      Rules and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral,” Harvard Law Review,
      85, 1089-1128.
Coase, Ronald H. (1960), “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law &
      Economics, 3, 1-44.
Dagan, Hanoch (2004), The Law and Ethics of Restitution (Cambridge University
      Press).
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole (1991), Game Theory (MIT Press).
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell (1996), “Property Rules versus Liability
      Rules: An Economic Analysis,” Harvard Law Review, 109, 713-790.
Katz, Avery W. (1990), “Your Terms or Mine: The Duty to Read the Fine Print in
      Contracts,” Rand Journal of Economics, 21, 518–537.
Katz, Avery W. (1993), “Transaction Costs and the Legal Mechanics of Contract
      Formation: When Should Silence in the Face of an Offer be Construed as
      Acceptance?” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 9, 77–97.
Levmore, Saul (1985), “Explaining Restitution,” Virginia Law Review, 71, 65-
      124.
Palmer, George E. (1995), The Law of Restitution (Aspen).
Polinsky, A. Mitchell (1983), “Risk Sharing through Breach of Contract
      Remedies,” Journal of Legal Studies, 12, 427-444.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell and Rubinfeld, Daniel L. (1988), “The Welfare Implications
      of Costly Litigation for the Level of Liability,” Journal of Legal Studies, 17,
      151-164.
Porat, Ariel (2007), “Advocating a General Duty of Restitution,” mimeo, Tel
      Aviv University School of Law.
Posner, Richard A. (2003), Economic Analysis of Law (6th ed., Aspen Publishers).
Reinganum, Jennifer F., and Louis L. Wilde (1986), “Settlement, Litigation, and
      the Allocation of Litigation Costs,” RAND Journal of Economics, 17, 557-
      68.
Rogerson, William P. (1984), “Efficient Reliance and Damage Measures for
      Breach of Contract,” RAND Journal of Economics, 15, 39-53.




                                         19
Schankerman, Mark, and Suzanne Scotchmer (2001), “Damages and Injunctions
      in Protecting Intellectual Property,” RAND Journal of Economics, 32, 199-
      220.
Schweizer, Urs (2006), “Cooperative Investments Induced by Contract Law,”
      RAND Journal of Economics, 37, 134-145.
Spier, Kathryn E. (1992), “The Dynamics of Pretrial Negotiation,” Review of
      Economic Studies, 59, 93-108.
Spier, Kathryn E. (2007), “Litigation,” in A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven
      Shavell, eds., Handbook of Law and Economics, Volume 1 (North-
      Holland).




                                      20
                                        Appendix

Proof of Proposition 3:
(a) We first show that ∀q E [WS q ] > 0 , and thus all sellers enter the market.
Given the assumption that q + μ > C , there are three cases depending on the
relative magnitudes of the actual exchange value, q + μ , the court’s estimate of
the exchange value Vˆ = q + μ , and the cost of production (or transfer) to the
seller, C:
Case       I:     q+μ <C<q+μ                (or    μ < C − q ).         In    this    case,
WS = (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) + θ ⋅ (q + μ − q − μ ) or, after          some rearranging,
WS = (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) − (q + μ − q − μ ) .           Since          Vˆ = q + μ > C ,
(q + μ − C ) − (q + μ − q − μ ) > 0 ,            which            also          implies
(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) − (q + μ − q − μ ) > 0(since q + μ < C ). Therefore, WS > 0 .
Case II: C < q + μ < q + μ (or              C − q < μ < q − q + μ ).    In this case,
WS = q + μ − C > 0 .
Case III: C < q + μ < q + μ    (or                  μ > q − q + μ ).      In   this   case,
WS = q + μ − C > 0 .
Therefore: ∀q E [WS q ] > 0 , and all sellers enter the market.
We next show that a buyer's expected payoff from an encounter with a seller is
monotonically increasing in μ , and that there exists a threshold buyer type μˆ < μ
such that high-valuation buyers, i.e., buyers with μ > μˆ gain from an exchange:
E [WB μ > μˆ ] > 0 , buyers with μ = μˆ break even: E [WB μ = μˆ ] = 0 , and low-
valuation buyers, i.e., buyers with μ < μˆ , lose from an exchange:
E [WB μ < μˆ ] < 0 . Again, there are three cases:
Case    I:       q+μ <C <q +μ              (or    q < C − μ ).    In           this    case,
WB = −[(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) + θ ⋅ (q + μ − q − μ )] or, after some           rearranging,
WB = −[(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) − (q + μ − q − μ )] .
Case II: C < q + μ < q + μ (or C − μ < q < q + μ − μ ).              In         this case,
WB = q + μ − q − μ < 0 .
Case III: C < q + μ < q + μ               (or q > q + μ − μ ).     In          this   case,
WB = q + μ − q − μ > 0 .
The expected payoff of a type- μ buyer is:




                                              21
 E [WB μ ] = Pr (q < C − μ ) ⋅ E [− [(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) − (q + μ − q − μ )] q < C − μ ] +
 + Pr (q > C − μ ) ⋅ E [q + μ − q − μ q > C − μ ] =
 = μ − μ + Pr (q < C − μ ) ⋅ E [− (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μ − C ) q < C − μ ]
∂E [WB μ ]
                    = 1 − (1 − θ )K (C − μ ) > 0
   ∂μ
Define                      μ̂              such         that         E [WB μ = μˆ ] = 0         or
μˆ = μ + Pr (q < C − μˆ ) ⋅ E [(1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μˆ − C ) q < C − μˆ ] .
        ∂E[WB μ ]
Since               > 0 , we have: E [WB μ < μˆ ] < 0 and E [WB μ > μˆ ] > 0 .
             ∂μ
Note that μˆ ≤ μ .
(b) All sellers enter under the R M Rule as they did under the R P Rule and based
on the same analysis provided for the R P Rule in part (a). 11
Buyers’ entry decisions are characterized by a threshold value μ̂ . To find the
threshold value under the R M Rule, μ̂ M , we return to the expected payoff
function                         from                               part                        (a):
 E [WB μˆ ] = μˆ − μ + Pr (q < C − μˆ ) ⋅ E [− (1 − θ ) ⋅ (q + μˆ − C ) q < C − μˆ ] . Substituting
the             equilibrium             condition                [
                                                         μ M = E μ μ > μˆ M   ]       we     obtain:
     [              ]            [
E WB μˆ M = μˆ M − E μ μ > μˆ M + A μˆ M ,    ] ( )                                           where
     ( )                (             ) [           (            )
A μˆ M = Pr q < C − μˆ M ⋅ E − (1 − θ ) ⋅ q + μˆ M − C q < C − μˆ M .             ]
When            C ≤ μ max ,      ∀q q ≥ C − μ max , which implies          A(μˆ M ) = 0    and thus
  [                 ]           [             ]
E WB μˆ M = μˆ M − E μ μ > μˆ M . Recalling that μ̂ M is a threshold value, we have
E [W     B   μˆ M   ] = 0 or μˆ  M
                                        [           ]
                                     = E μ μ > μˆ M . This condition is satisfied iff μˆ M = μ max ,
i.e., iff only buyers of the highest type, μ max , enter the market.
When C ≤ μ max , then clearly μˆ M > μˆ P . It remains to show that μˆ M ≥ μˆ P also
when C > μ max . Let EWBP (μ ) = μ − μ + A(μ ) and EWBM (μ ) = μ − μ M + A(μ )
denote the expected payoff functions under the R P Rule and the R M Rule,
respectively.          Note      that      EWBP (μ = 0) = − μ + A(0) and


11
   The analysis in part (a) relied on the court’s value estimate being above C, i.e., Vˆ > C
(in part (a) the court's value estimate was q + μ , but the same analysis applies to any
value estimate above C). The court's estimate is above C under the R M Rule.




                                                        22
 EWBM (μ = 0) = − μ M + A(0) . Since μ M ≥ μ , EWBP (μ = 0) < EWBP (μ = 0) , which
implies                                 μˆ M ≥ μˆ P                           (since
∂EWB ∂μ = ∂EWB ∂μ = 1 + A' (μ ) = 1 − (1 − θ )K (C − μ ) ).
      P              M


(c) Since all sellers enter the market and only buyers with μ > μˆ enter the market,
social, welfare equals
          μ max qmax                                            μ max qmax
W =          ∫μ ∫ max(q + μ − C ,0)k (q) f (μ )dqdμ = ∫μ ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ .
     R

             ˆ        0                                              ˆ   qmin
                                              12
The welfare loss is: ΔW = ΔW1 + ΔW2 ,              where:
                             μ max qmax                         max max   μ     q

ΔW1 =
           1
                     ∫ q∫  ( q + μ − C )k ( q ) f ( μ ) dqdμ −   ∫ q ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ =
      1 − K (qmin ) μmin min                                   μ min min

             K (qmin ) max max
                             μ    q

         =                ∫ q ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f ( μ )dqdμ
           1 − K (qmin ) μmin min


             μ max qmax                                 μ max qmax
ΔW2 =            ∫ ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ − ∫ ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ =
             μmin qmin                                   μˆ   qmin
                 μˆ   qmax

         =       ∫ ∫ (q + μ − C )k (q) f (μ )dqdμ
             μmin qmin

■




12
     Clearly ΔW1 ≥ 0 . And ΔW2 ≥ 0 , since μˆ ≥ μ min (it can be readily shown that
μˆ ≥ μ min ).




                                                   23
