NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTIONS UNDER LOW CARBON FUEL STANDARDS?
Stephen P. Holland
Christopher R. Knittel
Jonathan E. Hughes
Working Paper 13266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13266

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

We thank Douglas Miller and Burkhard Schipper for helpful discussions. Knittel and Hughes thank
financial support from the UC Davis Institute of Transportation Studies. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Stephen P. Holland, Christopher R. Knittel, and Jonathan E. Hughes. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Greenhouse Gas Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?
Stephen P. Holland, Christopher R. Knittel, and Jonathan E. Hughes
NBER Working Paper No. 13266
July 2007
JEL No. H23,L51,L71,L91,Q42,Q52,Q53,Q58
ABSTRACT
A low carbon fuel standard (LCFS) seeks to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by limiting a fuel producer's
carbon emissions per unit of output. California has launched an LCFS for transportation fuels; others
have called for a national LCFS. We show that this policy decreases production of high-carbon fuels
but increases production of low-carbon fuels. The net effect of this may be an increase in carbon emissions.
The LCFS cannot be first best, and the best LCFS may reduce social welfare. We simulate the outcomes
of a national LCFS, focusing on gasoline and ethanol as the high- and low-carbon fuels. For a broad
range of parameters, we find that the LCFS is unlikely to increase CO2 emissions. However, the surplus
losses from the LCFS are likely to be quite large ($80 to $760 billion annually for a national LCFS
reducing carbon intensities by 10 percent), energy prices are likely to increase, and the average carbon
cost ($307 to $2,272 per ton of CO2 for the same LCFS) can be much larger than damage estimates.
We describe an efficient policy that achieves the same emissions reduction at a much lower surplus
cost ($16 to $290 billion) and much lower average carbon cost ($60 to $868 per ton of CO2).
Stephen P. Holland
Dept. of Economics
University of North Carolina-Greensboro
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
sphollan@uncg.edu
Christopher R. Knittel
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu

Jonathan E. Hughes
Institute of Transportation Studies
UC Davis
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
jehughes@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Low carbon fuel standards (LCFSs) are rapidly becoming an integral part of the national debate
over how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. On January 18th, 2007 California Governor Arnold
Schwarzenegger signed an executive order launching a low carbon fuel standard to reduce the carbon
intensity of fuels for light-duty vehicles.1 The standard, which limits an industry’s weighted average
carbon emissions rate or equivalently the carbon emissions per unit of output, allows fuel producers
to achieve a given carbon emissions rate by flexibly altering their production of fuels.2 Senators
John McCain and Barack Obama have both called for a national low carbon fuel standard.3 Other
countries, states, and regions also have proposed low carbon fuel standards.4 Despite this increasing
prominence, this is the first paper to analyze the economics of low carbon fuel standards.
The political appeal of low carbon fuel standards has several components. First, federal resistance to the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions has limited states’ options. In particular,
the options for addressing carbon emissions from the transportation sector, which accounts for 28
percent of U.S. emissions (U.S. EPA 2006) are severely limited.5 An LCFS might avoid these federal restrictions. Second, Pigouvian taxes, which can correct negative pollution externalities, have
proven politically infeasible. An LCFS is not a tax. Third, cap and trade policies, which are more
politically palatable, may be undermined by demand shocks. For example, the RECLAIM emissions market was almost destroyed by the California electricity crisis since it was argued that the
rigid emissions limits contributed to electricity blackouts.6 An LCFS, by regulating emissions rates
rather than emissions, allows for higher emissions in years with higher demand. Finally, politicians
1

The executive order S-01-07 states the LCFS shall “reduce the carbon intensity” of fuels. An accompanying
White Paper states that providers must “ensure that the mix of fuel... meets, on average, a declining standard for
GHG emissions.”
2
There is much ambiguity in the design of an LCFS, including: what output is covered (e.g., light duty v. heavy
duty vehicle fuel), how output is measured (e.g., energy v. miles), and how emissions rates are measured (e.g.,
upstream v. downstream). These policy design issues are currently being debated for the California LCFS.
3
Similarly, US Senators Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe (both R-ME) have introduced
a measure (S.1073) designed to reduce carbon emissions, which requires an increase in the percentage of alternative
fuels.
4
A current count includes: British Columbia, Washington, Oregon, Arizona, New Mexico, Minnesota, Illinois, the
United Kingdom and the European Union.
5
The Clean Air Act of 1970 stipulates that only the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is allowed to regulate
fuel economy. California AB 1493, which caps greenhouse gas emissions from vehicles, is currently being challenged
in the courts.
6
Permits that are fully tradeable intertemporally can increase the flexibility of tradeable permits. In practice,
permits are “bankable” but not “borrowable.” Hybrid instruments can also increase the flexibility of tradable permits.

are quite sensitive to the effects of policies on energy prices in general and on gasoline prices in
particular. An LCFS certainly does not have a direct effect on prices, and one can imagine scenarios
(and we will illustrate one) in which an LCFS reduces carbon emissions without increasing gasoline
prices.7
Despite this political appeal, we argue that the standards have a cost in terms of efficiency and
effectiveness. In particular, we show that an LCFS limiting carbon emissions per unit of energy (the
energy-based LCFS) can achieve the first best outcome only under unrealistic assumptions. Moreover, we find that, contrary to the stated purpose, an LCFS can actually raise carbon emissions.
Additionally, we show that the second best LCFS—from a regulator’s perspective—“under-taxes”
all fuels and may require a nonbinding standard, i.e., the optimal standard may be no standard at
all.
The intuition behind these effects is that the LCFS acts as a tax on any fuel with a carbon
intensity above the standard, but acts as a subsidy for any fuel with a carbon intensity below
the standard. The first best outcome cannot be attained since it requires that any fuel emitting
carbon should be taxed (not subsidized) in equilibrium. Carbon emissions can increase because
compliance with the LCFS can be achieved by reducing the production of high carbon fuels or
increasing production of low carbon fuels. In equilibrium, it is optimal for firms to do both. We
show that it is possible that increases in carbon from ramping up production of the low carbon fuel
can outweigh the reduction in carbon associated with decreasing output of the high carbon fuel.
We extend the theoretical analysis in a number of ways. First, we argue that the results under
perfect competition also hold for firms with market power. In Section 4, we discuss meeting the
LCFS by trading carbon, energy, or weighted emissions rates and show that trading can reduce
compliance costs by allowing firms to equate the marginal production cost of each fuel across firms.
Section 5 illustrates the surplus gains and losses to producers and consumers. Depending on the
relative elasticities, producers and/or consumers can bear the burden of the LCFS. Incorporating
gains from carbon trading shows that producers of low-carbon fuels are better off under an LCFS,
while producers of high-carbon fuels are harmed.
Section 6 analyzes variants of the energy-based LCFS. We first show that an LCFS, which
7
In initial policy discussions for implementing an LCFS in California, no mention was made of any effects on
prices.

2

measures ouput as miles driven, has similar inefficiencies as the energy-based LCFS. We argue
that feasible variants, which use different baselines for output, can have better incentives than the
energy-based LCFS by increasing the implicit tax and reducing the implicit subsidy of the LCFS. In
particular, a historical-baseline LCFS, which regulates carbon emissions relative to historic energy
production, can attain the first-best emissions and fuel production. Analysis of these variants
makes explicit the difficulties of finding a suitable baseline for the LCFS or for any other trading
program. Section 7 analyzes the incentives under the different policies for technological innovation
in carbon emissions rates and fuel economy.
To understand the likely impacts of an LCFS, Section 8 calibrates the theoretical model using
a range of parameters representative of US supply and demand conditions for ethanol and gasoline.
We find that an energy-based LCFS is unlikely to increase CO2 emissions. In fact, we find that the
CO2 reductions can be surprisingly large. For example, an LCFS that reduces the carbon intensity
by 10% reduces emissions by 45% for one set of parameters.8
While the CO2 reductions can be significant, the energy-based LCFS is an expensive way to
achieve these reductions. For the 10% reduction in carbon intensity, we find that the social surplus
loss per ton of CO2 —the average cost of CO2 reduction—ranges from $307 to $2,272 per ton.9
This implies that if the damage per ton of CO2 is less than $307, the LCFS reduces welfare. Since
most damage estimates are less than this, our calculations imply that society would be better off
without an LCFS compared to a standard that reduces the carbon intensity by 10%. In fact, if
carbon damages are less than $140, even a modest LCFS reducing carbon intensities by only 1%
would never increase welfare in our simulations.
We compare these costs to the historical-baseline LCFS, which is equivalent to carbon trading
and can attain the first best. The carbon cost under the historical-baseline LCFS, which attains the
same CO2 emissions reduction, are much lower: ranging from $60 to $868 per ton of CO2 .10 This
historical-baseline LCFS corrects the perverse incentive for firms to internally subsidize ethanol
8

The proposed LCFS in California calls for a 10% reduction in carbon intensities.
Equivalent calculations that consider an energy-based LCFS operating only in California result in an average cost
of carbon that ranges from $263 to $903 per ton of CO2 . This analysis holds ethanol consumption for the remainder
of the U.S. fixed, while allowing CA consumption to vary. Therefore, these estimates represent a lower-bound on
energy prices and average cost of carbon. Energy prices are lower under the CA LCFS as compared to the unregulate
equilibrium for intensity reductions less than 10%. This results in increased consumer surplus and is reflected in the
relatively lower average cost of carbon compared to the U.S. system.
10
The equivalent values for a historical-baseline LCFS operating only in California range from $28 to $236 per ton
of CO2 and are significantly lower than costs under the comparable energy-based LCFS.
9

3

production, taxing all fuels commensurate with their carbon content.
In our simulations, consumer surplus from energy consumption decreases and energy prices
increase for all but the most lenient standards; and producer surplus can increase or decrease.
Accounting for carbon market transfers, surplus to ethanol producers always increases under an
LCFS while surplus to gasoline producers always decreases. Carbon market transfers account for
almost all of the gains to ethanol producers.
Our theoretical analysis is similar to Kwoka’s (1983) study of an auto manufacturing monopolist
facing linear demands and a CAFE standard.11 He shows that, under a CAFE standard, total
vehicle sales can increase and fuel savings can be partially or fully offset.12 Our theoretical results
are even stronger along several dimensions. First, we demonstrate that rate regulation cannot be
efficient. Second, we show that the optimal rate regulation may be nonbinding. Third, we show that
the results are not due to market power, but rather are an optimal response to the policy. Fourth,
our results hold for general supply and demand functions. Fifth, we illustrate the underlying supply
and demand conditions which lead to the counterintuitive result. Finally, we analyze alternative
baselines and trading.
While we analyze a low carbon fuel standard, our results are immediately applicable to any
policy which regulates a rate when the true target of the policy is the level. The analysis is even applicable beyond environmental policy. For example, No Child Left Behind (NCLB), which requires
a certain percentage of students to pass standardized tests, essentially regulates the test failure
rate of public schools. Our analysis shows that NCLB places an implicit tax on low achieving
students and a subsidy on high achieving students. If this tax leads to a reduction in the number
of low achieving students taking the tests, then NCLB would lead to a decrease in the number of
students passing the exams.13 Although, public school administrators at the primary and middle
11
Helfand (1991) considers a number of regulatory instruments for regulating pollution including a standard expressed as emissions per unit output. As in our analysis, Helfand finds that the “constraint could lead to the perverse
result that pollution increases.” Her analysis does not, however, include our other theoretical results.
12
An LCFS can be thought of as regulating the carbon efficiency of fuel. Khazzoom (1980) first identified the
“rebound” or “take-back” effect of energy efficiency regulations, and Portney (2003) discusses the rebound effect in
CAFE standards. Since motorists do not directly pay for carbon emissions, regulating carbon efficiency with an
LCFS does not affect the cost of driving, and the LCFS does not have a rebound effect.
13
Fiske and Ladd (2004) observe precisely this effect in post-apartheid South Africa. Although pass rates for
matriculation exams increased following 1997, the total number of passes declined slightly over this period of time.
The authors attribute part of this to a ”variety of responses by individual schools to political pressure to raise their
particular pass rates.”

4

school levels may have little scope for altering the mix of students taking the exams, our analysis
illustrates the incentives these administrators face.

2

Efficient fuel production and carbon emissions

The model considers a negative externality, carbon emissions, associated with energy production.
To illustrate the main theoretical effects, we focus on two fuels with different costs and carbon
emissions rates. The theoretical analysis readily generalizes to multiple fuel sources.
0 > 0
One fuel source, the high carbon fuel, e.g., gasoline, has production costs CH (q) with CH
00 > 0 and carbon emissions rate β . A second fuel source, the low carbon fuel, e.g., ethanol
and CH
H

or hydrogen, has production costs CL (q) with CL0 > 0 and CL00 > 0 and emissions rate βL . Assume
βH > βL ≥ 0 but CH (q) < CL (q) for every relevant q. Further assume the quantities of each
fuel source, qH and qL , are measured in some equivalent energy unit, e.g., mmBtu, with qi ∈ R+ .
Suppose a unit of carbon does τ dollars of damage, so the environmental damage from fuel i is
τ βi qi .
Let the benefit from consumption of energy be U (qH , qL ) with U increasing, differentiable, and
concave. This function, which captures consumer surplus, is quite general and allows for a wide
range of assumptions about substitutability of the fuels. Importantly, the marginal utilities, i.e.,
the partial derivatives, capture the demands for the fuels.14
Efficient fuel production, consumption and carbon emissions in the model can be found from
the following maximization problem:
max U (qH , qL ) − CH (qH ) − CL (qL ) − τ (βH qH + βL qL ).

qH ,qL

Letting M Ci =

∂Ci
∂qi ,

(1)

the first order conditions can be written:
∂U
= M Ci (qi ) + τ βi
∂qi

for i ∈ {H, L}. Thus in the first best allocation, the marginal benefit of consumption equals the
marginal social cost of production for each fuel.
14

This formulation assumes additive separability from other goods. Income effects could be easily incorporated at
the cost of additional notation.

5

As is well-known, perfectly competitive firms cannot in general achieve this efficient allocation,
producing too much of any good which causes a negative externality. For prices pi , the inefficiency
arises in this model since firms produce such that pi = M Ci (qi ), but ignore the marginal social
damage, τ βi . Because pi =

∂U
∂qi

< M Ci (qi ) + τ βi in equilibrium, too much of each good is produced.

This over-production could be corrected with market mechanisms such as Pigouvian taxes, here
τ βi , or a system of tradable permits. Importantly, the Pigouvian taxes, which internalize the
externality, impose a positive carbon tax on production of each fuel with a lower Pigouvian tax on
the low carbon fuel.

3

An energy-based low carbon fuel standard

Consider a low carbon fuel standard expressed as a limit on the emissions per energy unit of fuel
produced. This is equivalent to a limit on the average emissions rate weighted by output shares, i.e.,
the carbon intensity. To emphasize the tradeoffs between production of the two fuels, we focus on a
single, representative, price-taking firm which produces both fuels. The analysis is easily extended
to symmetric price-taking firms. Firms that are not price takers are analyzed in the section on
market power, and asymmetric firms are discussed in the section on trading.
Let σ be the low carbon fuel standard, for example, in tons of CO2 per mmBtu. The LCFS
constraint facing our representative firm is:
βH qH + βL qL
≤ σ.
qH + qL

(2)

Note that since the constraint implies that the weighted average of βH and βL must be less than
σ, the constraint set is empty if σ < βL . Similarly, the constraint set contains the entire positive
orthant if σ > βH .15 In what follows, we assume that βL ≤ σ ≤ βH .
If we write the constraint as βH qH + βL qL ≤ σ(qH + qL ), the Lagrangian for the firm’s profit
maximization can be written:
max pH qH + pL qL − CH (qH ) − CL (qL ) + λ[σ(qH + qL ) − βH qH − βL qL ]

qH ,qL

(3)

where λ is the shadow value of the LCFS constraint. The firm’s first order conditions are:
pi = M Ci (qi ) + λ(βi − σ),
15

(4)

Intuitively, if the standard is stricter than the lowest emissions rate, it is impossible to meet. Alternatively, if
the standard is weaker than the highest emissions rate, then it is not binding.

6

and:
λ[σ(qH + qL ) − βH qH − βL qL ] = 0,

(5)

where λ ≥ 0. The first condition is that the firm equates price and marginal opportunity cost, where
the opportunity cost includes the production cost as well as the effect on the LCFS constraint. The
second condition, [5], is the complementary slackness condition which states that either the shadow
value of the constraint is zero or the LCFS constraint binds. Since [4]-[5] characterize supply, and
demand for fuel i is characterized by pi =

∂U
∂qi ,

we have:

Characterization of the energy-based LCFS equilibrium
e , q e , λe ) is characterized by:
If the LCFS binds, the LCFS equilibrium (qH
L
e , qe )
∂U (qH
L
= M Ci (qie ) + λe (βi − σ)
∂qi

for i ∈ {H, L} and the constraint equation σ(qH + qL ) = βH qH + βL qL .
The LCFS equilibrium introduces a wedge, λe (βi − σ), between marginal benefit, i.e., demand,
and marginal cost, i.e., supply. Intuitively, this LCFS wedge can be analyzed like any tax wedge.
To analyze this wedge, note that βH − σ ≥ 0 and βL − σ ≤ 0 since the standard is between the
two emissions rates. For fuels with emissions rates higher than the standard, the LCFS wedge is
nonnegative. Thus the high carbon fuel is taxed in the LCFS equilibrium. However, for fuels with
emissions rates lower than the standard, the LCFS wedge is nonpositive, and the low carbon fuel
is subsidized in the LCFS equilibrium.16 This leads to our first result:17
Proposition 1 The energy-based low carbon fuel standard cannot achieve the efficient allocation of
fuel production and carbon emissions if βL > 0. If βL = 0, the efficient allocation can be attained
(by setting σ = 0) iff ∂U (0, qL∗ )/∂qH ≤ M CH (0) + τ βH (i.e., it is optimal only for fuel 2 to be
produced).
Proposition 1 follows since production of each fuel causes a negative externality. The efficiency
conditions show that marginal utility should be above the marginal production cost for each fuel.
However, with a standard, the firm faces an additional incentive to produce the low carbon fuel.
Namely, increasing production of the low carbon fuel means the firm need not decrease production
of the high carbon fuel as severely. This additional incentive means that the low carbon fuel is
16

More precisely, we can define λe (βH − σ) as the LCFS tax and λe (σ − βL ) as the LCFS subsidy.
17
All proofs are in the appendix.

7

produced so that its price (equal in equilibrium to its marginal utility) is less than its marginal
cost. This is not efficient. In short, the carbon in the low emissions fuel faces a negative price
even though it produces the same damages as the carbon in the high emissions fuel, which faces a
positive carbon price.
The second part of the proposition follows since if one fuel has zero emissions and production
of the other fuel is socially inefficient, then setting the LCFS to zero can prohibit production of the
high carbon fuel.
Proposition 1 does depend on the differentiability of U . To see this consider the case of perfectly
inelastic demand. In this case, the first best, the unregulated equilibrium, and the LCFS equilibrium
each have the same energy output. The first best is then fully characterized by an output ratio
which can also be attained by an LCFS.
Since Proposition 1 shows that the energy-based LCFS generally cannot attain the first best,
the question arises as to how effective the LCFS can be in reducing carbon emissions. This leads
to our second result:
Proposition 2 The energy-based low carbon fuel standard may either increase or decrease carbon
emissions and may either increase or decrease total energy production. If the LCFS increases
emissions, then it increases energy. Similarly, if the LCFS reduces energy, then it reduces emissions.
Proposition 2 follows for two separate reasons, which are reflected in the two independent proofs
of the proposition. The first proof uses an example which shows that the LCFS can increase carbon
emissions and energy, for a given standard, depending on the relative slopes of the marginal benefit
and marginal cost curves. The second proof uses an example which shows that the LCFS can
increase carbon emissions if the standard is not stringent enough.
The first proof of Proposition 2 follows because a given tax or subsidy affects output more if
demand and supply are more elastic. For example, if the standard is set at the average emissions
rate (βH + βL )/2, then the tax and subsidy are exactly equal. If demand and supply of the high
carbon fuel are relatively flatter than those of the low carbon fuel, then the tax decreases production
of the high carbon fuel more than the subsidy increases production of the low carbon fuel. In this
case, carbon emissions clearly decrease under the LCFS. However, if demand and supply of the low
carbon fuel are relatively flatter, then the tax decreases production of the high carbon fuel less than
the subsidy increases production of the low carbon fuel. If the difference in relative slopes is large
8

enough, the resulting large increase in low carbon fuel can lead to an increase in carbon emissions
despite the lower emissions rate of the low carbon fuel.
The first proof might suggest that the energy-based LCFS only has perverse effects when the
slopes of the marginal benefit and marginal cost curves are dramatically different. However, as
shown in the second proof, the energy-based LCFS can lead to an increase in carbon emissions—
even when the slopes are identical—if the standard is not set sufficiently tight. This follows because
the relative sizes of the tax and subsidy depend on the stringency of the LCFS standard. If the
standard is set relatively tight, i.e., close to βL , then the subsidy is smaller than the tax. In
this case, production of the low carbon fuel increases less than production of the high carbon fuel
decreases, and the LCFS decreases carbon emissions. However, if the standard is relatively lax,
i.e., close to βH , then the subsidy is larger than the tax. In this case, production of the low carbon
fuel increases more than production of the high carbon fuel decreases. Under certain conditions,
the relative increase can be large enough that the LCFS can increase carbon emissions without
differences in the relative slopes.18
The necessary conditions developed in Proposition 2 are quite intuitive. Since an LCFS reduces
the carbon intensity of fuel, if it increases carbon emissions then energy must have increased.
Similarly, if the LCFS reduces energy, then it must also reduce carbon emissions. This proposition
also points to an interesting possibility: an LCFS could reduce carbon emissions while slightly
increasing energy production.

3.1

The second best energy-based LCFS

Propositions 1 and 2 show that an energy-based low carbon fuel standard is not efficient and may
even increase carbon emissions. However, if this is the only feasible policy option, the regulator
may prefer to use the policy tool. This section analyzes the best energy-based LCFS a regulator
could choose. Since any LCFS is not efficient, we call this the second best standard.
If the regulator can only determine the level of the standard, but not firms’ responses to the
e , q e , λe ) depends on σ. The
standard, the LCFS equilibrium is as characterized above, where (qH
L
18
A standard close to βH may not be binding, so even a relatively lax, binding standard may imply a larger implicit
tax than subsidy.

9

regulator’s second best problem is:
e
e
e
max U (qH
, qLe ) − CH (qH
) − CL (qLe ) − τ (βH qH
+ βL qLe ).
σ

with βL ≤ σ ≤ σ 0 where σ 0 is the carbon intensity in the unregulated equilibrium.19 Here the
regulator, whose only policy tool is the energy-based LCFS, puts equal weight on consumer surplus,
producer surplus, and environmental damages.
The first order necessary conditions for the regulator’s problem are:

 e
 e

dqH
dqL
∂U
∂U
− M CH (qH ) − τ βH
− M CL (qL ) − τ βL
+
≥ 0,
∂qH
dσ
∂qL
dσ
and σ 0 −σ ∗ ≥ 0 plus the complementary slackness condition.20 Substituting in the firm’s optimality
conditions shows that the FOC for an interior solution can be written
[λe (βH − σ ∗ ) − τ βH ]

e
dq e
dqH
= −[λe (βL − σ ∗ ) − τ βL ] L .
dσ
dσ

(6)

This equation says that the differences between the implicit tax/subsidy, λe (βi − σ ∗ ), and the
optimal taxes, τ βi , weighted by the changes in output should be equal at the optimal LCFS. By
rearranging, this equation can be written:
(λe − τ )

e + β qe )
e + qe )
d(βH qH
d(qH
L L
L
= λe σ ∗
dσ
dσ

(7)

which relates the marginal change in carbon emissions from a change in the standard with the
marginal change in energy. We can now state the following proposition:
Proposition 3 The second-best optimum may have σ ∗ = σ 0 . At an interior solution, i.e., if
σ ∗ ∈ (βl , σ 0 ) the second best optimum has:
e +β q e )
d(βH qH
L L
i)
> 0,
dσ
d(q e +q e )

H
L
ii) λ > τ if and only if
> 0,
dσ
e
∗
iii) λ (βL − σ ) < τ βL if βL > 0, and
dq e
iv) λe (βH − σ ∗ ) < τ βH if βL > 0, dσH > 0, and

e
dqL
dσ

< 0.

Proposition 3 first shows that it may be optimal to choose a nonbinding energy-based LCFS.
This result has a strong implication, namely: under these conditions, any energy-based LCFS would
decrease surplus relative to imposing no LCFS regulation.
19

Formally, if we let qi0 be the equilibrium production of fuel i in the absence of regulation, then the carbon intensity
0
0
0
0
in the unregulated equilibrium, i.e., most lax binding standard, is σ 0 = (βH qH
+ β L qL
)/(qH
+ qL
).
20
Since the constraint imposed on the regulator by the LCFS equilibrium is highly nonlinear, care must be taken
to ensure that this necessary condition is indeed sufficient.

10

For an interior solution, Proposition 3 derives several results about the optimal LCFS. First,
relaxing the optimal standard cannot reduce emissions. This is intuitive since otherwise the regulator would presumably relax the standard. Second, the optimal λ is greater than τ if and only
if tightening the standard reduces energy. With carbon trading, the regulator can attain the first
best by comparing the shadow value of the carbon constraint with the marginal damages. This
result shows that the second best cannot be attained by a simple comparison of the shadow value
of the LCFS constraint and the marginal damages. The third result, that the implicit tax/subsidy
on the low carbon fuel is less than the optimal tax, is unsurprising since the implicit tax is negative.
The fourth result, shows that the optimal standard also under-taxes the high carbon fuel in the
intuitive case where the standard decreases high carbon fuel, but increases low carbon fuel. Thus,
the optimal LCFS “under-taxes” both fuels.21

3.2

Graphical illustration of the propositions

To illustrate Propositions 1 and 2, consider the function U (qH , qL ) − CH (qH ) − CL (qL ). By assumption the function is concave and has a unique global maximum. Define the iso-surplus curves
as the level curves of this function, which are illustrated by circles in Figure 1. The unconstrained
maximum of the function is shown by point A. By simple inspection of the first order conditions,
this maximum is the (inefficient) perfectly competitive equilibrium which would result without
regulation of the externality.
Now consider optimization of this function subject to the constraint βH qH + βL qL ≤ C ∗ . This
constraint set requires total carbon emissions to be less than C ∗ . If we define an iso-carbon line
for C ∗ as the locus of points with carbon emissions C ∗ , then the constraint set is the area below
this iso-carbon line.22 The constrained optimum is point B. If C ∗ is chosen such that the shadow
value of the constraint equals τ , this constrained optimum is the efficient outcome—seen again by
simple inspection of the FOCs.
Finally, consider optimization of this function subject to the LCFS constraint βH qH + βL qL ≤
σ(qH + qL ). This constraint set is the area above and to the left of the line qL =
21

dq e

dq e

βH −σ
σ−βL qH .

Again

The appendix shows that dσH < 0 and dσL > 0 lead to a contradiction, i.e., tightening the standard cannot lead
to more high carbon fuel but less low carbon fuel. However, other sign combinations are possible.
22
We can think of C ∗ as a cap on total carbon emissions. The constraint set is then all feasible allocations under
a cap and trade program.

11

by simple inspection of the FOCs, this optimum, given by point C, is the LCFS equilibrium. Since
points B and C are different, the LCFS is not efficient. This inefficiency is the main result in
Proposition 1.23
The first proof of Proposition 2 is illustrated in Figures 2 through 5. Figures 2 and 3 show
an LCFS that is effective in reducing carbon emissions while Figures 4 and 5 show an LCFS
that increases carbon emissions. In Figure 2, the iso-surplus curves are illustrated along with the
unconstrained maximum, A. The iso-carbon line, βH qH + βL qL = K, shows the locus of points
with the same carbon emissions as the unconstrained maximum. Thus points below the iso-carbon
line decrease carbon emissions while points above the iso-carbon line increase emissions. The LCFS
equilibrium is illustrated by point B. As illustrated, the elliptical iso-surplus curves lead to an LCFS
optimum where carbon emissions are lower than in the unconstrained optimum.
These elliptical iso-surplus curves arise because of differences in the marginal surplus cost of
increasing the low carbon fuel above the unconstrained optimum relative to decreasing the high
carbon fuel below the unconstrained optimum. With the relative slopes of the marginal benefit and
marginal cost curves illustrated in Figure 3, there is a larger surplus loss from increasing qL than
from decreasing qH by the same amount. These relative slopes generate elliptical iso-surplus curves
as in Figure 2. Figure 3 also illustrates the tax, λe (βH − σ), and subsidy, λe (σ − βL ), wedges. As
illustrated the tax decreases production of the high carbon fuel by more than the subsidy increases
production of the low carbon fuel, and carbon emissions decrease.
Figures 4 and 5 show an LCFS that increases carbon emissions. Again the iso-surplus curves in
Figure 4 are elliptical, but now a decrease in qH reduces surplus relatively more than an increase
in qL does. Here the LCFS optimum at C leads to an increase in carbon emissions since C is
above the iso-carbon line, βH qH + βL qL = K. The relative slopes of corresponding marginal benefit
and marginal cost curves are illustrated in Figure 5. Here the slopes of the marginal benefit and
marginal cost curves of the low carbon fuel are flatter than the corresponding slopes of the high
carbon fuel. Thus the LCFS subsidy increases production of the low carbon fuel more than the
LCFS tax decrease production of the high carbon fuel. In this case, the increase in qL is large
enough that it leads to an increase in total carbon emissions despite the lower emissions rate of the
low carbon fuel.
23

Figure 1 also illustrates an additional problem with the LCFS. Namely, the efficient allocation of fuel production
may itself violate the LCFS constraint.

12

Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the second proof of Proposition 2 which shows that the energy-based
LCFS can lead to an increase in carbon emissions—even when the slopes of the marginal benefit and
marginal cost curves are identical—if the standard is not set sufficiently tight. In Figure 6, the isosurplus curves are circles, which implies that the (linear) marginal benefit and marginal cost curves
of the two fuels have the same slopes. With iso-surplus circles, the gradient of the surplus function,
which is normal to the iso-surplus circles, always points to the unconstrained maximum allowing
easy comparison of carbon emissions with and without the LCFS constraint. In particular, if the
gradient vector at the LCFS optimum is steeper (flatter) than the isocarbon line, then emissions
are increased (decreased) by the standard. In Figure 6, the unconstrained optimum is at A, and the
points B, C, and D illustrate the LCFS equilibria subject to progressively more stringent LCFS
standards. At point B the gradient vector is steeper than the iso-carbon line, which implies that
carbon emissions are higher under the LCFS. At C, the standard is such that the border of the
H βH −σ
LCFS constraint and the isocarbon line are perpendicular, i.e., , ( −β
βL ) σ−βL = −1 or σ =

2 +β 2
βH
L
βH +βL .

This implies that the gradient vector and iso-carbon line have the same slope at C, and that C is on
the iso-carbon line, i.e., , emissions are unchanged by the LCFS. Under a more stringent standard,
as illustrated by D, the gradient vector is flatter than the isocarbon line, which indicates that the
standard decreases carbon emissions.
Figure 7 illustrates point B where the standard increases carbon emissions. This standard is
not very stringent, i.e., σ is closer to βH than to βL , and the LCFS tax on the high carbon fuel is
smaller than the subsidy for the low carbon fuel. Thus, the firm optimally increases production of
the low carbon fuel more than it decreases production of the high carbon fuel. If the increase in
production is relatively large, the modest LCFS can increase carbon emissions.24
The second best LCFS is illustrated in Figure 8. Here the iso-surplus circles are illustrated
by the dashed circles, and the unregulated optimum is point A. The social indifference curves are
illustrated by the solid ellipses and attain a maximum at the efficient allocation, point B.25 The
locus of LCFS equilibria with different standards is illustrated by the curve connecting points A
and D.26 Point C is the LCFS equilibrium on the highest social indifference curve and is, thus, the
24

In Figure 6, a modest (binding) standard increases carbon emissions if the unconstrained optimum, A, is below
the ray through the origin which is perpendicular to the iso-carbon line.
25
Including the environmental costs changes the circles to ellipses since increasing qH has a greater environmental
cost than increasing qL by the same amount.
26
Point A is the equilibrium with a nonbinding LCFS, and point D is the equilibrium with a standard equal to βL .

13

second best allocation. In this example, a modest LCFS is second best. The proof of Proposition 3
describes an example in which a nonbinding LCFS is second best.

3.3

Market power

Our results assume perfect competition in both markets, but could easily be extended to alternative
models of firm conduct. While market power is unlikely to change our main results, it has two
effects in the model. For one, market power tends to mitigate the negative externality associated
with carbon. Market power is itself a market failure. In the absence of a negative externality,
market power leads to under-consumption of the good. In the presence of a negative externality,
whether a good is under- or over-consumed depends on the size of each market failure. If the mark
up for fuel j equals τ βj , then the market outcome is first best.27 Here points A and B coincide in
Figure 1. As mark ups are reduced from this level, point B moves northwest.
While market power does not change Proposition 2, asymmetric levels of market power across
the two fuels would affect the likelihood an LCFS would lead to an increase or decrease in carbon.
Market power ultimately drives a wedge between demand and marginal revenue.28 With linear demand, market power steepens the marginal revenue curve; whether an LCFS increases or decreases
carbon then depends on the relative slopes of the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves across
the two fuels. To illustrate this point, consider a monopolist operating in these two markets. The
firm’s first order condition for fuel i is:
e , qe )
e , qe )
e , qe )
∂U (qH
∂ 2 U (qH
∂ 2 U (qH
L
L
L
+
qi +
q−i = M Ci (qie ) + λe (βi − σ),
2
∂qi
∂qH ∂qL
∂qi

where −i represents fuel other than i. Comparing this set of first order conditions with those under
perfect competition, we see that the left hand side of the first order condition replaces the marginal
utility for fuel i with the marginal revenue associated with the fuel.
It is difficult to speculate as to the relative levels of market power in gasoline and ethanol
refining. Market power concerns are common in gasoline refining, but given the small amount of
ethanol currently consumed may not be vocalized for ethanol. A recent FTC study of the ethanol
27

It is important to note that for this result, the relevant mark up is the sum of mark ups over each facet of the
fuel’s production. This includes extraction/feedstock growth, refining and retail.
28
Here, the relevant market power is at the refining and retail levels, since the LCFS is set at the refining level.
Upstream market power simply corresponds to a shift in the marginal cost curves.

14

market reports an HHI range of 499 to 1613, depending on whether a firm is defined as a producer
or marketer and whether capacity or production is used.29 These calculations assume the relevant
market is national; in the gasoline refining market, the FTC has traditionally viewed the relevant
market to be smaller than a PADD, where PADD-level HHIs range from 1000 to 2000.30 Applying
a consistent market size assumption increases the estimated HHI for ethanol.
Given this range and the likelihood that the ethanol industry is in a state of change, we leave
the issue of relative market power in the two industries for future work.

4

Trading

If firms with different production costs must each meet the same low carbon fuel standard, then
trading can potentially reduce compliance costs. Policymakers can take advantage of the cost savings from trading in a number of ways. For one, reducing the cost of compliance might increase the
support of legislation among fuel producers. Alternatively, for a given level of costs, policymakers
can increase the stringency of the standard by allocating production more efficiently.
To illustrate trading, extend the model to two different (types of) firms, A and B, with different
marginal production costs. Suppose that firms trade “low carbon energy” where xj is the (net)
quantity of low carbon energy demanded by firm j ∈ {A, B}, βx is the emissions rate of low carbon
energy with βx < σ,31 and px is its price. Firm j’s profit maximization is now:
max

qHj ,qLj ,xj

pH qHj +pL qLj −CHj (qHj )−CLj (qLj )−px xj +λj [σ(qHj +qLj +xj )−βH qHj −βL qLj −βx xj ].

This maximization is identical to [3] except the firm can also purchase (or sell) low carbon energy
at cost px xj , but must incorporate additional emissions βx xj and additional energy xj in its LCFS
constraint. The firm’s FOCs for energy are pi = M Cij (qij ) + λj (βi − σ), and its FOC for low
carbon energy is px = λj (σ − βx ). We show in the appendix that the firm’s net demand for low
carbon energy is downward sloping, i.e., dxj /dpx < 0. The trading equilibrium for two firms
(taking energy prices as given) is then characterized by the six FOCs, the two LCFS constraints,
and market clearing in low carbon energy, i.e., xA + xB = 0.
29

Available at: http://www.ftc.gov/reports/ethanol05/20051202ethanolmarket.pdf.
See, Moss (2007).
31
If βx > σ, the traded commodity would be “high carbon energy” and would have a negative price.
30

15

Three points are worth noting. First, by writing the firm’s LCFS constraint with trading as
(βH − σ)qHj + (βL − σ)qLj = (σ − βx )xj , it is easy to show that the market clearing condition
implies (βH − σ)(qHA + qHB ) + (βL − σ)(qLA + qLB ) = 0. Thus with trading, the LCFS constraint
holds for the market, even though it need not hold for any single firm. Second, the firms’ first
order conditions for low carbon energy purchases imply that λA =

px
σ−βx

= λB . The first order

conditions for energy then imply that M CiA (qiA ) = M CiB (qiB ). Thus trading equates equilibrium
marginal production costs for each fuel across firms with different costs. Finally, the shadow value
of the LCFS constraint is λj =

px
σ−βx .

Since the units of the numerator are, for example, dollars

per mmBtu, and the units of the denominator are CO2 tons per mmBtu, the shadow value of the
LCFS constraint is simply the price of carbon, i.e., the units are dollars per CO2 ton.
Since the shadow value of the constraint is the price of carbon, a question arises as to whether
the firms could equivalently trade carbon emissions permits.32 If pc is the price of a carbon permit
and cj is firm j’s net demand for carbon permits, then firm j’s profit maximization with carbon
trading would be:
max

qHj ,qLj ,cj

pH qHj + pL qLj − CHj (qHj ) − CLj (qLj ) − pc cj + λj [σ(qHj + qLj ) − βH qHj − βL qLj + cj ]. (8)

As above, this maximization includes purchases of carbon permits, and the LCFS constraint subtracts permitted emissions, cj , from the numerator. It is easy to show that with trading the
LCFS constraint again holds for the market and marginal production costs are equal across firms.
Moreover, pc = λj , so the shadow value of the constraint is simply the price of a carbon permit.
Since the carbon permits and low carbon energy trading equilibria are both characterized by
marginal production costs equal across firms and the LCFS constraint holding for the market, it
follows that the two equilibria lead to identical energy production profiles. Moreover, the transfers
are identical since (σ − βx )xj = (βH − σ)qHj + (βL − σ)qLj = cj and

px
σ−βx

= λj = pc . Since trading

low carbon energy with βx = 0 is equivalent to trading energy, then it follows that the equilibria
resulting from trading (i) carbon emissions permits, (ii) low carbon energy, or (iii) energy are
equivalent.
Trading is equivalent to minimizing production costs subject to a market LCFS constraint since
in equilibrium only the market LCFS constraint is relevant. Thus trading reduces (cannot increase)
32

This might be particularly useful if the program were eventually subsumed into a global carbon trading framework
such as Kyoto.

16

production costs. Note that cost savings from trading could be essentially zero, if firms are nearly
identical. On the other hand, gains from trading could be quite large if there are substantial cost
differences or economies of scale. The magnitude of gains from trade is thus an empirical question.

5

Distributional effects of the LCFS

Since the LCFS imposes an implicit tax on the high carbon fuel and an implicit subsidy on the low
carbon fuel, the distributional analysis is similar to tax incidence analysis. However, unlike with
a tax imposed by the government, the LCFS tax/subsidy transfers occur within firms. To analyze
the surplus to producers of high carbon fuel separately from the surplus to low carbon fuel, we
utilize the carbon permit trading framework developed above.33
First, consider the changes in consumer surplus from energy consumption under an LCFS.
Figure 9 illustrates the supply and demand curves for the low and high carbon fuels. Since the
LCFS subsidizes the low carbon fuel, the quantity increases and its price drops. Thus, consumer
surplus from the low carbon fuel increases by Area(D+E) with an LCFS. Since the LCFS taxes the
high carbon fuel, the consumer surplus from the high carbon fuel decreases by Area(W+X).
Consumer surplus, which changes by Area(D+E−W−X), can either increase or decrease with
an LCFS. Note that if the demand for the high carbon fuel is perfectly elastic, then Area(W+X)=0,
and consumers do not bear any of the burden from the LCFS. Conversely, if supply of the low carbon
fuel is perfectly inelastic, then Area(D+E)=0, and consumers are worse off under the LCFS.
Now consider changes in producer surplus. The LCFS tax decreases production of the high
carbon fuel and increases its price. Thus producer surplus from the high carbon fuel would increase
by Area(W−Z).34 However, this firm (division) would not be in compliance with the LCFS and
would need to purchase (βH − σ)qH carbon permits at an equilibrium price of pc = λ to come
into compliance. Since this expenditure on permits is equal to Area(W+Y), producers of the high
carbon fuel are worse off by Area(Y+Z) under the LCFS. Note that producers of the high carbon
fuel cannot be better off under the LCFS.
33

Even within a large energy firm, low carbon and high carbon fuel production would likely be in separate accounting
centers.
34
This is the increase in profit that a monopolist would attain by restricting output by an equal amount.

17

For the low carbon fuel, the implicit LCFS subsidy increases its production and decreases its
price. Thus producer surplus from the low carbon fuel would decrease by Area(C+D+E). But this
firm (division) would exceed the standard and could still sell (σ − βL )qL carbon permits at a price
of pc = λ and remain in compliance. Since the revenue from permit sales is Area(A+B+C+D+E),
producer surplus from the low carbon fuel increases by Area(A+B) under the LCFS, and producers
of the low carbon fuel cannot be worse off under the LCFS.35
Total producer surplus, which changes by Area(A+B−Y−Z), can either increase or decrease
with an LCFS. For example, if the supply of the low carbon fuel is perfectly inelastic, Area(A+B) is
zero, and producers are worse off. Conversely, if supply of the high carbon fuel is perfectly elastic,
then Area(Y+Z)=0, so producers are better off with the LCFS. Note that in this case, the burden
of the LCFS is borne entirely by the consumers of the high carbon fuel.
Combined consumer plus producer surplus decreases with the LCFS by Area(C+X+Z), i.e.,
the usual deadweight loss. Whether this loss in surplus from production and consumption is
efficient depends on the environmental costs. Figure 10 illustrates the marginal benefit and private
marginal cost of each fuel along with its social marginal cost and the LCFS tax or subsidy.36
With the LCFS, production of the high carbon fuel decreases, and the deadweight loss decreases
by Area(U). However, production of the low carbon fuel increases, and deadweight loss from the
low carbon fuel increases by Area(F+G). Thus, the efficiency benefit of the LCFS is given by
Area(U−F−G). The LCFS can either increase or decrease efficiency. If demand for the high carbon
fuel is perfectly inelastic, then Area(U)=0, and any LCFS decreases efficiency. This illustrates the
second part of Proposition 3. Conversely, if demand for the low carbon fuel is perfectly inelastic,
then Area(F+G)=0, and any LCFS increases efficiency.

6

Alternative baselines

The energy-based LCFS limits carbon emissions per unit of current energy production, i.e., limits
carbon emissions as a fixed factor of the energy baseline. However, an alternative low carbon fuel
standard could use some other baseline. This section analyzes LCFSs using fuel economy, historical
35

Since revenues and expenditures on carbon permits are equal, Area(W+Y)=Area(A+B+C+D+E).
The social marginal cost simply increments the private marginal cost by the marginal damages, τ βi , which are
higher for the high carbon fuel.
36

18

energy production, a rolling average of energy production, and fixed proportions of total energy
production as baselines.

6.1

Fuel-economy LCFS

One alternative definition of a low carbon fuel standard, the fuel-economy LCFS, is based on carbon
per transportation mile. While the energy-based LCFS treats each mmBtu of energy the same,
the fuel-economy LCFS recognizes that the energy in some fuels can be converted more easily into
miles driven; for example, hydrogen fuel cell or battery electric vehicles can achieve higher miles
per mmBtu than conventional gasoline vehicles.
To analyze a fuel-economy LCFS, let γi be the mileage of fuel i expressed as, for example,
miles per mmBtu. The fuel-economy standard, σ̃, is the ratio of carbon to miles driven, and the
constraint becomes
βH qH + βL qL
≤ σ̃,
γH qH + γL qL
which is equivalent to qL ≥

βH −γH σ̃
γH σ̃−βL qH .

Let

βi
γi

be the fuel-economy adjusted emissions rate for

fuel i—measured, for example, in CO2 tons per mile. As with the energy-based LCFS, the fuelH βL
H βL
, γL } and is nonbinding if σ̃ > max{ βγH
, γL }. Thus, a
economy LCFS is unattainable if σ̃ < min{ βγH

relevant standard must lie between the two fuel-economy-adjusted emissions rates, and the boundary of the constraint is an upward sloping ray through the origin. This constraint set is mathematically very similar to the constraint set for the energy-based LCFS, except that the “low carbon
fuel” is now the fuel with the lower fuel-economy adjusted emissions rate. Since βH > βL does not
imply that

βH
γH

>

βL
γL ,

the equilibrium and the distributional effects of the fuel-economy LCFS may

be very different from the energy-based LCFS.
If we write the constraint as βH qH + βL qL ≤ σ̃(γH qH + γL qL ), the firm’s first order conditions
can be written
pi = M Ci + λ̃(βi − σ̃γi )

(9)

where λ̃ is the shadow value of the constraint. Since the standard must lie between the fueleconomy-adjusted emissions rates, the LCFS again taxes one fuel and subsidizes the other fuel.
Using the fuel-economy-adjusted emissions rates, the analysis of the fuel-economy LCFS is identical
to the energy-based LCFS. In particular, the fuel-economy LCFS cannot attain the efficient fuel
production and carbon emissions, and it may or may not reduce carbon emissions.
19

6.2

Historical-baseline LCFS

A second alternative baseline would be to base each firm’s baseline on historic energy production.37
For example, the firm’s baseline could be energy produced in 2003, or the average energy production
between 2001 and 2004. If we let q̄H and q̄L be the firm’s historic production of energy, the LCFS
constraint becomes:
βH qH + βL qL
≤ σ.
q̄H + q̄L
Two points are relevant for the analysis. First, any σ is feasible, i.e., the standard is not bounded
below by the lower emissions rate. Any standard, no matter how stringent, can be met by simply
reducing output. Second, the slope of the boundary of the constraint set is negative. Thus the
constraint set looks like the constraint set from a carbon cap and trade program.
Since historic production is exogenous to the firm’s production decisions, the firm’s FOC is now:
pi = M Ci (qi ) + λβi
where λ is the shadow value of the historical-baseline LCFS constraint. Since λ ≥ 0, production of
both the high and low carbon fuels are taxed. In fact, if the standard is chosen such that λ = τ ,
then the historical-baseline LCFS can attain the efficient fuel production and carbon emissions.
Moreover, any standard reduces carbon emissions.
The historical-baseline LCFS is surprisingly like carbon trading. Indeed, the historical-baseline
LCFS is equivalent to carbon trading in the sense that any emissions reduction that could be
attained by carbon trading can be attained at the same cost by the historical-baseline LCFS and
vice versa. This LCFS can even incorporate banking, if firms are allowed to use emissions reductions
from an earlier year to meet the current year LCFS. Clearly, the historical-baseline LCFS has many
desirable properties.

6.3

Rolling-average LCFS

Although the historical-baseline LCFS is desirable, it is highly dependent on the baseline chosen.
This is likely to make agreement on a baseline year or years very difficult, since the baseline years
37

Pizer (forthcoming) advocates regulating carbon intensity targets where the baseline is GDP. This is similar to
the historical baseline LCFS because the denominator is exogenous to any firm, and firms treat the standard similar
to a cap on carbon emissions.

20

essentially set allowable carbon emissions for the life of the program. On the other hand, if firms
anticipate the baseline years, they may have an incentive to overproduce during these years. A
final difficulty with the historical-baseline LCFS is that over time allowable emissions may be very
different than actual emissions. With liquid trading, this does not reduce efficiency, but it may
represent a large windfall profit for a firm which had planned to cease fuel production regardless of
the LCFS.
If firms are allowed to build their own baseline over a period of years, these difficulties can be
mitigated. We call such an LCFS the rolling-average LCFS. For concreteness, we analyze a baseline
which is the average energy production of the preceding five years. The analysis is easily extended
to analyze a longer baseline period or a baseline period which ends at some other time.
Let qit be production of fuel i at time t. If the baseline for the LCFS is averaged over the last
5 years, the LCFS constraint is:
βH qHt + βL qLt
≤ σt .
0.2(qH(t−5) + ... + qH(t−1) ) + 0.2(qL(t−5) + ... + qL(t−1) )
where σt is the rolling-average LCFS in year t. For a myopic firm, this constraint set looks identical
to the constraint set for the historical-baseline LCFS. In addition, note that any standard is feasible,
since even a very stringent standard can be met by simply reducing current production.
A forward looking firm has an incentive to increase current production in order to make its
LCFS constraints in the future less strict. Analysis of this incentive requires extending the model
to multiple time periods. If the discount factor is δ, the forward looking firm’s FOC for optimal
production at time 0 is:
pi0 = M Ci (qi0 ) + λ0 βi − 0.2(δλ1 σ1 + ... + δ 5 λ5 σ5 ).
where λt is the shadow value of the LCFS constraint in year t.38 Note that the marginal benefit
of increasing current production has two components. First is the current price, and second is the
effect on all the future constraints. Since λt is the shadow value of the constraint in year t, the
future benefit in year t of increasing current production by one unit is 0.2λt σt . Averaging this
future benefit across five years and discounting gives 0.2(δλ1 σ1 + ... + δ 5 λ5 σ5 ).
In the stationary solution, where σt = σ and hence λt = λ, the FOC becomes:
pi0 = M Ci (qi0 ) + λ[βi − 0.2σ(δ + ... + δ 5 )].
38

As above, both sides of the constraint equation have been multiplied by the denominator of the LHS.

21

First, note that if δ = 1, the first order condition is pi0 = M Ci (qi0 ) + λ(βi − σ) which is identical to
the FOC for the energy-baseline LCFS. In this case, the standard cannot attain the first best and
may or may not decrease carbon emissions. At the other extreme, with δ = 0, the FOC is identical
to the FOC for the historical-baseline LCFS. In this case, the standard can attain the first best,
and any standard decreases carbon emissions.
With δ ∈ (0, 1), the standard cannot attain the first best.39 The standard taxes production of
the high carbon fuel, and may either tax or subsidize production of the low carbon fuel.40 If the
standard subsidizes production of the low carbon fuel, carbon emissions may or may not increase.
Note that the incentives with this standard are better than the incentives with the energy-based
LCFS since λ[βi − 0.2σ(δ + ... + δ 5 )] > λ(βi − σ), i.e., the rolling-average LCFS tax is higher and
the subsidy is smaller than under the energy-based LCFS.
Although the rolling-average LCFS does not have all the desirable efficiency properties of the
historical-baseline LCFS, it is potentially more feasible politically since it can lessen disagreement
over the baseline period and will accurately reflect current production. The efficiency of the rollingaverage LCFS can be improved by lengthening the averaging window or shifting the averaging
window further into the past, since these both increase the LCFS tax and decrease the LCFS
subsidy.

6.4

Fixed-proportion LCFS

One advantage of the energy-based LCFS is that it allows for higher carbon emissions in a year in
which demand is unexpectedly high. Although the historical-baseline and rolling-average LCFSs
may have better static efficiency properties, they do not have this flexibility to allow additional
carbon emissions in a year with high demand.41 The fixed-proportion LCFS uses a firm’s incentive
to free ride to reduce the incentive to overproduce the low carbon fuel while still allowing carbon
emissions to respond to current demand conditions.
The fixed-proportion LCFS has a baseline which is a fixed proportion of current production
39

The proof of Proposition 1 holds for any k where the LCFS tax/subsidy is λ(βi − k).
This LCFS taxes production of the low carbon fuel iff βL > 0.2σ(δ + ... + δ 5 ).
41
Permits, which are fully tradable intertemporally, can smooth out shocks to demand. However, most permits are
bankable but not “borrowable.”
40

22

by all other firms.42 Suppose firm j would hypothetically produce the fraction αjt of total energy
production. If the firm is assumed to produce this proportion, then this proportion can be used to
define the fixed-proportion LCFS for year t by the constraint:
βH qHt +
αjt
1−αjt (Q∼1t

βL qLt
≤ σt .
+ Q∼2t )

where Q∼it is production of fuel i by all other firms in year t and αjt is the fixed-proportion. Note
that

αjt
1−αjt (Q∼1t

+ Q∼2t ) = qHt + qLt , so the denominator of the constraint would be equal to the

denominator for the energy-based LCFS if production were equal to the hypothetical production.
To analyze the firm’s incentives, we again turn to a dynamic model to capture the effects of
current production on future constraints. The firm’s FOC in year t is now:


αj(t+1)
d
pit = M Ci (qit ) + λt βi − δλt+1 σt+1 [Q∼1(t+1) + Q∼2(t+1) ]
dqit 1 − αj(t+1)
The marginal benefit of increasing production in year t again has two component: the current price
and the relaxing of the next year’s LCFS constraint. First, note that if the proportions are fixed,


α
based on some historic baseline period, then dqdit 1−αjtjt = 0. In this case, the first order condition
becomes pit = M Ci (qit )+λt βi , which is the FOC for the historical-baseline LCFS. Since production
from both fuels is taxed, this LCFS can attain the first best and decreases carbon emissions. Note
that in contrast to the historical-baseline LCFS, the fixed-proportion LCFS does allow for higher
carbon emissions in a year with high demand.
If the proportion is allowed to vary during the program, then increasing current production does
change the future standard. If the allowed proportion is simply the fraction of total production in


α
1
the prior year, then dqdit 1−αj(t+1)
= Q∼1t +Q
. The firm’s FOC is then:
∼2t
j(t+1)

pit = M Ci (qit ) + λt βi − δλt+1 σt+1

Q∼1(t+1) + Q∼2(t+1)
.
Q∼1t + Q∼2t

which in the stationary solution is simply pit = M Ci (qit ) + λ(βi − δσ). This FOC is equivalent to
the 1-year rolling-average LCFS. As with the rolling-average LCFS, this LCFS cannot attain the
second best and may or may not decrease carbon emissions. Similarly, the incentives are better
with a longer average and more distant window. However, unlike the rolling-average LCFS, the
fixed-proportion LCFS does allow for current carbon emissions to increase in years with higher
demand.
42

This is similar in spirit to a Vickery auction, which links a player’s payoffs to the bids of other players and
eliminates the incentive to manipulate his/her own bid.

23

7

The incentive to innovate

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions to recommended levels at a reasonable cost will require technological innovation. Thus, the incentive to innovate under each policy is a crucial component
across which the policies should be compared. In this section, we analyze the incentive to reduce
carbon emissions rates and to increase fuel economy (mileage) under the various proposals. This
incentive, i.e., the marginal benefit of innovation, could then be compared with the marginal cost
of innovation to determine an optimal level.

7.1

Carbon emissions rates

The unregulated equilibrium does not depend on βi . Thus there is no incentive to reduce carbon
emissions in the absence of regulation. On the other hand, the efficient incentive to reduce carbon
emissions can be found from the Lagrangian for the optimization in [1]. The efficient incentive, i.e.,
the marginal benefit of decreasing βi , is −dL/dβi = −∂L/∂βi = τ qi∗ by the envelope theorem.43
Thus the emissions rate should be reduced further as long as the marginal cost of reducing βi is
less than τ qi∗ and emissions rates are too high in the unregulated equilibrium.
To analyze the firm’s incentive to reduce carbon emissions, we consider the most general version
of the producer’s optimization problem in [8]. Again, by the envelope theorem, the incentive to
reduce the carbon emissions rate for fuel i for the various low carbon fuel standards is λqi .44 This
incentive can either be correct, too large, or too small. For the historical-baseline LCFS, the first
best can be attained. In this case, the incentive is correct since λ = τ . For the energy-based
LCFS, the shadow value of the constraint is zero when the constraint is σ 0 . Since the shadow value
is continuous in σ, for a small constraint the incentives to reduce each emissions rate can be too
e < τ q ∗ and λe q e < τ q ∗ .45 On the other hand, if the constraint is set such that
small, i.e., λe qH
H
L
L
e = q ∗ , and q e > q ∗ . In this case, the incentives to decrease the
λe (βH − σ) = τ βH , then λe > τ , qH
H
L
L

carbon emissions rates are too great for both fuels.
43

The intuition is that reducing the emissions rate by one ton per mmBtu reduces damages by τ for each mmBtu
and qi∗ mmBtu’s are produced.
44
The marginal change in producer surplus for a change in βi is qH ∗ dpH /dβi + qL ∗ dpL /dβi − c ∗ dpc /dβi − λqi .
The price taking assumption implies that the firm’s incentive is simply λqi .
∗
q∗
qL
45
This would require a constraint that is lax enough such that λ < τ min{ qH
0 , q 0 + }.
H

24

L

With the other LCFS variants, the incentives generally can be either too large or too small.
Thus analysis of the incentives to reduces carbon emissions rates is mainly an empirical question.

7.2

Fuel economy/mileage

As with the incentive to improve emissions rates, the incentive to improve mileage can be found
from the various Lagrangians. First note that fuel economy affects the consumer surplus from
energy usage. To make this explicit, assume that consumers only care about miles driven so
U = U (γH qH + γL qL ).46 Now the benefit of increased mileage from fuel i, dL/dγi , is given by
U 0 (·)qi .
The efficient incentive is U 0 (.)qi∗ , i.e., the marginal utility of an additional mile per mmBtu.
The incentive under the energy-based LCFS is U 0 (.)qie . Note that this incentive could be too
high or two low depending on fuel production. With the fuel-economy LCFS, the incentive is
U 0 (.)qie + λσqie . Note that this has an additional incentive for fuel economy, namely the benefit of
relaxing the firm’s LCFS constraint. Interestingly, this benefit would be hard to decentralize, since
it is a positive externality. In other words, the firms get an external benefit from the customer’s
fuel economy purchase decision.

8

Simulations

To investigate the economic significance of our results, we numerically simulate the model using
a range of parameters representative of the U.S. market for gasoline in 2005.47 The simulation,
which is meant to capture relatively short-term adjustments, analyzes two representative firms: a
gasoline producer and a low-carbon fuel producer, in this case ethanol.48 A representative consumer
demands fuel energy measured in units of gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) where gasoline and
ethanol are assumed to be perfect substitutes.49 Our analysis focuses on a range of parameters—
46

In other words, the consumer likes a Prius because she can drive further, but doesn’t get any additional utility
from the higher mileage by itself, i.e., there is no “warm glow.”
47
Following California, we focus on light-duty vehicles. However, an LCFS could easily include other segments of
the transportation sector such as diesel fuel used in heavy-duty vehicles.
48
Discussions with fuel refiners suggest that initial compliance strategies will center around blending more ethanol
into the fuel supply.
49
The assumption of perfect substitutes is correct if vehicles can use any mixture of ethanol and gasoline. Most
current vehicles are limited to moderate blends of 10% - 20% ethanol, but “flex-fuel” vehicles can operate on much
higher blends.

25

rather than specific values—to describe the characteristics of the fuels and fuel market.50 Appendix
B discusses the parameters in more detail and describes the numerical solution algorithm.
Demand for transportation energy in gasoline gallon equivalents is a constant elasticity demand
curve calibrated to U.S. gasoline consumption in the baseline year 2005. Demand for transportation
energy is generally considered inelastic, so we assume demand elasticities range from 0.1 to 0.5,
consistent with Espey (1998) and Hughes et al. (forthcoming).
Gasoline and ethanol supply are represented as constant elasticity supply curves with 2005 as
the baseline year. We assume supply elasticities vary between 1.0 and 4.0 for ethanol and 0.5 and
2.0 for gasoline. These supply elasticities are consistent with Webb (1981) for ethanol and Dahl
and Duggan (1996) for gasoline. These wide ranges reflect considerable uncertainty in the literature
particularly about ethanol costs.
The CO2 emissions rate of gasoline, 11.29 KgCO2 e per gasoline gallon equivalent, comes from
Wang (2007). We assume a carbon emissions rate for ethanol of 8.42 KgCO2 e per gasoline gallon
equivalent. Estimates of carbon emissions from ethanol production vary greatly, see Farrell et al.
(2006), including estimates higher than the emissions rate for gasoline. For this reason, we also
analyze a range of ethanol emissions rates.
The LCFS standard, σ, is normalized by the 2005 carbon intensity of transportation fuel.
Binding, attainable standards are thus in the interval [0.75,1), since 0.75 is the assumed normalized
emissions rate of ethanol. The standards thus have a natural interpretation: e.g., σ = 0.9 represents
a 10% reduction in the carbon intensity of transportation fuel.
We investigate six scenarios. The first two scenarios vary the elasticities of supply and demand
and are intended as upper and lower estimates of the welfare changes of the LCFS. The second
two scenarios vary the relative supply elasticities of ethanol and gasoline while holding the demand
elasticity at 0.3. These scenarios are intended as upper and lower estimates for CO2 emissions
reductions. The last two scenarios, which hold elasticities at intermediate ranges, vary the normalized ethanol emissions rate between 0.65 and 0.85. These scenarios capture the considerable
uncertainty about the carbon emissions rate of ethanol. Specific parameter values for each scenario
are reported in the respective tables.
50

In future work, we plan to develop more precise estimates of the relevant parameters.

26

Tables 1 through 6 summarize the results. The first column in each table presents the unregulated equilibrium, σ = 1. The LCFS standard becomes increasing strict moving from left to
right. The equilibrium price and quantity for the unregulated scenario are the 2005 baseline values
of $2.27 per gasoline gallon equivalent and 117 billion gasoline gallon equivalents. For each value
of σ, the change in social surplus is calculated as the sum of changes in tax revenue, producer
and consumer surplus relative to the unregulated case. Finally, an implicit average cost of CO2
is calculated as the change in social surplus divided by the change in emissions, relative to the
unregulated equilibrium.
To provide context for our estimates, the tables also present simulations using the historicalbaseline LCFS to attain the same reductions in CO2 emissions implied by the LCFS. The resulting
average cost of carbon, shadow values λ and energy prices, for the scenarios are presented at the
bottom of each table. Because the cost of CO2 under the historical-baseline LCFS is equivalent to
the cost of CO2 under a cap and trade system, these results enable a direct comparison between
the energy-based LCFS and an efficient trading system.
Since the range of outcomes is primarily covered by the scenarios varying the elasticity ranges,
we discuss Tables 1 and 2 in detail. Discussion of the remaining scenarios is more brief since these
cases mainly support the major outcomes in Tables 1 and 2.

8.1

Elasticity range scenarios

Tables 1 and 2 present simulation results for the energy-based LCFS for relatively less and more
elastic supply and demand curves. The less elastic scenario, shown in Table 1, assumes that the
two supply elasticities and the demand elasticity take on the smallest values in their assumed
ranges. This maximizes the costs of increases in ethanol production, maximizes the lost profit from
decreases in gasoline production, and maximizes the consumer surplus loss for a given change in
quantity. Since the LCFS requires a change in the quantities produced, as in a quota, the relatively
inelastic supply and demands imply a large surplus cost of the LCFS. In the more elastic scenario
in Table 2, elasticities take their largest values, and the surplus cost of the LCFS is smaller.
The simulation outcomes are largely as would be expected. For tighter standards: energy
prices generally increase; energy production generally decreases; the fuel mix shifts to include more

27

ethanol; CO2 emissions fall; surplus losses are greater; and the shadow value of the constraint and
average carbon cost are higher.
In most cases, energy production falls and energy prices increase with a tighter LCFS. However,
Proposition 2 shows that it is possible for energy production to increase, and the 99% intensity
standard in Table 2 does show a small increase in energy production (with a decrease in the energy
price). This is perhaps the best case for the LCFS since carbon emissions actually fall slightly
without affecting energy prices. However, this outcome is not very robust across our parameters
and is unlikely to occur.
The shift in fuel mix is quite extreme. For a 90% intensity standard in Tables 1 and 2, the
proportion of ethanol in the fuel supply would need to increase from the current 2% to approximately
40%. Since most current vehicles can only accept up to a 20% ethanol mix, our results suggest that
attaining a 10% reduction in carbon intensities would require substantial expansion of the number
of flex-fuel vehicles.51
CO2 emissions fall in all cases in Tables 1 and 2. This suggests that CO2 emissions are unlikely
to increase with an LCFS despite the theoretical possibility identified in Proposition 2. In fact, we
find that emissions reductions are likely to be substantial. The standard reducing carbon intensities
by 10% leads to a reduction in CO2 emissions of 20-25% across Tables 1 and 2.
Surplus decreases substantially for all scenarios. For the less elastic scenario, surplus changes
range from -$9.7 billion to -$760 billion per year. Estimates are smaller, though still substantial,
for the more elastic scenario and range from -$1.8 billion to -$81 billion per year. To put these
numbers in perspective, annual revenues in the transportation energy market are only $265 billion
in the unregulated case and these surplus losses range from 4% to 50% of implied transportation
revenues across these two tables.
These substantial surplus losses are not shared equally. Consumers surplus decreases in every
case except when the energy price decreases. The consumer surplus losses are large and account
for a substantial proportion (sometimes over 100%) of the entire surplus cost. As described in
Section 5, it is important to take into account carbon market transfers when analyzing surplus
to gasoline and ethanol producers separately. After accounting for these carbon market transfers
51
This suggests that our assumption of perfect substitutability between gas and ethanol may be invalid for the 90%
standard. Future work will relax this assumption.

28

(which in many cases exceed the revenue from ethanol production), ethanol producers benefit quite
handsomely. Surplus to ethanol producers increases substantially across all the scenarios. On the
other hand, gasoline producers are harmed by the LCFS with surplus losses sometimes exceeding
the entire surplus loss.
The shadow values of the LCFS constraint are quite large: ranging from $250 to $12,000 across
Tables 1 and 2. As explained in Section 4, these shadow values are the price the firms would be
willing to pay on the margin for an emissions permit for one ton of CO2 . These shadow values
should be interpreted with caution, however, since Proposition 3 shows that these shadow values
can optimally exceed CO2 damages for the second-best energy-based LCFS.
Tol (2005), reviews 103 estimates of the damage cost of CO2 emissions in 28 published studies.52
The 95th percentile of these estimates is a damage cost of approximately $95 per ton, though the author argues that damage costs are unlikely to exceed $14 per ton.53 Even taking the 95th percentile
of damage estimates, social welfare decreases under even the most lenient LCFS standard.54
Finally, we compare these results with a historical-baseline LCFS that attains the CO2 emissions
reduction implied by the energy-based LCFS. As explained in Section 6, the historical-baseline
LCFS is equivalent to carbon trading and thus attains the emissions reduction at least cost. The
average carbon cost under the historical-baseline LCFS is significantly lower than under the energybased LCFS. The less and more elastic scenario carbon costs range from $16 to $868 and $2 to
$60 per ton. These costs range from 2-38% of the carbon costs from the energy-based LCFS for
the same reduction in emissions. These results suggest that the carbon costs associated with an
energy-based LCFS would be much larger than the costs associated with a cost-effective policy.
The simulations of the historical-baseline LCFS provide useful context since they show what
could be attained under a cost-effective policy. Note that the carbon costs under the historicalbaseline LCFS may or may not be consistent with increasing welfare. At the 95th percentile of
damages, $95 per ton, reductions in CO2 emissions of 20% would increase welfare under the more
52

Tol reports damage costs in units of dollars per ton of carbon ($/tC). We convert these values to units of dollars
per ton of CO2 for comparison with our estimates of average carbon costs.
53
In addition, the distribution of damage costs presented in Tol (2005) is strongly right-skewed with mode, median
and mean damage costs of approximately $1 per MTCO2 e, $4 per MTCO2 e and $25 per MTCO2 e, respectively.
54
There is considerable uncertainty about the true damages from carbon emissions. Factors such as the wide range
of ecosystems that may be affected by climate change and the difficulty associated with evaluating both use and
non-use values for the environment make this task extremely challenging. For this reason, we simply present the
carbon cost, which can be compared with the relevant damages.

29

elastic scenario in Table 2. However, the maximum welfare would be achieved at a level less than
20% since the marginal cost of reductions after a 20% reduction is $133. In contrast, with these
same damages, a 13% reduction in emissions would decrease welfare in the less elastic scenario in
Table 1.
The comparison between the two LCFS policies highlights the inefficiencies of the energy-based
LCFS. The higher CO2 costs under the energy-based LCFS indicate a much larger surplus loss for
an equivalent quantity of abatement.

8.2

Additional scenarios

Tables 3 and 4 summarize simulation results using more (less) elastic ethanol supply and less (more)
elastic gasoline supply while holding the demand elasticity at an intermediate level. These results
give guidance as to how CO2 levels may be affected by an LCFS. For the upper-CO2 scenario in
Table 3, we choose parameter values within our ranges (namely more elastic ethanol supply and
less elastic gasoline supply) that lead to small reductions in CO2 . For the lower-CO2 scenario in
Table 4, we choose the parameters which lead to large CO2 reductions.
These two scenarios largely confirm the main results from the simulations in Tables 1 and 2.
Namely, carbon emissions decrease with an energy-based LCFS, but the carbon cost is substantial.
In all cases, the carbon costs are much larger than the carbon costs under the historical-baseline
LCFS.
The upper CO2 scenario in Table 3, does show one interesting outcome that does not occur
in any other scenario. Under the 99% standard, carbon emissions actually increase by 0.1% even
though the carbon intensity decreases by 1%. In this scenario, the supply of ethanol is particularly
elastic while the gasoline supply is less elastic. Thus, it is optimal for firms to expand ethanol
production relatively more than they decrease gasoline production; energy increases; and CO2
emissions increase. Since CO2 emissions increase only for these extremes of the supply elasticities
and only for a modest standard, the results suggest that an LCFS is unlikely to increase CO2
emissions.
Table 4 shows the other extreme where the LCFS if particularly effective in reducing CO2
emissions. Here a standard reducing the carbon intensity by 10% reduces CO2 emissions by 45%.
Despite these large emissions reductions, the energy-based LCFS is still a costly way of attaining this
30

emissions reduction which could be attained at less than half the cost with the historical-baseline
LCFS.
Tables 5 and 6 test the sensitivity of the results to our assumptions about the carbon emissions
rate of ethanol. Given the extensive controversy surrounding this emissions rate, we vary the
normalized emissions rate between 0.65 in Table 5 and 0.85 in Table 6.
Again these scenarios confirm our main results: CO2 emissions are unlikely to increase, and
carbon costs are much larger than under a historical-baseline LCFS.
Several interesting results arise in these simulations. First, the surplus costs and energy prices
are lower under the lower emissions rate. Second, the emissions reductions are higher when ethanol
has a higher emissions rate. This result follows primarily from the output effect since energy output
(and hence CO2 emissions) is lower when ethanol has a higher emissions rate. Finally, surplus gains
to ethanol producers are larger when they have a higher emissions rate. This follows again since
prices are higher and a higher output of ethanol is required when the ethanol emissions rate is only
slightly below the standard. This result suggests a rather perverse incentive: ethanol producers
acting together may have an incentive to overstate the emissions rate of ethanol.

9

Conclusion

As states and the federal government seek policies for regulating greenhouse gas emissions, low
carbon fuel standards will be part of the regulatory toolkit. Despite the increasing prominence of
the standards in policy debates, this is the first work to analyze the economic effects and incentives
of the LCFS. We find that an energy-based low carbon fuel standard (i) cannot be efficient, (ii)
can decrease or increase carbon emissions, and (iii) can increase or decrease efficiency. In fact, a
regulator’s best option may be to choose a nonbinding LCFS even if the LCFS is its only policy
option.
By illustrating the LCFS equilibrium, we show that the perverse effects of the LCFS depend on
the slopes of the marginal utility and marginal cost curves as well as the magnitudes of the implied
LCFS subsidy and tax. We show that the LCFS is more likely to increase carbon emissions if (i)
supply and/or demand for the high carbon fuel are relatively steep, or (ii) the standard is relatively
lenient and the unregulated equilibrium has a large proportion of high carbon fuel.
31

Analyzing the burden of the LCFS, we find that producers or consumers (but not both) can
be better off under the LCFS. Consumers can be better off if the lower prices on the low carbon
fuel make up for the higher prices on the high carbon fuel. With carbon trading, producers of
the low carbon fuel are always better off, while producers of the high-carbon fuel are worse off.
Incorporating the environmental costs, we find that the LCFS can decrease efficiency if the demand
for the high carbon fuel is relatively inelastic.
Trading across firms can reduce compliance costs if firms have different marginal production
costs. The equilibria that result from trading (including any transfers) are identical whether firms
trade (i) carbon, (ii) low carbon energy, or (iii) energy. As in other Coase theorem results, trading
minimizes total costs of production.
Because of the efficiency costs and potentially perverse effects of the energy-based LCFS, we
explore other baselines for the LCFS. A fuel-economy LCFS is quite similar to the energy-based
LCFS, but may change the low carbon fuel source and thus have quite different distributional
effects. A historical-baseline LCFS can be efficient, but would not have flexibility to allow higher
carbon in high demand years and would likely lead to disagreement over the baseline year or years.
The rolling-average and fixed-proportion LCFSs can reduce (but not eliminate) these difficulties
but also may not be abble to attain the first best.
We also theoretically analyze the incentives to improve carbon emissions rates and fuel efficiency. We find that the incentives can be either too large or too small depending on the standard.
Interestingly, the fuel-economy LCFS introduces a positive externality from higher mileage which
may be hard to decentralize.
To illustrate the economic significance of our theoretical results, we numerically simulate the
model for a range of parameters representative of short-term adjustments in the U.S. markets for
gasoline and ethanol. The functional forms for the simulation are chosen to rely on a minimal
number of free parameters. Nonetheless, the main difficulty with our simulations is the lack of
credible parameters from the literature. In particular, there is either little evidence or little agreement about the supply elasticities for ethanol and gasoline and about the carbon emissions rate of
ethanol. For this reason, we assume broad parameter ranges to approximate the range of possible
outcomes from an energy-based LCFS. In future work, we hope to develop more precise estimates
of the relevant parameters and functional forms.
32

Despite the simplicity of our calculations, several results are clear. First, CO2 emissions are
unlikely to increase with adoption of an LCFS in the U.S., despite the theoretical possibility. We
find quite large reductions in CO2 emissions resulting even from modest regulation of the carbon
intensity with an energy-based LCFS.
Despite these significant reductions in CO2 emissions, an energy-based LCFS is an expensive
way to reduce greenhouse gas levels. In fact, we find that the average carbon cost of the emissions
reduction from the energy-based LCFS are at least twice as large, and under some circumstances,
may be an order of magnitude higher than the average carbon cost from a cost-effective policy
which attains the same CO2 emissions reduction.
These high cost estimates suggest that an energy-based LCFS may not increase social welfare.
In fact for some parameters and some estimates of carbon damages, our results suggest that it
would be better to have no LCFS (or a nonbinding LCFS) then to adopt an energy-based LCFS.
Policy-makers concerns often extend beyond efficiency, and the distributional effects of an
energy-based LCFS are also quite profound. We find that all of the burden of the energy-based
LCFS is borne by the consumers and by gasoline producers. In fact, after accounting for carbon
market transfers, ethanol producers are better off in each scenario we analyze.
Other market failures such as: technology spillovers, learning by doing, an inability of private
firms to privately appropriate all of the benefits from developing cleaner alternatives, etc., may
suggest subsidizing renewable resources. If regulators lack direct policy instruments to address
these other market failures, an energy-based LCFS, which subsidizes low-carbon fuels (primarily
renewables), may be a second best policy instrument for addressing multiple policy goals with one
instrument. Further analysis of multiple policy goals is beyond the scope of this paper. However,
even the historical-baseline LCFS, which taxes all fuels and can be efficient, places a smaller tax
on low carbon fuels, and thus implicitly subsidizes low carbon fuels precisely in proportion to their
lower carbon emissions. Thus, it is not clear that an energy-based LCFS would be superior to a
historical-baseline LCFS even in the presence of multiple policy objectives.
Adoption of any policy requires careful comparison of the costs and benefits of the policy along
with the consideration of other policy options and any potentially unintended consequences. This
paper lays out a framework for analyzing low carbon fuel standards. Explicit comparisons of an
LCFS with other policies, such as a cap and trade program, depend on the details of the LCFS and
33

the cap and trade program. However, given all the potential problems and excessive costs of an
energy-based LCFS identified here, it is unlikely that an energy-based LCFS would be the preferred
policy unless the range of alternative options were extremely limited.

34

References
[1] Dahl, C. and Duggan, T. E. (1996). “U.S. Energy Product Supply Elasticities: A Survey and
Application to the U.S. Oil Market.” Resource and Energy Economics, 18: 243-263.
[2] Espey, M. (1998). “Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International Meta-Analysis of Elasticities.” Energy Economics, 20: 273-295.
[3] Farrell, A. E., Plevin, R. J., Turner, B. T., Jones, A. D., O’Mare, M. and Kammen, D. M.
(2006). “Ethanol Can Contribute to Energy and Environmental Goals.” Science, 311(5760):
506-508.
[4] Fiske, Edward B. and Helen F. Ladd. (2004) Elusive Equity: Education Reform in PostApartheid South Africa. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
[5] Helfand, Gloria E. (1991). “Standards versus Standards: The Effects of Different Pollution
Restrictions.” American Economic Review, 81(3): 622-634.
[6] Hughes, J. E., Knittel, C. R. and Sperling, D. (Forthcoming). “Evidence of a Shift in the
Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand.” Energy Journal.
[7] Khazzoom, I.D. (1980). “Economic Implications of Mandated Efficiency in Standards for
Household Appliances.” Energy Journal, 1(4): 21-40.
[8] Kwoka, John E. (1983). “The Limits of Market-Oriented Regulatory Techniques,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 98(4): 695-704.
[9] Moss, Diana. (2007). “Competition in U.S. Petroleum Refining and Marketing: Industry
Trends (Part I),” AAI Working Paper No. 07-02.
[10] Pizer, William. (forthcoming). “The Case for Intensity Targets,” Climate Policy.
[11] Portney, Paul R. et al. (2003)“Policy Watch: The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall, v. 17, iss. 4, pp. 203-17
[12] Renewable

Fuels

Association,

Historic

U.S.

Fuel

Ethanol

http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/#A. Accessed April 26, 2007.

35

Production.

[13] Tol, R. S. J. (2005). “The Marginal Damage Cost of Carbon Dioxide Emissions: An Assessment
of the Uncertainties.” Energy Policy 33: 2064-2074.
[14] Unnasch, S., Pont, J., Chan, M., and Waterland, L., (2007). “Full Fuel Cycle Assessment Well
to Wheels Energy Inputs, Emissions, And Water Impacts.” California Energy Commission.
[15] U.S. Energy Information Administration, Refiner Motor Gasoline Sales Volumes. U.S. Department of Energy. http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet cons refmg d nus VWR mgalpd m.htm.
Accessed March 20, 2007.
[16] U.S. Energy Information Administration, Weekly Retail Gasoline and Diesel Prices. U.S.
Department of Energy. http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet pri gnd dcus nus w.htm. Accessed March 28, 2007.
[17] U.S. Department of Transportation, (2005). Highway Statistics 2005. Federal Highway Administration. Wang, M. The Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation (GREET) Model, Version 1.7. Argonne National Laboratory. Accessed 1/29/2007.
[18] Webb, S. B. (1981). “The Impact of Increased Alcohol Production on Agriculture: A Simulation Study.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 63(3): 532-537.

36

Figures and Tables

qL

β H qH + β L qL = C

qL =

*

βH − σ
q
σ − βL H

C
q

LCFS
L

qL0

A
B

qL*

qHLCFS qH*

qH0

qH

Figure 1: Iso-surplus curves with LCFS constraint and efficient carbon trading constraint

37

qL

qL =

β H qH + β L qL = K

qLLCFS

βH − σ
q
σ − βL H

B
A

qL0

qHLCFS

qH0

qH

Figure 2: Iso-surplus curves with LCFS constraint and iso-carbon line where the LCFS decreases
emissions.

38

$

MC L ( qL )

MC H ( qH )

pLe − λ ( β L − σ )
pH = pL
p − λ (βH − σ )
e
H

∂U
∂qH

∂U
∂qL
qL0 qLLCFS

qHLCFS

qH0

q

Figure 3: Marginal cost and marginal utility curves and LCFS subsidy/tax wedges where the LCFS
decreases emissions. Here the supply of the high carbon fuel is flatter, so production of the high
carbon fuel decreases relatively more, and emissions decrease.

39

ql

qL =

β H qH + β L qL = K

C

qLLCFS

qL0

βH − σ
q
σ − βL H

A

qHLCFS qH0

qH

Figure 4: Iso-surplus curves with LCFS constraint and iso-carbon line where the LCFS increases
emissions.

40

$

MC H ( qH )
MC L ( qL )

p − λ (βL − σ )
e
L

pH = pL

pHe − λ ( β H − σ )
∂U
∂qL

qL0

∂U
∂qH
qLLCFS

qHLCFS qH0

q

Figure 5: Marginal cost and marginal utility curves and LCFS subsidy/tax wedges where the LCFS
increases emissions. Here the supply of the high carbon fuel is steeper, so production of the high
carbon fuel decreases relatively less, and emissions increase.

41

σ<

qL

β H qH + β L qL = K

β H2 + β L2
βH + βL

σ=

β H2 + β L2
βH + βL

σ>
D

C

β H2 + β L2
βH + βL

B

A

qLe

qHe

qH

Figure 6: Iso-surplus curves and iso-carbon line with three different LCFS constraints. The first
constraint (the most lenient constraint) causes carbon emissions to increase, the second causes
emissions to stay the same, and the third causes emissions to decrease.

42

$

MC L ( qL )

MC H ( qH )

pLe − λ ( β L − σ )
pH = pL

pHe − λ ( β H − σ )
∂U
∂qH

∂U
∂qL
qLe qLLCFS

qHLCFS qHe

q

Figure 7: Marginal cost and marginal utility curves and LCFS subsidy/tax wedges for a lenient
standard which increases emissions.

43

qL

C

q̂ LLCFS
q L0

A
B

q L*

q H*

q H0

q̂

qH

LCFS
H

Figure 8: Illustration of the second best LCFS at C with locus of LCFS equilibria and social
indifference curves.

44

$

$

MCl ( ql )

MCH (qH )

pL − λ ( β L − σ )

X
C

pL
A

pH

Y
Z

pH − λ ( β H − σ )

B

∂U
∂qL
q LLCFS

∂U
∂qH
qL

q HLCFS q He

Figure 9: The distributional effects of an LCFS.

45

qH

MClsocial ( ql )

MC Hsocial (q H )

$

$

MCLpriv (qL )

MC Hpriv (qH )

D
W
E

∂U
∂qL
q L* q Le

q LLCFS

∂U
∂qH
qL

q H* q HLCFSq He

Figure 10: Changes in deadweight loss with an LCFS.

46

qH

Table 1: Simulation results using least elastic parameter values implying the highest welfare
changes
σ = 1i
Fuel Price ($/gge)ii

$

LCFS Simulation Results: Less Elastic Scenario
σ = 0.95
σ = 0.90
σ = 0.99

2.27

$

2.33

$

5.43

$

14.94

Fuel Quantity (billion gge)

117.00

116.66

107.20

96.89

Gasoline Quantity (billion gge)

114.44

109.54

83.88

56.87

2.56

7.12

23.32

40.02

1313.96

99%

87%

75%
$ (1,313.63)

Ethanol Quantity (billion gge)
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Δ CS (billion $)

$

(7.88)

$

(352.69)

Δ PS Gasoline - Transfers (billion $)

$

(19.37)

$

(92.95)

$

(129.28)

Δ PS Ethanol + Transfers (billion $)

$

17.74

$

229.24

$

690.23

Carbon Market Transfer (from Gasoline to Ethanol)

$

28.18

$

353.63

$

817.44

Δ Tax Revenue (billion $)

$

(0.13)

$

(3.77)

$

(7.74)

Δ Surplus (billion $) iii

$

(9.65)

$

(220.18)

$

(760.41)

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$ 1,468.34

$ 6,752.45

$ 12,124.13

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)iv

$

$

$

2,272

$

33.43

569

1,293

Historical Baseline LCFS
Fuel Price ($/gge)

$

2.58

$

8.70

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

32.79

$

622.42

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)

$

16

$

245

Notes: Assumed parameter values: Elasticity of demand, 0.1; Gasoline Supply Elasticity, 0.5; Ethanol Supply Elasticity, 1.0;
Normalized Ethanol Emission Rate, 0.75.
i
σ = 1, represents the unregulated case with the LCFS standard normalized by the current carbon intensity.
ii
The fuel quantity in gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) reflects the adjustment for the lower volumetric energy density of ethanol
iii
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)
iv
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)/(CO 2 equivalent abatement)

47

$ 2,864.96
$

868

Table 2: Simulation results using most elastic parameter values implying the smallest welfare
changes
σ = 1i
Fuel Price ($/gge)ii

$

LCFS Simulation Results: More Elastic Scenario
σ = 0.95
σ = 0.90
σ = 0.99

2.27

$

2.26

$

2.43

$

2.87

Fuel Quantity (billion gge)

117.00

117.05

113.07

104.04

Gasoline Quantity (billion gge)

114.44

109.91

88.47

61.07

2.56

7.14

24.59

42.98

1313.96

99%

92%

80%

Ethanol Quantity (billion gge)
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Δ CS (billion $)

$

0.25

$

(18.45)

$

(66.03)

Δ PS Gasoline - Transfers (billion $)

$

(3.33)

$

(17.68)

$

(32.19)

Δ PS Ethanol + Transfers (billion $)

$

1.26

$

9.97

$

22.68

Carbon Market Transfer (from Gasoline to Ethanol)

$

4.74

$

38.39

$

73.88

Δ Tax Revenue (billion $)

$

0.02

$

(1.51)

$

(4.98)

Δ Surplus (billion $) iii

$

(1.81)

$

(27.67)

$

(80.52)

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

246.19

$

694.94

$ 1,020.41

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)iv

$

144

$

257

$

307

Historical Baseline LCFS
Fuel Price ($/gge)

$

2.31

$

2.68

$

3.52

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

4.83

$

45.65

$

132.63

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)

$

2

$

22

$

60

Notes: Assumed parameter values: Elasticity of demand, 0.5; Gasoline Supply Elasticity, 2.0; Ethanol Supply Elasticity, 4.0;
Normalized Ethanol Emission Rate, 0.75.
i
σ = 1, represents the unregulated case with the LCFS standard normalized by the current carbon intensity.
ii
The fuel quantity in gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) reflects the adjustment for the lower volumetric energy density of ethanol
iii
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)
iv
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)/(CO 2 equivalent abatement)

48

Table 3: Simulation results using least elastic gasoline supply and most elastic ethanol supply
implying the smallest CO2 reductions
σ = 1i
Fuel Price ($/gge)ii

$

LCFS Simulation Results: Upper CO2e Scenario
σ = 0.95
σ = 0.90
σ = 0.99

2.27

$

2.18

$

2.08

$

2.40

Fuel Quantity (billion gge)

117.00

118.30

120.11

114.94

Gasoline Quantity (billion gge)

114.44

111.08

93.98

67.46

2.56

7.22

26.12

47.48

1313.96

100.1%

98%

88%

Ethanol Quantity (billion gge)
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Δ CS (billion $)

$

9.65

$

22.46

$

(15.99)

Δ PS Gasoline - Transfers (billion $)

$

(13.47)

$

(69.23)

$

(119.35)

Δ PS Ethanol + Transfers (billion $)

$

1.28

$

10.92

$

26.17

Carbon Market Transfer (from Gasoline to Ethanol)

$

5.42

$

51.50

$

109.02

Δ Tax Revenue (billion $)

$

0.50

$

1.19

$

(0.79)

Δ Surplus (billion $) iii

$

(2.03)

$

(34.66)

$

(109.97)

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

278.73

$

877.71

$ 1,362.94

NA

$

1,065

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)iv

$

723

Historical Baseline LCFS
Fuel Price ($/gge)

$

2.26

$

2.47

$

3.42

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

NA

$

27.26

$

145.57

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)

NA

$

13

$

69

Notes: Assumed parameter values: Elasticity of demand, 0.3; Gasoline Supply Elasticity, 0.5; Ethanol Supply Elasticity, 4.0;
Normalized Ethanol Emission Rate, 0.75.
i
σ = 1, represents the unregulated case with the LCFS standard normalized by the current carbon intensity.
ii
The fuel quantity in gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) reflects the adjustment for the lower volumetric energy density of ethanol
iii
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)
iv
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)/(CO 2 equivalent abatement)

49

Table 4: Simulation results using most elastic gasoline supply and least elastic ethanol supply
implying the largest CO2 reductions
σ = 1i
Fuel Price ($/gge)ii

$

LCFS Simulation Results: Lower CO2 e Scenario
σ = 0.95
σ = 0.90
σ = 0.99

2.27

$

2.44

$

5.21

$

11.61

Fuel Quantity (billion gge)

117.00

114.45

91.14

71.66

Gasoline Quantity (billion gge)

114.44

107.47

71.32

42.06

2.56

6.99

19.82

29.60

1313.96

97%

74%

55%

Ethanol Quantity (billion gge)
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Δ CS (billion $)

$

(19.97)

$

(299.59)

$

(810.04)

Δ PS Gasoline - Transfers (billion $)

$

(5.09)

$

(27.27)

$

(39.21)

Δ PS Ethanol + Transfers (billion $)

$

16.95

$

164.03

$

373.75

Carbon Market Transfer (from Gasoline to Ethanol)

$

26.08

$

243.92

$

430.50

Δ Tax Revenue (billion $)

$

(0.98)

$

(9.95)

$

(17.44)

Δ Surplus (billion $) iii

$

(9.10)

$

(172.78)

$

(492.94)

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$ 1,385.19

$ 5,478.39

$ 8,632.92

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)iv

$

$

$

836

$

15.57

219

506

Historical Baseline LCFS
Fuel Price ($/gge)

$

2.52

$

6.09

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

25.71

$

367.96

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)

$

13

$

148

Notes: Assumed parameter values: Elasticity of demand, 0.3; Gasoline Supply Elasticity, 2.0; Ethanol Supply Elasticity, 1.0;
Normalized Ethanol Emission Rate, 0.75.
i
σ = 1, represents the unregulated case with the LCFS standard normalized by the current carbon intensity.
ii
The fuel quantity in gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) reflects the adjustment for the lower volumetric energy density of ethanol
iii
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)
iv
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)/(CO 2 equivalent abatement)

50

$ 1,233.65
$

388

Table 5: Simulation results using a lower ethanol intensity rating
σ = 1i
Fuel Price ($/gge)ii

$

LCFS Simulation Results: Lower CO2 e Ethanol
σ = 0.95
σ = 0.90
σ = 0.99

2.27

$

2.25

$

2.41

$

2.94

Fuel Quantity (billion gge)

117.00

117.21

114.89

108.26

Gasoline Quantity (billion gge)

114.44

111.37

96.32

75.64

2.56

5.84

18.57

32.63

1311.04

99%

93%

83%

Ethanol Quantity (billion gge)
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Δ CS (billion $)

$

1.60

$

(16.42)

$

(75.21)

Δ PS Gasoline - Transfers (billion $)

$

(4.14)

$

(14.77)

$

(14.60)

Δ PS Ethanol + Transfers (billion $)

$

0.79

$

2.66

$

1.71

Carbon Market Transfer (from Gasoline to Ethanol)

$

3.70

$

32.13

$

65.23

Δ Tax Revenue (billion $)

$

0.08

$

(0.81)

$

(3.36)

Δ Surplus (billion $) iii

$

(1.66)

$

(29.34)

$

(91.46)

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

235.19

$

770.25

$ 1,186.90

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)iv

$

155

$

333

$

417

Historical Baseline LCFS
Fuel Price ($/gge)

$

2.33

$

2.84

$

4.09

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

7.17

$

64.86

$

196.22

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)

$

4

$

31

$

88

Notes: Assumed parameter values: Elasticity of demand, 0.3; Gasoline Supply Elasticity, 1.0; Ethanol Supply Elasticity, 2.5;
Normalized Ethanol Emission Rate, 0.65.
i
σ = 1, represents the unregulated case with the LCFS standard normalized by the current carbon intensity.
ii
The fuel quantity in gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) reflects the adjustment for the lower volumetric energy density of ethanol
iii
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)
iv
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)/(CO 2 equivalent abatement)

51

Table 6: Simulation results using a higher ethanol intensity rating
σ = 1i
Fuel Price ($/gge)ii

$

LCFS Simulation Results: Higher CO2 e Ethanol
σ = 0.95
σ = 0.90
σ = 0.99

2.27

$

2.27

$

3.18

$

5.58

Fuel Quantity (billion gge)

117.00

116.91

105.71

89.27

Gasoline Quantity (billion gge)

114.44

106.72

68.94

29.11

2.56

10.18

36.78

60.16

1316.90

99%

86%

69%

Ethanol Quantity (billion gge)
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Δ CS (billion $)

$

(0.69)

$

(101.14)

$

(333.23)

Δ PS Gasoline - Transfers (billion $)

$

(26.01)

$

(190.01)

$

(379.77)

Δ PS Ethanol + Transfers (billion $)

$

18.94

$

179.18

$

405.11

Carbon Market Transfer (from Gasoline to Ethanol)

$

29.02

$

249.86

$

437.07

Δ Tax Revenue (billion $)

$

(0.04)

$

(4.34)

$

(10.67)

Δ Surplus (billion $) iii

$

(7.79)

$

(116.32)

$

(318.56)

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$ 1,057.07

$ 3,024.74

$ 4,312.92

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)iv

$

$

$

772

549

624

Historical Baseline LCFS
Fuel Price ($/gge)

$

2.35

$

3.77

$

7.86

Shadow Value λ ($/MTCO2e)

$

9.56

$

161.93

$

561.39

Carbon Cost ($/MTCO 2e)

$

5

$

74

$

215

Notes: Assumed parameter values: Elasticity of demand, 0.3; Gasoline Supply Elasticity, 1.0; Ethanol Supply Elasticity, 2.5;
Normalized Ethanol Emission Rate, 0.85.
i
σ = 1, represents the unregulated case with the LCFS standard normalized by the current carbon intensity.
ii
The fuel quantity in gasoline gallon equivalents (gge) reflects the adjustment for the lower volumetric energy density of ethanol
iii
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)
iv
Calculated as ( Δ CS + Δ PS + Δ TR)/(CO 2 equivalent abatement)

52

Appendices
A

Proofs

A.1

Proof of Proposition 1.

Assume βL > 0. Suppose the regulator sets the constraint such that λe (βH − σ) > τ βH . But
this implies that

∂U
∂qH

e ) + λe (β − σ) > M C (q e ) + τ β . Thus efficiency could
= pH = M CH (qH
H
H H
H

be increased by increasing qH since the marginal benefit is greater than the social marginal cost.
Similarly, the first best is not attained if λe (βH − σ) < τ βH since efficiency could be increased by
decreasing qH . Suppose instead the regulator sets the standard such that λe (βH − σ) = τ βH .55 In
this case, qH is set optimally conditional on qL . However,
∂U
= pL = M CL (qLe ) + λe (βL − σ) ≤ M CL (qLe ) < M CL (qLe ) + τ βL
∂qL

(10)

since σ ≥ βL > 0. But now efficiency can be increased be decreasing qL , so the first best is not
attained.
Now assume βL = 0. As above, the first best is not attained if λe (βH − σ) 6= τ βH , so let
λe (βH − σ) = τ βH . If σ > βL , first best is not attained since the first inequality in [10] would be
e = 0 and λe = τ . Producers set q e = 0 iff
strict. So let σ = βL = 0. Note that this implies that qH
H

pH ≤ M CH (0) + τ βH which is efficient iff

A.2

∗)
∂U (0,qL
∂qH

≤ M CH (0) + τ βH .

Proof of Proposition 2.

The proofs of Propositions 2 and 3 rely on examples with linear marginal costs M CH (qH ) = BqH
and M CL (qL ) = 40 + qL where B ∈ {0.5, 1, 2} and with linear demand D(p) = 1000 − 20p where
the fuels are perfect substitutes, i.e., pH = pL = p. Throughout assume βH = 1 and βL = 0.75.
The first proof of Proposition 2 varies the relative slopes of the marginal cost curves and the second
proof varies the stringency of the standard. Let qi0 be the output of the unregulated firm and qie be
the equilibrium output of the firm subject to the LCFS.
First proof:
55

This may or may not be feasible.

53

0 =
This proof varies B. Begin with B = 2. The unregulated firm produces qH

at p0 =

2080
43

1040
43 ,

qL0 =

360
43 ,

with carbon intensity of 0.936, carbon emissions 30.47, and energy of 32.56. Under an

e = qe =
LCFS equal to the average intensities of the two fuels (σ = 0.875), qH
L

75
4 ,

pe =

385
8 ,

and

λ = 85. Since emissions are 32.81 and energy is 37.50, this LCFS increases carbon emissions and
increases energy.
0 =
Now let B = 0.5. Here the unregulated firm produces such that qH

p0 =

1040
23

2080
23 ,

qL0 =

120
23 ,

and

with a carbon intensity of 0.986, carbon emissions of 94.35, and energy of 95.65. Under

e = qe =
an LCFS of 0.875, qH
L

600
17 ,

pe =

790
17

and λ =

3920
17 .

Here carbon emissions are 61.76 and

energy is 70.59, and this LCFS reduces carbon emissions and reduces energy.
Second proof:
This proof varies σ. Let B = 1 so the slopes of the marginal costs are equal. The unregulated
0 =
firm would produce qH

520
11 ,

qL0 =

80
11 ,

at p0 =

520
11

with carbon intensity of 0.967 and carbon

e =
emissions 52.73. Under a lax, binding standard of 0.9, the LCFS equilibrium has qH

qLe =

1360
57 ,

pe =

2680
57 ,

and λ =

6400
57 ,

with carbon emissions of 53.68. This standard increases carbon

e = qe =
emissions. Under a more stringent standard of 0.875, the LCFS equilibrium has qH
L

pe =

520
11 ,

680
19 ,

300
11 ,

and λ = 160, with carbon emissions of 47.73. This standard decreases carbon emissions.

Proof of assertions:
A binding LCFS must reduce the carbon intensity of fuel so
e + β qe
0 + β q0
βH qH
βH qH
L L
L L
.
<
e + qe
0 + q0
qH
q
L
H
L
e + β q e > β q 0 + β q 0 , it is easy to show that q e + q e > q 0 + q 0 . Similarly, it is easy to
If βH qH
L L
H H
L L
H
L
H
L
e + q e < q 0 + q 0 implies that β q e + β q e < β q 0 + β q 0 .
show that qH
H H
L L
H H
L L
L
H
L

A.3

Comparative statics of LCFS equilibrium

We analyze how the LCFS equilibrium changes with the standard. First, the total derivative of the
constraint is,
βH

e
dq e
dqH
dq e
dq e
e
+ βL L = qH
+ qLe + σ( H + L )
dσ
dσ
dσ
dσ

which can be written,
(βH − σ)

e
dqH
dq e
e
+ (βL − σ) L = qH
+ qLe .
dσ
dσ

54

(11)

Since βH − σ ≥ 0 and βL − σ ≤ 0, it is easy to show that

e
dqH
dσ

≤ 0 and

e
dqL
dσ

≥ 0 leads to a

contradiction. Other sign combinations cannot be ruled out by theory.

A.4

Proof of Proposition 3.

The proof of the first statement of the proposition follows from the linear example described in the
proof of Proposition 2 where B = 1. Solving for the LCFS equilibrium with σ as a parameter,
qH =

200(33 − 92σ + 64σ 2 )
501 − 1120σ + 640σ 2

and qL =

−800(11 − 27σ + 16σ 2 )
501 − 1120σ + 640σ 2

are the LCFS equilibrium quantities for an arbitrary σ ∈ [3/4, 29/30]. Integrating under the
demand and supply curves and with τ = 20, we have the social welfare function
2
W (σ) = 50(qH + qL ) − (qH + qL )2 /2 − qH
/2 − 40qL − qL2 /2 − 20(qH + .75qL ).

W has local maximums at W (29/30) = 163.64 and W (3/4) = −95.24. Thus social welfare is
maximized when the standard is not binding and any binding standard decreases welfare.
The proof of i) follows since [11] can be substituted into [7] to derive
τ
which implies that

e +β q e )
d(βH qH
L L
dσ

e + β qe )
d(βH qH
L L
e
= λe (qH
+ qLe )
dσ

> 0.

The proof of ii) follows since [11] can be differently substituted into [7] to derive
e
(λe − τ )(qH
+ qLe ) = τ σ ∗

which implies λe > τ iff

e +q e )
d(qH
L
dσ

e + qe )
d(qH
L
dσ

> 0.

iii) follows trivially since λe (βL − σ ∗ ) ≤ 0 < τ βL if βL > 0.
iv) follows from [6] since the right-hand side is positive from iii) and the assumption.

A.5

Details of trading equilibrium.

First we show that the net demand for low carbon energy is downward sloping. If Sij is firm j’s
supply function for fuel i, then
(σ − βx )xj = (βH − σ)qHj + (βL − σ)qLj
55


= (βH − σ)SHj




px
px
pH −
(βH − σ) + (βL − σ)SLj pL −
(βL − σ) .
σ − βx
σ − βx

The first equation is simply the constraint and the second equation follows by substituting in the
supply functions at the LCFS price. The derivative of this last equation w.r.t. px is negative which
implies that dxj /dpx < 0.

B

Simulation Details

B.1

Parameter Choice Details

Simulation parameters have been selected to approximate the U.S. market for transportation fuel
as well as the emissions properties of gasoline and ethanol. The year 2005, is used as a baseline
for all parameter values. Because the volumetric energy density of ethanol is lower than that of
gasoline, ethanol volumes are converted to gasoline gallon equivalent units.
For convenience, the emissions rates for gasoline and ethanol as well as the LCFS standard are
normalized by the 2005 carbon intensity of transportation fuel, which is calculated as the average
of each fuel’s emissions rate weighted by 2005 U.S. sales of gasoline and ethanol. The emissions
rate for gasoline is taken from the Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in
Transportation (GREET 1.7), Wang (2007). There is a great deal of uncertainty about the carbon
intensity of ethanol production, Farrell (2006). While ethanol itself is a homogenous product,
different production technologies and raw materials can result in large differences in “upstream” or
production process emissions. In this analysis, we assume a normalized emissions rate for ethanol
ranging from 0.85 to 0.65, which is comparable to estimates from current emissions models. For
example, Unnasch et. al. (2007) predict normalized emissions rates for Midwest corn ethanol that
range from approximately 0.51 to 1.24.
The constant elasticity demand curve for gasoline gallon equivalents is calibrated to 2005 U.S.
average annual values using data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2007). The
baseline price is the U.S. average retail price in 2005. Quantity is U.S. annual “Total Gasoline
Wholesale/Resale Volume by all R&G” in gallons per year as reported by the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2007). For the four simulation scenarios we assume upper and lower
estimates for the price elasticity of gasoline demand of 0.50 and 0.10. This range is consistent with

56

previous studies of gasoline demand, such as Espey (1998) who reports a median long-run price
elasticity of 0.43 and Hughes et al. (forthcoming) who report a short-run price elasticity of 0.08.
The constant elasticity supply curve for gasoline is calibrated to 2005 U.S. average annual
values using data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2007) as described above. We
assume lower and upper estimates for the elasticity of gasoline supply of 0.50 and 2.00, respectively.
This range is consistent with previous studies of gasoline supply for example, Dahl and Duggan
(1996). As prices are retail prices, producer revenue is calculated from retail price less the federal
gasoline tax and weighted average state gasoline tax. Tax rates are taken from the Federal Highway
Administration (2005). The tax on the blended fuel is equivalent to the current gasoline tax.
Implicitly, this assumes that the current federal and state subsides for fuel ethanol are excluded.
The constant elasticity supply curve for ethanol is calibrated to 2005 U.S. ethanol production
using data from the Renewable Fuels Association (2007). The baseline price per gasoline gallon
equivalent is assumed to be equal to the baseline price of gasoline. We assume lower and upper
estimates for the elasticity of ethanol supply of 1.0 and 4.0, respectively. This broad range reflects
considerable uncertainty, but is consistent with Webb (1981) where the implied elasticity at relevant
prices exceeds 3.5.56

B.2

Numerical Solution Algorithm

The numerical simulation, which allows considerable flexibility in functional forms, is implemented
as follows. For an assumed initial price per gasoline gallon equivalent, Pgge , and shadow value, λ,
the supply of gasoline and ethanol are calculated from the respective supply curves and the first
order conditions in Equation 3. Equation 1 is then used to check for compliance with the LCFS
standard. If the carbon intensity is greater than (less than) the standard, the shadow value, λ, is
increased (decreased) until the LCFS standard is exactly met. The total supply of gasoline gallon
equivalents (gasoline plus ethanol) is then checked against consumer demand at the assumed price
Pgge . If demand is greater than (less than) supply, the price is increased (decreased). The model
iterates on λ and Pgge until the LCFS standard is exactly met and the market for gasoline gallon
equivalents clears.
56

Webb estimates a linear supply curve for ethanol using relationships for corn supply and demand for distiller’s
dried grains. The minimum supply elasticity implied by this analysis is approximately 3.7.

57

