                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       BANKRUPTCY REFORM AND CREDIT CARDS

                                          Michelle J. White

                                        Working Paper 13265
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13265


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




I am grateful to Jim Hynes, Richard Hynes, Eva-Marie Steiger, Andrei Schleifer, Tim Taylor, and
Jeremy Stein for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards
Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 13265
July 2007
JEL No. G21,G28,G33,K35

                                             ABSTRACT

From 1980 to 2004, the number of personal bankruptcy filings in the United States increased more
than five-fold, from 288,000 to 1.5 million per year. Lenders responded to the high filing rate with
a major lobbying campaign for bankruptcy reform that led to the adoption in 2005 of the Bankruptcy
Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA), which made bankruptcy law much less
debtor-friendly. The paper first examines why bankruptcy rates increased so sharply. I argue that
the main explanation is the rapid growth in credit card debt, which rose from 3.2% of U.S. median
family income in 1980 to 12.5% in 2004. The paper then examines how the adoption of BAPCPA
changed bankruptcy law. Prior to 2005, bankruptcy law provided debtors with a relatively easy escape
route from debt, since credit card debt and other types of debt could be discharged in bankruptcy and
even well-off debtors had no obligation to repay. BAPCPA made this escape route less attractive by
increasing the costs of filing and forcing some high-income debtors to repay from post-bankruptcy
income. However, because many consumers are hyperbolic discounters, making bankruptcy law less
debtor-friendly will not solve the problem of consumers borrowing too much. This is because, when
less debt is discharged in bankruptcy, lending becomes more profitable and lenders increase the supply
of credit. The paper examines the determinants of an optimal bankruptcy law. It also considers the
relationship between bankruptcy law and regulation of lending behavior and discusses proposals that
would reduce lenders incentives to supply too much credit to debtors who are likely to become financially
distressed.

Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu
                        Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards

                                          Michelle J. White
                                          UCSD and NBER



     From 1980 to 2004, the number of personal bankruptcy filings in the United States
increased more than five-fold, from 288,000 to 1.5 million per year. By 2004, more
Americans were filing for bankruptcy each year than were graduating from college,
getting divorced, or being diagnosed with cancer. Lenders responded to the high filing
rate with a major lobbying campaign for bankruptcy reform that lasted nearly a decade
and cost more than $100 million. Under the Clinton administration, bankruptcy reform
went nowhere, but the Bush administration was more supportive and, in 2005, the
Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) went into effect.
It made bankruptcy law much less debtor- friendly. Personal bankruptcy filings surged to
two million in 2005 as debtors rushed to file under the old law and then fell sharply to
600,000 in 2006.
        This paper begins with a discussion of why personal bankruptcy rates rose, and
will argue that the main reason is the growth of “revolving debt” – mainly credit card
debt. Indeed, from 1980 to 2004, revolving debt per household increased five- fold in real
terms, rising from 3.2 to 12.5 percent of U.S. median family income. As of 2003,
households that held credit card debt had an average revolving debt level of $15,600 and
the average bankruptcy filer had credit card debt of $25,000. 1 Table 1 shows real
revolving debt per household and the number of personal bankruptcy filings from 1980 to
2006.
        The paper then discusses how the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer
Protection Act of 2005 altered the conditions of bankruptcy. Prior to 2005, bankruptcy
law provided debtors with a relatively easy escape route and many ended up having their
credit card and other debts discharged (forgiven) in bankruptcy. The new bankruptcy
legislation made this route less attractive, by increasing the costs of filing and forcing

1
  Average debt of households that hold credit card debt is calculated assuming that 76 percent of
households have credit cards and 63 percent of cardholders have credit card debt (Johnson, 2005; Laibson
et al., 2003). Debt of households in bankruptcy is based on a sample of filings in 2003 (Zhu, 2006).


                                                                                                           2
some debtors to repay from post-bankruptcy earnings.
           However, because many consumers are hyperbolic discounters, making
bankruptcy law less debtor- friendly will not solve the problem of consumers borrowing
too much. After all, when less debt is discharged in bankruptcy, lending becomes more
profitable and lenders have an incentive to offer yet more credit cards and larger lines of
credit. In fact during the first year that BAPCPA was in effect, revolving debt per
household rose at a real rate of 4.6%--higher than the rate of increase in any of the
previous five years. The paper considers the balances that need to be struck in a
bankruptcy system and how the U.S. bankruptcy system strikes these balances in
comparison with other countries. I also consider how bankruptcy policy relates to bank
regulation and truth- in- lending laws. The paper concludes by reviewing proposals for
changes in regulation of lender behavior that would discourage lenders from supplying
too much credit or charging excessively high interest rates and fees.



Why Did Personal Bankruptcy Filings Increase?



      There are two main questions about the causes of bankruptcy filings: Why do people
file for bankruptcy? And what caused the U.S. bankruptcy filing rate to increase so
dramatically between 1980 and 2004?


           Adverse Events
           One set of potential causes of bankruptcy is adverse events, such as job loss,
health problems/high medical costs, and divorce, that reduce debtors’ incomes or increase
their living costs. Some researchers argue that adverse events explain most bankruptcy
filings. Using data from surveys of bankruptcy filers, Sullivan et al. (2000) claimed that
67 percent of bankrupts filed because of job loss and Himmelstein et al. (2005) claimed
that 55 percent of bankrupts filed because of illness, injury or medical bills. But these
findings have been criticized as exaggerated. 2 Another survey, by the Panel Study of


2
    In the latter study, bankrupts were classified as filing due to medical reasons whenever they reported


                                                                                                             3
Income Dynamics (PSID), found evidence that adverse events play a much less important
role. In the PSID survey, only 23 percent of bankrupts gave job loss as their primary or
secondary reason for filing and 20 percent ga ve illness, injury, or medical costs. An
additional 17 percent gave divorce as their primary or secondary reason for filing. 3 Fay,
Hurst and White (2003) used the PSID data to estimate a model of the bankruptcy filing
decision that tested the importance of adverse events. They found that households were
significantly more likely to file if the household head was divorced in the previous year,
but not if the head or spouse lost a job or experienced health problems.
        In any case, adverse events do not provide a good explanation for the increase in
bankruptcy filings, because they have not become more frequent over time. The
unemployment rate was 9.7 percent in 1982, fell to 5.6 percent in 1990, and since then
has fluctuated between 4.0 and 7.5 percent. The divorce rate also declined, from 5.2 per
1,000 in 1980 to 3.8 per 1,000 in 2002. Medical costs also can’t explain the increase in
bankruptcy filings. Out-of-pocket medical expenditures borne by households increased
only slightly as a percent of median U.S. family income, from 3.5 percent in 1980 to 3.9
percent in 2005 (Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2007, table 120). The
percentage of Americans not covered by health insurance has also remained fairly steady:
it was 14.8 percent in 1985, 15.4 percent in 1995, and 15.7 percent in 2004 (Statistical
Abstract of the United States, 1990 and 2007, Table 144).
     The availability of casino gambling is another possible explanation for the increase
in bankruptcy filings: specifically, casinos existed only in Nevada and New Jersey in
1980 but had spread to 33 states by 2000. Barron et al. (2002) found that bankruptcy
filing rates were 2.6 percent higher in counties that contained a casino or were adjacent to
a county with a casino than in counties that were further from the nearest casino.
However the effect was fairly small: if gambling were abolished all over the United
States, their model predicts that bankruptcy filings would fall nationally by only 1
percent.



$1,000 or more in medical expenses during the previous two years. But the average household with annual
income of $22,000 - $40,000 spends $2,250 per year on health care, or $4,500 over two years. See
Dranove and Millenson (2006).
3
  The PSID conducted a special survey of financial distress and bankruptcy in 1996
(psidonline.isr.umich.edu).


                                                                                                     4
       Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook (2000) also argue that bankruptcy filings
increased over time because bankruptcy has become a middle-class phenomenon, so that
households in a much larger portion of the income distribution now file. However,
surveys show that, since the early 1980’s, the median income of bankruptcy filers has
fallen rather than risen relative to the U.S. median family income level. Sullivan et al.
(1989) found that the median income of filers in 1981 was 70 percent of U.S. median
family income that year; while in a later survey, Sullivan et al. (2000) found that the
median income of filers in 1991 had fallen to 50 percent of the U.S. median family
income level. In the largest and most recent survey, Zhu (2006) found that the median
income of filers in 2003 was 49 percent of U.S. median family income level that year.
Thus, the evidence suggests that the typical bankrupt has become poorer over time, not
more middle class.


       From Credit Cards to Rising Bankruptcy Filings
       In the Panel Study of Income Dynamics’ survey question asking why households
file for bankruptcy, 43 percent of bankruptcy filers gave “high debt/misuse of credit
cards” as the ir primary or secondary reason for filing—higher than any other explanation.
Similarly, all of the empirical models of the bankruptcy filing decision have found that
consumers are more likely to file if they have higher consumer debt. Using cross-section
household data, Domowitz and Sartain (1999) found that households are more likely to
file as their credit card and medical debt levels increase. Using a panel dataset of credit
card accounts, Gross and Souleles (2002) also found that cardholders are more likely to
file as their credit card debt increases. In Fay et al.’s (2003) model of bankruptcy filings,
households were found to be more likely to file as their financial gain from filing
increases--where the financial gain from filing mainly depends on how much debt is
discharged in bankruptcy. Since both the Gross and Souleles and Fay et al. studies
include time dummies, their results suggest that debt is an important factor in explaining
both who files for bankruptcy at any particular point in time and why bankruptcy filings
have increased over time.
       International comparisons also suggest a connection between credit card debt and
bankruptcy filings. Ellis (1998) uses the comparison between the United States and



                                                                                              5
Canada to argue for the importance of the credit card debt in explaining the increase in
bankruptcy filings. General credit cards were first issued in 1966 in the U.S. and in 1968
in Canada. In Canada, both credit card debt and bankruptcy filings increased rapidly
starting in 1969. But in the United States, usury laws in a number of states limited the
maximum interest rates that lenders could charge on loans, which held down their
willingness to issue credit cards. The result was that bankruptcy filings remained
constant throughout the 1970s. But in 1978, the U.S. Supreme Court effectively
abolished state usury laws in the Marquette decision4 and, after that, both credit card debt
and bankruptcy filings increased rapidly in the U.S. 5 Mann (2006) documents a similarly
close relationship between credit card debt and bankruptcy filings in Australia, Japan, and
the United Kingdom.
         Livshits et al. (2006) use calibration techniques to examine various explanations
for the increase in bankruptcy filings since the early 1980s. They find that only the large
increase in credit card debt combined with a reduction in the level of the bankruptcy
punishment can explain the increase in bankruptcy filings since the early 1980s.
         Finally, mortgage debt has also grown rapidly since 1980, although the growth
rate of mortgage debt is well below the growth rate of revolving debt. The increase in
mortgage debt and the increase in bankruptcy filings are related in several ways: first,
homeowners often file for bankruptcy in order to delay mortgage lenders from
foreclosing on their homes. Second, although mortgage debt is not discharged in
bankruptcy, homeowners may file because having their consumer debt discharged makes
it easier for them to pay the ir mortgages. Finally, debtors may file for bankruptcy if
lenders have foreclosed, but the house sells for less than the mortgage. In this situation,
debtors may be liable for the difference, but the liability can be discharged in


4
  In Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First Omaha Services Corp. (435 U.S. 299 [1978]), the
U.S. Supreme Court held that states cannot regulate interest rates charged on credit card loans if the lender
is an out-of-state bank. After this decision, banks that issue credit cards quickly moved to states such as
South Dakota and Delaware that abolished their usury laws. A later decision by the Supreme Court,
Smiley v. Citibank (South Dakota), N.A. (517 U.S. 735 [1996]), applied the same argument to state
regulation of credit card late fees.
5
  Two additional changes that occurred in the United States in 1978 complicate this picture: the adoption
of a new U.S. Bankruptcy Code and the legalization of lawyer advertising, which caused lawyers to begin
advertising the availability of bankruptcy. But while these factors could have been responsible for a one-
time increase in bankruptcy filings, they are unlikely to explain the steady increase in bankruptcy filings
over the past 25 years.


                                                                                                                6
bankruptcy. 6
        Overall, the increase in credit card debt and possibly mortgage debt since 1980
provides the most convincing explanation for the increase in bankruptcy filings in the
United States.


        The Evolution of Credit Card Markets
        Given the close connection between the expansion in credit card debt and the rise
in bankruptcy filings, it’s useful to review how markets for credit cards have evolved in
recent decades. 7 Until the 1960s, consumer credit generally took the form of mortgages
or installment loans from banks or credit unions. Obtaining a loan required going
through a face-to-face application procedure with a bank or credit union employee,
explaining the purpose of the loan, and demonstrating ability to repay. Because of the
costly application procedure and the potential embarrassment of being turned down, these
loans were generally small and went only to the most credit-worthy customers.
Consumers also obtained installment loans from stores and car dealers to purchase
durable goods and cars. 8 This pattern began to change with the introduction of credit
cards in 1966, since credit cards provided unsecured lines of credit that consumers could
use at any time for any purpose. The earliest credit cards were issued by banks where
consumers had their checking or savings accounts. Because most states had usury laws
that limited maximum interest rates, lenders offered credit cards only to the most
creditworthy consumers and card use therefore grew only slowly. But after the
Marquette decision in 1978, credit card issuers could charge higher interest rates and they
expanded in states where low interest rate limits had previously made lending
unprofitable.
      Over time, the development of credit bureaus and computerized credit scoring
models changed credit card markets, because lenders could obtain information from

6
  Real mortgage debt per household tripled between 1980 and 2006, while real revolving debt per
household grew by a factor of 4.6 over the same period. See Berkowitz and Hynes (1999) and Lin and
White (2001) for discussion of the relationship between mortgage debt and homeowners’ gain from filing
for bankruptcy.
7
  See Ausubel (1997), Evans and Schmalensee (1999), Moss and Johnson (1999), Peterson (2004), and
Mann (2006) for discussion and history of credit cards.
8
  Although less consumer credit was available prior to credit cards, some consumers nonetheless ended up
in financial distress. See Caplovitz (1974).


                                                                                                      7
credit bureaus about individual consumers’ credit records and could therefore offer credit
cards to consumers who had no prior relationship with the lender. Lenders first offered
credit cards to consumers who applied by mail, and then began send ing out pre-approved
card offers to lists of consumers whose credit records were screened in advance. These
innovations reduced the cost of credit both by eliminating the face-to- face application
process and by allowing lenders to expand nationally, which increased competition in
local credit card markets. From 1977 to 2001, the proportion of U.S. households having
at least one credit card rose from 38 to 76 percent (Durkin, 2000). Over the same period,
revolving credit increased from 16 to 37 percent of non- mortgage consumer credit, which
means that credit card loans tended to replace other forms of consumer credit.
     This shift from installment to revolving loans meant dramatic changes in the terms
of consumer debt. Secured and installment loans carry fixed interest rates and fixed
repayment schedules. Credit card loans, in contrast, allow lenders to change the interest
rate at any time and allow debtors to choose how much they repay each month, subject to
a low minimum payment requirement. Consumers who choose to repay in full each
month use credit cards only for transacting; while those who repay less than the full
amount due each month use credit cards for both transacting and borrowing. The former
group receives an interest- free loan from the date of the purchase to the due date of the
bill, while the latter pays interest from the date of purchase. If consumers pay late or
borrow close to their credit limits, then lenders raise the interest rate to a penalty range.
Lenders also charge fees when debtors pay late or exceed their credit limits.
     Credit card issuers compete heavily for new customers by mailing out unsolicited,
pre-approved credit card offers: in 2001, the average U.S. household received 45 of these
offers (Bar-Gill, 2004). Over time, competition among issuers has led them to offer
increasingly favorable introductory terms and increasingly onerous post- introductory
terms. The favorable introductory terms encourage consumers to accept new credit
cards—they include zero annual fees, cash back or frequent flier miles, and low or zero
introductory interest rates on purchases and balance transfers. Once consumers accept
new cards, the rewards programs encourage them to spend more and low minimum
monthly payments encourage them to borrow. The format of the monthly bills also
encourages consumers to borrow, since minimum payment s are often shown in large type



                                                                                                8
while the full amount due is shown in small type. Minimum monthly payments are
low—typically the previous month’s interest and fees plus one percent of the principle—
which means that debtors who pay only the minimum each month still owe nearly half of
any amount borrowed after five years. After the introductory period, terms become much
more onerous: the average credit card interest rate is 16 percent, interest rates rise to 24
to 30 percent if debtors pay late, and penalty fees for paying late or exceeding the credit
limit are around $35. This pattern of credit card pricing implies that issuers make losses
on new accounts and offset the ir losses with profits on older accounts.
         Credit card issuers have also expanded their high-risk operations by lending to
consumers who have lower incomes, lower credit scores, and past bankruptcy filings.
The percentage of households in the lowest quintile of the income distribution who have
credit cards rose from 11 percent in 1977 to 43 percent in 2001 (Durkin, 2000; Johnson,
2005). A study in the early 1990s found that three-quarters of bankrupts had at least one
credit card within a year after their bankruptcy filings (Staten, 1993). 9
       The shift of consumer debt from installment debt to credit card debt, combined
with the pattern of credit card pricing, have made consumers’ debt burdens much more
sensitive to changes in income. When consumers’ incomes are high, they are likely to
pay their credit card bills in full and therefore their debt burden is low and they pay little
or no interest. But when their incomes decline, they are likely to pay late or pay the
minimum on their credit cards, so that their debt burdens increase and they pay much
more in interest and fees. Although credit cards allow consumers to smooth
consumption when their incomes fall, the cost of doing so is extremely high and may
cause debtors to be in permanent financial distress.


         Rational Consumers versus Hyperbolic Discounters
         Considerable recent research suggests that consumers fall into two groups based
on their attitudes toward saving: rational consumers versus hyperbolic discounters.
Rational consumers apply the same discount rate over all future periods. Hyperbolic
discounters, in contrast, want to save more starting at some point in the future, but in the


9
 Interest rates on credit card loans have been high relative to lenders’ cost of funds since the 1980s
(Ausubel, 1991 and 1997; Bar-Gill, 2004).


                                                                                                         9
present they always prefer to consume rather than save (Laibson, 1997). Thus a
hyperbolic discounter is like a person who always wants to start dieting tomorrow, but
never today. Prior to the development of credit cards, the difference between rational
consumers and hyperbolic discounters was less important, because consumers’ borrowing
opportunities were limited. But as credit card loans have become more widely available,
borrowing opportunities have increased and the difference has become more important.
       Laibson et al. (2003) found in simulations that hyperbolic discounters borrow
more than three times as much as rational consumers, regardless of whether both types
pay the same interest rate or hyperbolic discounters pay higher rates. Applying these
results to credit card pricing suggests that rational consumers are more likely to use credit
cards purely for transacting, while hyperbolic discounters are more likely to use them for
borrowing. Also, allowing consumers to choose how much to pay on their credit cards
each month makes it more likely that hyperbolic discounters will accumulate high credit
card debt, because each month they resolve to start paying off their debt, but when the
next bill arrives they consume too much and postpone repaying until the following
month. Because hyperbolic discounters borrow more than rational consumers, they are
also more likely to pay high credit card interest rates and penalty fees. Thus, hyperbolic
discounters are likely to accumulate steadily increasing credit card debt, while rational
consumers are more likely to avoid accumulating debt by repaying in full.
       Gross and Souleles (2002) provide evidence supporting the hyperbolic
discounting model in the context of credit cards: they find that cardholders increase their
borrowing in response to interest rate reductions by more than they reduce their
borrowing in response to interest rate hikes—which suggests why lenders offer low
introductory interest rates and charge high rates later on. In the bankruptcy context, a
2006 study of debtors who sought credit counseling prior to filing for bankruptcy found
that two-thirds were in financial difficulties because of “poor money
management/excessive spending,” while only 31% who were in difficulties because of
loss of income or medical bills (National Foundation for Credit Counseling, 2006).
These results suggest that most debtors in financial distress are hyperbolic discounters
rather than rational consumers who have experienced adverse events.




                                                                                            10
U.S. Bankruptcy Law

       U.S. bankruptcy law has traditionally had two separate personal bankruptcy
procedures named, after parts of the bankruptcy law, Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. Under
both procedures, creditors must immediately terminate all efforts to collect from the
debtor—including letters, telephone calls, garnishment of wages, and lawsuits. Most
consumer debt is discharged in bankruptcy, but most tax obligations, student loans,
alimony and child support obligations, debts incurred by fraud, and some credit card debt
incurred for luxury purchases or cash advances are not. Mortgages, car loans, and other
secured debts are not discharged in bankruptcy, but filing for bankruptcy generally allows
debtors to delay creditors from foreclosing or repossessing assets. The main difference
between the two Chapters is that Chapter 7 only requires bankrupts to repay from their
assets and Chapter 13 only requires them to repay from future income. Prior to the
Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005, debtors were
allowed to choose between the two.


       Bankruptcy Law Before 2005
       The most commonly used procedure before the 2005 law was Chapter 7. Under
it, bankrupts must list all their assets. Bankruptcy law makes some of these assets
exempt, meaning that they are off- limits to creditors and the debtor is allowed to keep
them. Asset exemptions are determined by the state in which the debtor lives. Most
states exempt debtors’ clothing, furniture, “tools of the trade,” and some equity in a
vehicle. In addition, nearly all states have homestead exemptions for equity in owner-
occupied homes and these vary from a few thousand dollars to unlimited in six states,
including Texas and Florida. Many states also allow debtors an unlimited homestead
exemption if they are married, only one spouse files for bankruptcy, and they own their
homes as “tenants by the entirety.” Other states allow debtors to exempt assets by
placing them in a trust before filing. Elias (2005) provides a list of asset exemptions by
state. Under Chapter 7, debtors must use their non-exempt assets to repay creditors, but
they are not obliged to use any of their future income to repay.
       Under the alternative procedure--Chapter 13, bankrupts are not obliged to repay



                                                                                             11
from assets, but they must use part of their post-bankruptcy income to repay. Before the
2005 law, there was no pre-determined income exemption; instead, debtors who filed
under Chapter 13 proposed their own repayment plans. They often proposed to repay an
amount equal to the value of their non-exempt assets in Chapter 7 or, if all of their assets
are exempt, then they proposed to repay a token amount. Debtors were not allowed to
repay less than the value of their non-exempt assets and, since they could file under
Chapter 7, they had no incentive to offer more. Only the approval of the bankruptcy
judge--not creditors--was required.

       The costs of filing for bankruptcy were low--about $600 in Chapter 7 and $1,600
in Chapter 13 as of 2001 (Flynn and Bermant, 2002). The punishment for bankruptcy
was also low--bankrupts’ names are made public and the bankruptcy filing appears on
their credit records for 10 years. Their access to credit falls and they may not be hired for
certain types of jobs. In addition, bankrupts were not allowed to file again under Chapter
7 for six years (but they were allowed to file under Chapter 13 as often as every six
months).

       In order to induce more bankrupts to file under Chapter 13 and repay from future
income, U.S. bankruptcy law allowed additional debt to be discharged under Chapter 13.
Debtors’ car loans could be discharged to the extent that the loan principle exceeded the
market value of the car. Also, debts incurred by fraud and cash advances obtained
shortly before filing could be discharged in Chapter 13, but not in Chapter 7. These
features were known as the Chapter 13 “super-discharge.” Some bankrupts took
advantage of the super-discharge by filing first under Chapter 7, where most of their
debts were discharged, and then converting their filings to Chapter 13, where they
proposed a plan to repay part of the additional debt covered by the super-discharge. This
two-step procedure, known as filing a “Chapter 20,” increased debtors’ financial gain
from bankruptcy relative to filing under either procedure by itself.
       Overall, these features made U.S. bankruptcy law very pro-debtor. Since debtors
could choose between Chapters 7, 13, and “20,” they picked the procedure that
maximized their gain. Debtors could gain from filing under Chapter 7 regardless of how
high their incomes were and they could also gain from filing under Chapter 7 with high


                                                                                          12
assets, if they planned in advance to convert their assets from non-exempt to exempt. For
example, debtors could move to a state with a high asset exemption and use their assets to
buy a large house, thereby converting non-exempt assets into exempt home equity.
Around three-quarters of all bankruptcy filers used Chapter 7 (Flynn and Bermant, 2003).
Most debtors who filed under Chapter 13 did so because their gains were even higher
than under Chapter 7.
        Indeed, prior to the adoption of BAPCPA, debtors’ obligation to repay in
bankruptcy bore little relationship to their ability-to-pay. Using data from the early
1990s, I estimated that at least one-sixth of U.S. households could gain financially from
filing for bankruptcy under pre-BAPCPA Chapter 7 and the proportion increased to as
high as one-half if households followed simple strategies to shelter additional assets
before filing. Debtors’ gain from filing for bankruptcy also increased as their incomes
rose, since higher- income debtors usually had more debt that would be discharged, but
still had no obligation to repay in bankruptcy (White, 1998).
        By providing consumers with an easy escape route from debt, U.S. bankruptcy
law encouraged consumers to borrow and encouraged debtors to behave strategically and
to file for bankruptcy even when they could afford to repay. It also penalized debtors
who repay by causing lenders to raise interest rates and reduce credit availability (Gropp,
Scholz, and White, 1997). But while a number of rich and famous people made headlines
by filing for bankruptcy, most bankrupts were not well-off—at least according to the
information they provide in their bankruptcy filings. 10 In Zhu’s (2006) sample of
bankruptcy filings in 2003, only 2.5 percent had annual incomes above $70,000.


        The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act
       The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) of
2005 made several major changes to bankruptcy law. First, it abolished the right of

10
   Among the high-profile people who have filed for bankruptcy are Governor of Texas John Connally,
actor Burt Reynolds, corporate raider Paul Bilzerian, actresses Debbie Reynolds and Kim Basinger, rapper
MC Hammer, singer Merle Haggard, U.S. baseball commissioner Bowie Kuhn, and boxer Mike Tyson
(www.bankruptcy-usa.info/famous-bankruptcies.html ). In contrast, O.J. Simpson would not gain from
filing for bankruptcy, because debts resulting from legal judgments due to “willful or malicious acts” are
not dischargeable in bankruptcy (Elias, 2006). Simpson presumably moved to Florida because state asset
exemptions apply both in and out of bankruptcy, so that Florida’s unlimited homestead exemption protects
his assets from creditors’ claims even though he has not filed.


                                                                                                        13
debtors to choose between Chapters 7 and 13. Second, debtors are no longer allowed to
propose their own Chapter 13 repayment plans. Third, BAPCPA greatly raised
bankruptcy costs by imposing many new requirements on debtors and their lawyers. Let’s
discuss these in turn.
        The first change, abolishing the right of debtors to choose between Chapter 7 and
Chapter 13, may be the most significant. Under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and
Consumer Protection Act, debtors must pass a new “means test” to file under Chapter 7.
Debtors qualify for Chapter 7 if their monthly family income averaged over the six
months prior to filing is less than the median monthly family income level in their state,
adjusted for family size. To get a flavor of what this rule means, median family income
for three-person families is currently about $64,000 in California and New York, $75,000
in Massachusetts, and $48,000 in West Virginia. Depending on their debt levels, some
debtors are allowed to file under Chapter 7 with average monthly family income that
exceeds the state median income level, as long as their monthly “disposable income”
(defined below) is no higher than $166 per month. Thus, the 2005 law prevents some
debtors from taking advantage of the unlimited income exemption in Chapter 7, since
they cannot file under Chapter 7 if their incomes are too high. Debtors who fail the
means test must file under Chapter 13 if they file for bankruptcy at all.
        Otherwise, Chapter 7 itself remains essentially unchanged. State-specific asset
exemption levels remain in effect and Chapter 7 filers are only obliged to use their non-
exempt assets to repay. But the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection
Act imposed new restrictions on some of the strategies that debtors previously used to
shelter high assets in bankruptcy. For example, if debtors move to a state with a higher
homestead exemption and file for bankruptcy within two years, they must now use their
old state’s homestead exemption. If debtors purchase a home and then file for
bankruptcy within 2½ years, the homestead exemption is capped at $125,000. If debtors
convert non-exempt assets into home equity by paying down their mortgages or
renovating their homes, they must do so at least 3 1/3 years or 10 years, respectively,
before filing---otherwise the additional home equity will not be exempt (Martin, 2006).
On the other hand, BAPCPA added a generous new Chapter 7 asset exemption for up to
$1,000,000 in tax-sheltered individua l retirement accounts (up to $2,000,000 for married



                                                                                           14
couples who file for bankruptcy). Although this new exemption is very generous, few
debtors are likely to benefit from it, because they cannot shift large amounts of assets into
retirement accounts just before filing.
    The second major change under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer
Protection Act abolishes debtors’ right to propose their own Chapter 13 repayment plans
and substitutes a uniform procedure that determines their repayment obligations. Debtors
must now use 100 percent of their “disposable income” for five years to repay, where
BAPCPA defines disposable income as the difference between debtors’ average monthly
family income during the six months prior to filing and a new income exemption. The
income exemption is based on Internal Revenue Service procedures for collecting from
delinquent taxpayers and, for each debtor, it determines an allowance for living expenses.
Debtors receive an allowance for housing and utilities that varies by metropolitan area;
for example it covers expenditures up to a maximum of $986 per month in Charleston,
West Virginia, and $1,763 per month in Boston, Massachusetts. They also receive a
transport allowance that depends on the number of vehicle s the debtor’s family owns (up
to two) and local gasoline prices. For two-car families, the allowance in Boston is $1,185
per month. Debtors also receive an allowance for food, clothing and personal care that
varies with income. For three-person families, the maximum allowance ranges from
$830 per month if family income is below $10,000 per year to $1,368 per month if family
income exceeds $70,000 per year. A number of other types of expenditure are added to
the income exemption, including the full amount of debtors’ expenditures on taxes
(except property taxes); mandatory retirement contributions; child support payments;
education expenses up to $125/month per child; uninsured health care costs; child care
costs; the cost of term life, disability, ho meowners’, and health insurance; contributions
to charity; contributions to the care of elderly or disabled relatives; the costs of
telecommunications and home security; and the cost of repaying secured debt. For details
of the means test and the income exemp tion, see
<http://www.usdoj.gov/ust/eo/bapcpa/meanstesting.htm>. All of these components are
added together to determine each debtor’s income exemption.
        Third, BAPCPA greatly raised bankruptcy costs. Debtors are now required to
take a credit counseling course before they file and a financial management course before



                                                                                              15
their debts are discharged. They must file detailed financial information with the
bankruptcy court, inc luding copies of their tax returns for the past four years (which may
mean they have to prepare tax returns that were never filed). Bankruptcy lawyers must
certify the accuracy of all the information filed. Lawyers can be fined and debtors’
bankruptcy filings can be dismissed if any information is found to be false or inaccurate.
Filing fees have also increased. These new requirements raise debtors’ out-of-pocket
costs of filing to around $2,500 for Chapter 7 and $3,500 for Chapter 13 (Elias, 2005),
plus the costs of the two courses and preparation of tax returns.
        BAPCPA also abolished the Chapter 13 “super-discharge” and increased the
amount of credit card debt that is not discharged in bankruptcy. It increased the length of
Chapter 13 repayment plans from as little as three years to a mandatory five years.
Finally it increased the minimum time that must elapse between bankruptcy filings: from
six to eight years for Chapter 7 filings; from six months to two years for Chapter 13
filings; and from no minimum to four years for a Chapter 7 filing followed by a Chapter
13. These changes mean that fewer debtors are eligible for bankruptcy at any given
time.
        Overall, the adoption of Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection
Act raised bankruptcy costs, lowered the amount of debt discharged in bankruptcy,
lowered the income exemption, raised the amount of post-bankruptcy income that debtors
must use to repay, and increased the repayment period. There is now a maximum income
level above which debtors no longer gain from filing, since the BAPCPA means test
prevents them from filing under Chapter 7 and forces them to repay from post-
bankruptcy income. BAPCPA also lowered asset exemptions for some debtors who
have high home equity and raised asset exemptions for a few debtors who have large
retirement accounts. Except for the last of these points, all of these changes made U.S.
bankruptcy law more pro-creditor.
         However, the stringency of these changes should not be exaggerated. Although
there is now a maximum income level above which debtors do not gain from filing for
bankruptcy, the maximum is quite high and debtors can raise it by planning strategically
before filing. For example, debtors who have experienced income fluctuations can pass
the means test at higher income levels by filing when their average income over the



                                                                                           16
previous six months is minimized. Because social security income is excluded from the
means test, older debtors qualify for Chapter 7 at higher income levels. Entrepreneurs
can file under Chapter 7 regardless of how high their incomes are, since debtors who
have primarily business debts are allowed to bypass the means test and file under Chapter
7. Debtors can also pass the means test at higher income le vels by changing their
expenditures in ways that raise the income exemption, such as by buying a car with a car
loan or obtaining a new mortgage before filing, or spending more on child care,
insurance, or charitable contributions. In sample calculations (White, 2007), I found that
debtors could pass the means test with family incomes at least twice their state’s median
income level, which means that debtors can still gain financially from filing for
bankruptcy even if their family income level is in the top decile of the U.S. income
distribution. Debtors who fail the means test can also reduce their obligation to repay in
Chapter 13 by working less during the six months prior to filing—for example, a
reduction in work effort that reduces debtors’ average monthly income by $1 prior to
filing costs them $6, but reduces their repayment obligation in Chapter 13 by $1 per
month for 5 years, or $60.


     Overall, the adoption of a means test under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and
Consumer Protection Act of 2005 made debtors’ obligation to repay in bankruptcy more
closely related to their ability-to-pay. However U.S. bankruptcy law still allows debtors
to gain from filing for bankruptcy even with fairly high asset and income levels. Despite
all the changes under BAPCPA, U.S. bankruptcy law remains more pro-debtor than
bankruptcy law in other country. But BAPCPA harms the worst-off debtors, because
many of them will be unable to pay the new high bankruptcy costs.




Directions for the Next Bankruptcy Reform


     Bankruptcy law was greatly in need of reform before 2005, because it allowed
debtors to escape their debts even if they had high assets and high income. But although
the 2005 law is barely on the books, it’s already possible to discern the outlines of the


                                                                                            17
next set of bankruptcy reforms that is likely to be needed.
        The difficulty comes in two reinforcing parts. First, although bankruptcy law in
the U.S. remains more pro-debtor than in any other country, some of the debtors who are
most in need of bankruptcy-provided debt relief will be unable to file because they cannot
afford to pay the higher costs of bankruptcy, including lawyers’ fees, filing fees, and the
other costs of filing. In addition, because BAPCPA changed bankruptcy law in a pro-
creditor direction, credit card issuers responded by expand ing the supply of credit. But
more credit card loans combined with reduced access to debt relief in bankruptcy seems
certain to result in severe financial distress for at least some debtors.
        This problem is particularly severe for hyperbolic discounters. As discussed
above, hyperbolic discounters tend to be worse off than rational consumers, since they
have higher debt, lower assets, and—because they invest less in human capital—lower
incomes. In the post-BAPCPA environment, hyperbolic discounters will be more
tempted by the up- front rewards from credit card lenders, and will borrow even more.
But hyperbolic discounters are also likely to ignore the changes in bankruptcy law until
after they are in financial distress. At that point, many of them will discover that they are
unable to file, either because they cannot afford the costs of bankruptcy or because they
have filed under Chapter 7 within the past eight years. Also once in bankruptcy,
hyperbolic discounters are more likely to have difficulty providing the detailed
information that the new bankruptcy law requires, including four years’ of past tax
returns that they may not have filed originally. The new BAPCPA education mandates—
for credit couns eling and financial management—could theoretically help hyperbolic
discounters learn to control their spending. But in practice, education is likely to have
little effect, since debtors are only required to get it after they are in financial distress and
considering bankruptcy.
        Any delay by debtors in filing for bankruptcy, even if only for a few months,
benefits lenders by giving them additional time to harass debtors with collection calls,
persuade them to make payments on credit card loans even though the loans would be
discharged in bankruptcy, and collect part of their earnings using wage garnishment.
Indeed, early evidence suggests that credit card issuers have benefited from the adoption
of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act. Credit card issuers’



                                                                                               18
charge-off rates fell from around 6 percent before the adoption of BAPCPA to 3 percent
afterwards, while their mark- up over costs remained constant. Also the share prices of
publicly-traded third party debt collectors—firms that buy charged-off credit card loans
and attempt to collect from debtors—increased by 17 percent relative to the market when
BAPCPA was adopted (Ashcraft, Dick, and Morgan, 2006).
        To understand the sorts of reforms that are likely to be useful, let’s first review the
underlying functions of bankruptcy law, and then consider how the more pro-creditor
bankruptcy laws of other countries function. With that background, we can then suggest
some potentially useful reforms both of bankruptcy law and of complementary laws and
rules related to banking and truth- in- lending.




        The Underlying Functions of Bankruptcy Law

        Bankruptcy law must balance two conflicting functions. First, bankruptcy
provides debtors with a form of consumption insurance. Consumers benefit from being
able to borrow so that they can smooth consumption over the life cycle, but their future
incomes and expenses are uncertain. If income turns out to be particularly low and/or
expenses particularly high when the loans come due, then repaying could harm debtors
and their families by drastically reducing their consumption. Discharging debt in
bankruptcy increases debtors’ consumption when it is low and therefore allows them to
smooth consumption over states of nature as well as over time. Debtors pay a “premium”
for this implicit consumption insurance in the form of higher interest rates, because the
insurance raises the risk of default.

        The objective of providing consumption insurance has grown in importance over
time, as evidenced by the expansion in most countries’ government-provided social
safety nets. Having a bankruptcy procedure that discharges debt when debtors’ ability-
to-pay is low increases the overall level of consumption insurance by forcing lenders to
provide some insurance privately (Posner, 1995). Bankruptcy-provided consumption
insurance may not be needed if the government itself provides a generous social safety
net. But having it forces lenders to bear part of the cost of consumption insurance and


                                                                                            19
prevents credit markets from undermining the social safety net.

         Second, bankruptcy discourages default by punishing those who file. Debtors
who default and file for bankruptcy impose a negative externality on future borrowers,
since default causes lenders to ration credit and raise interest rates. A harsh bankruptcy
policy reduces this externality by reducing moral hazard on the part of debtors, including
debtors borrowing without intending to repay, borrowing without considering whether
they have the ability to repay, and working less so that their ability-to-pay falls. But
punishing bankrupts harshly also increases moral hazard on the part of lenders, because
lenders have a stronger incentive to attract borrowers with attractive introductory offers,
to lend too much to risky borrowers, and to charge very high fees and interest rates.

        In the past, credit was scarce and expensive, so that the main purpose of
bankruptcy law was to punish defaulters and to distribute debtors’ assets among
creditors. 11 Loans were made only to the most credit-worthy borrowers—mainly
merchants and landowners—and those who went bankrupt were assumed to have either
engaged in fraud or recklessly disregarded their moral obligation to repay. Punishments
therefore were severe. Among the punishments that have been used in various countries
at various times are the death penalty, selling bankrupts and their children into slavery,
forcing bankrupts to become indentured servants of their creditors, putting them in
prison, flogging, branding, and cutting off their hands, exiling them, and publicly
shaming them in various ways (Efrat, 2002). In addition, bankrupts were forced to give
up all of their assets to repay creditors and there was no debt discharge, so they remained
liable to repay for the rest of their lives.

         As the cost of lending fell, the death penalty, slavery, prison, and other severe
punishments for bankruptcy were abolished in most places and filing for bankruptcy is no
longer considered to be a crime. The U.S. states and England abolished prison as a
penalty for default during the 19th century. The development of debt discharge and of
asset exemptions also reduced the severity of punishment for bankruptcy. In England, a


11
   Having a procedure to allocate debtors’ assets among multiple creditors reduces creditors’ incentive to
race to be first to collect. See White (2007) for discussion.


                                                                                                         20
short- lived bankruptcy statute adopted in 1706 was the first to allow some discharge of
debt and, prior to American independence, some of the colonies had procedures for
discharging debt. The first U.S. bankruptcy law, adopted in 1800, also allowed for debt
discharge if a majority of creditors consented. Asset exemptions appeared as early as the
1790s, when Virginia and other southern states adopted them in order to protect local
landowners from their northern creditors. Exemptions became more widespread and
more generous in the nineteenth century, when states in the south and west used them to
compete for migrants (Coleman, 1974; Mann, 2002).

        Finally, another aspect of bankruptcy law is that it affects workers’ incentives to
become self-employed. Owners of small businesses are personally liable for their
business debts (this is often the case even if the businesses are incorporated), so that they
end up with high debts if their businesses fail. A pro-debtor bankruptcy law encourages
self-employment by discharging both business and personal debts in bankruptcy, by
having high exemptions for assets and future income, and by having low bankruptcy
costs and punishment. These provisions encourage even risk-averse workers to go into
business because, if the ir businesses fail, they will no t have to use their future income to
repay past business debts and they may be able to keep their homes. Conversely, a pro-
creditor bankruptcy law discourages workers from taking on the risk of self-
employment. 12



      Bankruptcy Law Tradeoffs in Other Countries

        How do different countries make the bankruptcy tradeoff between providing
consumption insurance to debtors and punishing default? In comparing bankruptcy
policies, it is useful to think of such policies as summed up by seven parame ters: the
amount of debt discharged, the asset exemption, the income exemption, the fraction of
debtors’ future income above the exemption that must be used to repay, the length of the
repayment obligation, bankruptcy costs, and the bankruptcy punishment. A bankruptcy


12
  Fan and White (2003) show empirically that more workers choose self-employment in U.S. states that
have higher homestead exemptions.


                                                                                                       21
policy is more pro-debtor if the amount of debt discharged or the exemption levels
increase, or if bankruptcy costs, the bankruptcy punishment, the length of the repayment
period, or the fraction of non-exempt income that must be used to repay fall. Table 2
summarizes these parameters for U.S. personal bankruptcy law both before and after the
adoption of BAPCPA. Among other countries, some have no bankruptcy laws at all and
some only allow business owners and corporations to go bankrupt. Table 3 summarizes
bankruptcy law in four countries that allow consumers to file for bankruptcy—France,
Germany, Canada, and England/Wales. 13
       The values of the bankruptcy parameters differ considerably across the four
countries. France’s bankruptcy law is the most pro-creditor: exemptions for assets and
income are very low, bankrupts must use nearly all of their non-exempt income to repay,
and the repayment obligation lasts for eight to ten years. Bankruptcy judges can penalize
debtors for low effort during the repayment period by denying the discharge. This means
that bankrupts are reduced to a poverty- level standard of living and have little incentive
to work for a long period of time. However, judges can also soften the procedure by
giving debtors an immediate discharge on the grounds that they cannot repay their debts
even over 10 years. Judges can also discharge additional debt if they feel that lenders
made loans to debtors who were already “over- indebted.” Because debtors’ costs of
filing are very low, they have an incentive to default on their repayment plans and file for
bankruptcy again, since a new filing gives them a new chance of having their debts
discharged immediately (Kilborn, 2005). Thus while French bankruptcy procedure is
very pro-creditor, a small percentage of French bankrupts receive a more lenient
treatment similar to Chapter 7 in the U.S.
         Germany’s bankruptcy procedure is similar to France’s but the repayment period
is six years rather than eight to ten. Debtors who exhibit good behavior by working or
seeking work are allowed to keep 10 percent of their non-exempt income during the 4th
year of the repayment plan and 15 percent during the 5th year. However there is no


13
  China, Turkey, Italy, Mexico and Argentina are examples of countries that allow only business owners to
go bankrupt. Chile and the Czech Republic are examples of countries that allow individuals to file for
bankruptcy, but do not discharge debt in bankruptcy (Efrat, 2002). In Germany, the first bankruptcy law
that allowed individual consumers to have debt discharged in bankruptcy was adopted in 1999.




                                                                                                      22
procedure that allows for immediate discharge of debt; all bankrupts in Germany must
complete a repayment plan before receiving a discharge even if they earn too little to
repay anything (Kilborn, 2004). Bankruptcy laws in England/Wales and in Canada are
more pro-debtor than those in France or Germany. In England/Wales, debtors are only
obliged to use 30 to 50 percent of their non-exempt income to repay and the repayment
period lasts three years. However Britain imposes shaming punishments on bankrupts,
who are barred from borrowing mone y, managing a business, working as a lawyer, or
holding public office for 3 years after filing. In Canada, debtors must use 50 percent of
their non-exempt income to repay and the repayment period lasts between nine months
and three years. Like the U.S., Canada has homestead exemptions that vary across
provinces—they are generally lower than homestead exemptions in the U.S., but higher
than those in the other countries. Overall, U.S. bankruptcy law remains more debtor-
friendly than bankruptcy law in any of the four countries, even after the adoption of
BAPCPA.

       Adjusting Bankruptcy Law

       As a starting point for thinking about adjustments to bankruptcy law, consider a
world of rational consumers, who borrow only to smooth consumption. These consumers
sometimes suffer adverse shocks. The interest rates that they pay for borrowing include a
risk premium for the defaults that inevitably occur following adverse events.
        In this setting, bankruptcy-provided consumption insurance costs debtors more
than its fair price, because debtors not only compensate lenders for default by paying
higher interest rates but, in addition, they must pay bankruptcy costs and bear the
bankruptcy punishment whenever they file. As a result, if debtors are risk neutral, then
they prefer not to have a bankruptcy system at all; while if they are risk-averse, they
prefer to have a bankruptcy system and the ir preferred bankruptcy system is more pro-
debtor as the degree of risk-aversion increases. This suggests that if most debtors are risk
averse, the optimal bankruptcy policy is to provide some consumption insurance, with the
optimal level of consumption insurance increasing as debtors become more risk-averse
(Wang and White, 2000). Additional considerations that affect the optimal bankruptcy
policy are that it should provide a higher level of consumption insurance in countries that


                                                                                           23
want to encourage self-employment and a lower level of consumption insurance in
countries that provide more comprehensive social safety nets.
        When debtors are hyperbolic discounters, the determination of optimal
bankruptcy policy becomes more complex. Remember, hyperbolic discounters have
dynamically inconsistent preferences; they prefer to borrow today and start saving
tomorrow – but tomorrow never comes. This means tha t their preferences concerning
bankruptcy are also inconsistent. When hyperbolic discounters focus on their desire to
borrow and consume today, they prefer to have no bankruptcy system or a very pro-
creditor bankruptcy system, because they can borrow the most under such a system. But
if and when hyperbolic discounters focus on their desire to save, they prefer a bankruptcy
system that forces them to save by restricting their ability to borrow today. These
sophisticated hyperbolic discounters prefer a very pro-debtor bankruptcy system, since
lenders ration credit more tightly as the bankruptcy system becomes more pro-debtor and
may not be willing to lend at all if the bankruptcy system is very pro-debtor. Thus
whether hyperbolic discounters prefer a pro-debtor or pro-creditor bankruptcy system
depends on whether or not they recognize their tendency to borrow too much and favor a
bankruptcy system that gives them more control over their own behavior.
        Another issue that affects bankruptcy law is whether creditors can tell if particular
debtors are rational consumers versus hyperbolic discounters. Creditors can identify
many individuals’ types by their past borrowing behavior, which they learn from credit
records. But creditors probably cannot identify all debtors’ types and, if so, then rationa l
consumers cross-subsidize hyperbolic discounters in the loan market because rational
consumers are less likely to default. This means that rational consumer pay a risk
premium for borrowing that exceeds their true default risk, while hyperbolic discounters
pay a risk premium that is lower than their true default risk. As a result, rational
consumers prefer to borrow less and, since they benefit less from bankruptcy, they prefer
a more pro-creditor bankruptcy system. In contrast, hyperbolic discounters may prefer a
more pro-debtor bankruptcy system, although their preferences change less since their
demand for credit is less responsive to changes in the interest rate. 14


14
  In simulations, Laibson et al. (2003) found that rational consumers borrow slightly more when a
bankruptcy system is introduced, but the borrowing behavior of hyperbolic discounters does not change.


                                                                                                         24
        A variety of bankruptcy policy parameters have different effects on rational
consumers versus hyperbolic discounters. For example, an increase in the asset
exemption provides debtors with additional consumption insurance, but only if they have
non-exempt assets. Since rational consumers tend to have more assets than hyperbolic
discounters, this change mainly benefits rational consumers. Similarly, an increase in the
income exemption or a reduction in the proportion of non-exempt income that debtors
must use to repay provides additional consumption insurance, but only to debtors whose
have non-exempt income. If rational consumers tend to have higher incomes than
hyperbolic discounters, then these changes also mainly benefit rational consumers.
        On the other hand, raising the income exemption reduces the distortion to debtors’
post-bankruptcy work incentives, while an increase in the asset exemption has little or no
effect on debtors’ work incentives. This suggests that the income exemption should be
relatively high, while the asset exemption should be relatively low. If hyperbolic
discounters tend to have a higher ratio of income to assets than rational consumers, then
this policy prescription benefits them. Similarly, an increase in the amount of debt
discharged benefits hyperbolic discounters more than it benefits rational consumers, since
hyperbolic discounters have more debt. And reductions in bankruptcy costs or the
bankruptcy punishment also benefit hyperbolic discounters more than rational consumers,
because hyperbolic discounters file for bankruptcy more often.
        Overall, an economically efficient bankruptcy system should have a fairly low
asset exemption level, since a higher asset exemption mainly benefits well-off bankruptcy
filers. It should also ha ve low bankruptcy costs and a low bankruptcy punishment, since
low values of these variables provide additional consumption insurance to the worst-off
bankrupts. The income exemption should be higher if debtors are more risk averse or if
debtors’ work effort responds more strongly to the exemption level. Bankruptcy policy
should be more pro-debtor if hyperbolic discounters wish to control their borrowing
behavior.
          However a problem with bankruptcy policy is that it is not very effective in
reducing borrowing by hyperbolic discounters, since these debtors are likely to ignore the
provisions of bankruptcy law until after they are in financial distress. This means that, if

(They did not examine the effects of making the bankruptcy system more or less pro-debtor.)


                                                                                              25
the goal is to reduce borrowing by hyperbolic debtors, a more effective approach would
be to focus on lenders’ incentives. Under current U.S. bankruptcy law, lenders have an
inefficiently high incentive to lend to borrowers who already are heavily indebted, since
all unsecured loans are treated equally in bankruptcy. One approach to reform is to vary
the treatment of particular loans in bankruptcy depending on when they were made and
how indebted individuals were at the time the loan was made—an approach used in
French bankruptcy procedure. A pre-determined debt schedule could be adopted based
on the borrowing behavior of rational consumers at given levels of income and other
characteristics. All debt in excess of the scheduled amount would be discharged in
bankruptcy and, if a debtor had multiple loans from different creditors, then loans would
be ranked in chronological order and the most recent loans would be discharged first.
This approach would discourage lenders from lending more to hyperbolic discounters
than they lend to otherwise similar rational consumers, since the additional loans would
be discharged in bankruptcy more often.


         Coordinating Bankruptcy with Other Policy Tools
         Both bankruptcy law and banking regulations affect credit markets, so that when
the bankruptcy system shifts in a pro-creditor direction, other types of regulation could be
changed so as to provide additional protection to debtors. A number of researchers have
proposed changes in banking regulations and truth- in-lending laws that would reduce the
supply of credit to the most vulnerable debtors.
         Ronald Mann (2006) discusses a number of possible changes in regulation of
credit card loans. One proposal would require that purchases made using credit cards be
subject to a surcharge, which would encourage consumers to use cash rather than credit.
Another is to restrict or ban rewards programs that encourage spending by credit card
holders. Another would be to require lenders to raise their minimum monthly payment
levels, so that debtors would be required to repay more of the amount owed each month.
This would both reduce the amount of interest that debtors pay and force debtors to
reduce their consumption before they accumulate as much debt. 15 Credit bureaus could


15
  Federal regulators do not directly regulate credit card loan terms, but they issue “guidances” to lenders
that are generally followed. In 2005, a guidance was issued recommending that credit card lenders raise


                                                                                                         26
also be prohibited from selling information about individual consumers’ credit records
without their consent, which would reduce or eliminate the practice of lenders mailing
out unsolicited card offers. Finally, the marketing of credit cards to minors and college
students could be more tightly restricted.
        Truth-in- lending laws could also be extended to require that consumers receive
additional information concerning their credit card loans. Senator Christopher Dodd
introduced legislation in 2004 that would require credit card lenders to inform consumers
each month how long it will take to repay their loans if they make only the minimum
payment. Mann (2006) proposed that credit card issuers be required to give consumers
additional information each time they use their cards; the information could include
whether the purchase will trigger a penalty for exceeding the credit limit and how much
interest consumers will pay if the purchase adds to their credit card debt.
        Finally, Posner (1995), Rougeau (1996), Bar-Gill (2004), Peterson (2004), and
Mann (2006) consider abolishing the Marquette decision and allowing states to re-
introduce usury limits on interest rates (although they do not all go so far as to advocate
this change ). While binding usury limits would reduce the amount that hyperbolic
discounters can borrow, they have the drawback that they could drive hyperbolic
discounters and other risky debtors to borrow from “payday” lenders, pawnbrokers, and
rent-to-own stores, which charge annual interest rates in the range of 400 to 500 percent.
        The unifying theme of these proposals is that when bankruptcy is caused by
rational borrowers who suffer adverse events, the issues are fairly straightforward to
analyze and to resolve. But when bankruptcy results from overborrowing on the part of
hyperbolic discounters that eventually grows into severe financial distress, just moving
the rules of bankruptcy in a pro-creditor direction is at best a very partial answer.
Instead, an appropriate policy response to this kind of overborrowing must both
discourage hyperbolic discounters from borrowing too much and penalize lenders who
take advantage of hyperbolic discounters’ tendency to overborrow.




their monthly minimum payments so that negative amortization could not occur. Most issuers responded
by increasing their minimum payment levels to the previous month’s interest and fees plus one percent of
the principle. See Mann (2006).


                                                                                                      27
                                         References
Ashcraft, Adam, Astrid A. Dick, and Donald P. Morgan, “The Bankruptcy Abuse
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act: Means-Testing or Mean Spirited? working
paper (2006).

Ausubel, Lawrence M. “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” The
American Economic Review, vol. 81:1, pp. 50-81 (1991).

Ausubel, Lawrence M., “Adverse Selection in the Credit Card Market,” University of
Maryland working paper, June 1999.

Ausubel, Lawrence M., “Credit Card Defaults, Credit Card Profits, and Bankruptcy,”
American Bankruptcy Law Journal, vol. 71, p. 249 (1997).

Bar-Gill, Oren. “Seduction by Plastic,” Northwestern Law Review, vol. 98, p.1373
(2004).

Barron, John M., Michael E. Staten, and Stephanie M. Wilshusen, “The Impact of Casino
Gambling on Personal Bankruptcy Filing Rates,” Contemporary Economic Policy
(2002).

Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Richard Hynes, “Bankruptcy exemptions and the market for
Mortgage Loans,” J. of Law and Economics, vol. 42, pp. 809-830 (1999).

Caplovitz, David, Consumers in Trouble: A Study of Debtors in Default. New York:
The Free Press (1974).

Coleman, Peter J., Debtors and Creditors in America. State Historical Society of
Wisconsin (1974).

Domowitz, Ian, and Sartain, Robert L., “Determinants of the Consumer Bankruptcy
Decision,” J. of Finance, vol. 54(1), pp. 403-20 (1999).

Dranove, David, and Michael L. Millenson, “Medical Bankruptcy: Myth versus Fact,”
Health Affairs (online edition), vol. 25(2): w74-w83 (2006).

Durkin, Thomas, “Credit Cards: Use and Consumer Attitudes, 1970-2000,” Federal
Reserve Bulletin, pp. 623-634 (September 2000).

Efrat, Rafael. “Global Trends in Personal Bankruptcy,” American Bankruptcy Law
Journal, vol. 76, pp. 81-110 (2002).

Elias, Stephen. 2006. The New Bankruptcy: Will it Work for You? Nolo Press (2006).

Ellis, Diane. “The Effect of Consumer Interest Rate Deregulation on Credit Card
Volumes, Charge-Offs, and the Personal Bankruptcy Rate,” Bank Trends, No. 98-05


                                                                                     28
(1998).

Evans, David S., and Richard Schmalensee. Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution
in Buying and Borrowing. Cambridge: MIT Press (1999).

Fan, Wei, and Michelle J. White. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of
Entrepreneurial Activity.” Journal of Law & Economics, vol. 46:2, pp. 543-568 (2003).

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White. “The Household Bankruptcy Decision,”
American Economic Review, vol. 92:3, pp. 708-718 (2002).

Flynn, Ed, and Gordon Bermant. “Bankruptcy by the Numbers: Credit Card Debt in
Chapter 7 Cases,” American Bankruptcy Institute Journal. vol. 22, p. 20 (Dec. 2003/Jan.
2004).

Flynn, Ed, and Gordon Bermant. “Bankruptcy by the Numbers: A Tale of Two
Chapters: Financial Data,” American Bankruptcy Institute Journal, vol. 21, p. 20 (2002).

Gropp, Reint, J. Karl Scholz and Michelle J. White, “Personal Bankruptcy and Credit
Supply and Demand,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112, pp. 217-251 (1997).

Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles, “An Empirical Analysis of Personal
Bankruptcy and Delinquency,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 15(1), pp. 319-47
(2002).

Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data,” Quarterly J. of Econ.
vol. 117, pp. 149-? (2002).

Himmelstein, David U., Elizabeth Warren, Deborah Thorne, and Steffie Woolhandler,
“Illness and Injury as Contributors to Bankruptcy,” Health Affairs (online edition), vol.
24, pp. w5-63-w5-73 (Feb. 2, 2005).

Johnson, Kathleen W., “Recent Developments in the Credit Card Market and the
Financial Obligations Ratio,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, pp. 473-486 (Autumn 2005).

Kilborn, Jason J., “La Responsabilisation de l’Economie: What the United States Can
Learn from the New French Law on Consumer Indebtedness,” Michigan Journal of
International Law, vol. 26, p. 619 (2005).

Kilborn, Jason J., “The Innovative German Approach to Consumer Debt Relief:
Revolutionary Changes in German Law, and Surprising Lessons for the United States,”
Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business, vol. 24, p. 257 (2004).

Laibson, David, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly J. of Econ.,
vol.112, pp.443-477 (1997).


                                                                                            29
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, “A Debt Puzzle,” in
Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of
Edmund S. Phelps (Philippe Aghion et al, eds.) (2003).

Lin, Emily Y., and Michelle J. White, “Bankruptcy and the Market for Mortga ge and
Home Improvement Loans,“ Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 50:1, pp. 138-162 (2001).

Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt, “Accounting for the Rise in
Consumer Bankruptcies,” working paper, (2006).

Mann, Bruce H., Republic of Debtors, Harvard University Press (2002).

Mann, Ronald J., Charging Ahead, Cambridge University Press (2006).

Mann, Ronald J. “Bankruptcy Reform and the ‘Sweat Box’ of Credit Card Debt.” Univ.
of Illinois Law Review, vol. 2007:1, 375-404 (2007).

Martin, Nathalie. J.K. Lasser’s The New Bankruptcy Law & You. Wiley & Sons (2006).

Moss, David A., and Gibbs A. Johnson. “The Rise of Consumer Bankruptcy:
Evolution, Revolution, or Both? ” American Bankruptcy Law Journal, vol. 73, p. 311
(1999).

National Foundation for Credit Counseling,” Consumer Counseling and Education
under BAPCPA, (2006).

Peterson, Christopher L., Taming the Sharks: Towards a Cure for the High-Cost Credit
Market. Akron, Ohio: University of Akron Press (2004).

Posner, Eric A., “Contract Law in the Welfare State: A Defense of the Unconscionability
Doctrine, Usury Laws, and Related Limitations on the Freedom to Contract,” J. of Legal
Studies. vol. 24, pp. 283-319 (1995).

Rougeau, Vincent D., “Rediscovering Usury: An Argument for Legal Controls on Credit
Card Interest Rates,” Colorado Law Rev., vol. 67, p. 9 (1996).

Staten, Michael, “The Impact of Post-Bankruptcy Credit on the Number of Personal
Bankruptcies,” working paper 58, Credit Research Center, Krannert School of
Management, Pursue University (1993).

Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren and Jay Lawrence Westbrook. As We Forgive Our
Debtors. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, (1989).

Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren and Jay Lawrence Westbrook. The Fragile Middle
Class: Americans in Debt. Yale University Press (2000).


                                                                                     30
Wang, Hung-Jen, and Michelle J. White. “An Optimal Personal Bankruptcy System and
Proposed Reforms,” Journal of Legal Studies, vol. XXIX:1, pp. 255-286 (2000).

White, Michelle J., “Bankruptcy Law, ” in Handbook of Law and Economics, edited by
A.M. Polinsky and Steven Shavell. Elsevier, 2007. NBER working paper 11536, July
2005.

White, Michelle J., “Why Don't More Households File for Bankruptcy? ” Journal of
Law, Economics, and Organization, vol. 14:2, pp. 205-231 (1998).

Zhu, Ning, “Household Consumption and Personal Bankruptcy, ” working paper, UC
Davis (2006).

Ziegel, Jacob, “Philosophy and Design of Contemporary Consumer Bankruptcy Systems:
A Canada-United States Comparison,” Osgoode Hall Law Journal, vol. 27, p. 205
(1999).

Ziegel, Jacob, “What Can the United States Learn from the Canadian Means Testing
System?” Univ. of Illinois Law Review, vol. 2007:1, pp. 195-240 (2007).




                                                                                   31
                                Table 1:
                   Non-Business Bankruptcy Filings and
                   Consumer Revolving Debt in the U.S.,
                               1980-2006



                                    Non-       Consumer
                                  business      revolving
                                 bankruptcy      debt per
                                   filings     household
                                               (in 2006$)
                        1980       287,000        1,664
                        1985       341,000       2,702
                        1990       718,000       3,943
                        1995       874,000       5,927
                        2000      1,217,000      7,661
                        2001      1,452,000      7,782
                        2002      1,539,000      7,786
                        2003      1,625,000      7,739
                        2004      1,563,000      7,742
                        2005      2,039,000      7,771
                        2006       598,000       7,856


Notes: Bankruptcy filings in the U.S. may be by an individual or a married couple.
Bankruptcy filings are taken from
http://www.abiworld.org/AM/AMTemplate.cfm?Section=Home&TEMPLATE=/CM/Co
ntentDisplay.cfm&CONTENTID=35631.




                                                                                32
                             Table 2:
       U.S. Personal Bankruptcy Law Before versus After the
  Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005
               Types of         Asset         Income       Percent of   Repayment    Cost of         Bank-
               debt not       exemption      exemption       non-         period      bank-         ruptcy
              discharged         ($)            ($)         exempt                   ruptcy*        punish-
                                                            income                                   ment
                                                              that
                                                            debtors
                                                             keep
Pre-
BAPCPA
Chapter 7        secured     varies across   unlimited        N/A         N/A          $600       repeat
              debt, taxes,   states; some                                                         filing not
              some credit        have                                                             allowed
                card debt      unlimited                                                          for 6 years
                   not        homestead
              discharged      exemptions
Chapter 13    more types       unlimited     depends on        0        3-5 years     $1,600      repeat
                 of debt                     repayment                                            filing not
              discharged                        plan                                              allowed
               than under                                                                         for 6
                Chapter 7
                                                                                                  months

BAPCPA
Chapter 7      less debt     same as pre-    unlimited        N/A         N/A         $1,800 -    repeat
              discharged      BAPCPA,                                               $2,800 plus   filing not
               than pre-     but with new                                           the cost of   allowed
              BAPCPA          restrictions                                          educational   for 8 years
                               on when                                               mandates
                              debtors can                                             and tax
                                use high                                            preparation
                              homestead
                              exemptions
Chapter 13     same as         unlimited        sum of      100%**       5 years     $2,700 -        repeat
               Chapter 7                      three sets                            $3,700 plus    filing not
                                                  of                                the cost of   allowed for
                                             allowances                             educational     2 years
                                              (see text)                             mandates
                                                                                      and tax
                                                                                    preparation
*Under BAPCPA, debtors’ are required to use all of their non-exempt income to repay,
but income is defined as debtors’ average income during the six- month period prior to
filing. This means that the obligation to repay is a fixed dollar amount, so that debtors
keep 100% of their income above the exemption.
Sources: Elias (2006) and Martin (2006).



                                                                                            33
          Table 3: Personal Bankruptcy Law in Other Countries
             Types of        Asset           Income       Percent of    Repayment      Debtors’        Bank-
                debt       exemption        exemption         non-        period        cost of       ruptcy
            discharged                                       exempt                     bank-         punish-
                                                            income                      ruptcy         ment
                                                               that
                                                            debtors
                                                               keep
France         all debt      modest          $6,000 for    falls from   8-10 years         0          discharge
           remaining at    household         singles to   95% to 0%                                  contingent
           the end of the     goods         $15,000 for       when                                        on
             repayment       exempt;         family of       income                                    debtors’
               period;    no homestead        three per     exceeds                                   efforts to
                           exemption            year      $20,000 for                                find/hold a
                                                            single or                                    job
                                                          $23,000 for
                                                           family of
                                                               four
Germany        all debt    modest           $21,000 for    0 in years     6 years       inter-        discharge
            remaining at  household         couples, up   1-3, 10% in                  mediate       contingent
           the end of the   goods               to        year 4 and                                       on
             repayment     exempt;          $38,000 for      15% in                                    debtors’
            period; 25% no homestead         families       year 5 if                                  effort to
             discharged   exemption          per year         “good                                  find/hold a
              for “good                                    behavior”                                    job; no
              behavior”                                                                               discharge
                                                                                                     unless the
                                                                                                        debtor
                                                                                                     completes
                                                                                                     repayment
                                                                                                          plan
Canada      unsecured       homestead       $21,000 for      50%        9 months to     $1,600          cannot
             and some       exemptions         single                     3 years                      borrow,
           secured debt     vary across       person;                                                manage a
            discharged      provinces;      $40,000 for                                               business,
                           the largest is   families of
                                                                                                     hold some
                             $40,000            four
                                                                                                        public
                                                                                                       offices
England        most         household       “reasonable    50-70%         up to 3        low for        cannot
and          unsecured      goods and         domestic                     years      liquidation;     borrow,
Wales       and secured      pensions        needs” of                                 £1,800 for    manage a
               debts         exempt;          bankrupt                                 repayment      business,
            discharged;     homestead        and family                                 plan         hold some
            not student    exemption is
             loans and        £1,000                                                                    public
            debt arising                                                                             offices for
            from fraud                                                                                 3 years



                                                                                            34
Notes: France, Germany and Canada require that debtors negotiate with creditors and
attempt to arrive at a voluntary repayment plan before filing for bankruptcy. In both
France and Germany, judges can impose repayment plans if a majority of creditors
consents. Sources: Ziegel (1999) and (2007), Kilborn (2004) and (2005),
www.bankruptcycanada.com, and
www.insolvency.gov.uk/pdfs/guidanceleafletspdf/guidetobankruptcy.pdf.




                                                                                        35
