                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       MULTINATIONALS AND THE CREATION OF CHINESE TRADE LINKAGES

                                        Deborah L. Swenson

                                        Working Paper 13271
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13271


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Deborah L. Swenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Multinationals and the Creation of Chinese Trade Linkages
Deborah L. Swenson
NBER Working Paper No. 13271
July 2007
JEL No. F1,F23

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the relationship between multinational firm proximity and the formation of new
export connections by private Chinese exporters between 1997 and 2003. The results indicate that
growth in the presence of multinational firms is positively associated with the formation of new trade
by local Chinese firms. Further exploration suggests that information spillovers may drive this result,
as the positive association due to own-industry multinational presence is particularly strong in contexts
where information improvements may be the most helpful. Thus, it appears that a growing presence
of multinational firms may enhance the export capabilities of local domestic firms.

Deborah L. Swenson
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
deswenson@ucdavis.edu
Introduction


       Many countries actively promote foreign investment within their borders

expecting to reap the benefits arising from the presence of multinational firms.1 One

particular benefit that economists have studied is how proximity to multinational firms

affects local firms’ export capabilities. For example, Aitken, Hanson and Harrison’s

(1997) work on Mexican firms suggests that proximity to multinational firms increased

Mexican firms’ export probabilities. However, while work on UK firms by Greenaway,

Sousa and Wakelin (2004) and Chinese provinces by Ma (2004) also find a positive

association between multinational firm presence and export probabilities or export

volumes, a positive effect is not uncovered in all contexts.

       The fact that multinational presence is not always associated with elevated export

performance may not be surprising. As Aitken and Harrison (1999) point out, the net

effect of multinational presence on local firms may be negative if the effects of

intensified product market competition outweigh the spillover benefits of improved firm

productivity among the local firms. Multinational firm activity might also harm private

firms if the multinational firms’ demands for workers and other local factors drive up

operating costs for firms in the area.

       Most treatments of export spillovers from multinational firms study whether the

export probabilities or export volumes of local firms are enhanced by proximity to

multinational firms. In contrast, this paper examines another potential channel for export

spillovers: whether proximity to multinational firms is associated with an expansion in

the export relationships of host country exporters. This dimension of trade relationships

1
 Blomstrom and Kokko (1998), and Navaretti and Venables (2004), and Gorg and Greenaway (2004)
provide comprehensive surveys of host country benefits and harms from multinational activity.


                                             1
is important, since it addresses whether location near multinational firms enables local

firms to increase the density of their trade networks, or the size of their newly introduced

transactions. Such diversity is of interest, since there is a growing appreciation that

increased export diversity may contribute to a country’s economic growth.2 In addition,

Bernard, Redding and Schott’s (2006) investigation of firm dynamics suggests that

industries realize productivity improvements through firms’ reallocation of activity

across products.

        To study how the growing presence of multinational firms affected the creation of

new Chinese trading relationships, this paper studies Chinese trade data for 1997 to 2003

to learn observe the connection between the presence of multinational firms and the

introduction of new HS8 product exports at the city level. These data provide an unusual

opportunity to examine the relationship between multinational firm activities and the

ability of local firms to increase their export connections. First, since the sample period

includes China’s entrance to the WTO, increased certainty about the international

treatment of China’s exports may have resulted in a more rapid formation of trading

relationships than is typical for countries that have already attained WTO membership.

As a result, the data set is likely to provide an especially large number of new trade

transactions that allow one to identify spillover effects from multinational firms. Second,

since China managed to attract an unusually large volume of foreign investment in the

1990’s and early 2000’s, there is sizable variation in the evolution of multinational

variables at the city-hS2 industry level, that again facilitates identification of spillover

effects to exports.

2
  See Feenstra and Kee (2004). In addition, since new product introductions represent an expansion in the
diversity of products sold, they enable a country to expand exports without depressing the country’s terms
of trade [Kang (2004)].


                                                    2
         While there is a large literature on the effects of multinational firms on host

economies, this paper is the first to examine the association between the presence of

multinational firms and the growth in the product and destination diversity of local

exporters.3 The results indicate that private Chinese firms and entrepreneurs were indeed

more likely to form new trading relationships or to expand their range of traded products

when the number of proximate multinationals increased. For China, the analysis implies

that the actual change in own-industry multinational presence (size) between 1997 and

2002 was associated with a 2.8% (2.5) increase in new private export value between 1998

and 2003.

         In addition, while it is well understood that multinational firm presence may bring

both positive and negative spillovers to local firms, this paper exploits the fine data

disaggregation to better understand the sources of multinational spillovers, with a

particular emphasis on evidence regarding information spillovers.4 To test whether the

results support the idea that multinational firm presence helps local firms to learn about

exporting I test whether the positive association is larger in contexts where information is

the most important. This appears to be the case, as the estimated effects of multinational

firm presence are largest for differentiated goods and for trade growth in China’s interior.

In addition, further support is found in the result that contact with foreign invested

enterprises, which arguably provide the most information-rich form of contact,                            is

associated with greater increases in trade formation than is related to other forms of


3
  The fine city-industry disaggregation of the data are used to identify the connection between multinational
presence and local firm exports. In this sense, this paper takes the approach of many other authors who
improve their identification of spillovers from foreign investment, by specifying the types of multinational
linkages, or by studying data disagregated to the level at which the spillovers operate. See for example,
Javorcik (2004), Kneller and Pisu (2005), Ruane and Sutherland (2004) or Keller and Yeaple (2003).
4
  The idea that local firms may learn from multinational firms is also supported by Haskel, Pereira and
Slaughter’s (2002) discovery that British firm productivity is enhanced by contact with multinational firms.


                                                     3
multinational contact. Taken together, these results support that idea that multinationals,

by acting as a conduit of information, facilitate international economic integration.




2. Multinational contacts and local Export Behavior

       Improved access to accurate information can help explain developments in the

global integration of labor and product markets. Thus, if the presence of multinational

firms provides informational spillovers which enable local firms to learn more about

market opportunities in foreign locations, contacts with multinational firms may enhance

the export capabilities of local firms. To test this idea, and to motivate the empirical

analysis, I reinterpret Rauch and Trindade’s (2003) model of globalization to form

predictions about the effects of multinational contacts on the formation of new export

relationships by local Chinese firms and entrepreneurs.

       To begin, consider a Chinese firm that is interested in initiating new product

exports, or in expanding the locations to which it exports. In either case, since the

formation of a new export relationship requires the Chinese manager to identify a foreign

buyer, the formation of the new trade relationship involves costly search. For example,

while the Chinese firm can observe customer demand for radios in Britain, the Chinese

firm requires further information if it is to learn whether it can profitably sell its variety

of radios to British purchasers. Further, while the Chinese firm may possess enough

information to avoid introductions with the worst-suited, lowest-profit distribution

partners, search can be modeled as yielding a single introduction within the Chinese




                                              4
firms’ search range.5 The Chinese exporter forges an export relationship with the foreign

buyer as long as the expected profit from the sale exceeds the Chinese firm’s reservation

value, which is defined by outside opportunities in the Chinese market.

         This form of search uncertainty in Rauch and Trindade’s (2003) framework

explains how North-South wage differentials may endure even when labor quality is

identical across countries. In this reinterpretation of their model, search uncertainty can

also explain why some profit-generating export transactions fail to commence.                               In

particular, the Chinese firm may turn down a profitable foreign sales opportunity, if the

Chinese firm has better sales opportunities in the Chinese market. In other cases, an ideal

buyer may exist, but the failure of the search to reveal the potential partner, leaves

profitable but undiscovered transactions unrealized. Finally, the sales associated with

new partnerships may be small if the Chinese firm locates a viable buyer that is

nonetheless inferior to the ideal, but undiscovered, partner.

         Information-driven globalization can be represented as a reduction in search

uncertainty, which enables firms to narrow their search, thus excluding a greater

percentage of the least desirable matches.                In the case of private Chinese firms or

entrepreneurs, the expanding presence of multinational firms in China may have provided

such information if observation of the product mix and product destinations of

multinational firm exporters helped local firms learn about the types of products, and

market locations where they could sell their products for the highest profit.6 Information


5
  To conceptualize search uncertainty, Rauch and Trindade consider a setting in which partners are evenly
distributed on the unit circle, with the optimal partner located at position 1/2. Search provides the random
introduction to a partner in the range [1/2-k/2, 1/2+k2]. Thus search uncertainty is parameterized by k {0 ≤
k ≤ 1}. If k = 1 the search is equivalent to a random draw from entire unit circle, while for k = 0 there is no
informational uncertainty and the search is guaranteed to identify the ideal partner.
6
  The scope for learning spillovers is suggested by Brambilla’s (2006) discovery that multinational firms in
China introduced twice as many new product varieties as did domestic firms between 1998 and 2000.


                                                      5
spillovers may have also occurred if employees brought information about foreign market

opportunities with them when they left the multinational firms to take a job with one of

the local Chinese firms.7 Finally, local firms may have gained information due to the

growing presence of multinational firms, even if they had no direct contact with

multinational firms. For example, if the growing presence of multinational firms in a

Chinese city drew an increasing number of trade agents to the city, the local Chinese

firms may have gained information through the influx of agents who came to serve the

new multinationals, rather than any direct contact with multinational firms. Regardless of

the mechanism, if the presence of multinational firms refines the search process, the

expected probability of finding an acceptable match increases since the random draw

originates from a narrower interval that is more tightly centered around the set of

acceptable partner draws. Further, if better information improves the probability of

locating partner that is closer to the “ideal”, newly introduced transactions may be larger

in size.8

        Nonetheless, while multinational firms may bring informational spillovers that

help facilitate the formation of export relationships by Chinese firms, increased

multinational firm activity may bring other effects that discourage the expansion of local

firm exports. First, if multinational firms intensify competition in product markets, they

may reduce export opportunities for local firms. Second, if multinational expansion

elevates demand for labor and factors in the Chinese cities where they operate,

multinational firms may increase local production costs, thus depressing the ability of

7
  Rodrik (2006) provides examples of such contacts in China.
8
  Further work by Rauch and Watson (2003) demonstrates how information improvements may increase
transaction size. Besedes and Prusa (2006) find support for this idea in U.S. trade data. Similarly, if
multinational proximity enables firms to learn more about buyer reliability, improved information may
enable a larger fraction of new transactions to start at a larger size.


                                                  6
local Chinese firms to export profitably. Overall, the net effect of multinational presence

will reflect the relative magnitude of the positive and negative spillovers to local firm

export capabilities.

       To more directly test whether the association between multinational presence and

the trade of local firms exhibited evidence of informational spillovers, the regressions

investigate whether the positive association with multinational presence was particularly

strong in information-dependent sectors where the formation of trade relationships

requires high-quality information.



3. Estimation and Data

       To examine the relationship between multinational firm (MNC) proximity and the

new export activity of local Chinese firms, I use the following regression specification:

(1) VNewhct = α + β1*OwnInd_MNChc,t-1 + β2*OtherInd_MNChc,t-1 + γ*X + ε hct

The dependent variable, VNewhct, is the value of new HS8 product trade transactions by

private Chinese firms within an HS2 industry, where h represents the HS2 industry, c the

Chinese city of origin, and t the year.

        The key regressors of interest, OwnInd_MNChc,t-1 and OtherInd_MNChc,t-1,

represent the level of multinational activity in the city, by multinationals in the same HS2

industry, and by multinationals in other HS2 industries, respectively. In both cases,

multinational activity is measured by the MNC export activities, where the level of export

activity is measured either by the value of MNC exports and or by the number of distinct

MNC export transactions in the HS2 industry.




                                             7
          The error term is assumed to have two components. The first, Ψhc is a city -HS2

industry fixed effect, while the second ηhct is an iid error term.

(2) εhct = Ψhc + ηhct

The inclusion of City-HS2 Industry fixed effects is especially important for this analysis,

since it is easy to imagine that there are a number of unobserved, and potentially

unobservable factors, that make some cities well-suited for the export of some industry

outputs and not for others.

          The effects of multinational contact are identified from within variation, as the

use of fixed effects removes time-invariant factors that attracted FDI and stimulated new

private exports.     While the validity of this approach relies on the assumption that

comparative advantage or investment attractiveness at the city-HS2 industry level was

static, this assumption may not be too far from the truth since the estimation window is

only six years in length.

          An instrumental variables (IV) strategy could deal with the issue of time-varying

shocks.     However, the implementation of a valid IV strategy faces a number of

complications. First, while policy variables representing city efforts at promoting foreign

investment are an ideal instrument, these variables can only be easily attained for the

cross section of cities. As a result, it is not possible to use the policy variables in a panel

IV setting which has city-HS2 fixed effects, since any time-invariant instruments are

dropped in the first stage. Unfortunately, while the analysis could be performed under

the assumption that the error component Ψhc is a random effect, the validity of the

random effects approach is rejected by the Hausman test. Further, abandoning the panel

format which includes city-HS2 industry controls would be problematic since it would be




                                               8
difficult to include a sufficiently broad set of regressors to capture underlying differences

in city- industry abilities.9 Alternatively, if other-industry foreign investment is used as

an instrument, it is possible to use fixed-effects panel methods since MNC activity is

time-varying on the city-industry dimension. 10                However, this instrument is less than

ideal in resolving concerns about endogeneity, since it is easy to imagine many

circumstances where a shock to a local economy, or a change in local regulations would

spur both private exports and foreign investment.                    For this reason I include policy

variables as instruments, and discuss results from random-effects panel regressions in the

robustness checks. However, while IV results are mentioned the robustness checks, the

robustness checks focus instead on other strategies for controlling for time-varying

shocks. A more developed focus on IV strategies is set aside for future work.



3.1 Data

         The primary data for this project are based on Chinese exports of products at the

HS8 level of disaggregation, as reported in the Customs General Administration of the

People’s Republic of China for 1997-2003.11 In addition to information on the Chinese

city-district of origin and country destination of these exports, these data include

information on the ownership type of the transactions, which enable one to distinguish

transactions that were controlled by foreign versus Chinese-owned entities. Finally,

while a 4-digit code distinguishes the city origin of Chinese exports, there is a fifth digit

9
  The relevance of city-industry effects is demonstrated in Table 2, since the coefficient on multinational
contact is much smaller when city-industry fixed effects are used. Due to the diversity of industries and
span of cities, it would be difficult to identify and collect a set of economic controls that adequately control
for cross-city differences in sector abilities. Further, even if such data were available, economic data on
Chinese cities is available for only a small set of cities in the data sample.
10
   Head and Ries (1996) find that the location choices of foreign multinationals in China responded not
only to the location of local Chinese firms, but also to the location decisions of previous foreign firms.
11
    These data were used under license to the CID at the University of California, Davis.


                                                       9
in the geographic codes, which enables one to more finely distinguish the location of

export within a city, thus identifying the activities of different exporters.

         The dependent variable VNewhct is the total value of all new HS8 export

transactions within an HS2 industry h, from city c in year t. Since collection of these data

at the HS8 level of disaggregation began in 1997, it is possible to generate count

measures for new trade transactions for the years 1998 to 2003. New private transactions

arose for two different reasons. First, new transactions developed when private firms in a

city expanded the number of countries to which they exported their products.                            For

example, if a city exported a particular HS8 product to Germany in 1999, and then was

observed exporting the product to the U.S. in 2000 for the first time, this expansion in

destinations was defined to be a new trade transaction.12 New trade was also generated

when Chinese firms within a city started to export an HS8 product that had not been

exported anywhere in the previous year. Table 1 presents summary statistics on the

frequency of new private trades, and on the prevalence of multinational contacts. In the

full sample, the average number of new trades created at the city-industry level was 6.55

per year. Of those new trades, 1.36 were new product exports, while the remainder

represented exports to new country destinations of products that were exported to other

locations in the previous year.

         After the new private transactions were identified, the transactions values for the

new transactions were aggregated to form a balanced panel whose dimensions are city,

HS2 industry and year. All city-industry pairs were included, as long as the city-industry

had at least one non-zero observation for multinational activity or new trade during the

12
  While new private trade transactions are defined with reference to the previous year, it is possible that
such a connection existed in year t-2 or earlier. Further exploration of alternative definitions of new trade
based on earlier years activities will become possible when the time dimension of the data panel expands.


                                                     10
sample period.13 As a result, the dependent variable VNewhct will grow from one year to

the next if the size of newly introduced transactions grew in size and/or the number of

new transactions increased. The majority of the results are based on the observation of

new trade value. However, since new trade can increase due to expansion on different

dimensions, I examine the frequency of new private transaction introductions in the

robustness checks.

        To capture the economic influence of multinational firms I create a set of

variables that measure the activities of multinational firms.                       First, to measure

multinational presence, I created a multinational variable that is a synthetic count of

“firms”, where firms are defined by each unique combination of the geographic, regime-

type, and firm-type identifiers in the data set.14 Thus, OwnInd_MNChc,t-1 is the count of

“firms” exporting HS8 products within an HS2 industry from city c. Such a measure will

overestimate the number of multinational firms when multinational firms ship more than

one product. At the same time, such a measure conforms to the typical definition of a

firm in most theoretical treatments, where each firm sells a single product variety.

Further, it could be argued that when multinational firms are active in more than one

product area, they are providing relevant information on more than one type of activity,

and thus are providing information on activities that might otherwise be provided by

multiple firms.      Finally, since the information on multinational contact is based on

product level export transactions data that are reported by multinational firms, the

regressions are also run using an alternative measure of multinational firm activities
13
    The sample contains information on 98 HS2 industries and 504 cities. Of the 49,392 possible HS2-city
combinations, 21,677 met the criteria of non-zero activity.
14
    Feenstra and Hanson (2005) note that even though the operational identifier is HS8 product code for
each transaction, once the data are broken down to the HS8 product- city- zone – ownership- processing
regime level of disaggregation, this data set begins to provide information that is close in nature to that
available in firm-level data sets.


                                                    11
which is based on the size or volume of exports emanating from multinationals within

Chinese cities. In this case, the variable OwnInd_MNChc,t-1 is defined as the value of all

exports of multinational firms from a Chinese city within an HS2 industry classification.

       In the full sample, the average count of own-industry multinational contacts was

7.7.15 While the number of multinational contacts and the number of new trades for the

average HS2-city observation are very similar, the value of new trade transactions was

considerably smaller than the value of established multinational trade relationships. In

this sample the value of new private trade transactions at the HS2-city level was only

2.78% as large as the value of trade by established multinational firms.

       Multinational contacts in other HS2 industries may also provide information

spillovers, such as country-specific information about buyers that is of use to all Chinese

firms regardless of industry. To account for multinational firm activity in other HS2

industries in the city, OtherInd_MNChc,t-1, measures the activities of other HS2 industry

multinational “firms” within a city. As with the variable for own-industry MNC contact,

this measure is measured both by the presence, or count of other HS2 “firm” contacts, as

well as by size, where size reflects the total export volume of multinational firms in the

city, in other HS2 categories.

       Since private Chinese firms may need time to react to information learned from

multinational presence, each of these variables are lagged one period. The use of lags is

also beneficial since it ensures that the multinational variables are predetermined relative

to the dependent variable.       Finally, the regressions include additional measures of




15
   Between 1997 and 2002, the number of own-industry contacts, which are used to explain new
transactions for 1998 to 2003, rose from 150,586 to 193,920.


                                             12
economic activity at the province or city level. In each case, these data were collected

from multiple years of the China Statistical Yearbook.



3.2 Results

       Equation (1), which examines how new trade volumes were related to the

presence of multinational firms, is estimated both by OLS with a full set of HS2 industry

and city dummies, and again by a panel regression that includes HS2-city fixed effects.

The baseline estimates which are displayed in Table 2 establish two results. First, the

estimates uniformly show that a growing presence of own-industry multinationals was

associated with expanding volumes of new private trade.          Second, the regressions

uncover a positive association between other-industry multinational activity and the value

of new private trade.     For each of these results, the positive association between

multinational firm contact and the value of new private exports is observed whether

multinational proximity is measured by the size or number of multinational export

contacts.

       To compare the effects of multinational contact as measured by size with the

effects of multinational contact as measured by presence, columns (3) and (6) in Table 2

include both measures of multinational contact. The new estimates indicate that the

volume of new private exports is positively related to the presence of multinational firms,

and negatively related to the size of local multinational firm activity. The dichotomous

effect of multinational exposure suggests that the presence of multinational contacts may

be helpful in generating information spillovers, while the size of multinational contacts

may exert a negative influence due to the role of large multinational operations in




                                            13
intensifying product market competition, or in creating congestion in local factor

markets. Nonetheless, evaluated at the average level of multinational size and presence

in the sample, the results suggest that net effect of multinational proximity was positive.

        The controls in the baseline regression are all highly significant. 16                      When

specification (1) is estimated by OLS, the F-tests for the joint significance of the industry

and for the city fixed effects are significant at the one-percent level. In addition, the time

trend and the gross value of industrial output (GVIO) at the provincial level are similarly

significant.

        The last control for provincial economic activity is perhaps the most important,

since it allows one to conclude that the positive association between the expansion of

multinational firm activity and the subsequent expansion of new trade value is driven by

more than a simple increase general economic activity or productive opportunities at the

provincial level.17 However, since the regression measures how city-level changes in

multinational presence are related to changes in city-level trade, we repeat the baseline

regression in Table 3 using city-level GVIO, rather than the provincial measure. In so

doing, the number of observations declines, since this data is only available for 31 cities.

Notably, replacing provincial GVIO with city GVIO has no effect on the general results:

the coefficient magnitudes for own-industry multinational contact in Table 3 are very

similar to those in Table 2. If anything, the coefficients on multinational presence are




16
    Since this significance carries through the entire paper, the control variables are not discussed in the
following regressions.
17
    Amiti and Javorcik (forthcoming) find that multinational location decisions are influenced by market
and supplier access. However, if provincial GVIO is generally correlated with developments on these
dimensions, the coefficients on the multinational firm variables suggest that multinationals do something
further to change the economic opportunities for domestic firms.


                                                    14
somewhat larger than they were in the original regression.18 The only other change in

table 3 relates to the fixed-effects estimates which measure effects related to the size of

multinational contacts. The positive association between the size of other-industry

multinational activity and the value of trade transactions disappears when local economic

activity is represented by city-level GVIO. (Compare column (5) in Table 2 with column

(5) in Table 3.) Thus, Table 2 results on the relationship between new trade and the size

of other-industry multinational contact may simply reflect city-level economic activity, of

which, multinational firm exports are one component. In sum, Table 3 shows that while

growing levels of provincial or city GVIO assist new private trade creation, there appears

to be an additional increase in new trade creation which is associated with a growing

presence of own-industry multinational firms.

        Information spillovers could explain the positive association between the growing

activity of multinational firms and the subsequent increase in new local exports.

However, if information spillovers are behind this relationship, industries where

information is especially important should be particularly affected by the growth in

multinational firm activities. To test for differential sensitivity based on information

needs, Table 4 tests whether the positive association between multinational firm presence

and the growth of new private trade was larger in differentiated goods industries.19 This

prediction is distinct from the result we would expect if evolving, and unmeasured,

18
   This change does not appear to be due to the differences in the samples. Estimation of Table 2’s
specification with provincial GVIO, if limited to the subsample of data for which city GVIO is available,
yields results that are very similar to those reported in Table 2.
19
   Rauch (1999) argues that search costs for differentiated goods will exceed those of homogenous or
reference-priced goods, since information is not as easily collected and compared in differentiated goods
industries. I generate a dummy variable for differentiated goods that is based on Rauch’s (1999)
conservative classification. HS2 industries were classified as “differentiated” if the modal product in the
industry was differentiated. While there is some heterogeneity in the product classifications within HS2
industries, most industries were almost exclusively populated by either differentiated or non-differentiated
industry sub-categories. The results do not change if Rauch’s liberal classification is used instead.


                                                    15
differences in comparative advantage at the local level drive the positive association

between new private trades and changes in multinational presence.              Under this

alternative, we might predict a lower association between multinational presence and the

growth of new trade in differentiated goods, if differentiated goods depend less on natural

location-based sources of comparative advantage such as unmeasured differences in

industry-specific endowments.

       Consistent with the hypothesis of information spillovers, the results in Table 4

show that the positive association between the growth of multinational firm activity and

the expansion in new private trade was especially large in differentiated goods industries.

For example, column (1) indicates that an increase in own-industry multinational activity,

when measured by the count of multinational contacts, was associated with an expansion

in trade volumes that was twice as large for differentiated goods industries. This finding

is echoed in column (5), when multinational firm contact is measured by the size of own-

industry multinational trade flows.

       As before, we may be concerned that the positive association between

multinational firm growth and domestic trade expansion reflects general economic

growth effects rather than the special benefits arising from multinational contact. To deal

with this issue, columns (2) and (6) replace provincial GVIO with city-level GVIO to

provide a more accurate measure of local growth. Once this change is made, the positive

association between own-industry multinational contact and new private trade is observed

for differentiated goods sectors only.

       Geographic location in China is another factor which may have influenced the

informational needs of private Chinese firms. In particular, the exceptional economic




                                            16
growth of China’s coastal provinces, and the resulting economic gap between China’s

coastal and interior provinces, may imply that firms in China’s interior stood to gain

more from an improvement in information-rich contacts. Thus, Table 4 also tests whether

contact with multinationals was associated with equivalently large effects on the value of

new export transactions introduced in China’s coastal and interior provinces. Comparing

column (3) with column (4), or column (7) with column (8), shows that the benefit of

own-industry MNC presence in differentiated goods is observed for China’s interior

provinces, while the effect is absent in the coastal regions of China. This suggests that

informational spillovers in differentiated goods sectors may have been especially

important in facilitating the development of trade in China’s interior.

       Another way to analyze the informational content of multinational firm contact is

to distinguish between alternative forms of multinational activity. Chinese trade data

record whether multinational export transactions were conducted by foreign invested

enterprises (FIEs), joint ventures or outsourcing firms. Since FIE activity implies that

foreign firms set up a subsidiary and have a greater local presence that may span a greater

number of tasks in the firm’s production process, FIE operations may provide

informational spillovers that are particularly rich. If so, increases in FIE presence are

predicted to have a stronger positive association with increases in local private exports

than would a similar increase in outsourcing or joint venture operations. To see if this

was the case, the own-industry multinational contact variable was divided into its

constituent components.

       As the results in Table 5 show, two primary differences arise when one

distinguishes between alternative types of multinational activity.        First, the positive




                                             17
association between new private trade and own-industry multinational contact is greatest

for contacts with foreign-invested enterprises. In Panel A, where multinational contacts

are measured by multinational counts, joint venture contacts are also found to have a

positive association in some cases, though the FIE coefficients are larger and statistically

distinct.   In contrast, when multinational contact is measured by the volume of

multinational exports (Panel B), FIE activity still has the largest positive association with

new private trade, though own-industry outsourcing presence is at times found to have a

positive association which is similar in magnitude to the effects of FIE expansion.

Second, the association between the value of new private trade and the growth of

multinational activity remains strongest for differentiated goods sectors (compare column

(3) with column (4), or column (7) with column (8)). This further supports the idea that

growing multinational firm activity helped spur trade in those sectors where information

was most vital to the creation of new trading relationships.



3.3 Robustness Checks

        A primary concern in interpreting the correlation between changes in

multinational activity and the subsequent changes in new private trade is that there may

have been other economic determinants that were changing during the six-year estimation

window that simultaneously altered multinational activity as well as new private exports.

As a result, the first set of robustness checks estimates alternative specifications which

include additional measures of economic activity.              If the correlation between

multinational firm activity and new trade was driven by underlying changes in the

economic environment, we would expect that changing the controls for provincial




                                             18
economic activity would affect the estimated coefficients on multinational firm

proximity. As a result, I experimented with numerous specifications, and report some

representative regressions in Table 6. Notably, while the coefficients on the measures of

provincial economic activity change from specification to specification (for example, the

sign on provincial GDP changes if population is taken out of the regression), the

inclusion of extra provincial economic controls has no apparent effect on the coefficients

describing the relationship between multinational firm activity and new private trades.

       We might still be concerned that unmeasured growth in economic opportunities at

the city-industry level drives the positive association between multinational presence and

new trade relationships. For example, one might note that the number of multinational

firms increased in Jiangsu in 2002, and that in 2003, the number of new trade connections

in Jiangsu increased as well. While this set of events is consistent with the presence of

spillovers, it could also arise if the multinationals came to Jiangsu in 2002 to produce and

export digital cameras, and the private entrepreneurs started exporting digital cameras in

2003 too because Jiangsu gained valuable infrastructure that made it the best location for

both multinational and private Chinese to produce and export consumer electronics

products.   Thus, to address whether there were city-industry-year shocks that were

beneficial to Chinese and foreign exporters, the second robustness check adds the count

of new contemporaneous own-industry trade relationships formed by multinational firms

as an explanatory variable in column (3), and the value of new own-industry

multinational trade in column (4). If unmeasured shocks at the city-year level made some

cities more attractive for all types of activities, while information spillovers were non-

existent, the coefficient on the measures of new multinational trade transactions should




                                            19
be positive, while the coefficients on previous period multinational firm activity should

lose significance. However, while the new regressions uncover a strong correlation

between the value of new private trade and the contemporaneous increase in own-

industry multinational trade, the magnitude of the originally estimated multinational

coefficients are not changed by inclusion of these new variables.

         As a final check on issues related to simultaneity, I ran IV using random effects.

To instrument for foreign investment, I used 1) a binary variable indicating whether the

city provided any incentive programs (SEZ, High-Tech Development Zone, or Economic

Development Zone), 2) A count variable for the number of programs offered in the city,

and 3) ln(Wage in State-owned enterprises), and 4) Other-industry MNC activity. 20

While the use of random effects estimation is called into question, it is worth noting that

similar to results in Aitken, Hanson and Harrison’s (1999) study of firm export

probabilities, the coefficient on own-industry multinational contact is larger when IV is

applied.21

         As a third robustness check, the original transactions data are re-aggregated to

create a panel of data whose dimensions are province, HS2 industry and year.22 The

regressions for the provincial-level regressions are reported in columns (5) and (6) of

Table 6. When the regressions are run at the provincial level, all of the qualitative results


20
   Head and Ries (1996), Cheng and Kwan (2000), and Rodrik (2006) show and discuss the effects of
evolving incentives for foreign investment. While many Chinese incentive areas were open to all firms,
Naughton (2007) notes that differences in regulations meant that multinational firms were given more
leeway in using the programs than were domestic firms. The variable definitions are based on a data
appendix in Feenstra, Deng, Ma and Yao (2004).
21
    The IV coefficient for own-industry MNC activity is three to five times larger than it is in a regular
random effects panel setting. Unfortunately, the appropriateness of a random-effects approach is rejected
by the Hausman test. These results are available from the author by request.
22
    Since the new dependent variables are created by summing across city values within a province, they
are based on the assumption that, even at the HS8 level of product disaggregation, plants in different cities
produce differentiated outputs


                                                     20
remain.      Notably, the estimated effects of own-industry contact increase a bit in

magnitude, which suggests that own-industry spillovers may operate at the provincial

level.23

           To provide further insight into the results, and to check further for robustness,

Table 7 examines two alternate dependent variables: the count of new private trade

transactions and the count of new private product trade transactions. If the reallocation of

economic activity in China, as in the U.S., reflects product switching, then the ability to

introduce new product trades, rather than initial entry to exporting, may be of particular

importance.24 Since the dependent variable is now a count measure, the new regressions

are estimated using negative binomial methods. As before, all variables are measured at

the city-HS2 level of aggregation. For example, the count variable for new private trade

transactions is the count of all new trade transactions at the HS8 level emanating from a

particular city, aggregated to the city-HS2 industry level.

           The count regressions in Table 7 show that the number of new private trade

transactions increases when own-industry and other-industry multinational presence

increases. Further, if an interaction between MNC presence and differentiated industry is

added, we learn that the effects of own-industry contact are associated with a reduced

number of new product introductions, which may indicate competitive effects. This

implies that own-industry contact may reduce new trade introductions, while

informational spillovers improve the size or quality of trades that are introduced. In

contrast, the presence of other-industry multinational presence is associated with both an


23
   This suggests that the original city regressions could be augmented to include measures of own- and
other-industry multinational contact at the province-level (that is not already included in the city measures).
However, the estimated coefficient on provincial MNC activity outside the city is generally insignificant.
24
   See Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006) for evidence on firm-level product switching.


                                                      21
increase in the number of trade transactions as well as an increase in the number of new

product trades introduced – an effect that is especially large for differentiated goods

sectors.

       The final regressions in Table 7 add multinational product diversity as a regressor.

In this context, multinational product diversity, which is measured at the city level is the

count of distinct HS8 products exported by multinational firms in the city within an HS2

industry. Regressions which include measures of MNC product diversity are reported in

columns (5) and (10) of Table 7. When these regressors are added, they are found to be

negatively associated with new transaction creation by private Chinese firms, which may

reflect increased competition in product markets. In particular, if multinational firms

already offer a full range of products in the HS2 industry, there may be less room for a

local entrepreneur to enter the product space for the industry. However, when the

regression controls for MNC product diversity, the coefficient on own-industry

multinational activity rises. Thus it appears that when Chinese firms had good products

that were not already offered by MNCs, their ability to export was enhanced when they

were located near local multinationals who may have increased their awareness of

destinations to which they could export.



4. Discussion

       Development economists are particularly interested in learning whether the

activities of multinational firms enhance economic outcomes for local firms and

economies. While China’s remarkable growth means that China’s growth prospects may

be of less concern than the growth outcomes in other developing locations, the results




                                            22
from this analysis suggest that growth in multinational firm activities may help local

firms in developing countries to increase their export engagement with the global

economy.

        From a policy perspective, it is important to ask how large the implied effects of

increased multinational firm activity are. Based on the actual change in multinational

presence (size) between 1997 and 2002 the coefficient estimates in columns (4) and (5) of

Table 2 imply that growth in the presence of own-industry multinational firms was

associated with a 2.8% (2.5) increase in new private export value between 1998 and

2003. Similarly the coefficients in column (1) of Table 7 imply that the growth in MNC

activities between 1997 and 2002 was associated with a 2.6% increase in the number of

trade transactions, while the coefficients column (2) of Table 7 imply that the same

increase in MNC activities was associated with a 15.9% increase in new product trades

by private Chinese firms. Thus, it appears that exposure to multinational firms may help

Chinese firms to move more quickly through the product cycle. If so, this may be yet

another channel of multinational firm spillovers that has helped speed China’s growth.25

        Due to the method of measuring multinational contact, the estimated results in

this paper may represent an upper bound on the effects of multinational contact. In

particular, since the multinational measures in this paper are based on multinational

export activities, they do not capture contact with multinational firms that located in

China to serve local customers.26 If contacts with “market-seeking” multinational firms



25
    Feenstra and Rose (2000) use a semi-parametric procedure to rank counties based on their sequence of
U.S. trade relationships as indicated by the time when they first export different products to the U.S. In
suggestive regressions, Feenstra and Rose show that countries that were more highly ranked, as being at the
forefront of product cycle introductions, grew more rapidly than less favorably ranked countries.
26
   Buckley and Meng (2005) argue that the majority of MNCs in China located to serve local customers,
rather than to export.


                                                    23
provided less information about export opportunities, such contacts may have a weaker

effect on private firm export capabilities.

       While most of the analyses in this paper also find a positive association between

other-industry multinational contacts and the growth in private firm exports, the

correlation may be influenced by both information and other factors. First, one potential

benefit of multinational firms is the creation or strengthening of supply or purchasing

networks. If multinational networks enable local firms to purchase a more diverse set of

higher quality inputs this benefit may assist local firms in their efforts to initiate new

projects and export abroad. Further, if increased multinational activity encourages local

governments to providing infrastructure, or deregulation that is beneficial to all firms,

expansion in the scale of multinational export operations will improve the operating

environment for local firms as well. However, the fact that expansion in the size of

multinational export operations is negatively correlated with new export transactions by

private Chinese firms, once the presence of multinational contacts is controlled for,

suggests that multinational firm activity brings negative externalities due to competition,

or effects on factor prices in local markets.



5. Conclusion

       This paper studies how the presence of multinational firms contributed to the

formation of private Chinese export transactions between 1997 and 2003. The evidence,

which is based on the activities of multinational firms at the fine industry-city level

shows that an expanded presence of multinational firms was associated with an elevated




                                                24
creation of trading relationships, and that the effect of multinational presence was

especially large when the multinationals were in the same industry.

       The fact that the association between own-industry multinationals and new

exports is especially strong in cases where information was the most important –

differentiated goods industries, and for firms in China’s interior – suggests that

information is part of the story. This interpretation is further supported by the fact that

the effects are strongest for contacts with multinational foreign-invested enterprises, that

arguably provide the most information-rich form of contact. Taken together, the results

suggest that multinationals, since they act as a conduit of information, help local firms to

integrate and further engage in the international economy.




                                            25
                                               Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                           Full Sample               Differentiated Good        Homogenous Good
                                                                          Industries               Industries
                                                 Standard                       Standard                 Standard
                                  Mean           Deviation        Mean          Deviation   Mean         Deviation
Count of All New HS8 Trade
Connections – City/HS2/Yr            6.55            43.9             8.25          52.0        3.60          11.1
Count of All New Trade in HS8
Products – City/HS2/Yr               1.36            4.95             1.59          5.56        .966          .302

Multinational Contacts:
               Foreign Invested
             Enterprises (FIEs)      5.49            22.8             6.89          27.5        3.04          9.85
                 Joint Ventures
                                     .75             5.04             .95           6.10        .402          2.38
                   Outsourcing
                                     1.46            9.70             1.91          11.9        .671          3.49




                                                             26
Table 2: The Effect of Multinationals on the Value of All New Trade Connections

                               (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Own-Ind_MNC                   .511a                     1.967a        .081a                     .140a
(Count Measure)              (.008)                     (.033)       (.010)                    (.046)
Other-Ind_MNC                 .312a                      .609a        .412a                     .968a
(Count Measure)              (.023)                     (.070)       (.020)                    (.063)
Own-Ind_MNC                                .112a        -.400a                     .022a       -.018a
(Value Measure)                           (.002)        (.008)                    (.003)       (.008)
Other-Ind_MNC                              .084a        -.098a                     .101a       -.180a
(Value Measure)                           (.007)        (.022)                    (.006)       (.019)
Gross Value of               1.233a       1.286a        1.171a       1.298a       1.333a       1.263a
Industrial Output in         (.161)       (.161)        (.160)       (.139)       (.139)       (.139)
Province
Year                         1.269a       1.276a         1.276a      1.283a       1.289a       1.285a
                             (.027)       (.027)         (.027)      (.023)       (.024)       (.032)
City Effects                  Yes          Yes            Yes           -            -            -
HS2 Industry Effects          Yes          Yes            Yes           -            -            -
City-HS2 FE                     -            -              -         Yes          Yes          Yes
R2                            .397         .392           .410        .159         .148         .163
Observations                130,002      130,002        130,002     130,002      130,002      130,002
Notes: Standard Errors in ( ). The superscripts a, b, and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% levels. Dependent variable is the value of new trade transactions, at the HS2 city level.
Aside from year, all variables are in logs.




                                                   27
Table 3: The Effect of Multinationals on the Value of All New Trade Connections

                               (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
Own-Ind_MNC                   .664a                      2.237a       .095a                      .467a
(Count Measure)              (.026)                      (.092)      (.034)                     (.131)
Other-Ind_MNC                 .902a                      2.846a       .338a                     3.132a
(Count Measure)              (.043)                      (.133)      (.084)                     (.261)
Own-Ind_MNC                                .162a         -.458a                     .018b       -.107a
(Value Measure)                           (.007)         (.025)                    (.009)       (.034)
Other-Ind_MNC                              .332a         -.953a                      .006      -1.103a
(Value Measure)                           (.019)         (.057)                    (.031)       (.097)
Gross Value                   .640a       1.617a         -.890a    -1.0972a       -1.132a      -1.233a
Industrial Output in         (.079)       (.071)         (.107)     (.185)         (.186)       (.185)
City
Year                        1.708a       1.467a          2.134a      2.211a       2.244a       2.269a
                            (.038)       (.038)          (.043)      (.055)       (.055)       (.055)
City Effects                 Yes          Yes             Yes           -            -             -
HS2 Industry Effects         Yes          Yes             Yes           -            -             -
City-HS2 FE                    -            -               -        Yes          Yes           Yes
R2                           .416         .392            .441       .139         .088          .259
Observations                15,762      15,762          15,762     15,762       15,762        15,762
Notes: Standard Errors in ( ). The superscripts a, b, and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% levels. Dependent variable is the value of new trade transactions, at the HS2 city level.
Aside from year, all variables are in logs.




                                                   28
Table 4: Product Differentiation and the Effect of Multinationals on New Trade

                   Panel A: MNC Contact Measured by the Count of MNC Contacts
                                  (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)
                             All China   All China      Coast       Interior
                                      a                        c
Own-Ind_MNC                     .050        .010         .040         .047c
                               (.017)      (.052)       (.022)       (.027)
                                      b          b
Own-Ind_MNC                    .051        .145           .004        .095b
   *Differentiated             (.022)      (.069)       (.028)       (.033)
                                      a          b              a
Other-Ind_MNC                   .312       .338         1.029         .269a
                               (.034)      (.142)       (.162)       (.036)
                                      a                        a
Other-Ind_MNC                   .155       -.009         .494         .137a
 *Differentiated               (.042)      (.174)       (.195)       (.044)
                                       a           a            a
Gross Value Industrial         1.297      -1.094        7.230          .123
Output*                        (.139)      (.185)       (.359)       (.161)
Year                           1.283a     2.211a         .196a       1.482a
                               (.023)      (.055)       (.061)       (.026)
R2                               .167       .140          .096         .153
Observations                  130,002     15,762        78,282       51,720

                   Panel B: MNC Contact Measured by the Value of MNC Contacts
                                 (5)        (6)            (7)          (8)
                            All China   All China       Coast       Interior
Own-Ind_MNC                    .012a      -.006          .011c        .011c
                              (.004)      (.013)        (.006)       (.007)
                                     a          b
Own-Ind_MNC                    .017       .043            .003        .028b
   *Differentiated            (.006)      (.018)        (.007)       (.009)
                                     a                         a
Other-Ind_MNC                  .064        .006          .089         .063a
                              (.010)      (.052)        (.065)       (.011)
Other-Ind_MNC                 .0572a      -.003          .411a        .048a
 *Differentiated              (.013)      (.064)        (.084)       (.013)
Gross Value Industrial        1.331a     -1.131a        7.914a         .119
Output*                       (.139)      (.185)        (.352)       (.161)
Year                          1.290a     2.244a          .113a       1.491a
                              (.023)      (.055)        (.060)       (.026)
R2                              .153       .091           .075         .145
Observations                 130,002     15,762         78,282       51,720
Notes: Each regression includes HS2-City fixed effects. Standard Errors in ( ). The superscripts a, b,
and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. Dependent variable is the value of
new trade transactions at the HS2-city level. Aside from year, all variables are in logs. The gross
value of industrial output is measured by provincial values, except for columns (2) and (6) which use
the city values of industrial output. Beijing, Tianjin, Liaoning, Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian,
Shandong, Guangdong, Hainan are defined as “Coast”, while all other provinces are “Interior”.



                                                  29
Table 5: The Effect of MNC Type on New Trade

                  Panel A: MNC Contact Measured by the Count of MNC Contacts
                               (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)
                         Full Sample Full Sample    Diff Goods   Hom Goods
                                   a            a             a
Own–Ind_FIE                  .081         .148          .094        .057a
                            (.011)       (.033)        (.014)      (.018)
                                                 a
Own–Ind_Outsourcing           .008       -.101           .023       -.025
                            (.015)       (.037)        (.018)      (.026)
Own–Ind_JointVenture        .040b          .027        .051b         .017
                            (.019)       (.049)        (.024)      (.033)
Other-Ind_MNC                .415a        .355a         .456a       .335a
                            (.020)       (.084)        (.025)      (.031)
                                    a             a            a
Gross Value Industrial      1.296       -1.093        1.089        1.770a
Output                      (.139)       (.185)        (.166)      (.255)
Year                        1.282a      2.187a        1.384a       1.150a
                            (.023)       (.055)        (.028)      (.042)
R2                            .162         .133          .185        .121
Observations               130,002      15,762        82,548       47,454

                   Panel B: MNC Contact Measured by the Value of MNC Contacts
                                (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)
                          Full Sample Full Sample    Diff Goods   Hom Goods
Own–Ind_FIE                   .028a       .039a         .031a        .023a
                             (.003)      (.008)        (.003)       (.004)
                                    a                         a
Own–Ind_Outsourcing           .035        -.004         .038         .026a
                             (.004)      (.008)        (.004)       (.006)
Own–Ind_JointVenture           .007        .004          .010         .002
                             (.006)      (.014)        (.007)       (.010)
Other-Ind_MNC                 .101a        .003         .118a        .070a
                             (.006)      (.031)        (.008)       (.010)
Gross Value Industrial       1.315a     -1.129a        1.101a       1.798a
Output                       (.139)      (.185)        (.166)       (.255)
Year                         1.289a      2.229a        1.355a       1.157a
                             (.023)      (.055)        (.028)       (.042)
R2                             .172        .104          .190         .133
Observations                130,002      15,762        82,548       47,454
Notes: Each regression includes HS2-City fixed effects. Standard Errors in ( ). The superscripts a, b,
and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. The dependent variable is the
value of new trade transactions at the HS2-city level. Aside from year, all variables are in logs. The
gross value of industrial output is measured by provincial values, except for columns (2) and (6),
which use city value of industrial output. Rauch’s conservative definition of differentiated goods is
used to classify differentiated goods.



                                                 30
Table 6: The Effect of Multinationals on Trade Connections – Robustness Checks
                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
         Dependent Value of Value of Value of Value of Value of Value of
           Variable New          New          New          New          New         New
                    Exports - Exports - Exports - Exports - Exports - Exports -
                    City         City         City         City         Province Province
                             a                         a
Own-Ind_MNC            .078                      .076                      .103a
(Count Measure)       (.010)                    (.010)                    (.013)
                             a                         a
Other-Ind_MNC          .395                      .378                      .702a
(Count Measure)       (.020)                    (.020)                    (.016)
                                          a                         a
Own-Ind_MNC                         .021                      .020                     .045a
(Value Measure)                    (.003)                    (.003)                   (.005)
                                          a                         a
Other-Ind_MNC                       .096                      .093                     .324a
(Value Measure)                    (.006)                    (.006)                   (.007)
                             a            a            a            a             a
Gross Value of         .403         .421         .396         .412       -2.081      -1.998a
Industrial Output     (.153)       (.154)       (.153)       (.153)       (.108)      (.108)
in Province
GDP                   7.066a      7.190a        6.956a       7.089a     -11.062a -11.391a
                      (.487)       (.487)       (.486)       (.487)       (.344)      (.344)
                               a            a            a            a          a
Population           -7.827       -7.977       -7.742       -7.889       5.392       5.537a
                      (.559)       (.487)       (.558)       (.558)       (.395)      (.395)
                              a            a            a            a           a
Wage                  2.595       2.701         2.502        2.627       7.093       7.372a
                      (.410)       (.411)       (.410)       (.411)       (.290)      (.289)
                             a            a            a            a            a
Year                   .431         .410         .444         .428       2.201       2.185a
                      (.064)       (.062)       (.064)       (.064)       (.045)      (.045)
                                               [Count]      [Value]
Increase in MNC                                  .082a        .035a
Trade in HS2                                    (.007)       (.003)
City-HS2 FE             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
  2
R                       .053         .046         .061         .046         .028        .039
Observations         130,002 130,002 130,002 130,002                     16,014      16,014
Notes: Standard Errors in ( ). The superscripts a, b, and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% levels. The dependent variable is the value of new trade transactions at the HS2-city level.
Aside from year, all variables are in logs.




                                                   31
Table 7: The Effect of Multinationals on New Trade on New Trade Transactions

               Panel A: Dependent Variable - Count of all New Private Transactions
                               (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)
                                   a         a           c            a
Own-Ind_MNC                   .147      .178        .149        .184        .475a
                            (.003)     (.052)      (.004)      (.027)      (.022)
Own-Ind_MNC                                         -.006       -.012
  *Differentiated                                  (.005)      (.012)
Other-Ind_MNC                 .148a     .064b       .135a       .052b       .144a
                            (.005)     (.026)      (.005)      (.026)      (.005)
Other-Ind_MNC                                       .021a       .019a
 *Differentiated                                   (.003)      (.006)
MNC Product Diversity in                                                   -.342a
HS2                                                                        (.022)
                                    a         b           a            b
Gross Value Industrial       -.662     -.089       -.664       -.089       -.696a
Output*                     (.059)     (.036)      (.059)      (.036)      (.059)
                                   a         a           a            a
Year                          .637      .524        .637        .524        .641a
                            (.011)     (.011)      (.011)      (.011)      (.011)
Log-Likelihood             -171,245   -32,642    -171,221     -32,687    -171,130
Observations               130,002     15,762     130,002      15,762     130,002

      Panel B: Dependent Variable - Count of all New Private Product Transactions
                              (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)        (10)
                                  a          a            a          a
Own-Ind_MNC                  .156       .205         .164       .227       .349a
                            (.003)     (.007)       (.004)     (.027)     (.024)
                                                           a          a
Own-Ind_MNC                                         -.015      -.037
  *Differentiated                                   (.005)     (.012)
Other-Ind_MNC                .129a      .104a        .117a      .098a      .126a
                            (.005)     (.027)       (.005)     (.027)     (.005)
                                                          a          a
Other-Ind_MNC                                        .021       .012
 *Differentiated                                    (.003)     (.006)
MNC Product Diversity in                                                  -.203a
HS2                                                                       (.024)
                                    a         a             a         a
Gross Value Industrial     -1.834      -.286       -1.835      -.286     -1.849a
Output*                     (.067)     (.038)       (.067)     (.038)     (.067)
Year                         .708a      .392a        .708a      .392a      .709a
                            (.012)     (.012)       (.012)     (.012)     (.012)
Log-Likelihood            -131,284    -24,371     -131,256    -24,366   -131,250
Observations              130,002      15,762      130,002     15,762    130,002
Notes: Standard Errors in ( ). The superscripts a, b, and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% levels. Each regression estimated by negative-binomial including HS2-City random effects.
Aside from year, all variables are in logs. * The gross value of industrial output is measured by
provincial values, except for columns (2), (4), (6) and (8), where the city value is used.



                                                   32
References
Aitken, Brian J. and Ann E. Harrison (1999) "Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela." American Economic Review, 89(3):605-618.

Aitken, Brian, Hanson, Gordon H. and Harrison Anne E. (1997) " Spillovers, foreign investment,
and export behavior." Journal of International Economics, V43(N1-2):103-132.

Amiti, Mary and Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska (forthcoming Journal of Development economics) ,
"Trade Costs and Location of Foreign Firms in China". Previously World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 3564.

Bernard, Andrew B. Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. (2006) “Multi-Product Firms and
Product Switching,” NBER Working Paper, 12,293.

Besedes, Tibor and Thomas J. Prusa. (2006) “Product Differentiation and Duration of US Import
Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 70(2): 339-358.

Blomstrom, Magnus and Kokka, A. (1998), “Multinational Corporations and Spillovers”, Journal
of economic Surveys, 12:247-277.

Brambilla, Irene. (2006) “Multinationals, Technology and the Introduction of Varieties of
Goods,” NBER Working Paper, 12217.

Buckley, P. and C. Meng. (2005) “The Strategy of foreign-invested manufacturing enterprises in
China: Export-oriented and market-oriented FDI revisited,” Journal of Chinese Economic and
Business Studies, 3(2): 111-131.

Chen, Huiya and Deborah Swenson (2007). “Multinational Firms and New Chinese Export
Transactions”. UC Davis manuscript.

Cheng, Leonard K. and Yum K. Kwan (2000). “What are the determinants of the location of
foreign direct investment?” The Chinese experience. Journal of international economics, 51(2),
379-400.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, (2005) “Ownership and Control in Outsourcing to
China: Estimating the Property-Rights Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
May: 729-761.

Feenstra, Robert C., Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Shunli Yao (2004), “Chinese and Hong
Kong International Trade Data,” Center for International Data, University of California, Davis
Manuscript.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Hiau Looi Kee (2004), “Export Variety and Country Productivity,”
NBER Working Paper, 10830.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Andrew K. Rose, (2000). “Putting Things in Order: Patterns of Trade
Dynamics and Growth,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(3), August 369-382.

Gorg, Holger, and David Greenaway (2004), “Much ado about nothing? Do Domestic Firms
Really Benefit from Foreign Direct Investment?”, World Bank Research Observer, 19(2) 171-
197.


                                             33
Greenaway, David, Nuno Sousa, and Katherine Wakelin, (2004). “Do Domestic Firms Learn to
Export from Multinationals?” European Journal of Political Economy, 20: 1027-1043.

Haskel, Jonathan E. Sonia C. Pereira and Matthew J. Slaughter. (2002) “Does Inward Foreign
Direct Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” NBER Working Paper #8724.

Head, Keith and John Ries. (1996) “Inter-City Competition for Foreign Investment: Static and
Dynamic Effects of China’s Incentive Areas.” Journal of Urban Economics, 40:38-60.

Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska. (2004) “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity
of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,” American Economic
Review, 94(3): 605-627.

Kang, Kichun (2004) “Export Variety and Terms of Trade: Theory and Evidence. Manuscript:
University of California, Davis.

Keller, Wolfgang and Stephen R. Yeaple. (2003) “Multinational Enterprises, International
Trade, and Productivity Growth: Firm Level Evidence from the United States,” NBER Working
Paper, 9504.

Kneller, Richard and Mauro Pisu (2005). “Industrial Linkages and Export Spillovers from FDI.”
University of Nottingham Manuscript.

Ma, Alyson C. (2004). Trade and Multinational Firms: Evidence from China. University of
California Ph.d. Thesis.

Naughton, Barry (2007).        The Chinese Economy :         Transitions and Growth.
Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Navaretti, Giorgio Barba and Anthony J. Venables (2004). Multinational Firms in the World
Economy. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Rauch, James E. (1999) “Networks versus Markets in International Trade.”          Journal of
International Economics 48: 7-35.

Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade. (2003) “Information, International Substitutability, and
Globalization.” American Economic Review, 93(3): 775-791.

Rauch, James E. and J. Watson. (2003) “Starting Small in an Unfamiliar Environment,”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21:1021-1042.

Roberts Mark J. and James Tybout. (1997) "The Decision to Export in Columbia: An Empirical
Model of Entry with Sunk Costs." American Economic Review, 87(4), 545-564.

Rodrik, Dani. (2006) “What’s so special about China’s Exports?” NBER Working Paper, 11947.

Ruane, F., and J. Sutherland (2004) “Foreign Direct Investment and Export Spillovers: How Do
Export Platforms Fare?” IIIS Discussion Paper, No. 58.




                                             34
