                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WALL STREET AND MAIN STREET:
            WHAT CONTRIBUTES TO THE RISE IN THE HIGHEST INCOMES?

                                          Steven N. Kaplan
                                            Joshua Rauh

                                        Working Paper 13270
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13270


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and NBER. This research has been supported
by the Center for Research in Security Prices, the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State, and the Global Financial Markets Initiative. We are grateful to Emmanuel Saez for useful
discussions and help with tax data. We thank David Autor, Lucian Bebchuk, Austan Goolsbee, Adam
Looney, Andrew Metrick, Berk Sensoy, Amir Sufi, Robert Topel, Mike Weisbach, and seminar participants
at Berkeley, the Duke-UNC Corporate Finance Conference, Stanford, and the University of Chicago
for helpful discussions and comments. We thank Sol Garger, Cristina Iftimie, James Wang, Michael
Wong, and Jaclyn Yamada for research assistance. Address correspondence to Steven Kaplan, University
of Chicago Graduate School of Business, 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail
at skaplan@uchicago.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Steven N. Kaplan and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?
Steven N. Kaplan and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 13270
July 2007
JEL No. G24,G3,H24,J3,J33,M52

                                              ABSTRACT

We consider how much of the top end of the income distribution can be attributed to four sectors --
top executives of non-financial firms (Main Street); financial service sector employees from investment
banks, hedge funds, private equity funds, and mutual funds (Wall Street); corporate lawyers; and professional
athletes and celebrities. Non-financial public company CEOs and top executives do not represent
more than 6.5% of any of the top AGI brackets (the top 0.1%, 0.01%, 0.001%, and 0.0001%). Individuals
in the Wall Street category comprise at least as high a percentage of the top AGI brackets as non-financial
executives of public companies. While the representation of top executives in the top AGI brackets
has increased from 1994 to 2004, the representation of Wall Street has likely increased even more.
While the groups we study represent a substantial portion of the top income groups, they miss a large
number of high-earning individuals. We conclude by considering how our results inform different
explanations for the increased skewness at the top end of the distribution. We argue the evidence is
most consistent with theories of superstars, skill biased technological change, greater scale and their
interaction.

Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Joshua Rauh
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jrauh@ChicagoGSB.edu
I.      Introduction

        It is well known that the income distribution in the United States has become increasing unequal

over the last two or three decades.1 The sources of this increased inequality, however, are not completely

understood, particularly at the very top end of the distribution. In this paper, we consider in detail how

much of the inequality today at the top end of the income distribution can be attributed to four different

sectors of the economy – top executives of non-financial firms (Main Street); financial service sector

employees from investment banks, hedge funds, private equity funds, and mutual funds (Wall Street);

lawyers; and professional athletes and celebrities.

        Where possible, we estimate how those contributions have varied over time. It is well-known and

well-documented that top executive pay has increased substantially over the last twenty-five years (Hall

and Liebman (1998), Hall and Murphy (2003), Jensen et al (2004), Bebchuk and Fried (2004 and 2006)).

Those increases have generated a great deal of controversy and attention. At the same time, the financial

and legal sectors also have experienced substantial growth over the last twenty-five years both in number

of employees and the pay of those employees. As a result, those sectors also include many high income

individuals. Unlike data on the top executives of public companies, however, compensation on

investment bankers, hedge fund employees, private equity partners, and law firm partners are not

disclosed systematically.

        We begin with the data in ExecuComp on compensation for top executives of public companies.

We use two measures of compensation. First, we consider realized or actual compensation that includes

options exercised during the year. While realized compensation estimates the compensation an executive

will recognize on his or her income tax return for one year, it may represent option grants from more or

less than one past year. Since income from stock options is taxed upon exercise, this provides a

reasonable measure of the employment-related compensation the executive actually reports to the IRS

that year. Second, we consider ex ante or estimated compensation that uses the estimated value of options


1
 See Autor, Katz and Kearney (2005) and (2006), Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005), Piketty and Saez (2003),
(2006a), and (2006b).


                                                      1
granted that year rather than the value of options exercised. This provides a better measure of the

compensation the board expected to give the CEO that year and clearly represents just one year of

compensation.

        We extrapolate the data on those companies to also include non-ExecuComp companies. We

estimate the contribution of all top executives from non-financial and financial firms to the top ends of the

distributions of adjusted gross income (AGI) from the IRS, both recently and for 1994. We consider both

total AGI and AGI excluding investment income.

        We estimate that non-financial executives represent 5.25% of the top 0.01% bracket of AGI in

2004 using realized compensation. Using ex ante compensation, the non-financial executives represent

only 3.9% of the top 0.01% bracket. In both cases, top executives explain only a modest fraction of the

top 0.01% bracket. The results are similar for the top 0.001% and 0.0001% brackets.

        At the same time, we find that non-financial executives represent 3.9% of the top 0.01% bracket

of AGI in 1994 using realized compensation, and 3.65% using ex ante compensation. Non-financial

executives, therefore, represent a modestly larger fraction of the very top brackets using realized

compensation, and virtually the same fraction using ex ante compensation. While top executive pay

increased substantially over the ten-year period, the increase in pay appears to explain only a modest

fraction of the increase in the top end of the AGI distribution using actual pay. Furthermore, on an ex

ante or expected basis the pay of top executives did not increase more quickly than that of other highly

paid individuals.

        We then use the financial statements of publicly-traded investment banking firms (e.g., Goldman

Sachs and Morgan Stanley), and calibrated assumptions of the distribution of compensation within those

firms, to estimate the distribution of the most highly compensated people (whom we refer to as managing

directors) at those firms. We estimate that the managing directors and top executives of the top

investment banking firms comprise a larger percentage of those individuals in the top 0.01% (but a

smaller percentage in the top 0.001%) than the top executives of non-financial public companies.




                                                      2
        Next, we attempt to estimate incomes for individuals in the asset management business. We look

at hedge fund, venture capital (VC) fund, private equity or buyout (PE) fund and mutual fund investors.

The data here are admittedly very coarse and we make a number of assumptions to obtain estimates of

income. A large number of professionals in these areas are highly compensated. For example, we

estimate that the professionals in hedge funds, VC funds, and PE funds include roughly the same number

of individuals in the top 0.1% of the AGI income distribution as the top non-financial executives. While

it is very difficult to estimate precise distributional changes over time for this sector, we also provide

evidence that these industries are significantly larger today than 10 and 20 years ago and therefore that

their employees must represent a much larger fraction of top quantiles than they did previously.

        We also find that hedge fund investors and other “Wall Street” type individuals comprise a larger

fraction of the very highest end of the AGI distribution (the top 0.0001%) than CEOs and top executives.

In 2004, nine times as many Wall Street investors earned in excess of $100 million as public company

CEOs. In fact, the top 25 hedge fund managers combined appear to have earned more than all 500 S&P

500 CEOs combined (both realized and estimated).

        We then examine lawyers using profit per partner for the top 50, 100, and 200 law firms in the

United States. The average profit per partner in 2004 in the top 100 firms is $1.0 million, representing

almost 18,000 partners. This compares to an average profit per partner of $0.45 million in 1994

representing 13,000 partners. Profits per partner, therefore, have increased by a factor of almost 2.2 times

while the number of partners has increased by more than 40%. In real terms, profits per partner have

increased by almost 2 times. Similarly, we estimate that the fraction of lawyers in the top 0.5% and 0.1%

AGI brackets increased substantially from 1994 to 2004 (as well as from 1984 to 1994). For example, we

estimate that partners of the top 100 law firms represent 2.4% of the top 0.1% AGI bracket in 2004,

compared to 1.3% in 1994.

        Finally, we investigate professional athletes in basketball, baseball, and football. These athletes

represent a similar percentage of the top 0.1% AGI bracket in 2004 as in 1994 (0.8% both years), but a

larger percentage of the top 0.01% AGI bracket (1.5% versus 1.0%). Data on celebrities are not as


                                                       3
complete as data on professional athletes but suggest that celebrities comprise a substantially smaller

share of the top fractiles.

        Overall, we estimate that the groups we study represent 15% to 26.5% of the individuals who

comprise the AGI categories at and above the top 0.1%. Among the groups we study, non-financial

public company CEOs and top executives are estimated relatively precisely and represent 2.0% to 6.4%

of the very top AGI brackets. In every top AGI bracket, we estimate that Wall Street-related individuals

comprise a greater percentage of the top AGI brackets than non-financial executives of public companies.

        When we exclude investment income from AGI, the groups we study represent 22% to 33% of

the individuals in the very top AGI brackets. Non-financial executives do not represent more than 12% of

any of the top AGI brackets excluding investment income.

        While our estimates represent a substantial portion of the top income groups, they clearly miss a

large number of high-earning individuals. We suspect that some of the missing individuals are trial

lawyers, executives of privately-held companies, highly paid doctors, and independently wealthy

individuals who have a high AGI. While some of the missing individuals may also be non-top five

executives of publicly-traded companies, the pay of the fifth highest paid executives suggests that this

number is negligible for the top 0.01% and above.

        From 1994 to 2004, the representation of top executives of non-financial firms in the top brackets

increased using realized pay, but was virtually the same using and using ex ante pay. The contribution of

lawyers, hedge fund managers, private equity and venture capital professionals to the top brackets

unequivocally increased over this period, and almost certainly to a greater extent than top executives.

        We conclude by considering how our results inform different explanations for the increased

skewness at the top end of the distribution. These explanations include trade theories (Hecksher (1931),

Olin (1933), Stolper and Samuelson (1941)), increasing returns to generalists rather than specialists

(Murphy and Zabojnik (2004), Frydman (2005)), stealing theories (Bebchuk and Fried (2004) and

Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005)), social norms (Piketty and Saez (2006a) and Levy and Temin (2007)),

greater scale (Gabaix and Landier (2006)), skill biased technological change (Katz and Murphy (1992),


                                                     4
Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006), Garicano and Hubbard (2007)), and the economics of superstars

(Rosen (1981).

        It seems unlikely that trade theories can account for the massive observed increase in inequality at

the highest levels of the income distribution, especially given the breadth of this phenomenon and the fact

that it does not affect only the groups for which the products and services are heavily and increasingly

exported or bid for by tradable sectors. For example, an increase in open trade cannot be the primary

factor driving the substantial increase in the pay of U.S. lawyers, given that most of their human capital is

country-specific.

        It also seems unlikely that our evidence can be reconciled with the theory of increasing returns to

generalists. It is difficult to argue that lawyers, hedge fund investors, investment bankers, and

professional athletes have become less specialized / more general over time. In fact, the opposite seems

more likely to be true.

        While we do not test directly whether any group of individuals is stealing or not, we do not find

that the top brackets are dominated by CEOs and top executives who arguably have the greatest influence

over their own pay. In fact, on an ex ante basis, we find that the representation of CEOs and top

executives in the top brackets has remained constant since 1994. Our evidence, therefore, suggests that

poor corporate governance or managerial power over shareholders cannot be more than a small part of the

picture of increasing income inequality, even at the very upper end of the distribution. We also discuss

the claim that CEOs and top executives are not paid for performance relative to other groups. Contrary to

this claim, we find that realized CEO pay is highly related to firm industry-adjusted stock performance

        Our evidence also is hard to reconcile with the arguments in Piketty and Saez (2006a) and Levy

and Temin (2007) that the increase in pay at the top is driven by the recent removal of social norms

regarding pay inequality. Levy and Temin (2007) emphasize the importance of Federal government

policies towards unions, income taxation and the minimum wage. While top executive pay has increased,

so has the pay of other groups, particularly Wall Street groups, who are and have been less subject to

disclosure and social norms over a long period of time. In addition, the compensation arrangements at


                                                      5
hedge funds, VC funds, and PE funds have not changed much, if at all, in the last twenty-five or thirty

years (see Sahlman (1990) and Metrick and Yasuda (2007)). Furthermore, it is not clear how greater

unionization would have suppressed the pay of those on Wall Street. In other words, there is no evidence

of a change in social norms on Wall Street. What has changed is the amount of money managed and the

concomitant amount of pay.

        Given what we think our evidence does not support, we believe that the evidence remains

consistent with theories of skill biased technological change, superstars, greater scale and their

interaction. With the huge improvements in information technology and the substantial increase in value

of the securities markets over the last twenty-five years, asset managers, investment bankers, lawyers, and

top executives can now apply their talent to much larger pools of money.

        Our analysis is most closely related to the second half of Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005). They

consider two possible sources of increasing income inequality – the pay of top executives and the pay of

entertainment and sports superstars. Based on average pay statistics, they claim that those two groups

account for most of the income earned in the very top quantiles of the income distribution. There are

several ways in which our analysis is different from theirs. First, Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005)

interpret the mean statistics from Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005) rather than analyze the distribution of pay

we do. In doing so, they assume that each executive earns the average amount of pay which clearly

ignores the true distribution. Second, they do not consider non-ExecuComp firms. Finally, they do not

measure Wall Street-type professionals or lawyers at all. In his discussion of Dew-Becker and Gordon

(2005), Topel (2005) raises several of these issues.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section II analyzes data from ExecuComp on incomes of top

executives in non-financial and financial firms and their contribution to the income distribution. Section

III focuses on other employees in the financial services and investment sector. Section IV reports our

results on lawyers. Section V reports our results on professional athletes. In section VI, we use the

results in the previous sections to see how much of the top end those groups explain. Section VII




                                                       6
discusses the extent to which the different groups are paid for performance. In section VIII, we discuss

the implications of our results on different theories of increased income inequality.




II.     Top Executives (Main Street)

        In this section, we consider the contribution of top executives of public companies in the U.S. to

the top end of the income distribution. We begin with the top executives in the ExecuComp database.

ExecuComp covers the compensation of top executives of the companies in the S&P 500, the S&P

Midcap 400, and the S&P Smallcap 600, plus some companies that were in those indices in previous

years. In this analysis, we focus on the year 2004 because it is the most recent for which complete data

are available, and 1994 because it is the first year that ExecuComp has full coverage of the index

companies. For the year 1994, ExecuComp covered 1,747 total companies, and for 2004 it covered 1,722

total companies.

        ExecuComp reports two summary measures of compensation, TDC1 and TDC2. TDC2 estimates

the value of total compensation realized by the executive in a given year. This is the sum of salary,

bonus, the value of restricted stock granted, the net value of stock options exercised and the value of long-

term incentive payouts. TDC2 also will reflect any benefit that an executive may have received from

backdating options. TDC2 will be closer to the amount reported as income on an executive’s tax return.

Because executives typically exercise options granted in previous years, TDC2 may represent

compensation from more than one (or less than one) year.

        TDC1 estimates the value of total compensation awarded (but not necessarily realized) to the

executive that year. This equals TDC2 but replaces the net value of stock options exercised with the

estimated value of stock options granted, using a Black-Scholes calculation. TDC1 does not reflect

option backdating benefits because it assumes that the stock price on the issue date was the same as the

exercise price.




                                                      7
        Reported taxable income may differ from TDC2 because some restricted stock grants are not

taxable until they vest. In any given year, an executive’s true taxable income will reflect the restricted

stock grants that vested that year which will include some current year as well as past year grants.

        Reported AGI also will differ from TDC2 to the extent that executives earn income from other

sources, such as directorships of other companies, or interest, dividend, and capital gains income. To

control for this, we also consider AGI brackets that exclude investment income and reach qualitatively

similar conclusions. Other deferred compensation, such as pension benefits, also will not appear in TDC2

or TDC1 nor would they appear in AGI.2 An additional caveat when looking at AGI comparisons is that

AGI is calculated at the level of the tax filing unit, whereas we consider individuals. In other words, we

essentially assume that none of the individuals in our paper are married to each other or to other high

earners. While not precisely true, we do not believe this is a large source of bias in our estimates.

        To summarize, TDC2 will be closer to an executive’s true AGI while TDC1 will more closely

approximate the compensation a company’s board expected to pay the executive.

        We also assume that all of the top executives are U.S. citizens and report all of their income to the

U.S. tax authorities. Because some top executives are not U.S. citizens or are taxed elsewhere, our results

will overstate the number of executives that actually appear in the relevant tax brackets.

        For 1994 and 2004, we report the number of top executives in each AGI income bracket based on

TDC2 and TDC1. We restrict our sample in several additional ways. First, we remove any duplicated

observations for a given individual. Second, we restrict attention to only the top five most highly

compensated executives per firm. ExecuComp typically takes as many executives as happen to be in the

disclosure statements, which may be more than the legally required 5. The average number of unique

executive names per firm-year in Execucomp was 6.7 in 1994 and declined to 5.9 in 2004. As we do not

want our results affected by changing coverage, we keep only the largest 5 TDC2 observations for each

firm-year. Finally, for executives who appear in the top 5 at multiple firms within a given year (perhaps


2
 Sundaram and Yermack (2005) estimate the average change in pension value is 10% of total compensation (TDC1)
for Fortune 500 CEOs from 1996 to 2002.


                                                      8
because they started the year at one firm and ended the year at another), we sum the TDC2 they earned at

each firm to convert these multiple observations into one observation.

        While most ExecuComp companies are non-financial companies, some, like Goldman Sachs, are

financial services companies, such as banks and investment banks. Accordingly, we divide the

ExecuComp executives into non-financial and financial executives. Financial executives are executives

of firms that have an SIC code from 6000 to 6299. We consider firms with SIC codes at 6300 and above

to be non-financials; these firms include insurance companies and real estate agents and operators. We

classify them as non-financials because they are generally not “Wall Street” type firms. Financial firms

comprised 42 of the S&P 500, 30 of the S&P Midcap 400, and 55 of the S&P Smallcap 600 in 1994 and

47 of the S&P 500, 33 of the S&P Midcap 400, and 32 of the S&P Smallcap 600 in 2004.

        Table 1a reports the number of non-financial and financial ExecuComp executives in each AGI

bracket. The cutoffs for the top fractiles of AGI income in 1994 are calculated based on the detailed IRS

Statistics of Income files for US individuals, held at the NBER. The cutoffs for the top fractiles of AGI

income in 2004 are calculated based on the 2002 distribution (the latest years for which the detailed files

are available) and the relation between the 2002 and 2004 fractiles documented in the tabulations of

Piketty and Saez (2003, 2006).

        Table 1a shows that from 1994 to 2004, CEO and top executive compensation increased

substantially. For the top five non-financial ExecuComp executives, the average nominal realized

compensation (TDC2) increased from $0.91 million in 1994 to $2.82 million in 2004. For financial

executives, the increase was from $1.32 million to $4.54 million.

        Using realized compensation, the table shows that non-financial ExecuComp executives represent

a somewhat larger fraction of the top AGI brackets in 2004 than they did in 1994. The increase is small

in the top 0.1%, but larger in the brackets above. For example, non-financial ExecuComp executives

represented 2.25% of the top 0.1% in 1994 and 2.58% in 2004. At the same time, for the top 0.01%, they

represented 2.56% in 1994, but 4.46% in 2004; for the top 0.001%, 1.90% in 1994, and 5.06% in 2004.




                                                     9
While the top executive share of the very top brackets has increased, the top executives comprise a

modest fraction of those brackets.

        Using ex ante or estimated compensation, the picture is quite different. the table shows that non-

financial ExecuComp executives occupy roughly the same fraction of the top brackets in 2004 as they did

in 1994 except for the very top where their share actually declines. For example, non-financial

ExecuComp executives represent 3.65% of the top 0.01% in 1994 and 3.54% in 2004. At the same time,

they represent 2.50% of the top 0.001% in 1994, but only 1.74% in 2004.

        For comparison with other studies, table 1b shows the results for ExecuComp CEOs only. The

results are qualitatively similar to those for all top executives. CEOs have maintained or increased their

share of the top brackets using realized compensation, and have more or less maintained their share using

ex ante or estimated compensation.

        Tables 1a and 1b show the fraction of financial executives in the top brackets also increase using

realized pay, but remain roughly the same using estimated pay. According to Table 1a, financial

executives comprise 0.57% of the AGIs in the top 0.01% in 1994 compared to 0.77% of the AGIs in 2004

using realized pay. Using estimated pay, financial executives comprise 0.80% of the top 0.01% in 1994

and 0.62% in 2004.

        While the ExecuComp data cover over 1,600 publicly-traded companies, there were a total of

8,060 publicly traded companies in 2004 for which equity market values are available in Compustat.

Accordingly, we estimate the compensation of top executives in the non-ExecuComp companies. We

sample proxy statements to measure compensation for up to 50 non-ExecuComp companies in each of

three size brackets. We do this because the non-ExecuComp companies are small relative to the

ExecuComp companies and compensation tends to be lower in smaller companies (see Bebchuk and

Grinstein (2005) or Gabaix and Landier (2006)).

        We use three size brackets that are analogous to those in the ExecuComp data. We assume that if

a firm's equity market value exceeds the maximum equity market value for S&P400 Midcap firms, it is

like an S&P500 firm. We identify fewer than 50 such firms. The second group includes firms with


                                                     10
equity market values above $1 billion but below the maximum for S&P 400 Midcap firms. The third

group includes firms with equity market values below $1 billion, but above the minimum equity market

value for the S&P600 Smallcap firms. We exclude firms with market values below the minimum for the

S&P 600 Smallcap, assuming that these companies have virtually no very high paid executives.

        Table 1c assumes that top executive compensation in the non-ExecuComp firms in each size class

mirrors the top executive compensation of the firms that we sampled in each size class. Table 1c

indicates that there are relatively few very highly paid executives in non-ExecuComp firms. The table

also shows that top executives in non-financial non-ExecuComp firms comprise a lower fraction of the

top 0.01% of AGI brackets in 2004 than they do in 1994 – 0.79% versus 1.34% – but a higher fraction of

the top 0.001% – 1.34% versus 0 – using realized compensation. The top executives occupy a higher

fraction of the very top brackets using ex ante or estimate compensation. In all cases, however, the

magnitudes are quite modest, never exceeding 1.36% of any bracket.

        Table 1c also combines the estimates for ExecuComp and non-Execucomp non-financial

executives. Using realized compensation, non-financial executives overall occupied 5.25% of the top

0.01% and 6.4% of the top 0.001% in 2004 compared to 3.9% and 1.9%, respectively, in 1994. Using

estimated compensation, non-financial executives overall occupied 3.9% of the top 0.01% and 1.9% of

top 0.001% in 2004 compared to 3.65% and 2.5% in 1994.

        Table 1d repeats the analyses in tables 1a and 1c for non-financial executives, but uses AGI

brackets that exclude investment income including dividends, interest, rentals, farm income, IRA

distributions, income from estates and trusts, pension and annuity distributions, long term capital gains,

and Form 4797 income. This increases the percentage of the brackets occupied by the top executives.

Using realized income, table 1d indicates that top executives of all non-financial firms comprise 8.55% of

the top 0.01% in 2004 versus 6.07% in 1994. For the top 0.001%, the top executives comprise 11.87% in

2004 versus 3.97% in 1994. Using estimated income, table 1d indicates that top executives of all non-

financial firms comprise 7.28% of the top 0.01% in 2004 versus 6.18% in 1994. For the top 0.001%, the

top executives comprise 5.90% in 2004 versus 5.35% in 1994.


                                                     11
        Overall, the analyses of top executives show two main patterns. First, using estimated or ex ante

pay the share of non-financial top executives’ share of the very top AGI brackets is small and has

remained roughly the same since 1994. Second, using realized pay, the share of non-financial top

executives in the top 0.01% has increased modestly, but has increased more substantially at the very top –

in the top 0.001%.

        It is worth ending with one additional point. It is possible that we leave out a large number of

high earners by restricting the sample to the top 5 executives. To assess whether this is true, we look at

the pay of the fifth highest paid executive (assuming that all others are below this level). The results in

table 1e suggest that including non-top 5 executives would not affect our basic results at all at brackets at

the top 0.01% and above. In 2004, table 1e shows that only 7 non-financial ExecuComp executives are

in the top 0.01% bracket using realized pay and only 14 are in that bracket using estimated pay. The

corresponding numbers in 1994 are 5 and 18. These represent at most 0.17% of their respective brackets.

They also represent similar percentages in 2004 and 1994.



III.    Wall Street

        A.      Investment Banking

        It is well-known that investment banking and other financial services firms have a large number

of highly compensated individuals. Because firms are not required to disclose individual compensation

for these individuals, it is not clear how large the amounts are and how many individuals earn them.

Investment banks typically report only a very small amount of information about the compensation of

their employees, generally limited to a figure for total global employee compensation plus the usual

figures for compensation of the top five corporate executives. These disclosures likely obscure the fact

that there are many highly paid professionals at the firm who are not among the top five employees.

Indeed, the typical managing director at a top Wall Street firm will almost never earn less than $500,000 a

year in total compensation, and there are thousands of these individuals.




                                                      12
        In this section, we attempt to estimate the number of highly paid professionals at Wall Street

securities firms, as well as their distribution of pay, and examine how this number and distribution

compare to the statistics on executives of publicly traded companies. We use publicly available

information on total compensation from the top 10 publicly-traded investment banks. Based on

discussions with industry insiders, we create a distribution of income for these firms. We then attempt to

extrapolate from that information to other firms.



                 1. Counting the Managing Directors

        We use the title managing director to describe the top echelon of securities firm professionals and

begin with a detailed study of ten of the top eleven securities firms from the list of the top 100 securities

firms by Institutional Investor (2004). Institutional Investor organizes this list by total consolidated

capital of the securities unit of the firms in question; the ten we study comprise roughly 90% of the total

consolidated capital of the top 100. These firms are listed in Table 2a. We exclude Bank of America

Securities from our top 10 because of data availability issues, and instead include number 11, J.P. Morgan

Securities.

        There are several complications that we attempt to address in this analysis. First, several of the

top 10 are divisions of conglomerates that include both investment and commercial banks. We focus on

only the securities businesses of these firms, including asset and wealth management but excluding

commercial banking. While some firms report disaggregated segment level information on total number

of employees, many do not. Where necessary, we use the ratio of segment net revenue to total net

revenue to derive an estimate of segment employees. Second, while some securities firms report the

number of managing directors, many do not. In these cases we either rely on industry sources that

estimate this figure or estimate the number of global managing directors as a fraction of global

employees. When we apply ratios, we typically use figures between 3 and 4 percent, calibrating in many

cases to information from industry insiders. Third, while some firms report U.S. information separately

from global information, in many cases we needed to estimate the number of U.S. employees. Where


                                                      13
necessary, we use the ratio of U.S. to global net revenues to estimate this figure. Finally, we generally

assume that the ratio of U.S. to global employees is indicative of the ratio of U.S. to global revenues.

        Table 2a presents our assessment of the likely number of U.S. managing directors at these ten

firms. Non-italicized figures are numbers taken directly from the financial reports of the companies in

question or calculated as ratios of figures taken directly from the reports. Italicized figures represent our

imputations, in which we have attempted to be as conservative as possible.

        We use relatively straightforward calculations to estimate the managing directors at Goldman

Sachs Group and Bear Stearns Companies. The 2004 Goldman Sachs annual report lists the number of

managing directors at 1,181. The annual report also lists 20,722 global employees with 13,278 based in

the U.S. for a ratio of 64%. We apply this ratio to the number of managing directors to derive an estimate

of 757 managing directors based in the U.S. For Bear Stearns, although the company does not list its

managing directors, industry insiders revealed approximately 850 global managing directors.

Furthermore, while this firm does not detail the U.S. versus non-U.S. employee breakdown, 91% of Bear

Stearns revenues originate in the U.S. We therefore estimate that Bear Stearns had 770 (91% of 850)

managing directors based in the U.S. in 2004. Both Goldman Sachs and Bear Stearns are essentially pure

investment banks, so there are no complications involved with deriving segment-level estimates.

        Lehman Brothers also provides a relatively straightforward case. The annual report lists 19,600

global employees with 14,100 based in the U.S. Unfortunately, we do not know the number of managing

directors at this firm. We assume a conservative 4% (compared to the implied figures of 6% for Goldman

Sachs and 8% for Bear Stearns), calibrated from conversations with industry insiders. This leads to a

figure of 564 managing directors based in the U.S. in 2004.

        Morgan Stanley is an example of a firm that engages in other non-securities related activities,

including Discover credit cards and retail brokerage. The annual report provides the number of total

employees and the number of managing directors for the firm. We estimate the number of employees in

each segment by applying the ratio of segment to total net revenues to the number of global employees.

For example, we estimate that the institutional securities division has 29,472 employees, which is 53,284


                                                      14
times the ratio of $13,313 to $23,708. We assume that all the managing directors come from the

institutional securities and asset management divisions. This implies that 3% of the employees in those

divisions are managing directors, still very low relative to Lehman, Goldman, and Bear Stearns. We

estimate U.S. employment as the ratio of U.S. to total net revenue, which we assume is roughly constant

across segments of the firm. These calculations yield 780 managing directors at Morgan Stanley.

        Proceeding in this fashion for the remaining investment banks, we count 6,006 managing

directors based in the U.S. working for these ten firms. We believe that this number is conservative.

Private conversations with industry participants suggest that we underestimate the highly paid investment

bankers at some of these firms. We also estimate that adding the rest of the U.S. investment banking

sector would raise this figure by a considerable, but unknown amount. In our analysis, we report the

income distribution per 10,000 managing directors. We believe this is a reasonable guess as to the total

number of managing directors or employees receiving managing director type pay. In any investment

bank, there will be a number of highly paid employees who are not yet managing directors. If one

wanted to be conservative, we think 7,000 managing directors would represent a minimum.



                 2. Estimating the Distribution of Pay

        According to industry sources, it is rare for a managing director at a top Wall Street firm to

receive compensation of less than $500,000 during the period we are studying. Furthermore, we

understand that at least one quarter of managing directors earn in excess of $2.5 million per year. 3

Based on this information, we consider two possible distributions of pay. The first is a pareto distribution

with a minimum value of $500,000, which we truncate at $35 million, as this is approximately the top

value observed for any investment banking employee.

        The cumulative distribution function of the pareto distribution takes the form:

3
 Our estimates are based on conversations with industry sources. For confirmation, see Lisa Kasenaar, The
International Herald Tribune, February 6, 2006 who reports that the Options Group, an executive-search company,
estimated that “managing directors may get an average bonus of about $2.25 million in coming weeks” in 2005; as
well as Duff McDonald’s “Please, Sir, I Want Some More. How Goldman Sachs is carving up its $11 billion money
pie,” in New York Magazine, December 5, 2005


                                                      15
                                                                 −k
                                                        ⎛ x ⎞
                                           P ( X > x) = ⎜ ⎟
                                                        ⎝ xm ⎠
where xm is the minimum value of $500,000 and we estimate k = 0.8613 based on the restriction that 25%

of the distribution earns more than $2.5 million. This distribution yields estimates that are more

conservative at the bottom of the distribution than would be accepted by most industry insiders, with

almost half of the managing directors earning less than $1 million.

        The second distribution is an exponential distribution, which we censor below at $500,000. The

cumulative distribution function of the exponential distribution takes the form:

                                           P ( X > x) = 1 − e − β x
where we estimate β = 0.00055 based on the restriction that 25% of the distribution earns more than $2.5

million. This distribution is more liberal at the upper end of the distribution than the truncated pareto,

though it is more conservative at the very top. The censored exponential distribution allows only 0.1% of

managing directors to earn more than $20 million, compared to 0.3% as given by the truncated pareto

distribution.

        It is our understanding that most of the pay estimated here will show up in AGI for the managing

directors. Most of the investment banks are public companies and C corporations. The MDs of these

firms will receive taxable income. MDs of private firms may receive K-1 or partnership income. It is our

understanding that the majority of income and bonus that MDs receive is in the form of cash. This will

appear in AGI in the year it is received. For many investment banks, MDs receive some fraction of

compensation as restricted stock and options or defer some compensation. For this compensation, there

will be a timing difference between our estimates and actual AGI. For example, restricted stock will

appear as income when it vests and option gains will appear when the options are exercised.

        Table 2b reports the estimated distributions of pay for 10,000 managing directors alongside the

AGI brackets. The first vertical panel presents the percentage of managing directors in each AGI bracket.

The Pareto distribution implies that 60% of the MDs earn less than $1.4 million (the top 0.1% threshold)

while the exponential distribution implies that number is 31%. The average MD earns $1.9 million



                                                        16
(Pareto) and $2.8 million (exponential). Based on conversations with industry insiders, we believe the

exponential distribution is somewhat more realistic.

        The second vertical panel presents the percent of each bracket accounted for by every 10,000

managing directors, and the third panel presents the number of individuals earning at least the minimum

bracket amount for every 10,000 managing directors. As noted above, we believe that 10,000 managing

directors is a reasonable estimate for Wall Street as a whole.

        Using our assumptions, we estimate that the 10,000 top-tier managing directors at investment

banks generate enough AGI to explain at least 5.8% (Pareto) or 11.2% (exponential) of the top 0.01% of

the AGI distribution. These are at least as large as our estimates for all top non-financial executives of

5.25% using realized compensation and 3.9% using ex ante compensation. The MDs explain a lower

fraction of the top 0.001%.

        We also estimate that the MDs earn a total of $19 billion (Pareto) to $28 billion (exponential).

This is slightly lower, but the same order of magnitude as our estimate of $34 billion (realized) and $27

billion (ex ante) for all top non-financial executives.

        Overall, then, investment bankers appear to explain roughly the same amount of the top end of

the income distribution as top executives of non-financial firms.



                 3.      Historical Wall Street.

        It seems likely that the number of managing directors on Wall Street and their compensation have

increased substantially in the last 20 or 30 years. Unfortunately, data availability concerns make it

difficult if not impossible to repeat our 2004 analysis for earlier periods. We can, however, get a sense of

the growth in Wall Street by compare the number of employees and capital employed at Wall Street firms

over time. The Securities Industry Association (SIA) provides a list of the top 50 securities firms each

year. We collected the 2004 list as well as the 1987 list (the furthest back we could find). We also

obtained the list of the top 50 securities firms in 1972 provided by the Investment Banker-Broker

Almanac.


                                                       17
        Table 2c reports the total number of global employees and the total global capital employed at the

top 50 U.S. securities firms in 1972, 1987, and 2004. Employment increased by 170% from 1972 to 1987

and, by 79% from 1987 to 2004. Capital employed by those employees increased exponentially by more

than ten times from 1972 to 1987, and by more than twenty times from 1987 to 2004. Capital per

employee, therefore, increased substantially as well, from $34 thousand ($124 thousand in $2004) in 1972

to $136 thousand ($203 thousand) in 1994 to $1,789 thousand in 2004. This represents a remarkable

increase in capital per employee, particularly since 1994.

        Similarly, Morrison and Wilhelm (2007) present evidence concerning investment banks in the

1960s and 1970s. In 1970, their tabulations indicate that the top twenty-three investment banks have a

total of fewer than 1,600 partners and average capital per partner of less than $0.75 million. This would

represent $3 million of capital per partner in 2004 dollars. Assuming that the firms in table 2c have

10,000 managing directors, table 2c implies almost $70 million of capital per managing director, a 23 fold

increase relative to 1970.



        B.      Alternative Assets

        Over the last twenty years, there has been a large increase in the amount of money allocated by

institutional investors and wealthy individuals to alternative asset classes. The most prominent members

of the alternative asset classes are hedge funds, venture capital (VC) funds, and private equity (PE) or

buyout funds. These funds are of interest for compensation and the income distribution because the

hedge fund, VC and PE fund investors potentially receive substantial compensation.

        The fees typically paid to the alternative asset fund – whether hedge, VC or PE fund – consists of

a management fee that equals a percentage of total or committed capital and a profit share or carried

interest of the profits of the fund (after paying the management fees). The typical compensation for hedge

funds today is 2 / 20, i.e., 2% management fee and 20% of the profits on total capital although the top

performing hedge funds charge more. This also is typical for VC and PE funds based on committed

capital. It is typical for the larger PE funds to reduce the management fee to 1½% of committed capital


                                                     18
while smaller VC funds increase the management fee to 2½%.4        In this section, we attempt to estimate

the amount of fees paid to the managers of alternative assets, how those fees have increased over time,

and the effect of those fees on the income distribution.



                   1. Hedge Funds

          It is well known that hedge funds have experienced a large increase in assets under management

in the last twenty years. Table 3a provides time series of hedge fund assets from three different databases,

Hennessee Group, Hedge Fund Research, and TASS. All three confirm the large increase in hedge fund

assets from less than $50 billion in 1990 to roughly $1 trillion by the end of 2005.

          The last three columns of table 3a use the Hennessee Group assets under management, realized

(net) hedge fund returns and the typical compensation of 2% / 20% to estimate the fees earned by hedge

fund managers. The management fees are estimated by multiplying the assets under management at the

beginning of the year (end of previous year) by 2%. The profit share or carry is estimated by multiplying

the average return for the year if it is positive by the beginning of year assets under management to get net

profit. Because net profit is after carry, we gross up the net profit by dividing by 80% to get the gross

profit for the year. We then take 20% of the gross profit as the estimate of the profit share. Total fees are

the sum of management fees and carried interest. Table 3a estimates that hedge fund fees have increased

from less than $0.5 billion in 1987 to less than $2 billion in 1994 to $17.5 billion in 2004 and $20.5

billion in 2005.

          This calculation almost certainly understates compensation because it assumes that all hedge

funds earn the average return for the year. Because the 20% profit share is applied only to positive

returns (and not negative returns) any appreciable dispersion across funds such that some funds earn

negative returns (but not negative carry) implies that the actual profit share exceeds the estimates above.

In other words, the profit share acts like a call option.



4
    See Gompers and Lerner (1999) and Metrick and Yasuda (2007).


                                                       19
        Malkiel (2005) reports a standard deviation of 11% on the Van Global Hedge Fund index. Chany

et al. (2005) report a standard deviation of 8.25% on the CSFB / Tremont hedge fund index. They report

mean annualized standard deviations across a sample of over 4,000 individual hedge funds that exceeds

14%. If we conservatively assume a standard deviation of 11% and risk free rate of 3%, using Black-

Scholes, a one year call option is worth almost 6% (with a 14% standard deviation, roughly 7%). The

20% profit share is 20% of a call option on an entire fund. This implies that the profit share has an

expected annual cost of 1.2% at the 11% standard deviation. Under the assumption of 11% standard

deviation of hedge fund returns, the expected fees on a 2 / 20 hedge fund are roughly 3.2%. The last

column of table 3a calculates fees on this basis, and figure 1 depicts the results. The estimated fees for

2004 increase from $17.5 under the simple method to over $25.4 billion. Obviously, the estimate would

be higher under higher volatility assumptions. Interestingly, the $25.4 billion figure is the same order of

magnitude as the total pay to non-financial top executives and to investment banking MDs.

         It is clear there has been a large increase in fees going to hedge funds. There is no doubt that

much of this increase shows up as compensation to the owners of the hedge funds and the people they

hire.5 It is difficult to know exactly how much. In what follows, we provide some rough estimates.

        We begin with the list of the top 100 hedge fund firms in Institutional Investor (II) in 2005 which

measures assets as of the end of 2004. According to II, these hedge funds managed $568 billion. Of the

100 firms, 79 are listed as U.S. companies with $459 billion under management. We searched the SEC

Investment Advisor Public Disclosure database for information on these funds. Forty-six of these funds

provided information to the SEC. These funds are listed by II as having $268 billion of hedge fund

money under management.

        The funds reporting to the SEC must list a range of the number of the total number of employees

as well as the number of employees who are investment advisory. On average, the forty-six funds list a

minimum of 89 and a maximum of 255 employees as well as a minimum of 26 and a maximum of 109

5
  Hedge funds may be organized as partnerships in which some of the carried interest is taxed as capital gains. Thus,
carried interest would appear as part of AGI, but would be taxed at lower rates. In addition, there is some evidence
that hedge fund managers defer the realization of ordinary income into the future. See Fleischer (2007).


                                                         20
investment advisory employees. This works out to $160 million per minimum number of employees and

$36 million per maximum number of employees. Similarly, this works out to $550 million per minimum

number of employees and $159 million per maximum number of investment advisory employees. The

average of the minimum and maximum is $98 million per employee and $305 million per investment

advisory employee.

           Another way of looking at this is to divide the total hedge fund assets at these firms by the total

number of employees. On this basis, the firms have $65 million per minimum number of employees and

$23 million per maximum number of employees. Similarly, this works out to $220 million per minimum

number of employees and $54 million per maximum number of investment advisory employees. The

average of the minimum and maximum is $44 million per employee and $137 million per investment

advisory employee.

           In what follows, we assume that the average highly paid employee controls or is compensated

from $100 million of assets. Under the assumption of total fees of 3.2%, this works out to $3.2 million in

fees per highly compensated employee. If we then apply this to $900 billion of hedge fund assets, we

obtain 9,000 highly compensated employees with average fees of $3.2 million.

           This is a very rough estimate. This overstates total compensation to these employees because the

hedge fund must pay expenses from these fees. However, operating margins in the asset management

business are quite high. Before compensating top executives and paying mutual fund marketing expenses

(which hedge fund firms do not pay), it is common for publicly-traded mutual fund firms to report

operating margins exceeding 70%.6 These estimates also overstate the number of employees who are

highly compensated to the extent that some of the assets and employees are not in the United States. At

the same time, these estimates will understate total compensation per employee to the extent that the

hedge fund firms have other activities and manage other assets.




6
    See, for example, 2005 10-Ks for Calamos Asset Management, Eaton Vance, and Janus Capital.


                                                        21
        It is likely that many of the big hedge fund payments will appear as ordinary partnership income

on the K-1’s of the owners or partners of the hedge funds. Some unknown number of the most highly

compensated employees who are not partners will receive W-2 income.

        Given the huge increase in hedge fund assets, it is virtually certain that the number of highly

compensated employees at hedge funds has increased substantially over time. In 1984, when there were

almost no hedge funds, there would have been very few such employees. In 1994, when hedge funds had

less than $100 million in assets under management, hedge fund fees were roughly 10% of the fees in

2005. At the same fee per employee ratio, this implies a ten-fold increase in the number of highly

compensated employees. To the extent that the amount of money managed per individual has increased,

the number of highly compensated employees will have increased less, but the compensation of each

individual will have increased more.



                2.       Venture Capital and Private Equity Funds

        The capital committed to venture capital (VC) private equity (PE) or buyout funds also has

increased substantially over time. The first three columns of table 3b present the capital committed to

U.S. VC funds, the number of funds raised each year from 1980 to 2005, and capital per fund according

to Thomson Financial’s Venture Economics database. The next three columns do the same for PE firms.

When a VC or PE firm raises a fund, its investors (limited partners) commit to provide a certain amount

of money over the investing life of the fund (usually five years). The investments are harvested over the

subsequent five to ten years, giving a total commitment period or investment life of ten to fifteen years.

The commitments, therefore, represent money committed, but not necessarily invested in a given year.

        The table shows that combined annual commitments to VC and PE funds have grown from less

than $2.5 billion combined in 1982 to less than $35 billion in 1994 to over $150 billion in 2005. Both the

number of funds and the size of the average fund have increased.

        For purposes of calculating fees, columns 7 and 8 estimate the total amount of money under

management in VC and PE at any one time as the sum of the capital committed over the previous seven


                                                     22
years (including the current year). This assumes that the VC and PE firms earn management fees on the

capital committed for seven years. Most funds actually earn management fees for ten years, but the

management fee typically declines after the five year investment period. Overall, the seven year

assumption will tend to be conservative.

        As mentioned above, compensation typically consists of a management fee (based on committed

capital) and a share of the profits. Metrick and Yasuda (2007) report median management fees of 2% and

median profit shares of 20% for a large sample of VC and PE funds raised from 2000 to 2005.

        Accordingly, the last four columns estimate fees paid to VC and PE funds using the analogous

methodology to that used initially for hedge funds. The management fees are estimated by multiplying

the assets under management at the beginning of the year (end of previous year) by 2%. The profit share

is estimated by multiplying the average return for the year (provided by Venture Economics) if it is

positive by the beginning of year assets under management to get net profit. Because net profit is after

carry, we gross up the net profit by dividing by 80% to get the gross profit for the year. We then take

20% of the gross profit as the estimate of the profit share. Total fees are the sum of management fees and

carried interest.

        VC and PE fees also have increased substantially over time. Under these assumptions, the

combined fees to VC and PE funds have increased from less than $0.25 billion in 1984 to almost $3

billion in 1994 to roughly $18 billion in 2004 and 2005.

        As with the hedge funds, the simple calculation above almost certainly understates compensation

because it assumes that all VC and PE funds earned the average return for the year. In fact, returns are

volatile around the average and the 20% profit share acts like a call option, increasing in value with

volatility. It also is likely the case that VC and PE fund returns are more volatile than hedge fund returns

because they are calculated based on performance over the life of the fund rather than annually.

        Kaplan and Schoar (2005) present evidence on the performance of VC and PE funds. They report

that the historical standard deviation of the returns on VC funds is between 19% and 34%; on PE funds,

between 19% and 27%. (The standard deviations depend on whether funds are value- or equal-weighted


                                                     23
and whether the returns are calculated by Venture Economics or Kaplan and Schoar.) If we

conservatively, assume a standard deviation of 22%, risk-free rate of 3%, the 20% profit share and a 2%

management fee, the expected annual fees for VC and PE firms equal 4% of assets under management.

As depicted in figure 2, this would equal a total for VC and PE firms of roughly $30 billion in 2004 and

2005.

        Again, the $18 billion to $30 billion estimates are the same order of magnitude as the total pay to

non-financial top executives, investment banking MDs, and hedge fund investors.

        How do these fees translate into compensation? In their sample of VC and PE funds, Metrick

and Yasuda (2007) report that the typical VC and PE fund has 6 partners (median of 5 and average of

6.4). Over the last five years, the Venture Economics figures indicate over 1,000 VC funds and almost

900 PE funds have been raised. This implies more than 10,000 highly compensated partners, a large

increase over the number 25 years ago.

        At $18 billion in fees, this represents roughly $1.3 million per VC partner and $2.3 million per PE

partner; at $30 billion in fees, this represents $2.0 million per VC partner and $3.8 million per PE partner.

Even these estimates may be low. Metrick and Yasuda (2007) estimate that the average partner in a VC

firm can expect to receive $13 million in present value over the life of a fund; the average partner in a PE

firm, $18 million in present value. Assuming a fund lasts for ten years, this works out to fees of $1.3

million and $1.8 million per partner per year in present value. However, successful firms invest their

funds in four to five years or less, at which point they raise another fund. As a result, the net present

value may effectively reflect four or five years of fees, not ten. Assuming five years, this would put the

present value of average annual fees received per partner at VC and PE firms equal to $2.6 million and

$3.6 million, respectively.

        Our calculations and those of Metrick and Yasuda (2007), then, give us a range of fees per

partner of $1.3 to $2.6 million per VC partner and $1.8 to $3.8 million per PE partner. The fees, of

course, do not equal compensation received by the partners. VC and PE firms must pay operating

expenses – employee salaries, rents, travel, deal costs, etc. – out of the fees. It is difficult to know exactly


                                                       24
what fraction of fees these expenses represent. It seems reasonable to assume that the expenses must be

less than the management fee. Otherwise, the partners would need to finance their business themselves.

As the management fees represent roughly ½ of the total fees, this puts a lower bound on partner

compensation of ½ of the amounts at the beginning of this paragraph. In addition, these fees are averages.

We have not attempted to estimates the distribution around these averages.

        PE and VC investors are likely taxed similarly to hedge fund investors in that most of the income

will appear as partnership income on the K-1’s of the owners or partners of the funds. The one difference

is that a larger fraction of the PE and VC income will be in the form of long term capital gains. The

reason for this is that most of the investments will have a term of greater than one year and the 20% profit

shares on those investments will appear as capital gains. (Again, see Fleischer (2007)).

        In summary, there is no doubt that VC and PE partners have contributed to the increase in the top

end of the income distribution. It seems likely that almost all of the 10,000 individuals earn in excess of

the $0.48 million necessary to put them in the top 0.5% of the income distribution.

        As estimated fees increased by more than ten times from 1984 to 1994, and, again, by a factor of

six times from 1994 to 2005, this undoubtedly represents a large increase in the number of such

individuals since 1984 and 1994. In 1984, roughly 500 VC and PE funds were raised over the previous

five years. These funds had capital under management of $19 billion. At 4% total fees, this translates

into $0.76 billion of fees. With six partners per fund, this translates into 3,000 partners and $0.25 million

in fees per partner or $0.41 million per partner in $2005. So, the number of partners has more than tripled

and the fees per partner have increased by more than a factor of five times over this period.



                3.       Contributions to the top end of the distribution

        In the previous subsection, we estimate average fees per highly compensated individual or partner

in hedge fund, VC, and PE firms. We are unable to estimate the contributions of such firms to the very

high end of the distribution. In this section, we use other data sources to attempt to do so.




                                                      25
        Table 4a presents Institutional Investor’s estimates of the incomes of the top 25 most

compensated hedge fund managers from 2003 to 2005. The table also presents the estimates for those

hedge fund managers based in the U.S. The table confirms that the top hedge fund investors earn large

amounts of compensation. The 20th most highly paid hedge fund manager in the U.S. earned $92, $110

and $150 million, respectively in those three years. This compares to 3 non-financial ExecuComp U.S.

executives and our estimate of 4 total non-financial U.S. executives who earned more than $100 million

in 2004.

        It also is striking that the top 25 individual hedge fund managers in the U.S. earned a combined

total of $5.2 billion, $6.3 billion and over $9 billion, respectively, in 2003, 2004 and 2005.

        Table 4b presents estimated earnings of top earners in the financial industry more broadly. The

first two columns present the rankings from Financial World for 1988 and 1995. Financial World

includes all financial industry individuals including investment bankers, hedge fund and private equity

investors. The last three columns combine the rankings from Trader Monthly and II Alpha for 2003 to

2005.

        Trader Monthly ranks the top traders and hedge fund professionals only. The Trader Monthly

and Alpha lists do not include PE and VC investors and, therefore, understate such incomes relative to the

Financial World rankings. The recent S-1 filings of Blackstone and KKR indicate that some PE investors

earn sums comparable to those of the hedge fund investors. For example, KKR reported net income of

$773 million and $941 million in 2004 and 2005. With Henry Kravis and George Roberts each owning

37.5% of KKR, these imply incomes for Kravis and Robers of almost $300 million in 2004 and over $350

million in 2005. Blackstone reported net income of $1.5 billion and $1.3 billion in 2004 and 2005. The

29.8% of Blackstone owned by Stephen Schwartzman implies income of $447 million and $388 million

in 2004 and 2005. At least two other Blackstone executives appear to have earned more than $60 million

each in each of those two years.

        Although we do not include PE investor incomes, table 4b suggests some conclusions. There is

not much of a change in the very top end of the distribution from 1988 to 1995. In both 1988 and 1995,


                                                      26
40 individuals earned more than $30 million in $2004 and 10 individuals earned more than $82 million in

$2004. There appears to have been a large increase in the top end since then. In 2004 and 2005, among

only the traders and hedge fund investors, more than 57 individuals earned more than $30 million and

more than 37 individuals earned more than $82 million. Again, this indicates a large increase in the very

top end of the income distribution.



           C.       Mutual Funds

           At the same time that alternative assets under management and their fees have grown

substantially, so have institutionally managed assets, particularly mutual funds. In this section, we

document the increase in assets under management and fees paid to mutual funds.

           Table 5a shows that total assets under management at mutual funds have increased from $135

billion in 1980 to $2.16 trillion in 1994 to $8.9 trillion in 2005 with more than half of the assets in 2005

residing in equity mutual funds. The number of funds has grown from fewer than one thousand to almost

eight thousand.

           Table 5b uses data from the 2006 Investment Company Institute Handbook to report the fees

including sales loads paid on these funds. The asset weighted percentage fees have declined over time,

driven by the increase in index funds and by the decrease in the use of sales loads. While the percentage

fees have declined, the huge increase in assets under management has lead to a substantial increase in

fees. Fees have increased from $1.3 billion in 1980 to $31.1 billion in 1995 to $73.1 billion in 2005. In

$2005, they have increased from $2.7 billion in 1980 to $37.9 billion in 1995 to $73.1 billion in 2005.7

           Unfortunately, it is very difficult to measure the number of people involved in the mutual fund

industry and the pay distribution of those individuals. The fees are paid to investment managers as well

as to brokers and intermediaries who sell or distribute the mutual funds. Some of these individuals work

for the top securities firms and are already counted in the investment banking section. Rather than



7
    Bogle (2005) makes a similar point.


                                                       27
provide inaccurate estimates, we simply conclude that there are likely many highly compensated

individuals in the mutual fund industry and that number has grown substantially since 1980.



IV.     Lawyers

        We next look at the pay of top corporate lawyers. To do this we rely on American Lawyer

Magazine’s annual surveys of law firm revenues and compensation. In 1985, Am Law covered the top 50

firms (by revenue); in 1995, the top 100 firms (by revenue); and, in 2005, the top 200 firms. The Am

Law surveys are released mid-year and, therefore, reflect results for the previous calendar year. Table 6a,

therefore, summarizes the Am Law results for the calendar years 1984 (Am Law 50), 1994 (Am Law 100)

and 2004 (Am Law 200).

        For the purpose of studying compensation, the current Am Law surveys report the average profit

per equity partner at each of the top law firms. Because law firms are typically structured as flow-through

entities for tax purposes, the profit an equity partner earns should appear as ordinary income to the partner

and will show up in the partner’s AGI. As a result, average profit per equity partner likely provides a

lower bound on the AGI of the average equity partner because it does not include non-law firm income

earned by the partner. Because law firms are typically structured as partnerships, equity partners do not

receive W-2’s and, therefore, will not show up in the distribution of W-2s.

        In our analysis, we prefer to use profit per equity partner because those partners are the key

partners in the firms. According to the Am Law survey, equity partners are those who file a Schedule K-1

tax form and receive no more than half their compensation on a fixed-income basis. Non-equity partners

receive more than half of their compensation on a fixed-income basis. They are lawyers whom the firm

wants to retain, but who do not receive the same voting rights, decision rights, and compensation.

        By 2004, most law firms distinguished between equity partners and non-equity partners, with the

median Am Law 100 firm having roughly one non-equity partner for each three equity partners. The

2004 Am Law numbers report profits per equity partner. For the 1984 Am Law 50, we use total partners

and profits per all partners. At that time, few firms, if any, had gone to the model of non-equity partners,


                                                     28
so these calculations represent primarily equity partners. In 1994, some firms had begun to appoint non-

equity partners. As a result the Am Law 100 reports the number of equity and non-equity partners. The

median firm in the Am Law 100 had no non-equity partners. Unfortunately, the Am Law 100 only

reports profit per total partners not profits per equity partner. In our analysis, we report the number of

equity partners and profits per all partners for 1994. This slightly understates true profits per equity

partner, but likely not more than 10%. When we estimate profits per partner for the 56 firms that do not

have any non-equity partners, we obtain average (median) profits per partner that are 9.4% (5.7%) greater

than the profits per partner for all 100 firms.

        Table 6a summarizes the data from the 1984, 1994, and 2004 Am Law surveys. The data exhibit

two strong patterns. First, a large number of law partners are in the top 0.5% and top 0.1% of the income

distribution in 2004. Second, both the compensation of law partners and the number of highly

compensated law partners have grown substantially over time.

        Table 6a indicates that the average profits per partner in the top 50, top 100, and top 200 U.S. law

firms in 2004, respectively, were $1.26, $1.01 and $0.83 million. These averages are the averages of the

average profit per partner for each firm. The medians of the averages are lower, at $1.08, $0.86 and $0.67

million. These profits accrued to, respectively, 11,034, 17,861, and 26,755 partners. Average profits per

partner exceed $2 million for 9 firms; they are at least $0.5 million for 93 of the top 100 firms, and 152 of

the top 200 firms.

        Because, the law firms do not make the profit distributions to individual partners known to the

public, it is impossible to know exactly how the payouts to individual partners are distributed around the

average profits per partner. Conversations with law partners suggest that the distribution is not so skewed

as the distribution of CEO and investment banker MD pay. In what follows, we make the following

distributional assumption. We assume that 1/3 of the partners earn more than the average while 2/3 of the

partners make less than the average. We assume that the most highly paid partner earns twice the average

while the least highly paid partner earns half the average. We base this distribution on conversations with

law partners at top firms. For some firms, the distribution is less skewed; for others, more skewed. Our


                                                      29
sense is that this captures the distribution on average. The bottom line of our results would not be very

different if we assumed a less skewed distribution.

           Based on these distributions, we estimate that 14,351 of the 17,861 partners in the Am Law 100

earned more than $0.48 million in 2004. Table 6b indicates that these partners represent more than 2% of

the returns with AGI’s in the top 0.5% and top 0.1%.

           If we extend the analysis to the Am Law 200, we estimate that another 4,246 lawyers earn more

than $0.48 million, bringing the total to over 18,000; and another 312 earn more than $1.4 million

bringing the total to 3,477.8 These figures imply that when the Am Law 200 firms are included, equity

partners comprise more than 2.6% of the AGI distribution above the top 0.5% and top 0.1%. When we

exclude investment income Am Law 200 partners comprise more than 4% of the top 0.1%.

           It also is worth pointing out that the 26,000 plus equity partners at Am Law 200 firms earn a total

of roughly $22 billion (at $0.83 million per partner). This is the same order of magnitude as the total pay

to non-financial top executives, investment banking MDs, hedge fund investors, and PE and VC

investors.

           Furthermore, table 6a indicates that lawyers have experienced a large real increase in pay over the

last 10 and 20 years. In 1984, the average profit per partner at the top 50 firms was $0.309 million or

$0.498 million in $2004. By 1994, the average profit per partner had increased to $0.531 million or

$0.636 in $2004. And by 2004, the average profit per partner at the top 50 firms had increased to $1.260

million.

           The table also reports the AGI cutoffs for the top 0.5% and top 0.1% of the AGI distribution in

those three years. In 2004, AGI of $0.48 million and $1.40 million, respectively, were in the top 0.5%

and top 0.1% of the AGI distribution. In 1994, the analogous figures were $0.29 million and $0.73 M; in

1984, they were $0.16 million and $0.42 million. While the average profit per partner in 1984 and 1994



8
  Because some of the partners of these law firms are based overseas, this overstates the true number of partners in
these brackets. It is impossible to know how large this effect is, both absolutely and compared to the overstatement
for top executives.


                                                         30
is close to the midpoint of the two cutoffs, the average profit per partner is much closer to the top 0.1% in

2004 suggesting that the average law partner is now at a higher point in the AGI distribution than before.

        Table 6a also indicates that the number of partners has increased substantially going from an

average of 90 in 1984, to 155 in 1994 and to 221 in the top 50 firms in 2004. In the top 100 firms, the

average number of equity partners increased from an average of 130 in 1994 to 179 in 2004.

         Table 6b shows the effect of the increase in equity partners and compensation per partner by

comparing the contribution of the equity partners to the top AGI brackets in the different years. The table

indicates that the equity partners at top law firms have markedly increased their presence in the top

income brackets. In 1984, Am Law 50 partners represented 0.50% of the top 0.5% and 1.06% of the top

0.1%. These increased to 0.90% and 0.97%, respectively, in 1994, and to 1.50% and 2.05% in 2004.

Am Law 100 partners comprised 1.46% of the top 0.5% and 1.30% of the top 0.1% AGI brackets in

1994. This increased to 2.17% and 2.39%, respectively, in 2004.

        Overall then, the representation of top corporate lawyers in the top 0.5% and top 0.1% AGI

brackets has increased substantially over time.



V.      Professional Athletes

        In this section, we look at the pay of professional athletes. To do this, we collect compensation

information on professional baseball, football, and basketball players in the U.S. These three sports are

among the most popular in the U.S. and include a relatively large number of athletes.

        We obtain baseball compensation information for 1984 to 2005 from the “Business of Baseball”

website (http://roadsidephotos.sabr.org/baseball/data.htm) and from USA Today for 2005. We obtain

basketball and football compensation information from Professor Rodney Fort of Washington State

University (http://www.rodneyfort.com/PHSportsEcon/Common/OtherData/DataDirectory.html). Fort

credits sports statistician Patricia Bender for the basketball information from 1991-2000, and the USA

Today site for information from 2001-present. He obtained the football information from USA Today




                                                     31
and Sports Illustrated. These figures understate AGI because they only include income earned from the

athlete’s team and, therefore, do not include any income from endorsements and other sources

        Table 7 describes the extent to which those professional athletes are represented in the top end of

AGI distributions for 1995 and 2004. The level of pay has increased substantially with the average

athlete earning $1.85 million in 2004 versus $0.78 million in 1995. The table also indicates that the

athletes represent roughly the same percentage of the top 0.1%, but a larger percentage of the top 0.01%

AGI bracket in 2004 than they did in 1995. In 1995 and 2004, the athletes in baseball, football and

basketball represented 0.8% of the returns in the top 0.1%. At the same time, the athletes represented

1.0% of the returns in the top 0.01% in 1995, but 1.5% of the returns in the top 0.01% in 2004.

        The table also shows that in total, the 3400 plus athletes earned just over $6.3 billion in 2004.

This sum is substantially smaller than the sums going to the other groups we have analyzed.

        Over this period, then, professional athletes increased their pay substantially, maintained or

increased their share of the top brackets, but represented a small fraction of those very top brackets.



VI.     Contributions to top end of the income distribution

        In this section, we attempt to aggregate the results from the previous section to see how many

individuals we can identify at the very top end of the income distribution.

        To summarize, we have estimated the number of high income individuals who are top executives

at public companies, highly compensated investment bankers, hedge fund investors, VC investors, PE

investors, lawyers and professional athletes. Table 8a presents a summary of the individuals that we

count in each category for the top fractiles – from top 0.5% to top 0.0001% -- of the earnings distribution

in 2004. Table 8a also includes the estimated earnings of the individuals in the Forbes Celebrity 100 in

2004. The table does not include estimates of the number of highly paid individuals at mutual funds and

other institutional money managers. As a result, we believe that the estimates in these tables understate

the individuals in our groups that are in the top brackets.




                                                      32
           In table 8a, we use the ExecuComp data on realized pay and our estimates for the non-

ExecuComp executives to populate the top brackets for non-financial and financial executives. We use

the exponential-based estimates of the distribution of investment banker income. For hedge fund

investors, we use an average compensation of 3.2% of assets under management and estimate an average

of $3.2 million in compensation per 9,000 highly compensated employees. We assume that all 9,000

have AGI above $0.48 million (top 0.5%) and 1/3 or 3,000 have AGI above $1.4 million (top 0.1%). We

use Trader Monthly and the II Alpha 25 for the very top end of the hedge fund distribution. We almost

certainly underestimate the number of hedge fund investors in the top 0.01% ($7.2 million) because the

Trader Monthly and II Alpha lists do not report enough hedge fund investor incomes to go below $12

million. For VC investors, we assume an average compensation of 4.0% of assets under management and

estimate an average of $1.8 million (the midpoint of the $1.3 to $2.3 million range) in compensation per

6,000 partners. We assume that all 6,000 partners have AGI above $0.48 million and 1/5 or 1,200 have

AGI above $1.4 million. For PE investors, under the 4.0% assumption, we estimate an average of $2.8

million in compensation per 5,400 partners. We assume that all 5,400 have AGI above $0.48 million and

2/5 or 2,160 have AGI above $1.4 million. For VC and PE, we do not try to make any assumptions for

incomes above the top 0.01%. We do recognize that at least three PE investors – Kravis, Roberts and

Schwarzman – earned at least $101 million and were in the top 0.0001% bracket. We use the

distributions calculated earlier for law partners and professional athletes.

           Table 8a indicates that our groups comprise at least 9.1% of those in the top 0.5% AGI bracket,

about 20% of those in the top 0.01% bracket, and approximately 26.5% of those in the very top 0.0001%

bracket.

           Including financial top executives, investment bankers, hedge funds, VC investors, and PE

investors, we count more than twice as many Wall Street individuals as Main Street individuals (non-

financial top executives) in the top 0.5% and the top 0.1% of the AGI distribution.

           We also estimate that financial top executives, investment bankers, and hedge fund investors

comprise a greater fraction of the top 0.01%, a similar fraction of the top 0.001% and a substantially


                                                      33
greater fraction of the top 0.0001% than the top Main Street individuals. Including VC investors, PE

investors, mutual fund investors, and measuring hedge fund investors more accurately would almost

certainly tip the fraction in favor of Wall Street for the top 0.001% as well.

        When we estimate AGI brackets excluding investment income, our groups explain a larger

fraction of the top groups, particularly the top 0.01%. Our groups comprise almost 10% of the top 0.5%,

22.2% of the top 0.1%, almost 33% of the top 0.01% and more than 26% of the top 0.001%. We are

unable to do this calculation for the top 0.0001%.

        Table 8b takes an alternative look at our different groups. It summarizes the dollar amounts of

AGI and fees of our various groups and how they have changed over time. The AGI of the non-financial

executives in ExecuComp in 2004 is $34 billion. This has increased in real terms by a factor of 2.6 times

from $12.9 billion ($10.7 billion nominal).

        Using the exponential distribution, we estimate that investment bankers earned a total of $28.4

billion in 2004. Because of data availability issues, we are unable to estimate total compensation in 1994.

        Fees to hedge funds investors totaled $25.4 million in 2004, an increase in real terms by a factor

over 7 times relative to 1994. Fees to PE funds and VC funds totaled $18.4 billion and $10.9 billion in

2004. These represent increases in real terms by factors of 3.9 and 6.8 times respectively relative to 1994.

Estimated fees to mutual funds increased by 1.9 times in real terms from 1995 to 2004 after having

increased by 4.6 times from 1985 to 1995.

        Law partners at the Am Law 100 earned a total of $18.1 billion in 2004, representing an increase

in real profits of 2.6 times relative to 1994, virtually identical to the increase to top non-financial

executives.

        While it is not possible to map all of these results into changes in the income distribution, these

results again strongly suggest that Wall Street and legal professionals have contributed at least as much as

and probably more than top executives of non-financial public companies to the widening of the income

distribution.




                                                       34
VII.      Pay-for-Performance

          Some critics of CEO and top executive pay point not only to the high levels of pay, but also argue

that those executives are not paid for performance. For example, Bebchuk and Fried (2005) argue that

CEO compensation schemes “weaken managers’ incentives to increase firm value and even create

incentives to take actions that reduce long-term reduce long-term reduce firm value.” They and others

have led some to conclude that there is no link between top executive pay and firm performance. The

compensation of top executives is often contrasted with that of hedge fund, VC, and PE investors who are

supposedly highly paid for performance.

          In this section, we provide evidence on the relation between firm performance and CEO

compensation. We also discuss the extent to which hedge fund, VC, and PE investors are paid for

performance.

          First, we use the ExecuComp database to compare the amount of compensation the CEOs

actually receive – realized compensation or TDC2 – to the company performance over the previous one,

three, and five years. Each year from 1999 to 2004, we sort the ExecuComp firms into five groups based

on beginning of year book assets. We do this because it is well-known that compensation varies with

firm size. (See Gabaix and Landier (2006)). Within each size group, we sort the CEOs into five groups

based on realized compensation from lowest to highest. For each firm-year, we measure performance as

the total return to the firm’s stock less the value-weighted performance of the firm’s industry (using

Fama-French industry returns). We then compare performance across the different compensation-size

groups.

          Figure 3 reports the results graphically for the three previous years of stock performance. Within

each size quintile, actual compensation is highly related to performance, i.e., there is strong pay-for-

performance. Firms with the CEOs in the top 20% of compensation outperform their industries by an

average of 61%. Firms with CEOs in the bottom 20% of compensation underperform their industries by

an average of 19%. The results are qualitatively identical for one year and five years of stock

performance.


                                                      35
        We suspect some of the confusion over pay is that critics focus on ex ante or estimated pay rather

than realized pay. Because much of realized pay reflects the exercise of in-the-money options, CEOs will

tend to receive large payoffs whenever their firms’ stock has increased substantially. It is not surprising

that most large payoffs result from strong stock performance. Estimates in Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005)

imply that at least 1/2 of the expected value of CEO compensation has been equity-based since 1996.

        It also is worth mentioning that CEO turnover has increased over time as has the relation of CEO

turnover to poor performance. (See Kaplan and Minton (2006)). Those results suggest that boards do

hold CEOs accountable for poor performance, providing CEOs additional incentives to perform.

        It is interesting to compare top executive compensation to hedge fund, VC, and PE investor

compensation. As mentioned earlier, all three types of investors receive compensation that is a

combination of a fixed annual management fee and a variable share of profits, usually 20%. These

option-like payoffs imply that compensation of hedge fund, VC, and PE investors is strongly related to

performance if the performance is positive, but is unrelated to performance if the performance is poor. In

other words, hedge fund, VC, and PE fund investors can earn a lot of money even with mediocre or even

poor performance. Estimates in Metrick and Yasuda (2007) suggest that the performance-based

component – the profit share or carried interest – of VCs and PE investors represents less than 40% of the

expected present value of compensation.

        Although the compensation of these different groups is not directly comparable, it is not obvious

that CEO pay is any less related to performance than that of hedge fund, VC, and PE investors.



VIII.   Summary and Implications

        We have attempted to measure how much of the inequality today at the top end of the income

distribution can be attributed to different sectors of the economy – top executives of non-financial firms

(Main Street); financial service sector employees from investment banks, hedge funds, VC funds, PE

funds, and mutual funds (Wall Street); lawyers; and professional athletes. We also have estimated how

those contributions have varied over time.


                                                     36
        Studying these groups, we believe we are able to identify at least 15% to 26.5% of the individuals

who comprise the AGI categories at and above the top 0.1%. We estimate that CEOs and top executives

of non-financial public companies comprise fewer than half of these individuals and do not comprise

more than 6.4% of any of the top AGI brackets. Individuals we characterize as Wall Street professionals

comprise a greater a fraction of the top end of the distribution than the top five executives of “Main

Street” public companies.

        We believe our assumptions are generally conservative and, therefore, these groups – particularly

the non-executive groups – may represent a larger fraction of the very top than we are able to report.

Nevertheless, even under less conservative assumptions, we doubt those groups could possibly explain

more than 40% of the very top categories. While our estimates represent a substantial portion of the top

income groups, they clearly miss a large number of high-earning individuals. This seems strongly

inconsistent with the claim in Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005) that CEOs, celebrities, and athletes explain

most of the top end of the distribution. We suspect that some of the missing individuals are trial lawyers,

executives of privately-held companies, and independently wealthy individuals who have a high AGI.

        We also find that the representation of the top executives in the top AGI brackets has increased

only modestly from 1994 to 2004, particularly using ex ante compensation. Using realized compensation,

top executives comprise roughly the same fraction of the top 0.1% of the AGI distribution in 2004 as they

did in 1994 and a somewhat higher fraction of the top 0.01% (5.3% in 2004 versus 3.9% in 1994). Using

ex ante compensation, top executives comprise a slightly lower fraction of the top 0.1% (3.32% versus

3.55%) and a slightly higher fraction of the top 0.01% (3.93% versus 3.65%) in 2004 than they did in

1994. In contrast, the contributions of hedge fund managers, private equity investors, venture capital

investors, and corporate lawyers have clearly increased substantially over the past 10 and 20 years, likely

by a greater amount than the top executives.

        These results inform some of the different explanations for the increased skewness at the top end

of the income distribution. As mentioned earlier, these explanations include trade theories (Hecksher

(1931), Olin (1933), Stolper and Samuelson (1941)), skill biased technological change (Katz and Murphy


                                                     37
(1992)), increasing returns to generalists rather than specialists (Murphy and Zabojnik (2004), Frydman

(2005)), stealing theories (Bebchuk and Fried (2004) and Bebchuk and Grinstein (2005)), social norms

(Piketty and Saez (2006a) and Levy and Temin(2007)), greater scale (Gabaix and Landier (2006)), and

the economics of superstars (Rosen (1981) which posits technological advance as an explanation for

greater scale.

        We believe our results are not well-explained by trade theories, increasing returns to generalists,

stealing theories, and social norms.

        The trade theories predict that the increase in inequality will be greater among individuals or

groups in industries that are most engaged in trade. It seems unlikely that trade theories can account for

the increase in inequality at the top levels of the income distribution given the breadth of the phenomenon

across the occupations we study. In particular, it seems difficult for trade to explain the increase in the

top end of VC investors, PE investors, and, particularly, lawyers and professional athletes. For example,

it is difficult to understand how trade has increased the pay of U.S. lawyers (most of whose human capital

is country-specific) by a factor of four over the last twenty years..

        The theory of increasing returns to generalists predicts an increased return to those with generalist

skills, and has been proffered as one explanation for the increase in CEO and top executive pay. We

think the types of occupations responsible for some of the increase in the top end of the income

distribution are not consistent with this theory. In particular, we do not believe that lawyers, hedge fund

investors, investment bankers, or professional athletes have become less specialized / more general over

time. In fact, the opposite seems more likely to be true.

        The stealing theories argue that corporate governance deteriorated in the last ten years to such an

extent that CEOs and top executives have been able to increase their compensation substantially through

what amounts to stealing. CEOs (and top executives) are the only one of the groups we study who some

argue can set their own pay without competitive negotiation. While we do not test directly whether any

group of individuals is stealing or not, our evidence suggests that stealing CEOs or poor corporate

governance cannot possibly be more than a small part of the picture of increasing income inequality, even


                                                      38
at the very upper end of the distribution. First, other groups that are not in a position to steal have

experienced equal or larger increases in their contribution to the top AGI brackets. Second, top

executives occupy roughly the same part of the top AGI brackets in 2004 as they did in 1994 using ex

ante compensation – the amount that boards of directors expect to pay. Third, the top executives

represent less than 6.4% of any of the top AGI brackets (using realized pay) and CEOs represent less than

5% of any of the top brackets. Fourth, realized top executive compensation (as measured by TDC2) is

strongly related to a company’s stock performance.

        Our evidence also is hard to reconcile with the arguments in Piketty and Saez (2006a) and Levy

and Temin (2007) that the increase in pay at the top is driven by the recent removal of social norms

regarding pay inequality. Piketty and Saez (2006a) suggest that “impediments to free markets due to

labor market regulations, unions, or social norms regarding pay inequality can keep executive pay below

market. Such impediments have been largely removed in the United States, but still exist in Europe and

Japan.” Levy and Temin (2007) emphasize the importance of Federal government policies towards

unions, income taxation and the minimum wage. We do not think our evidence is favorable towards a

central role for social norms. While top executive pay has increased, so has the pay of other groups,

particularly Wall Street groups, who are and were less subject to disclosure and, arguably, less subject to

social norms. In addition, the compensation arrangements at hedge funds, VC funds, and PE funds of a

2% management fee and 20% profit share have not changed much, if at all, in the last twenty-five years

(see Sahlman (1990), Gompers and Lerner (1999), and Metrick and Yasuda (2007)). Furthermore, it is

not clear how greater unionization would have suppressed the pay of those on Wall Street. In other

words, there is no evidence of a change in social norms on Wall Street. What has changed is the amount

of money managed and the concomitant amount of pay.

        We believe that our evidence remains more favorable toward the theories of skill-biased

technological change, greater scale and superstars.

        Skill biased technological change predicts that inequality will increase if technological progress

raises the productivity of skilled workers relative to unskilled workers and / or raises the price of goods


                                                      39
made by skilled workers relative to those made by unskilled workers. For example, computers and

advances in information technology may complement skilled labor and substitute for unskilled labor.

This seems likely to provide part of the explanation for the increase in pay of professional athletes

(technology increases their marginal product by allowing them to reach more consumers) and Wall Street

investors (technology allows them to acquire information and trade large amounts more easily and

efficiently).

         Gabaix and Landier (2006) argue that the wage differential between the best and next best CEO

for a firm will reflect the talent differential between the two multiplied by the size of the firm. In

equilibrium, CEOs and top executives will be paid more as their firms and the other firms they can work

for become larger. In other words, the larger size increases the returns to hiring the more productive

people. As long as other firms are also large, competition for talent will drive wages up. This theory is

not necessarily specific to CEOs and top executives.

         While we do not test the Gabaix and Landier (2006) theory directly, our results are arguably

consistent with it. Gabaix and Landier point out that U.S. public companies have grown larger over time,

with the typical large firm increasing in market value by four to seven times in real terms from 1980 to

2003. In our analysis, we find that financial services firms, VC funds, PE funds, hedge funds, and law

firms all have grown larger, in many instances by orders of magnitude. For example, the typical law firm

in the Am Law 50 has increased revenues by six times in real terms from 1984 to 2004. Similarly, the

total amount of capital per employee at the top 50 firms in the securities industry has increased by almost

nine times in real terms from 1987 to 2004.

         Our results also are consistent with Rosen (1981) who argues that technological change,

particularly in information and communications, can increase the relative productivity of superstars or

talented individuals. Rosen’s theory can be viewed as a combination of the previous two explanations in

that the individuals and firms who benefit from the technological change are likely to get larger. It is

worth noting that Gabaix and Landier do not explain why firms (and funds) have been able to become so

much larger over time. The same technological change that is biased towards skills may have helped


                                                      40
firms and funds to become larger during our sample period.




                                                  41
References


Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F., and Kearney, Melissa S., 2005, “Trends in U. S. Wage Inequality:
        Re-assessing the Revisionists,” NBER Working Paper 11627, September.

Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F., and Kearney, Melissa S., 2006, “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
        Market,” American Economic Review 96 (2).

Bebchuk, Lucian and Jesse Fried, 2005, “Pay Without Performance: Overview of the Issues,” Journal of
      Applied Corporate Finance, 17:4, 8-23.

Bebchuk, Lucian and Grinstein, Yaniv, 2005, “The Growth of Executive Pay,” Oxford Review of
      Economic Policy 21(2), 283-303.

Bogle, Jack, 2005, The Battle for the Soul of Capitalism, New Haven:Yale University Press.

Chany, Nicholas, Mila Getmansky, Shane M. Haas, and Andrew W. Lo, 2005, “Systemic Risk and Hedge
       Funds,” Working paper, Sloan School, MIT.

Dew-Becker, Ian and Robert J. Gordon, 2005, “Where Did the Productivity Go? Inflation Dynamics and
      the Distribution of Income.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2.

Fleischer, Victor, 2007, “Two and Twenty: Partnership Profits in Hedge Funds, Venture Capital Funds
        and Private Equity Funds,” UCLA Law School Working Paper.

Frydman, Carola , 2005, “Rising Through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate
      Executives, 1936-2003,” working paper, Harvard University.

Frydman, Carola and Raven E. Saks, 2005, “Historical Trends in Executive Compensation, 1936-2003,”
      working paper, Harvard University.

Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier, 2006, “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?” working paper,
        New York University.

Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2006, “Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge
       Economy”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Garicano, Luis and Tom Hubbard, 2007, “The Returns to Knowledge Hierarchies,” working paper,
       University of Chicago.

Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 1999, “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture Capital
      Partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51, 3-44.

Hall, Brian J., and Jeffrey B. Liebman, 1998, “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 113, 653-691.

Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy, 2003, “The Trouble with Stock Options,” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 17(3), 49-70.

Hecksher, Eli, 1931, Merkantilismen, Stockholm: Norstedt & Söner.


                                                  42
Jensen, Michael C, Kevin J. Murphy, and Eric G. Wruck, 2004, “Remuneration: Where We’ve Been,
        How We Got Here, What are the Problems, and How to Fix Them,” working paper, Harvard
        Business School, NOM Working Paper 04-28.

Kaplan, Steven and Bernadette Minton, 2006, “How has CEO Turnover Changed? Increasingly
        Performance Sensitive Boards and Increasingly Uneasy CEOs,” working paper, University of
        Chicago.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, 1992, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
        Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35-78.

Levy, Frank and Peter Temin, 2007, Inequality and Institutions in 20th Century America, working paper,
       MIT.

Malkiel, B. and A. Saha, 2005, “Hedge Funds: Risk and Return,” Working paper, Princeton University.

Metrick, Andrew and Ayako Yasuda, 2007, Economics of Private Equity Funds, working paper, Wharton
       School, University of Pennsylvania.

Morrison, A. and W. Wilhelm, forthcoming, “The Demise of Investment-Banking Partnerships: Theory
       and Evidence,” Journal of Finance.

Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik, 2004, “CEO Pay and Turnover: A Market Based Explanation for
      Recent Trends,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 192-196.

Ohlin, Bertil, 1933, Interregional and International Trade, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Piketty, Thomas and Saez, Emmanuel, 2003, “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913- 1998,”
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1-39.

Piketty, Thomas and Saez, Emmanuel, 2006a, “The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical and
         International Perspective,” American Economic Review 96 (2), 200-206.

Piketty, Thomas and Saez, Emmanuel, 2006b, “New tables updated to 2004 for Income Inequality in the
         United States, 1913-2004,” working paper, University of California.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1981, “The Economics of Superstars,” American Economic Review 71(5), 845-858.

Sahlman, William, 1990, “The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations,”
       Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 473-521.

Stolper, Wolfgang F., and Paul A. Samuelson, 1941, “Protection and Real Wages,” Review of Economic
         Studies 9, 58-73.

Sundaram, R. and D. Yermack, 2005, “Pay Me Later: Inside Debt and Its Role in Managerial
       Compensation,” working paper, New York University.

Topel, Robert, 2005, “Comments on Dew-Becker and Gordon,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
        2.



                                                   43
Table 1a: AGI Thresholds and Top Executive Compensation, Execucomp Executives
                                                                                       Including Options Exercised                                                  Including Options Granted
                                                                         Execucomp Non-Financial           Execucomp Financial                        Execucomp Non-Financial          Execucomp Financial

                                                                                                 Share of                              Share of                               Share of                              Share of
                                     Number of                         Number of     Share of   Bracket and   Number of    Share of   Bracket and   Number of     Share of   Bracket and   Number of    Share of   Bracket and
Bottom of Bracket   Top of Bracket    Returns         Bracket          Executives    Bracket      Above       Executives   Bracket      Above       Executives    Bracket      Above       Executives   Bracket      Above


2004
          $0           $309,160      131,061,150     0-99                   557       0.00%        0.01%            28      0.00%        0.00%           555       0.00%        0.01%            41      0.00%        0.00%
    $309,160           $479,177          661,925    99-99.5                 926       0.14%        0.55%            56      0.01%        0.05%           637       0.10%        0.55%            60      0.01%        0.04%
    $479,177         $1,400,370          529,540   99.5-99.9               2905       0.55%        0.95%           195      0.04%        0.08%          2961       0.56%        1.00%           200      0.04%        0.08%
  $1,400,370         $7,189,506          119,146 99.9-99.99                2824       2.37%        2.58%           249      0.21%        0.27%          3182       2.67%        2.76%           247      0.21%        0.25%
  $7,189,506        $31,178,805           11,915 99.99-99.999               524       4.40%        4.46%            87      0.73%        0.77%           445       3.73%        3.54%            78      0.65%        0.62%
 $31,178,805                               1,324   >99.999                   67       5.06%        5.06%            15      1.13%        1.13%            23       1.74%        1.74%             4      0.30%        0.30%

                                                    Mean ($M)                        $2.82                                  $4.54                                 $2.45                                  $3.66
                                                   Median ($M)                       $1.17                                  $1.66                                 $1.28                                  $1.48
                                             Total Dollars ($M)                     $22,025                                $2,863                                $19,084                                $2,307

1994
          $0           $194,200      114,783,570     0-99                   807       0.00%        0.01%            18      0.00%        0.00%           948       0.00%        0.01%            41      0.00%        0.00%
    $194,200           $286,290          579,715    99-99.5                1124       0.19%        0.59%            67      0.00%        0.06%           777       0.13%        0.58%            50      0.01%        0.06%
    $286,290           $733,602          463,772   99.5-99.9               3207       0.69%        0.99%           275      0.00%        0.11%          2851       0.61%        1.03%           243      0.05%        0.11%
    $733,602         $3,179,134          104,349 99.9-99.99                2262       2.17%        2.21%           310      0.00%        0.32%          2698       2.59%        2.69%           302      0.29%        0.34%
  $3,179,134        $13,444,936           10,435 99.99-99.999               275       2.64%        2.56%            52      0.50%        0.51%           394       3.78%        3.65%            87      0.83%        0.80%
 $13,444,936                               1,159   >99.999                   22       1.90%        1.90%             7      0.60%        0.60%            29       2.50%        2.50%             6      0.52%        0.52%

                                                    Mean ($M)                        $0.91                                 $1.32                                  $1.04                                  $1.53
                                                   Median ($M)                       $0.49                                 $0.74                                  $0.57                                  $0.82
                                             Total Dollars ($M)                     $6,988                                 $960                                  $8,037                                 $1,117

   This table shows the distribution of total compensation for executives in Execucomp relative to the distribution of AGI income. Only the top 5 executives in terms of TDC2 are counted for each Execucomp
   company. Financial firms are defined as firms that have an SIC code between 6000 and 6299, which includes depository institutions, nondepositorycredit institutions, and securities and commodities brokers.
   Percentilesare shown relative to the number of tax filers. The cutoffs for the top fractiles of AGI income in 1994 are calculated based on the detailed IRS Statistics of Income files for US individuals, held at the
   NBER. The cutoffs for the top fractiles of AGI income in 2004 are calculated based on the 2002 distribution (the latest years for which the detailed files are available) and the relation between the 2002 and
   2004 fractiles documented in the tabulations of Piketty and Saez (2003, 2006).
Table 1b: AGI Thresholds and Execucomp CEO Compensation
                                                                       Including Options Exercised             Including Options Granted
                                                                      Execucomp Non-Financial                  Execucomp Non-Financial
                                                                                            Share of                                       Share of
                                     Number of                      Number of   Share of   Bracket and     Number of                      Bracket and
Bottom of Bracket   Top of Bracket    Returns        Bracket          CEOs      Bracket      Above           CEOs      Share of Bracket     Above


2004
           $0          $309,160      131,061,150     0-99                  37     0.00%        0.00%              45           0.00%          0.00%
     $309,160          $479,177          661,925 99-99.5                   64     0.01%        0.11%              40           0.01%          0.11%
     $479,177        $1,400,370          529,540 99.5-99.9                392     0.07%        0.22%             281           0.05%          0.22%
   $1,400,370        $7,189,506          119,146 99.9-99.99               749     0.63%        0.80%             890           0.75%          0.90%
   $7,189,506       $31,178,805           11,915 99.99-99.999             272     2.28%        2.36%             280           2.35%          2.25%
  $31,178,805                              1,324 >99.999                   40     3.02%        3.02%              18           1.36%          1.36%

                                                  Mean ($M)                      $5.77                                     $5.08
                                                 Median ($M)                     $2.54                                     $3.01
                                           Total Dollars ($M)                   $8,964                                    $7,900
1994
           $0          $194,200      114,783,570     0-99                  21     0.00%        0.00%              21           0.00%          0.00%
     $194,200          $286,290          579,715 99-99.5                   51     0.01%        0.12%              30           0.01%          0.12%
     $286,290          $733,602          463,772 99.5-99.9                469     0.10%        0.23%             353           0.08%          0.23%
     $733,602        $3,179,134          104,349 99.9-99.99               718     0.69%        0.74%             764           0.73%          0.86%
   $3,179,134       $13,444,936           10,435 99.99-99.999             131     1.26%        1.20%             209           2.00%          1.98%
  $13,444,936                              1,159 >99.999                    8     0.69%        0.69%              21           1.81%          1.81%

                                                  Mean ($M)                      $1.58                                     $2.08
                                                 Median ($M)                     $0.94                                     $1.22
                                           Total Dollars ($M)                   $2,213                                    $2,910
  This table shows the distribution of total compensation including options exercised (TDC2) for CEOs in Execucomp relative to the
  distribution of AGI income. This tabulation is similar to Table 1a, the only difference being that only CEOs are counted. See note to Table
  1a for further details.
Table 1c: AGI Thresholds and Top Executive Compensation, Effect of Non-Execucomp Executives
                                                                                 Non-Execucomp Non-Financial                                             Execucomp and Non-Execucomp Non-Financial
                                                                 Including Options Exercised      Including Options Granted                    Including Options Exercised        Including Options Granted
                                                                                          Share of                              Share of                               Share of                               Share of
                                   Number of                    Number of     Share of   Bracket and   Number of    Share of   Bracket and   Number of     Share of   Bracket and   Number of     Share of   Bracket and
Bottom of Bracket Top of Bracket    Returns        Bracket      Executives    Bracket      Above       Executives   Bracket      Above       Executives    Bracket      Above       Executives    Bracket      Above


2004
          $0    $309,160           131,061,150     0-99              4111       0.00%       0.01%           6059      0.00%       0.01%           4668       0.00%        0.02%          6614       0.01%        0.02%
    $309,160    $479,177               661,925    99-99.5            3292       0.50%       0.77%           4137      0.63%       0.62%           4218       0.64%        1.32%          4774       0.72%        1.17%
    $479,177  $1,400,370               529,540   99.5-99.9           5259       0.99%       1.04%           3340      0.63%       0.62%           8164       1.54%        1.99%          6301       1.19%        1.62%
  $1,400,370  $7,189,506               119,146 99.9-99.99            1518       1.27%       1.23%            695      0.58%       0.56%           4342       3.64%        3.80%          3877       3.25%        3.32%
  $7,189,506 $31,178,805                11,915 99.99-99.999            86       0.72%       0.79%             50      0.42%       0.39%            610       5.12%        5.25%           495       4.15%        3.93%
 $31,178,805                             1,324    >99.999              18       1.34%       1.34%              2      0.18%       0.18%             85       6.40%        6.40%            25       1.92%        1.92%

                                                  Mean ($M)                   $0.84                                  $0.56                                 $1.54                                  $1.23
                                                Median ($M)                   $0.50                                  $0.38                                 $0.74                                  $0.70
                                           Total Dollars ($M)                $12,000                                $8,022                                $34,026                                $27,106

1994
          $0    $194,200           114,783,570     0-99              2801       0.00%       0.01%           3780      0.00%       0.01%           3608       0.00%        0.02%          4728       0.00%        0.02%
    $194,200    $286,290               579,715    99-99.5            1933       0.33%       0.60%           2112      0.36%       0.51%           3057       0.53%        1.19%          2889       0.50%        1.10%
    $286,290    $733,602               463,772   99.5-99.9           3410       0.74%       0.86%           2856      0.62%       0.66%           6617       1.43%        1.85%          5707       1.23%        1.69%
    $733,602  $3,179,134               104,349 99.9-99.99            1418       1.36%       1.36%            995      0.95%       0.86%           3680       3.53%        3.57%          3693       3.54%        3.55%
  $3,179,134 $13,444,936                10,435 99.99-99.999           156       1.49%       1.34%              0      0.00%       0.00%            431       4.13%        3.91%           394       3.78%        3.65%
 $13,444,936                             1,159    >99.999               0       0.00%       0.00%              0      0.00%       0.00%             22       1.90%        1.90%            29       2.50%        2.50%

                                                  Mean ($M)                   $0.38                                  $0.55                                 $0.61                                  $0.77
                                                Median ($M)                   $0.27                                  $0.37                                 $0.37                                  $0.46
                                           Total Dollars ($M)                $3,712                                 $5,329                                $10,700                                $13,366

   This table shows the estimated distribution of total compensation for top 5 executives of companies not in the Execucomp database, relative to the distribution of AGI income. Non-Execucomp counts were
   obtained by sampling the disclosure documents of non-Execucomp firms in 1994 and 2004, and then scaling to the number of non-Execucomp firms in the universe. See note to Table 1a for details on the
   computation of the income fractile thresholds and the definition of financial versus non-financial firms.
Table 1d: Non-Investment Income Thresholds and Top Executive Compensation
                                                                                        Execucomp Non-Financial                                                Execucomp and Non-Execucomp Non-Financial
                                                                        Including Options Exercised       Including Options Granted                   Including Options Exercised       Including Options Granted

                                                                                               Share of                               Share of                               Share of                               Share of
                                   Number of                          Number of    Share of   Bracket and    Number of    Share of   Bracket and    Number of    Share of   Bracket and    Number of    Share of   Bracket and
Bottom of Bracket Top of Bracket    Returns          Bracket          Executives   Bracket      Above        Executives   Bracket      Above        Executives   Bracket      Above        Executives   Bracket      Above


2004 Execucomp Executives
          $0    $270,601           131,061,150     0-99                     361     0.00%        0.01%             405      0.00%       0.01%            3177     0.00%        0.02%            4864      0.00%       0.02%
    $270,601    $404,912               661,925    99-99.5                   702     0.11%        0.56%             497      0.08%       0.56%            4008     0.61%        1.43%            4908      0.74%       1.30%
    $404,912 $1,121,024                529,540  99.5-99.9                  2711     0.51%        1.02%            2524      0.48%       1.04%            8743     1.65%        2.25%            6830      1.29%       1.86%
  $1,121,024 $5,143,664                119,146 99.9-99.99                  3110     2.61%        3.04%            3540      2.97%       3.31%            5026     4.22%        4.65%            4520      3.79%       4.14%
  $5,143,664 $19,778,205                11,915 99.99-99.999                 782     6.56%        6.94%             771      6.47%       6.32%             975     8.19%        8.55%             886      7.44%       7.28%
 $19,778,205                             1,324   >99.999                    137    10.35%       10.35%              66      4.99%       4.99%             157    11.87%       11.87%              78      5.89%       5.89%

1994 Execucomp Executives
          $0    $170,850           114,783,570     0-99                     555      0.00%       0.01%             760      0.00%       0.01%            2475      0.00%       0.02%            3680      0.00%       0.02%
    $170,850    $243,593               579,715    99-99.5                   873      0.15%       0.62%             595      0.10%       0.60%            3020      0.00%       1.29%            2767      0.48%       1.19%
    $243,593    $584,837               463,772  99.5-99.9                  3017      0.65%       1.08%            2573      0.55%       1.09%            6445      0.00%       2.06%            5791      1.25%       1.90%
    $584,837 $2,267,697                104,349 99.9-99.99                  2742      2.63%       2.80%            3052      2.92%       3.25%            4797      0.00%       4.74%            4486      4.30%       4.49%
  $2,267,697 $8,922,199                 10,435 99.99-99.999                 464      4.45%       4.40%             655      6.28%       6.18%             657      6.30%       6.06%             655      6.28%       6.18%
  $8,922,199                             1,159   >99.999                     46      3.97%       3.97%              62      5.35%       5.35%              46      3.97%       3.97%              62      5.35%       5.35%


  This table shows the distribution of total compensation for executives relative to the distribution of AGI income. Only the top 5 executives in terms of TDC2 are counted for each Execucomp company. Non-
  Execucomp counts were obtained by samplingthe disclosure documents of non-Execucomp firms in 1994 and 2004, and then scaling to the number of non-Execucomp firms in the universe. Financial firms are defined
  as firms that have an SIC code between 6000 and 6299, which includes depository institutions, nondepository credit institutions,and securitiesand commodities brokers. Percentiles are shown relative to the number of
  tax filers. The cutoffs for the top fractiles of AGI income in 1994 are calculated based on the detailed IRS Statistics of Income files for US individuals, held at the NBER. The cutoffs for the top fractiles of AGI
  income in 2004 are calculated based on the 2002 distribution (the latest years for which the detailed files are available)and the relation between the 2002 and 2004 fractiles documented in the tabulations of Piketty and
  Saez (2003, 2006). Non-investment income is AGI excluding dividends, interest income, rental income, farm income, IRA distributions, income from estates and trusts, pension and annuity distributions, long term
  capital gains, and Form 4797 income.
Table 1e: AGI Thresholds and Execucomp Compensation of 5th Highest Paid Executive
                                                              Including Options Exercised                        Including Options Granted
                                                               Execucomp Non-Financial                         Execucomp Non-Financial
                                                                                            Share of                                      Share of
                                     Number of                      Number of   Share of   Bracket and   Number of #5                    Bracket and
Bottom of Bracket   Top of Bracket    Returns        Bracket         #5 Guys    Bracket      Above          Guys      Share of Bracket     Above


2004
           $0          $309,160      131,061,150     0-99                 225     0.00%        0.00%             186          0.00%          0.00%
     $309,160          $479,177          661,925 99-99.5                  307     0.05%        0.09%             184          0.03%          0.10%
     $479,177        $1,400,370          529,540 99.5-99.9                650     0.12%        0.14%             648          0.12%          0.17%
   $1,400,370        $7,189,506          119,146 99.9-99.99               290     0.24%        0.22%             447          0.38%          0.35%
   $7,189,506       $31,178,805           11,915 99.99-99.999               7     0.06%        0.05%              14          0.12%          0.11%
  $31,178,805                              1,324 >99.999                    0     0.00%        0.00%               0          0.00%          0.00%

                                                  Mean ($M)                      $1.00                                     $1.33
                                                 Median ($M)                     $0.64                                     $0.88
                                           Total Dollars ($M)                   $1,477                                    $1,972
1994
           $0          $194,200      114,783,570     0-99                 327     0.00%        0.00%             349          0.00%          0.00%
     $194,200          $286,290          579,715 99-99.5                  326     0.06%        0.10%             209          0.04%          0.09%
     $286,290          $733,602          463,772 99.5-99.9                599     0.13%        0.13%             565          0.12%          0.15%
     $733,602        $3,179,134          104,349 99.9-99.99               177     0.17%        0.16%             293          0.28%          0.27%
   $3,179,134       $13,444,936           10,435 99.99-99.999               5     0.05%        0.04%              18          0.17%          0.16%
  $13,444,936                              1,159 >99.999                    0     0.00%        0.00%               0          0.00%          0.00%

                                                  Mean ($M)                     $0.42                                     $0.56
                                                 Median ($M)                    $0.31                                     $0.36
                                           Total Dollars ($M)                   $601                                      $796

This table shows the distribution of total compensation including options exercised (TDC2) for CEOs in Execucomp relative to the distribution of AGI
income. This tabulation is similar to Table 1a, the only difference being that only CEOs are counted. See note to Table 1a for further details.
Table 2a: Estimated Numbers of Managing Directors or Equivalents at Top Securities Firms

                                                                  Net Revenue (millions)                                                                       Employees
                                                                                                                                                                                                       U.S. MDs or
                                                                                                                                  Global Managing                                                      Equivalents in
                                                                                              Ratio of U.S. to                     Director (MD)    Global MDs or    U.S. to Global                      Securities
                                                   Currency        Global          U.S.           Global              Global           Ratio         Equivalents    Employee Ratio    U.S. Employees     Industries
                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                 (5)             (6)              (7)               (8)             (9)             (10)


Goldman Sachs Group                                        US$        20,550         12,932               63%            20,722               6%           1,181             64%            13,278                757
Bear Stearns Companies                                     US$         6,813          6,172               91%            10,961               8%             850             91%             9,930                770
Lehman Brothers                                            US$        11,576          8,225               71%            19,600               4%             784             72%            14,100                564
Morgan Stanley                                             US$        23,708         17,365               73%            53,284               2%           1,071             73%            39,028
  Institutional Securities                                 US$        13,113          9,572               73%            29,472               3%             884             73%            21,514                645
  Asset Management                                         US$         2,738          1,999               73%             6,154               3%             185             73%             4,492                135
J.P. Morgan Chase and Co.                                  US$        43,097         32,972               77%           160,968                —               —             77%           123,151
  Investment Bank                                          US$        12,605          9,644               77%            17,478               4%             699             77%            13,372                535
  Treasury & Securities Services                           US$         4,857          3,716               77%            22,612               2%             452             77%            17,300                346
  Assets and Wealth Management                             US$         4,179          3,197               77%            12,287               2%             246             77%             9,400                188
Credit Suisse First Boston                                 CHF        55,139         12,267               22%            19,479               3%             584             22%             4,334                130
Deutsche Bank                                              EUR        21,546                                             65,417                —               —             18%            11,954
  Corporate and Investment Bank                            EUR        13,414                                             14,130               4%             565             18%             2,582                103
  Corporate Investments (Private Equity)                   EUR           621                                                 65               4%               3             18%                12                  0
UBS                                                        CHF        50,975                                             67,424                —               —             39%            26,232
   Investment Banking and Securities                       CHF        17,600                                             16,970               4%             679             39%             6,602                264
   Wealth Management (U.S.)                                CHF         5,158                                             16,969               2%             339            100%            16,969                339
   Asset Management                                        CHF         2,487                                              2,665               2%              53            100%             2,665                 53
Merrill Lynch                                              US$        22,023         15,878               72%            50,600                —               —           79.4%            40,200
  Global Markets and Investment Banking                    US$        11,022          7,947               72%            12,000               4%             480           79.4%             9,534              381
  Investment Management                                    US$         1,581          1,140               72%             2,500               4%             100           79.4%             1,986               79
Citigroup Global Market Holdings                           US$        39,340         18,490               47%            38,000               4%            1520             47%            17,860              714
                                                                                                                                                                    Total U.S. MDs                            6,006
 This table presents an assessment of the likely number of U.S. managing directors in the securities business (including asset management but excluding commercial and retail banking) at top 10 investment
 banking firms. Non-italicized figures are numbers taken directly from the financial reports of the companies in question or calculated as ratios of figures taken directly from the reports. Italicized figures
 represent imputed figures, which we describe in detail in the text.
Table 2b: Income Distribution and Wall Street Managing Directors in 2004
                                                                                Distribution of             Percent of Category        Percent of Category and         Number in Category
                                                                               Compensation for            Bracket Explained per        Above Explained per           and Above Explained
                                                                             Managing Directors at           10,000 Managing              10,000 Managing             per 10,000 Managing
                                                                             Top Investment Banks                Directors                    Directors                     Directors
                                                         Number of             Pareto     Exponential        Pareto    Exponential        Pareto     Exponential        Pareto    Exponential
                                                          Filings

2004 AGI Distribution
      $479,177       $1,400,370   99.5-99.9                  529,540             60.4%        31.0%             1.1%        0.6%             1.5%         1.5%          10,000       10,000
    $1,400,370       $7,189,506 99.9-99.99                   119,146             32.0%        54.2%             2.7%        4.5%             3.0%         5.2%           3,964        6,900
    $7,189,506      $31,178,805 99.99-99.999                  11,915              7.4%        14.7%             6.2%       12.3%             5.8%        11.2%             767        1,482
   $31,178,805                     >99.999                     1,324              0.3%         0.1%             2.0%        1.0%             2.0%         1.0%              26           13

                                     Mean ($M)                                   $1.90        $2.84         $1.90       $2.84
                                    Median ($M)                                  $1.10        $2.60         $1.10       $2.60
                              Total Dollars ($M)                                     —            —        $19,013     $28,410

2004 Distribution of AGI Excluding Investment Income
      $404,912        $1,121,024     99.5-99.9               529,540             54.4%        27.2%             1.0%        0.5%             1.5%         1.5%          10,000       10,000
    $1,121,024        $5,143,664 99.9-99.99                  119,146             34.6%        47.6%             2.9%        4.0%             3.4%         5.5%           4,565        7,278
    $5,143,664       $19,778,205 99.99-99.999                 11,915              9.4%        24.7%             7.9%       20.7%             8.3%        19.0%           1,102        2,521
   $19,778,205                        >99.999                  1,324              1.7%         0.5%            12.6%        3.9%            12.6%         3.9%             166           51

  This table reports the estimated distributions of pay for 10,000 managing alongside AGI brackets. Based on industry information, the figures assume that essentially no managing
  director of a top 10 investment bank earned less than $500,000 in 2004. Two possible distributions of pay are considered. The first is a pareto distribution with a minimum value of
  $500,000, estimated so that 25% of managing directors earn more than $2.5 million and truncated at $35 million, the highest payout observed for an investment banking employee in
  2004. The second distribution is an exponential distribution, which we censor below at $500,000 and calibrate so that only one employee earns more than $25 million. The middle
  pair of columns presents the percent of each bracket accounted for by every 10,000 managing directors, and the right-most pair presents the number of individuals earning at least the
  minimum bracket amount for every 10,000 managing directors.
Table 2c: Securities Industry Capital and Employees Over Time

                                                           SIA 2004            SIA 1987          IB-BA 1972


Total Number of Employees in top 50 Firms                      389,181            217,813              80,784

Total Amount of Capital in top 50 Firms ($ Million)           $696,087            $29,636              $2,768

Capital per Employee                                              1.789              0.136              0.034

Capital per Employee ($2004)                                      1.789              0.203              0.124

 The table reports the total number of global employees and the total global capital employed at the top 50 U.S.
 securities firms in 1972, 1987, and 2004.SIA information is from Securities Industry Association Handbook for
 1987 and 2004. IB-BA is Investment Banker-Broker Almanac.
Table 3a: Assets Under Management and Estimated Fees for Hedge Funds

              Money               Money              Money                                                               Money                            Fees            Fees
              Under               Under              Under                                             # Funds           Under                           Hedge           Hedge
            Management          Management         Management       # Funds         # Funds           Hedge Fund       Management     Hedge Fund         Funds           Funds
  Year      Hedge Fund          Hedge Fund         Hedge Fund      Hedge Fund      Hedge Fund          No FOF          Hedge Fund      Returns            2/20            2/20
             Hennessee             HFR               TASS          Hennessee          HFR                HFR            Hennessee     Hennessee         Average         Expected
                                                                                                                                                        Returns       11% Volatility

    1980
    1981
    1982
    1983
    1984
    1985
    1986         $20                                                   100                                                 $20
    1987                                                                                                                                 11.99           $0.46            $0.68
    1988                                                                                                                                 20.16
    1989                                                                                                                                 24.58
    1990                             $39                                                610               530                            11.97
    1991         $35                 $58                               880              821               694               $35          25.83
    1992         $50                 $96                              1,100            1,105              937               $50          15.57           $0.84             $1.12
    1993         $99                $168                $50           1,640            1,514             1,277              $99          25.69           $1.32             $1.60
    1994         $76                $167                $57           2,080            1,945             1,654              $76           0.17           $1.98             $3.17
    1995         $97                $186                $72           2,800            2,383             2,006              $97          17.70           $1.86             $2.43
    1996        $130                $257                $99           3,000            2,781             2,392             $130          19.07           $2.40            $3.10
    1997        $210                $368               $145           3,200            2,990             2,564             $210          18.18           $3.19            $4.16
    1998        $221                $375               $154           3,500            3,325             2,848             $221           1.43           $4.28            $6.72
    1999        $324                $456               $197           4,000            3,617             3,102             $324          30.77           $6.12            $7.07
    2000        $408                $491               $209           4,800            3,873             3,335             $408           8.16           $7.14            $10.37
    2001        $564                $599               $264           5,500            4,454             3,904             $564           4.35           $8.60            $13.06
    2002        $592                $626               $310           5,700            5,379             4,598             $592          -2.89          $11.28            $18.05
    2003        $795                $820               $489           7,000            6,297             5,065             $795          18.78          $14.62            $18.94
    2004        $934                $973               $674           8,050            7,436             5,782             $934           8.25          $17.54            $25.44
    2005                           $1,105              $813                            8,661             6,665                            7.85          $20.51            $29.89
  This table reports assets under management at hedge funds and number of hedge funds over time as reported by the Hennessee Group, Hedge Fund Research, and TASS. Hedge
  fund fees are calculated in two ways, assuming annual management fees of 2% and profit share of 20% using Hennessee Group assets under management. First, hedge fund fees are
  calculated using the average returns for the year and assuming that all funds earn the average return. Second, hedge fund fees are calculated assuming that fees equal 2%
  management fee and that the profit share leads to fees of 1.2% per year based on a Black-Scholes calculation with expected volatility of 11% and a risk-free rate of 3%.
Table 3b: Assets Under Management and Estimated Fees for Venture Capital (VC) and Private Equity (PE) Funds
                                                                                                                  Money            Money                    VC          VC                   PE              PE
                 Capital           # Funds       Capital         Capital          # Funds        Capital          Under            Under          VC        Estimated   Estimated            Estimated       Estimated
                Committed            VC         per Fund       Committed            PE          per Fund        Management       Management      Returns    Fees 2/20   Fees 2/20            Fees 2/20       Fees 2/20
     Year        Venture                         ($ M)        Private Equity                     ($ M)              VC               PE                     Actual      Expected PE          Actual          Expected
                  ($B)                                             ($B)                                         SevenYear        SevenYear                  Returns     22% Vol. Returns     Returns         22% Vol.
                                                                                                                   ($B)             ($B)                    ($B)        ($B)

     1980          $2.1               54          $38               $0.2              4            $46               $2.1             $0.2
     1981          $1.5               75          $20               $0.4              7            $50               $3.6             $0.5          20.10     $0.05       $0.14
     1982          $1.7               89          $20               $0.6             13            $47               $5.3             $1.1          30.50     $0.10       $0.21
     1983          $4.0              143          $28               $1.5             18            $86               $9.3             $2.7          54.90     $0.18       $0.37     52.50         $0.04         $0.11
     1984          $3.2              120          $26               $3.5             24           $148              $12.4             $6.2          -5.80     $0.19       $0.50      -4.40        $0.05         $0.25
     1985          $4.0              120          $33               $3.0             22           $136              $16.4             $9.2          -0.90     $0.25       $0.66       2.90        $0.13         $0.37
     1986          $3.8              103          $37              $5.0              34           $147              $20.2            $14.2           4.40     $0.35       $0.81     11.70         $0.21         $0.57
     1987          $4.5              119          $38             $16.1              48           $335             $22.6             $30.1           6.40     $0.44      $0.91      10.00        $0.32          $1.20
     1988          $4.5              105          $43             $12.9              62           $209             $25.7             $42.7           2.60     $0.47      $1.03      17.70        $0.74          $1.71
     1989          $5.1              105          $48             $12.2              83           $146             $29.0             $54.2           5.20     $0.55      $1.16      13.70        $1.00          $2.17
     1990          $3.5               89          $39              $9.6              72           $134             $28.5             $62.3           3.00     $0.60      $1.14       -4.30       $1.08          $2.49
     1991          $2.0               42          $48              $7.5              34           $219             $27.4             $66.2          22.80     $0.73      $1.10      22.20        $1.59          $2.65
     1992          $5.3               82          $65             $12.3              64           $193             $28.7             $75.6          14.90     $0.65      $1.15      11.50        $1.51          $3.02
     1993          $4.0               91          $44             $17.8              88           $202             $29.0             $88.4          19.40     $0.71      $1.16      18.70        $1.86          $3.54
     1994          $8.9              137          $65             $25.5             117           $218             $33.3             $97.8          15.90     $0.69      $1.33      20.70        $2.23          $3.91
     1995         $10.1              173          $59             $32.1             124           $259             $38.9            $116.9          49.30     $1.08      $1.56      32.20        $2.74          $4.68
     1996         $11.5              161          $72             $37.8             128           $295             $45.4            $142.5          42.70     $1.19      $1.81      34.80        $3.36          $5.70
     1997         $19.6              242          $81             $51.7             154           $336             $61.5            $184.7          33.10     $1.28      $2.46      26.80        $3.81          $7.39
     1998         $30.0              289         $104             $79.1             206           $384             $89.5            $256.3          18.90     $1.52      $3.58      15.60        $4.41         $10.25
     1999         $57.2              450         $127             $71.1             188           $378             $141.5           $315.0         188.80     $6.02       $5.66      71.30        $9.69        $12.60
     2000         $107.4             639         $168              $86.8            193           $450             $244.9           $384.0          24.30     $3.69       $9.79      10.60        $7.14        $15.36
     2001         $38.0              310         $123              $71.2            169           $421             $274.0           $429.7         -34.30     $4.90      $10.96     -20.60        $7.68        $17.19
     2002          $9.2              198          $47              $47.7            166           $288             $273.0           $445.4         -29.50     $5.48      $10.92     -13.10        $8.59        $17.82
     2003         $11.6              155          $75              $40.0            138           $290             $273.1           $447.6           6.80     $5.92      $10.92     18.20        $10.93        $17.91
     2004         $18.8              206          $91              $65.3            177           $369             $272.3           $461.2          15.40     $6.51      $10.89     17.20        $10.88        $18.45
     2005         $26.4              200         $132             $130.9            228           $574             $268.7           $513.0          14.10     $6.41      $10.75     21.40        $11.69        $20.52
 This table reports annual capital commitments to, number of funds raised in, and average annual returns of Venture Capital (VC) and Private Equity (PE) from 1980 to 2005 using Thomson Financial's Venture Economics
 database. Money under management is calculated as the sum of capital commitments over the last seven years including the current year. Estimated fees are calculated using the money under management at the beginning of
 the year, average returns for the year, and assuming that all funds earn the average return.
Table 4a: Top Hedge Fund Incomes in Millions of Dollars

              Alpha Top Hedge Fund Managers (Global)              Alpha Top Hedge Fund Managers (U.S. Only)
Rank           2003            2004                 2005             2003           2004                 2005
   1                  750           1020            1500                   750           1020            1500
   2                  510            670            1400                   510            670            1400
   3                  500            550             840                   500            550              840
   4                  420            450             550                   420            450              550
   5                  350            420             500                   350            420              500
   6                  350            305             425                   350            305              425
   7                  300            300             400                   300            300              400
   8                  230            240             400                   230            240              400
   9                  150            225             340                   150            225              340
  10                  146            205             275                   146            205              275
  11                  135            195             230                   135            195              230
  12                  128            180             215                   128            180              215
  13                  125            153             210                   125            153              210
  14                  120            125             200                   120            125              200
  15                  110            125             200                   110            125              200
  16                  110            125             200                   110            125              200
  17                  100            120             190                   100            120              190
  18                   95            115             175                    95            115              175
  19                   95            115             160                    95            115              160
  20                   92            110             150                    92            110              150
  21                   80            110             150                    80            110              150
  22                   80            110             150                    80            110              145
  23                   75            102             150                    75            102               —
  24                   70            100             145                    70            100               —
  25                   65            100             130                    65            100               —
 Source: Institutional Investor’s estimates of the incomes of the top 25 most highly compensated hedge fund managers
 from 2003 to 2005. The right panel presents only those hedge fund managers listed as based in the U.S.
Table 4b: Top Financial Industry Incomes in Millions of Dollars

                                                Financial World                                                      Trader Monthly and Alpha
                                                   1988                                    1995
      Rank                     1988            in $2004               1995             in $2004                    2003                2004                2005
         1                      190                 283               1500                 1777                     750                1020                1500
         2                      120                 179                350                  415                     510                 670                1400
         3                      110                 164                150                  178                     500                 550                 840
         4                      110                 164                115                  136                     420                 450                 550
         5                      100                 149                 95                  113                     350                 420                 550
         6                       88                 130                 90                  107                     350                 305                 500
         7                       80                 119                 76                   90                     300                 300                 425
         8                       65                  97                 76                   90                     275                 240                 400
         9                       55                  82                 75                   89                     230                 225                 400
        10                       55                  82                 70                   83                     225                 205                 340
        20                       30                  45                 40                   47                     100                 120                 190
        30                       25                  37                 30                   36                      63                  88                 125
        40                       20                  30                 25                   30                      35                  63                  68
        50                       15                  22                 20                   24                      25                  35                  45
        60                       15                  22                 17                   20                      13                  28                  35
        70                       10                  15                 14                   17                       8                  23                  23
        80                        9                  13                 13                   15                       8                  13                  13
        90                        8                  12                 10                   12                       8                  13                  13
       100                        8                  12                  9                   11                     NA                  NA                  NA

  Financial World rankings include all financial industry individuals and employees, including private equity and hedge funds. Trader Monthly rankings include
  traders and hedge fund professionals only, and Alpha rankings are for hedge fund professionals only. Alpha figures are released later and for this reason when
  there is conflicting information about a given individual's earnings, Alpha numbers are used. Inflation adjustments for the counts of 1988 in $2004 and 1995 in
  $2004 are performed using the GDP deflator.
Table 5a: Assets Under Management at Mutual Funds

                                              $ billions                                                                     # of Funds
                                                                             Money                                                                        Money
              Total            Equity        Hybrid          Bond            Market        Total           Equity           Hybrid         Bond           Market

       1980             $135           $44                             $14           $76             564              288                           170              106
       1981             $241           $41                             $14          $186             665              306                           180              179
       1982             $297           $54                             $23          $220             857              340                           199              318
       1983             $293           $77                             $37          $179           1,026              396                           257              373
       1984             $371           $80             $11             $46          $234           1,243              459             89            270              425
       1985             $495          $111             $18            $123          $244           1,528              562            103            403              460
       1986             $716          $154             $26            $243          $292           1,835              678            121            549              487
       1987             $769          $175             $29            $248          $316           2,312              824            164            781              543
       1988             $809          $189             $26            $256          $338           2,737            1,006            179            942              610
       1989             $981          $245             $36            $272          $428           2,935            1,069            189          1,004              673
       1990           $1,065          $239             $36            $291          $498           3,079            1,099            193          1,046              741
       1991           $1,393          $405             $52            $394          $542           3,403            1,191            212          1,180              820
       1992           $1,643          $514             $78            $504          $546           3,824            1,325            235          1,400              864
       1993           $2,070          $741            $145            $619          $565           4,534            1,586            282          1,746              920
       1994           $2,155          $853            $164            $527          $611           5,325            1,886            361          2,115              963
       1995           $2,811        $1,249            $210            $599          $753           5,725            2,139            412          2,177              997
       1996           $3,526        $1,726            $253            $645          $902           6,248            2,570            466          2,224              988
       1997           $4,468        $2,368            $317            $724        $1,059           6,684            2,951            501          2,219            1,013
       1998           $5,525        $2,978            $365            $831        $1,352           7,314            3,512            526          2,250            1,026
       1999           $6,846        $4,042            $379            $812        $1,613           7,791            3,952            532          2,262            1,045
       2000           $6,965        $3,962            $346            $811        $1,845           8,155            4,385            523          2,208            1,039
       2001           $6,975        $3,418            $346            $925        $2,285           8,305            4,716            483          2,091            1,015
       2002           $6,390        $2,662            $325          $1,130        $2,272           8,244            4,747            473          2,035              989
       2003           $7,414        $3,684            $430          $1,248        $2,052           8,126            4,599            508          2,045              974
       2004           $8,107        $4,384            $519          $1,290        $1,913           8,041            4,547            510          2,041              943
       2005           $8,905        $4,940            $567          $1,357        $2,041           7,977            4,586            505          2,015              871
 This table reports assets under management and number of funds for equity, hybrid and bond mutual funds from 1980 to 2005. The source is the 2006
 Investment Company Institute Handbook.
Table 5b: Fees at Mutual Funds


                    $ billions                            Fees               Fees                                                                              Fees              Fees                 Fees
                        Total           Preferred        Asset               Asset                Fees               Fees                 Fees              $ Billions         $ Billions           $ Billions
                       Assets           Common        Weighted %          Weighted %           $ Billions          $ Billions           $ Billions           in $2005          in $2005             in $2005
    Year                                              Stock Funds      Bond Funds          Stock Funds         Bond Funds                 Total            Stock Funds     Bond Funds                 Total
    1980                                                 2.32%              2.05%                 $1.0               $0.3                 $1.3                 $2.1              $0.6                 $2.7
    1981
    1982
    1983
    1984                $137                  $83
    1985                $252                 $114        2.19%               1.91%                $2.4                $2.7                $5.1                $3.9                $4.3                $8.2
    1986                $424                 $161
    1987                $453                 $182
    1988                $471                 $179
    1989                $553                 $245
    1990                $567                 $216        1.98%               1.89%                $4.7                $6.2                $10.9               $6.5                $8.5                $15.0
    1991                $851                 $381
    1992              $1,096                 $485
    1993              $1,505                 $712
    1994              $1,544                 $824
    1995              $2,058               $1,215        1.55%               1.45%                $19.4               $11.7               $31.1               $23.6               $14.3               $37.9
    1996              $2,624               $1,718
    1997              $3,409               $2,358
    1998              $4,174               $3,004
    1999              $5,233               $4,060
    2000              $5,119               $3,910        1.28%               1.03%                $50.7               $11.9               $62.6               $56.9               $13.4               $70.2
    2001              $4,690               $3,424        1.24%               0.97%                $42.4               $12.3               $54.7               $46.4               $13.5               $59.9
    2002              $4,118               $2,688        1.24%               0.93%                $33.0               $13.5               $46.6               $35.5               $14.6               $50.1
    2003              $5,362               $3,760        1.22%               0.94%                $44.9               $15.8               $60.7               $47.4               $16.6               $64.1
    2004              $6,194               $4,490        1.17%               0.92%                $51.3               $16.6               $67.9               $52.7               $17.1               $69.8
    2005              $6,865               $5,054        1.13%               0.90%                $55.8               $17.3               $73.1               $55.8               $17.3               $73.1
  This table reports fees as a percentage of assets under management, dollars of fees, and dollars of fees in 2004 dollars using the GDP implicit price deflator for bond and equity mutual funds from 1980 to 2005.
  Fees include loads and sales charges. The source is the 2006 Investment Company Institute Handbook.
Table 6a: Statistics for Laywers at Top Firms

                                                                                                                             1984 Top 50 still
                                                      Top 50 in 1984         Top 50 in 1994          Top 50 in 2004        in Top 100 in 2004        Top 100 in 1994         Top 100 in 2004        Top 200 in 2004

Revenues ($ millions) per firm                            $66.4                  $209.5                  $644.6                  $611.9                  $153.1                  $460.4                  $297.6
                                                          $61.5                  $174.0                  $573.0                  $503.5                  $124.5                  $398.5                  $199.5

Revenues ($ millions) per firm in 2004$                  $106.8                  $251.2                  $644.6                  $611.9                  $183.6                  $460.4                  $297.6
                                                          $99.0                  $208.6                  $573.0                  $503.5                  $149.3                  $398.5                  $199.5

Lawyers per firm                                           258                     469                    889                     830                     371                     682                     471
                                                           230                     401                    808                     661                     330                     597                     361

Total number of lawyers all firms                        13,150                  23,463                  44,473                  37,329                  37,098                  68,186                  94,214

Equity partners per firm                                   90                      155                    221                     203                     130                     179                     134
                                                           75                      136                    205                     168                     112                     152                     116

Total number of equity partners all firms                 4,603                   7,774                  11,034                  9,144                   12,961                  17,861                  26,755

Profits per Equity Partner ($ millions)                  $0.309                  $0.531                  $1.260                  $1.339                  $0.450                  $1.014                  $0.828
                                                         $0.265                  $0.460                  $1.075                  $1.116                  $0.398                  $0.855                  $0.665

Top 0.5% in AGI                                          $0.160                  $0.286                  $0.479                  $0.479                  $0.286                  $0.479                  $0.479
Top 0.1% in AGI                                          $0.418                  $0.733                  $1.400                  $1.400                  $0.733                  $1.400                  $1.400

Profits per Equity Partner in 2004 $ ($ millions)        $0.498                  $0.636                  $1.260                  $1.339                  $0.540                  $1.014                  $0.828
                                                         $0.427                  $0.552                  $1.075                  $1.116                  $0.477                  $0.855                  $0.665

Number of firms                                            51                      50                      50                      45                     100                     100                     200

 This table reports revenues, lawyers, equity partners and profits per partner for law firms from the American Lawyer magazine, AmLaw top law firms for calendar years 1984, 1994, and 2004. In each cell,
 average is reported above medians. When converted, 1984 and 1994 dollars are converted into 2004 dollars using the GDP Implicit Price Deflator. In 1984, we assume that all partners are equity partners, so
 profits per equity partner equals profit per partner. In 1994, firms began to appoint non-equity partners. The median firm had no non-equity partners. For 1994, we report the number of equity partners and profits
 per all partners. This sligtly understates true proifts per equity partner. In 2004, ALM distinguished between profits per equity and total partners.
Table 6b: Top Law Firm Equity Partners and AGI


                                                                         Estimated Am Law 100              Estimated Am Law 200               Estimated Am Law 50
                                          Number in
                                          Bracket and                    Number of     Share of Bracket    Number of     Share of Bracket     Number of     Share of Bracket
       Bottom of Bracket Top of Bracket     Above       Bracket        Equity Partners   and Above         Executives      and Above        Equity Partners   and Above


2004
           $479,177       $1,400,370          661,925   >99.5                14,351            2.17%            18,597           2.81%              9,915           1.50%
         $1,400,370                           132,385   >99.9                 3,165            2.39%             3,477           2.63%              2,708           2.05%

1994
           $286,290         $733,602          579,715   >99.5                  8,465           1.46%                                                5,233           0.90%
           $733,602                           115,943   >99.9                  1,509           1.30%                                                1,130           0.97%

1984
           $159,958         $417,846          534,355   >99.5                                                                                       2,671           0.50%
           $417,846                           106,871   >99.9                                                                                       1,132           1.06%
 This table estimates the number of equity partners at the Am Law top law firms in the top 0.5% and 0.1% AGI brackets in 1984, 1994, and 2004. For each law firm, the
 estimates that 1/3 of the partners earn more than the average while 2/3 of the partners earn less than the average. The estimates assume that the most highly paid partner
 earns twice the average while the least highly paid partner earns half the average.
Table 6c: Top Law Firm Equity Partners and AGI Excluding Investment Income


                                                                          Estimated Am Law 100                 Estimated Am Law 200                  Estimated Am Law 50
                                       Number in
          Bottom of                    Bracket and                         Number of     Share of Bracket      Number of     Share of Bracket       Number of     Share of Bracket
           Bracket    Top of Bracket     Above        Bracket            Equity Partners   and Above           Executives      and Above          Equity Partners   and Above


2004
           $404,912     $1,121,024         661,925    >99.5                     15,802           2.39%              20,932           3.16%               10,514           1.59%
         $1,121,024                        132,385    >99.9                      4,986           3.77%               5,607           4.24%                4,137           3.12%

1994
           $243,593      $584,837          579,715    >99.5                      9,879           1.70%                                                    5,972           1.03%
           $584,837                        115,943    >99.9                      2,679           2.31%                                                    1,889           1.63%

This table estimates the number of equity partners at the Am Law top law firms in the top 0.5% and 0.1% AGI brackets in 1994, and 2004. For each law firm, the estimates that 1/3
of the partners earn more than the average while 2/3 of the partners earn less than the average. The estimates assume that the most highly paid partner earns twice the average while
the least highly paid partner earns half the average.
Table 7: Professional Athletes and AGI
                                                                                                                                                Share of
                                                                                                                                  Share of   Bracket and
                                          Number of Returns        Percentiles   Baseball    Football    Basketball   All         Bracket         Above
Total AGI
2004
 $            -       $      309,160.20     131,061,150           0-99                 122         616            0         738    0.0%          0.0%
 $     309,160.20     $      479,176.99         661,925          99-99.5               204         417           30         651    0.1%          0.2%
 $     479,176.99     $    1,400,370.36         529,540         99.5-99.9              173         633          134         940    0.2%          0.3%
 $   1,400,370.36     $    7,189,506.01         119,147        99.9-99.99              243         434          197         874    0.7%          0.8%
 $   7,189,506.01     $   31,178,804.88          11,915       99.99-99.999              84          57           62         203    1.7%          1.5%
 $ 31,178,804.88                                  1,324          >99.999                 0           1            0           1    0.1%          0.1%
                                                               Mean ($M)             $2.48       $1.24        $3.74    $1.85
                                                              Median ($M)            $0.76       $0.54        $2.21    $0.64
                                                        Total Dollars ($M)          $2,051      $2,681       $1,580   $6,312
1995
                      $      208,400.00     117,035,820           0-99                 481         743           59     1283       0.0%          0.0%
$      208,400.00     $      310,900.00         591,090          99-99.5                95         221           19      335       0.1%          0.2%
$      310,900.00     $      820,222.24         472,872         99.5-99.9              155         473           68      696       0.1%          0.3%
$      820,222.24     $    3,658,000.00         106,396        99.9-99.99              163         401          214      778       0.7%          0.8%
$    3,658,000.00     $   14,957,428.35          10,640       99.99-99.999              91           5           18      114       1.1%          1.0%
$   14,957,428.35                                 1,182          >99.999                 0           0            0        0       0.0%          0.0%
                                                               Mean ($M)             $0.96       $0.55        $1.42    $0.78
                                                              Median ($M)            $0.22       $0.28        $1.11    $0.30
                                                        Total Dollars ($M)            $950      $1,022         $535   $2,508
Excluding Investment Income
2004
 $            -       $      270,600.78     131,061,150           0-99                   0         493            0         493    0.0%          0.0%
 $     270,600.78     $      404,912.28         661,925          99-99.5               308         481           30         819    0.1%          0.2%
 $     404,912.28     $    1,121,024.07         529,540         99.5-99.9              169         606          117         892    0.2%          0.3%
 $   1,121,024.07     $    5,143,664.32         119,147        99.9-99.99              215         473          168         856    0.7%          0.9%
 $   5,143,664.32     $   19,778,205.17          11,915       99.99-99.999             132         104          106         342    2.9%          2.6%
 $ 19,778,205.17                                  1,324          >99.999                 2           1            2           5    0.4%          0.4%
1995
                      $      180,510.49     117,035,820           0-99                 442         638           54     1134       0.0%          0.0%
$        180,510.49   $      264,890.00         591,090          99-99.5                95         254           18      367       0.1%          0.2%
$        264,890.00   $      644,044.51         472,872         99.5-99.9              149         411           35      595       0.1%          0.3%
$        644,044.51   $    2,539,830.20         106,396        99.9-99.99              158         497          201      856       0.8%          0.9%
$      2,539,830.20   $    9,524,042.85          10,640       99.99-99.999             141          43           70      254       2.4%          2.1%
$      9,524,042.85                               1,182          >99.999                 0           0            0        0       0.0%          0.0%
Table 8a: Top AGI Income Quantiles and Earnings of Top Individuals in Different Categories in 2004

                                                                         in top 0.5%          in top 0.1%        in top 0.01%       in top 0.001%       in top 0.0001%

Total Tax Units in 2004                                                     661,925              132,385               13,239               1,324                 132
AGI Threshold                                                              $479,177           $1,400,370           $7,189,506         $31,178,805        $101,000,000

Non-Financial Top Executives in ExecuComp                                      6,320                3,415                 591                   67                  3
Non-Financial Top Executives Non-ExecuComp (Estimated)                         6,880                1,622                 104                   18                  0
Total Main Street                                                             13,200                5,037                 695                   85                  3
Total Main Street as % of Bracket                                             1.99%                3.80%               5.25%                6.40%               2.27%

Financial Top Executives Total (Estimated)                                       546                 351                  102                   15                   0
Investment Bankers                                                            10,000               6,900                1,482                   13                   0
Hedge Fund Investors                                                           9,000               3,000                >100                    60                  26
VC Investors                                                                   6,000               1,200
PE Investors                                                                   5,400               2,160                   >5                   >5                       3
Total Wall Street                                                             30,946              13,611

Am Law 100 Law Partners                                                       14,351               3,165
Total Wall Street + Law Partners                                              45,297              16,775

Professional Athletes                                                          2,018                1,078                 204                    1                       0
Top Celebrities                                                                >100                   100                  64                   22                       3

Total Estimated in Our Sample                                                 60,615               22,990               2,652                  201                  35
Total in our Sample as % of Bracket                                           9.16%               17.37%              20.03%               15.18%              26.44%

This table uses the ExecuComp data and our estimates of the non-ExecuComp companies to populate the top brackets for executives of non-financial and financial
companies. It uses estimated 2004 brackets for the top 0.5%, 0.1%, 0.01%, and 0.001%, and it uses the 2001 AGI cutoff for the top 0.0001% bracket due to data
availability. It assumes the exponential-based estimates of the distribution of investment banker income. For hedge fund investors, the figures in the table assume an
average compensation of 3.2% of assets under management; that all 9,000 have AGI above $0.5 million (top 0.5%); and that 1/3 or 3,000 have AGI above $1.4 million
(top 0.1%). For the very top end of the hedge fund distribution, the figures rely on the numbers in Tables 4a and 4b, which are based on Trader Monthly and the II
Alpha 25. For VC investors, we assume an average compensation of 4.0% of assets under management; that all 6,000 partners have AGI above $0.5 million; and that
1/5 or 1,200 have AGI above $1.4 million. For PE investors, under the same 4.0% assumption, we assume that all 5,400 have AGI above $0.5 million and 2/5 or 2,160
have AGI above $1.4 million. For VC and PE, we do not try to make any assumptions for incomes above the top 0.01%. We use the distributions calculated earlier for
law partners and professional athletes.
Table 8b: Dollars Earned over time by various sectors (in $billions)


                                                                                                  1994                1984
                                                                              2004            in $2004            in $2004               1994             1984
Group 1: Main Street
AGI of Non-Financial Top Executives in ExecuComp                             $22.0                $8.4                                   $7.0
AGI of Non-Financial Top Executives, not in ExecuComp                        $12.0                $4.5                                   $3.7
Total Main Street                                                            $34.0               $12.9                                  $10.7

Group 2: Wall Street, Including Lawyers
AGI of Financial Top Executives in ExecuComp                                  $2.9                $1.2                                   $1.0
AGI Investment Bankers (10,000 on Exponential Distribution)                  $28.4
Fees to Hedge Fund Investors                                                 $25.4                $3.8                $1.1               $3.2             $0.7
Fees to VC Investors                                                         $10.9                $1.6                $0.8               $1.3             $0.5
Fees to PE Investors                                                         $18.4                $4.7                $0.4               $3.9             $0.2
Profits to Am Law 100 Law Partners                                           $18.1                $7.1                $4.6               $5.8             $2.8
Fees to Mutual Fund Investors                                                $69.8               $36.8                $8.0              $31.1             $5.1
Total Wall Street, Including Lawyers                                        $174.0

Group 3: Other Public Figures
AGI to Professional Athletes                                                  $6.3                $3.0                                   $2.5
AGI to Celebrities                                                            $2.5
Total Other Public Figures                                                    $8.8

 The table summarizes the dollar amounts of AGI and fees of the various groups and how they have changed over time. 1984 Hedge funds use 1986 estimates. 1994
 Professional Athletes use 1995 estimates. 1994 and 1984 mutual funds use 1995 and 1985 estimates. 1984 Am Law 100 estimated as two times 1984 Am Law 50
 Partners. AGI to investment bankers for 2004 comes from the assumptions in Table 2b; for 1984 we scale the 2004 value down by the ratio of 1987 capital per
 employee to 2004 capital per employee.
                         Figure 1: Estimated Hedge Fund Fees
                                       ($ Billions)
$35.00



$30.00



$25.00



$20.00



$15.00



$10.00



 $5.00



 $0.00
         1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005
                         Figure 2: Estimated VC and PE Fund Fees
                                        ($ Billions)
$25.00




$20.00




$15.00




$10.00




 $5.00




 $0.00
         1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
         Figure 3: Three Year Performance Relative to Value Weighted Industry, CEOs Only
160.0%

                                                                                lowest compensation quintile
140.0%                                                                          2nd quintile
                                                                                3rd quintile
                                                                                4th quintile
120.0%
                                                                                highest compensation quintile

100.0%


80.0%


60.0%


40.0%


20.0%


 0.0%
          1                   2                     3                   4                        5

-20.0%


-40.0%
                                               Size Quintile
