                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS AMONG SHAREHOLDERS:
                      THE CASE OF CORPORATE ACQUISITIONS

                                           Jarrad Harford
                                             Dirk Jenter
                                               Kai Li

                                       Working Paper 13274
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13274


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




We thank Nittai Bergman, Murray Carlson, Alex Edmans, Adlai Fisher, Ron Giammarino, Jon Karpoff,
Alan Kraus, Kalina Manova, Gregor Matvos, Wayne Mikkelson, Pablo Moran, Hernan Ortiz-Molina,
Michael Ostrovsky, Jon Reuter, Frederik Schlingemann, Jeremy Stein, Ralph Walkling, and seminar
and conference participants at Bentley College, Boston College, Concordia, the MIT finance lunch,
Rutgers University, Simon Fraser University, Tsinghua University, the University of British Columbia,
the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Toronto, York University, the Pacific Northwest
Finance Conference (Seattle), the 13th Mitsui Life Symposium on Value Creation at the University
of Michigan (Ann Arbor), and the 2007 Western Finance Association Meetings (Big Sky) for useful
comments and discussions. We acknowledge the financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jarrad Harford, Dirk Jenter, and Kai Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Conflicts of Interests Among Shareholders: The Case of Corporate Acquisitions
Jarrad Harford, Dirk Jenter, and Kai Li
NBER Working Paper No. 13274
July 2007
JEL No. G30,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

We identify important conflicts of interests among shareholders and examine their effects on corporate
decisions. When a firm is considering an action that affects other firms in its shareholders' portfolios,
shareholders with heterogeneous portfolios may disagree about whether to proceed. This effect is
measurable and potentially large in the case of corporate acquisitions, where bidder shareholders with
holdings in the target want management to maximize a weighted average of both firms' equity values.
Empirically, we show that such cross-holdings are large for a significant group of institutional shareholders
in the average acquisition and for a majority of institutional shareholders in a significant number of
deals. We find evidence that managers consider cross-holdings when identifying potential targets
and that they trade off cross-holdings with synergies when selecting them. Overall, we conclude that
conflicts of interests among shareholders are sizeable and, at least in the case of acquisitions, affect
managerial decisions.

Jarrad Harford                                        Kai Li
University of Washington Business School              Sauder School of Business
Box 353200                                            University of British Columbia
Seattle, WA 98195-3200                                2053 Main Mall
jarrad@u.washington.edu                               Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
                                                      kai.li@sauder.ubc.ca
Dirk Jenter
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
djenter@mit.edu
       Much of the corporate finance literature makes the assumption that (homogenous)

shareholders want to maximize the value of their firm’s equity. In reality, most shareholders are

diversified and care about the effects of managerial actions on their portfolio values, not just on

the value of the specific firm taking the action. When shareholders have different portfolios, they

may disagree about which actions managers should take. In acquisitions, diversified shareholders

who hold equity stakes in both a bidder and its target—cross-holdings for short—want bidder

management to maximize a weighted average of the bidder’s and the target’s equity values.

Concentrated shareholders with stakes in only the bidder want management to focus on the

bidder’s equity value, setting-up a conflict between shareholder groups.

       Managers must choose how to act in the presence of shareholders with heterogeneous

portfolios. They could ignore this heterogeneity and simply align themselves with concentrated

shareholders. Alternatively, they could take it into account in an attempt to maximize the wealth

of most stockholders, or they could opportunistically use it to lower shareholder resistance to

empire-building acquisitions. In this study, we first measure the extent of shareholder cross-

holdings and then test for their impact on target choice and deal characteristics to determine

whether managers incorporate cross-holdings into their acquisition decisions.

       The insight that cross-holdings by shareholders alter their preferences over takeover

decisions is a special case of the general result that diversified shareholders prefer corporate

policies which maximize their portfolio values to policies which narrowly maximize the values

of individual firms (Hansen and Lott (1996); Rubin (2006)). In general, however, externalities on

other firms imposed by managers’ decisions are likely to be small or hard to estimate, so in a

bounded-rationality framework, it makes sense for managers to focus on own firm value. In

corporate acquisitions, one of the externalities is large and easily computed, and hence the

opportunity to maximize the wealth of the majority (but not simultaneously all) of the

shareholders is present. Thus, we use merger bids as our experimental setting and specifically




                                                                                                 1
test the hypothesis that cross-holdings by bidder shareholders affect target selection and deal

structure.

       A shareholder who owns equity in both a bidder and its target is concerned with the effect

of a takeover bid on both firms’ stock prices. We formally show that each shareholder’s

preferences are determined by the ratio of her percentage stake in the target to her percentage

stake in the bidder. This ratio, which we call the bidder shareholder’s cross-holding, fully

captures the objective function each shareholder wants bidder management to use. In particular,

each shareholder wants bidder management to act as if the bidding firm itself owned a toehold

equal to that shareholder’s cross-holding in the target. In all models of takeover bidding with

toeholds considered in the prior literature, toeholds make bidders more willing to pursue an

acquisition and to bid aggressively. Bidding firms that consider their shareholders’ cross-

holdings are therefore expected to follow a more aggressive acquisition strategy, and cross-

holdings should make a given target more attractive to bidders.

       The predicted effect of cross-holdings on observable bidding strategies and bid outcomes

is more ambiguous. Under the null hypothesis that cross-holdings have an effect on mergers,

managers will choose targets that have high cross-holdings, high synergies, or both. Thus, among

targets with high cross-holdings, some will also have high synergies, but many will not.

Although the direct effect of cross-holdings would be to increase premiums and completion

likelihoods, the fact that they may signal low synergies produces an indirect opposite effect. As a

result, while cross-holdings should have an observable effect on target selection and bidder

announcement returns, the predicted effect on premiums and deal completion is ambiguous.

       Bidder managers who want to take their shareholders’ cross-holdings into consideration

face the challenge that different shareholders have different cross-holdings in the target, with

many bidder shareholders holding no shares in the target at all. The heterogeneity in investors’

cross-holdings leads to disagreements about the objective function for the bidding firm, and it is

far from obvious which decision rule managers should adopt. We therefore use several measures



                                                                                                 2
of shareholder preferences in the empirical analysis. Two intuitively appealing solutions to the

aggregation problem are for managers to maximize a weighted average of shareholder

preferences, or for management to simply adopt the preferences of its median shareholder. The

median shareholder in our context is defined such that 50 percent of the bidder’s shares are held

by shareholders with smaller cross-holdings and 50 percent by shareholders with larger cross-

holdings. Since larger cross-holdings are associated with preferences for a more aggressive

acquisition strategy, the median shareholder defines the most aggressive policy a bidder can

pursue while maintaining the support of a majority of its shareholders’ votes.

         We document the magnitude of investor cross-holdings and the resulting conflicts of

interests using takeover data and information on the portfolios of large institutional investors

from 1984 to 2002. We show that the average bidder’s median institutional shareholder has a

cross-holding of 5.3 percent in the target, with a median of 0.0 percent. 1 The distribution of

cross-holdings is strongly right-skewed both across bidders and across shareholders in a given

bidder; in five percent of the bidders, the median institution has cross-holdings of more than 40

percent in the target. In the average bidder, 20 percent of the institutional holdings are by

investors with cross-holdings of more than 34 percent, and 10 percent of the institutional

holdings are by investors with cross-holdings of more than 74 percent. Hence many institutional

investors want bidder management to act as if the bidder had a large toehold in the target, which

in turn implies substantial disagreements between shareholders with cross-holdings and those

without. We compute the effect of these cross-holdings on the total abnormal returns experienced

by institutional investors around the bids, including the effect of the bid on the target’s stock

price. We find that the median institution averages a positive 0.2 percent return improvement, or

about 17 percent of the average bidder announcement return of −1.2 percent.



1
  The median institutional shareholder is defined such that 50% of the institutional ownership in the bidder is by
institutions with larger cross-holdings and 50% by institutions with smaller cross-holdings. This definition is similar
to the definition of the median shareholder discussed before, with all percentiles re-defined relative to the total
institutional ownership in the firm.


                                                                                                                     3
       We find that cross-holdings by bidder shareholders are important in the choice of

takeover targets. Target firms have significantly higher cross-holdings by bidder shareholders

than do non-target control firms. Further, consistent with our conjecture that bidders trade off

cross-holdings with synergies when selecting acquisition targets, we find that high cross-

holdings are associated with low post-acquisition operating performance. There is no observable

effect of cross-holdings on bid premiums or deal completion probabilities, which supports the

conjecture that any direct effect of cross-holdings on the aggressiveness of bidding strategies is

mitigated by an indirect selection effect associating cross-holdings with low synergies. Finally,

we do not find evidence that managers are using cross-holdings to facilitate empire-building

acquisitions. We conclude that the conflicts of interests between diversified and concentrated

shareholders in mergers are pervasive enough to matter, and that managers pay attention to the

cross-holdings of their diversified shareholders.

       In related work, Matvos and Ostrovsky (2006) argue that investor cross-holdings may

explain the low and often negative returns to acquiring firms in takeovers. They argue that bidder

shareholders with large cross-holdings do not mind overpaying for targets, and hence that cross-

holdings help explain why shareholders fail to block apparently bad takeover deals. Different

from our work, they do not analyze individual cross-holdings and instead add up bidder

shareholders’ stakes in the target. This approach aggregates away the conflicts between

shareholders with heterogeneous cross-holdings. Our analysis clarifies that each shareholder’s

preferences are determined by her relative holdings in the bidder and the target, and that only

shareholders who own a larger percentage of the target than of the acquirer favor overpayment.

Empirically, shareholders with cross-holdings above 100 percent are rare and hold on average

only 4.1 percent of the bidders’ equity in our data. Hence the influence of investors who favor




                                                                                                4
overpayment is likely to be limited, and cross-holdings are unlikely to explain why bidders

overpay. 2

        The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section draws on prior theoretical work on

toeholds to formally analyze the effects of cross-holdings on firms’ objectives, and to develop

our null hypothesis and some testable implications. Section II describes our data and the variable

definitions used in the empirical analysis. Section III presents summary statistics on the size and

prevalence of cross-holdings in actual takeovers and examines their effects on target selection,

announcement returns, takeover premiums, and the probability of takeover success. The last

section summarizes and concludes.




I. Theoretical Background and Hypothesis Development

        This section examines how cross-holdings affect shareholders’ preferences over mergers

and acquisitions, and how bidder management may react to the heterogeneous preferences of its

shareholders. We first analyze shareholder preferences in the two canonical classes of takeover

models examined in the prior literature, models of tender offers in the spirit of Grossman and

Hart (1980) and models of competitive takeover bidding in the spirit of Fishman (1988). We then

present our null hypothesis and its testable implications.




2
  Matvos and Ostrovsky (2006) also show that mutual funds that hold shares in both a bidder and its target are more
likely to vote for mergers with negative announcement returns. This finding suggests that institutional investors do
pay attention to interactions between the firms in their portfolios. There has also been other work on shareholder
conflicts. Eckbo and Verma (1994) identify shareholder conflicts over dividend policy due to heterogeneous tax
rates, information asymmetries, and agency costs. Rice (2006) demonstrates that the importance of a shareholder
group to price formation depends on the group’s price elasticity of demand for shares, leading to a divergence
between the effects of corporate decisions on market values and the effects of those decisions on shareholder
welfare. Kraus and Rubin (2007) show that the conflict between diversified shareholders who want to maximize
their portfolio values and managers who use capital budgeting rules to choose firm-value maximizing projects has
important implications for executive compensation design.


                                                                                                                  5
I.A. Cross-holdings in a model of tender offers with free-riding

       This section describes shareholder preferences in a Grossman and Hart (1980)-type

setting with dispersed target shareholders. Consider a model with two firms, a bidder and a

target. The bidder is able to create synergies worth S > 0 that are realized only if the bidder

acquires control. To obtain control, the bidder needs to acquire 50 percent of the target shares in

a conditional tender offer, which entails a transaction cost of k > 0. Assume that S > k so that the

acquisition is socially efficient. All target shares are held by dispersed shareholders.

       In Grossman and Hart, atomistic target shareholders do not tender their shares at any

price below the full post-takeover value since their own tendering decision is irrelevant for the

outcome of the tender offer. The result is that all synergies S accrue to target shareholders, while

bidder shareholders incur the transaction cost k. Now consider the preferences of a shareholder

who owns αB percent of the bidder and αT percent of the target. This shareholder wants the bidder
             B




to pursue an acquisition whenever her share of the associated takeover gains exceeds her share of

the takeover costs:

                                                       ⎛ αT ⎞
                               αT ⋅ S > α B ⋅ k ⇔ −k + ⎜⎜   ⎟⎟ ⋅ S > 0                          (1)
                                                       ⎝ αB ⎠

       The shareholder wants bidder management to put a weight of (αT /αB) on target value and
                                                                                B




to effectively internalize (αT /αB) percent of the takeover gains accruing to target shareholders.
                                  B




But the decision rule in (1) is simply the optimal rule for a value-maximizing bidding firm that

owns a toehold of (αT /αB) percent in the target (see for example, Shleifer and Vishny (1986),
                           B




Hirshleifer and Titman (1990), and Chowdhry and Jegadeesh (1994)). Hence a bidder

shareholder with relative cross-holdings of (αT /αB) wants bidder management to act as if the
                                                        B




bidder itself had a toehold of (αT /αB). In the extreme, a shareholder who owns a higher
                                           B




                                                                                                  6
percentage of the target than of the bidder and thus has a cross-holding larger than 100 percent

would benefit from overpayment for the target. 3


I.B. Cross-holdings in a model of competitive takeover bidding

         This section examines shareholder preferences in models in which two or more bidders

compete for a target, and in which the Grossman-Hart free-rider problem plays no role. Most

papers in this literature use an “ascending clock” auction, in which the bid price is gradually

increased and the bidders choose whether to remain in the auction or to drop out. The last

remaining bidder wins and has to pay the price at which the second-to-last bidder withdrew. For

simplicity, we assume that there are only two bidders, labeled 1 and 2, and that both bidders are

risk neutral. Let Vi denote the private value of the target to bidder i, and assume that both V1 and

V2 exceed the value of the target under current management. Bidder 1’s and bidder 2’s strategies

consist of choosing price ceilings C1 and C2, respectively, at which to withdraw from the auction,

given that the rival is still bidding. The winning bidder is obligated to accept all tendered shares,

including any toehold shares tendered by the rival bidder. Target shareholders tender their shares

to the auction winner as long as the final price exceeds the value of the target under incumbent

management.

         Now consider the preferences of a shareholder who owns αB percent of bidder 1 and αT
                                                                                    B




percent of the target. This shareholder receives αB percent of any takeover gains accruing to
                                                                B




bidder 1 in case bidder 1 wins the auction, and the shareholder sells her αT percent target stake at

the winning price to whichever bidder wins the auction. Hence her expected payoffs are given

by:




3
  It may seem surprising that shareholder preferences are independent of the size of the bidder relative to the target.
However, this result obtains because the impact of a larger relative bidder value on the shareholder’s wealth (αBVB)
is exactly offset by the smaller effect on the bidder value due to overpaying for a relatively smaller target.
Intuitively, a shareholder with stakes in both firms simply receives αB percent of any takeover gains accruing to the
bidder and αT percent of any gains accruing to the target, independently of the relative sizes of the two firms.


                                                                                                                     7
Pr(bidder 1 wins) ⋅ [α B ⋅ (V1 − E (C 2 | bidder 1 wins )) + α T ⋅ E (C 2 | bidder 1 wins )] + Pr(bidder 2 wins) ⋅ [α T ⋅ C1 ]
⇒                                                                                                                                  (2)
                    ⎡                                 ⎛α      ⎞                            ⎤                        ⎡⎛ α     ⎞ ⎤
Pr(bidder 1 wins) ⋅ ⎢V1 − E (C 2 | bidder 1 wins ) + ⎜⎜ T     ⎟⎟ ⋅ E (C 2 | bidder 1 wins )⎥ + Pr( bidder 2 wins) ⋅ ⎢⎜⎜ T    ⎟⎟ ⋅ C1 ⎥
                    ⎣                                 ⎝αB      ⎠                           ⎦                        ⎣⎝ α B    ⎠ ⎦

The payoff function puts a relative weight of one on the takeover gains to bidder 1 in case that

bidder wins, and a relative weight of (αT /αB) on the takeover price paid, independently of which
                                                          B




bidder wins. But this is exactly the objective function of a bidding firm that owns a toehold of

(αT /αB) percent in the target and sells that toehold in case a rival wins the auction (Burkhart
       B




(1995); Singh (1998)).

           To summarize, we have shown that both in free-rider models based on Grossman and

Hart (1980) and in models of competitive bidding based on Fishman (1988) and Burkhart (1995),

a shareholder with percentage stakes αB in the bidder and αT in the target wants bidder
                                                      B




management to act as if the bidder itself owned a toehold of size (αT /αB). This motivates our    B




focus on the distribution of these cross-holdings among bidder shareholders in Section III.


I.C. Aggregation of shareholder preferences by bidder management

           The cross-holdings are by construction shareholder-specific and range from zero to above

100 percent in most bidder-target combinations. Bidder management thus faces the question of

how to aggregate the preferences of its shareholders into a decision rule for the overall firm.

Even if we assume that bidder managers wish to maximize the welfare of their shareholders, it is

far from obvious what acquisition strategy managers should adopt since any strategy has to favor

the preferences of one set of shareholders over others. Theory provides little guidance as to how

bidder management should aggregate its shareholders’ preferences, and what weight to attach to

the target value in its objective function. Two intuitively appealing solutions to the aggregation

problem are for managers to adopt the preferences of its median shareholder, or for managers to

maximize a weighted average of shareholder preferences.




                                                                                                                               8
         Under the median-shareholder criterion, bidder management pursues all takeover deals

which are supported by the owners of a majority of its shares. The median shareholder is defined

such that 50 percent of bidder shares are held by investors with larger cross-holdings and 50

percent by investors with smaller cross-holdings. Since larger cross-holdings make a shareholder

prefer a more aggressive acquisition strategy, the median shareholder defines the most

aggressive strategy managers can implement while retaining the support of a majority of

shareholders’ votes.

         The median-shareholder criterion by design ignores the preferences of most shareholders.

Alternatively, bidder managers may try to maximize a weighted average of all their shareholders’

subjective preferences. While it is not obvious what weights management should use to

aggregate shareholder preferences, most reasonable weighting schemes would imply that bidders

shift to a more aggressive acquisition strategy even if only 10 or 20 percent of their shareholders

have equity stakes in a target. 4 In Section III, we document both the preferences of the median
shareholder and of the subsets of bidder shareholders with the highest cross-holdings, and

examine whether their preferences are reflected in acquisitions.

         Cross-holdings will only affect real-world acquisitions if bidder management does in fact

consider the portfolios of its shareholders, or if diversified shareholders have the means to

impose portfolio-value maximization on management. A priori, there are several reasons to

expect that managers may ignore the cross-holdings their shareholders have in other firms. Large

concentrated shareholders such as founding families or venture capitalists are unlikely to own

any cross-holdings in target firms, but are likely to be active in corporate governance and to exert

influence over managers. Further, the compensation of top executives is heavily biased towards

stock options and restricted stock and thus ultimately depends on own-firm performance

4
  Drèze (1974) uses shareholders’ ownership stakes as weights to aggregate heterogeneous shareholder preferences.
Interestingly, applying this weighting scheme to cross-holdings amounts to simply adding up the bidder
shareholders’ percentage stakes in the target, and hence yields aggregate preferences as if there were a perfect
coalition among bidder shareholders. This degree of coordination between shareholders is not realistic and we opt
not to use this aggregation scheme in the empirical analysis. We do, however, consider the possibility that the largest
institutional shareholders may align their preferences through negotiated side-payments.


                                                                                                                     9
(Murphy (1999)). 5 Hence managers are given strong incentives to maximize the performance of

their own firm, but few obvious incentives to care about any externalities they impose on other

firms in their shareholders’ portfolios.

        The degree to which cross-holdings will matter thus depends on the ability of cross-

holding investors to influence bidder management. Shareholders with cross-holdings may be able

to influence acquisition decisions through their representatives on boards of directors, voting at

shareholders’ meetings, or private or public communication with the management team (Smith

(1996); Carleton, Nelson, and Weisbach (1998)). This kind of influence is most likely for

institutional investors and for blockholders, which are therefore the focus of our empirical

analysis. Whether bidder management takes its shareholders’ portfolios into account is ultimately

an empirical question which we attempt to answer in Section III.



I.D. Hypothesis development and testable implications

        Our null hypothesis is that bidder managers take their shareholders’ cross-holdings into

account in target selection and structuring deals, while our alternative hypothesis is that cross-

holdings have no effect on mergers. Assuming that the null hypothesis prevails, how would the

bidder’s acquisition strategy change? In Grossman and Hart (1980), a toehold bidder receives

some of the takeover gains accruing to target shareholders, making it more likely that the bidder

is able to cover the acquisition cost and hence more likely that the bid goes ahead. Cross-

holdings by bidder shareholders in a target should thus make an acquisition bid more likely.

Hence, we expect:

•   Testable Implication 1: There is a positive association between cross-holdings by a bidder’s
    shareholders and, ceteris paribus, the likelihood that a firm will be targeted by that bidder.
5
  This raises the question of why managerial contracts are written this way to begin with. While beyond the scope of
this paper, we offer the following considerations. First, incentives are endogenous and negotiated between managers
and the board. If concentrated shareholders dominate corporate governance and boards, then incentive contracts will
reflect their preferences. Second, moving away from firm-value maximization as the objective function in designing
executive compensation schemes may have costs, e.g., create more opportunities for managers to maximize their
own welfare at the expense of shareholders.


                                                                                                                 10
        In models of competitive takeover bidding, a toehold makes it optimal for a bidder to bid

more aggressively and to even raise its bid above its own valuation for the target. The more

aggressive bidding strategy increases the bidder’s expected capital gain on the toehold should a

rival win and purchase the toehold. Hirshleifer and Titman (1990), and Chowdhry and Jegadeesh

(1994) conclude that the probability of takeover success increases in the size of the bidder’s

toehold. Cross-holdings by bidder shareholders in a target should therefore motivate bidder

management to bid more aggressively.

        Empirically, however, we only observe the net effect of cross-holdings on target selection

and on bid aggressiveness. If firms select targets by trading off cross-holdings with synergies,

then a substantial fraction of targets with high cross-holdings will have lower than average

synergies. 6 To the extent that we are unable to perfectly measure synergies, this confounds our

analysis. For example, a bid where a high premium is paid for a target with low synergies and

high bidder shareholder cross-holdings may be indistinguishable from a bid where a normal

premium is paid for a target with high synergies and low shareholder cross-holdings. Moreover,

the benefits of more aggressive bidding accrue only to bidder shareholders with cross-holdings

and not to the bidding firm itself. We predict:

•   Testable Implication 2: Ceteris paribus, there is a negative association between cross-
    holdings and synergies.
•   Testable Implication 3: The net effects of cross-holdings on premiums and completion rates
    are ambiguous, while their effect on bidder announcement returns is negative.

         Under the null hypothesis, bidder managers may choose to take their shareholders’ cross-

holdings into account for the opportunistic purpose of reducing their resistance to empire-

building acquisitions. If the motivation is management driven, then we would still expect to see

an effect of cross-holdings in target selection, but not necessarily in bid characteristics. More

importantly, we would expect to see this type of managerial behavior concentrated in poorly

6
 Based on the same argument, Shleifer and Vishny (1986) and Hirshleifer and Titman (1990) show that toeholds are
associated with lower bid premiums as toeholds allow acquisitions with lower value-added to proceed.


                                                                                                             11
governed firms. Empirically, if agency problems drive the effect of cross-holdings on target

selection, we expect:

•   Testable Implication 4: There is a positive association between cross-holdings and poor
    governance in the bidding firm.



II. Sample Formation and Variable Construction

II.A. Sample selection

        We begin with all announced (both completed and cancelled) US mergers with

announcement dates between January 1, 1984 and December 31, 2002 as identified from the

Mergers and Acquisitions database of the Securities Data Company (SDC). We identify all deals

where both the bidder and the target are public firms and the form of deal was coded as a merger,

an acquisition of majority interest, or an acquisition of assets. After applying the above filters,

we get 8,075 deals. The sample period is chosen because the information in SDC is less reliable

before 1984 and we require data on post-merger performance.

        Next, we match our bidders and targets with Compustat and CRSP data, and only retain

an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the target prior to the bid and is seeking

to own greater than 50 percent after the bid. For completed deals, we require that the bidder

owns more than 90 percent of the target after the deal completion. These filters yield 2,885 deals.

        Finally, we merge our acquisition data with the CDA/Spectrum 13F data on institutional

shareholdings in the bidder and the target.7 Ideally, we would also like to measure cross-holdings

at the individual investor level. Using data on institutional investors adds a layer of

intermediation between individual investors and firms, and makes it difficult to assess the extent

to which the ultimate owners of the assets are diversified across firms. However, given the

greater size of their stakes, the cross-holdings of institutional investors are more likely to be
7
  A 1978 amendment to the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 requires all institutions with greater than $100
million of equity securities under discretionary management to report every quarter all common-stock positions
greater than 10,000 shares or $200,000 using the SEC’s form 13F.


                                                                                                           12
reflected in company policies than the cross-holdings of individuals. When interpreting our

results it is nevertheless useful to keep in mind that we do not observe the portfolios of non-

institutional investors and therefore miss potentially significant cross-holdings. In a similar vain,

an institutional portfolio reported to the SEC may be an aggregate of multiple distinct portfolios

managed by the institution, adding noise to our measure of cross-holdings. Our final sample has

2,815 merger deals where both the bidder and the target have data on institutional shareholdings

in the quarter-end prior to the bid announcement.


II.B. Variable construction

       From Section I we know that bidder shareholders’ preferences are determined by their

cross-holdings, defined as their percentage ownership of the target divided by their percentage

ownership of the bidder. Since different shareholders have different cross-holdings, their

preferences over acquisitions are heterogeneous. We therefore adopt three complementary

approaches to describing the distribution of cross-holdings across shareholders. Given that we do

not observe the portfolios of non-institutional investors, we focus most of our discussion on the

cross-holdings of institutional investors and restrict our sample to bidders that have at least 20

percent of their equity owned by institutions. This restriction excludes firms in which

institutional investors are unlikely to have any influence on management.

       The first approach to measuring shareholder preferences captures what percentage of the

institutional holdings in the bidder is by investors with large cross-holdings, and what percentage

by investors with small or no cross-holdings. Figure 1 illustrates the approach. Specifically, we

order all institutional investors in the bidder by their cross-holdings, and then calculate the

(marginal) cross-holding for the top 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 percent of institutional shareholdings

(labeled as the top-1%, top-5%, top-10%, top-20%, and median cross-holdings, respectively).

For example, a top-10% cross-holding of 75 percent means that 10 percent of the institutional

ownership in the bidder is controlled by investors with cross-holdings of at least 75 percent. Of



                                                                                                  13
particular interest is the cross-holding of the median institutional shareholder in the bidder. This

median cross-holding determines the set of acquisition policies the bidder can pursue while

maintaining the support of the majority of its institutional shareholders’ votes. To complement

the analysis for institutional shareholders, we also calculate and report cross-holdings for all

shareholders of the bidder by making the conservative assumption that all non-institutional

investors have zero cross-holdings.

        The above approach to measuring cross-holdings ignores the fact that shareholders differ

greatly in their ability to impose their preferences on bidder management. We expect

management to be most responsive to the preferences of its largest shareholders; hence our next

two approaches look explicitly at the cross-holdings of blockholders, defined as institutional

investors who own at least five percent of the bidder’s shares. Specifically, we order the

blockholders by their cross-holdings, and then report the (marginal) cross-holding for the top 5,

10, 20, 50, 75, and 100 percent of all shares owned by blockholders, in parallel to the

calculations for all institutional investors described above.

        Finally, we consider the possibility that blockholders might coordinate their actions and

negotiate side-payments with each other. With costless bargaining, the Coase Theorem (Coase

(1960)) predicts that the blockholders should act in unison and support any acquisition that is

profitable for all blockholders combined. The aggregate preferences of any coordinated group of

investors are determined by their combined cross-holdings, given by the sum of their equity

stakes in the target divided by the sum of their stakes in the bidder. In reality, coordination

between blockholders may not be costless and side-payments are likely to be restricted by law. 8

Hence the blockholders’ combined cross-holdings should be interpreted as an upper bound on

the cross-holding the blockholders may bring to bear on the bidding firm’s decision process.




8
  The Securities and Exchange Commission passed new rules in 1992 allowing shareholders to directly
communicate with each other (SEC (1992)). Thus, the costs of creating shareholder coalitions were substantially
reduced.


                                                                                                            14
III. Empirical Results

       In this section, we first present an overview of our sample with a focus on the magnitude

of shareholder cross-holdings. Then, we formally test the null hypothesis that shareholder cross-

holdings do matter in target selection and present evidence on the effect of cross-holdings on

post-merger operating performance. Finally, we examine the role of cross-holdings in

determining bid characteristics and outcomes in a multivariate regression framework, and

explore alternative explanations to our findings.


III.A. Sample overview

       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on the announced merger deals, the bidders, and the

targets. In Panel A, we show that 75 percent of the announced deals are eventually completed. A

quarter of the deals use only cash as the method of payment, and over 40 percent of the deals are

pure stock swaps. Approximately 13 percent of the targets receive competing bids within one

year. The sample is split evenly between diversifying and within-industry deals. The mean

relative deal size, defined as the ratio of the transaction value to the market value of the bidder, is

30 percent. Consistent with the prior literature, there are few direct toeholds, and more than 95

percent of the bidders have no toehold at all in their targets. On average, the bidder is offering a

premium of 45 percent above the market price of the target as of four weeks before the bid.

       In Panel B, we show that the average three-day abnormal announcement period return

(CAR3) for the bidder is –1.2 percent, while the average CAR3 for the target is close to 20

percent. Following Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1988), we also compute the dollar amount of the

synergistic gains (= bidder CAR3 × bidder market capitalization + target CAR3 × (1 – toehold) ×

target market capitalization) as well as the percentage synergy gains (= synergy in dollars

/(bidder market capitalization + (1 – toehold) × target market capitalization). Panel B shows that

the average synergies amount to about $47 million in 2002 dollars, corresponding to an average




                                                                                                    15
percentage gain of about 2 percent. This implies that, once we account for the large positive

announcement return to the target, mergers in our sample are on average welfare-improving.

       Panels C and D present summary statistics on the bidders and targets in our sample,

respectively. Consistent with the relative size variable, the bidders are much larger than their

targets in terms of both book and market values. The bidders and targets have similar levels of

leverage, while the bidders appear to enjoy faster sales growth, better operating performance, and

higher stock returns in the year prior to the bid.

       Table 2 presents summary statistics of institutional shareholdings in the bidders and

targets. On average, institutional investors own 46 percent of the equity of bidding firms and 32

percent of the equity of targets. Bidder institutions that also own shares in the target control 14

percent of all bidder shares, or 31 percent of the bidder shares owned by institutions. While

target institutions that also own shares in the bidder control a similar 18 percent of all target

shares, they own over half of the generally smaller institutional holdings in the target.


III.B. The size and pervasiveness of cross-holdings

       Table 3 summarizes the empirical distribution of cross-holdings in the bidders and

targets. In Part I of Panel A, we calculate cross-holdings for the top 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 percent

of the bidders’ institutional shareholders and limit our sample to bidders with total institutional

ownership no less than 20 percent. This reduces our sample by only 16 percent to 2,356

observations. We find that the average cross-holding by the median institutional shareholder is

5.3 percent, with a median of 0.0 percent. The distribution of cross-holdings across bidders is

strongly right-skewed; in five percent of the bidders, the median institution has cross-holdings of

at least 40 percent, and in one percent of the bidders, the median cross-holding is at least 87

percent. Focusing on the largest cross-holdings, we find that the average top-10% cross-holding

is 75 percent, and that the average top-5% cross-holding is 140 percent.




                                                                                                16
       In Part II of Panel A, we calculate cross-holdings for the top 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 percent

of all bidder shareholders, assuming that the cross-holdings of non-institutional investors are

zero. With this assumption, we find that the average median cross-holding is only 0.3 percent.

This low number is a direct result of the assumed zero cross-holdings for non-institutional

investors and of the fact that the median shareholder is an institution in less than half of the

bidders in our sample. However, even under these assumptions, the average top-10% cross-

holding is 30 percent. We also compute the fraction of bidder shares whose holders own a higher

percentage stake of the target than of the bidder. We find that bidder shareholders with cross-

holdings greater than one are rare and control on average only 4.1 percent of the bidder’s equity

and only 10.1 percent of the total institutional holdings in the bidder. This means that the

influence of shareholders who favor actual overpayment for the target is likely to be small.

       We conclude that there is a substantial number of institutional investors with large cross-

holdings in the average bidder, and that there is a significant set of mergers in which even the

median institution owns a large stake in the target. At the same time, many institutional

shareholders of the bidder have no cross-holdings in the target at all, implying significant

conflicts of interests over the objective function of the bidder.

       The above analysis ignores the differences in the power of different shareholders to

impose their preferences on bidder management. We therefore focus next on large shareholders.

Table 4 presents summary statistics of cross-holdings held by blockholders, defined as

institutions that own at least five percent of the shares of a firm. Part I of Panel A shows that the

average cross-holding by the median blockholder is 11 percent (median 0.0 percent), and that in

five percent of the bidders, the median blockholder has a cross-holding of 82 percent or more in

the target. Turning to blockholders with large cross-holdings, the average top-20% cross-holding

exceeds 18 percent, and the average top-10% cross-holding is almost 20 percent. These numbers

suggest that there is a significant number of institutional blockholders, the subset of institutional

investors most likely to influence bidder management, with large cross-holdings in the target.



                                                                                                  17
        In Part II of Panel A we examine what would happen if blockholders were to negotiate

side-payments with one another and act as a group. The average combined cross-holding by all

blockholders in the bidder is 12 percent. The distribution is again skewed, with the median of the

combined cross-holding equal to zero. In ten percent of all deals, however, blockholders want

management to act as if the bidder had a 46 percent toehold in the target, and in five percent of

all deals as if the bidder had a 69 percent toehold in the target. For comparison, Betton, Eckbo,

and Thorburn (2005) analyze toeholds held directly by acquirers in a comprehensive sample of

twelve thousand bidders and find that only 11 percent of the bidders own any toehold in the

target. In their sample, the average toehold size among bidders with a positive toehold is 21

percent, with a median of 17 percent. 9

        Of course, target shareholders can have cross-holdings in the bidder as well, so Tables 3

and 4 present analogous information for target shareholders’ cross-holdings in the bidder. We

find similar, but generally higher cross-holdings held by target shareholders in the bidder. This is

likely a mechanical outcome driven by the relatively greater institutional interest in bidders

observed in Table 2.


III.C. Wealth effects of bid announcements

        Next we examine to what extent the wealth effects of takeovers on bidder shareholders

change when we take their cross-holdings in the target into account. To address that question, we

introduce the concept of a return improvement. First define the total abnormal announcement

return for an institutional investor in a bidder as

        Total Abnormal Announcement Return = α Bi ⋅ ΔVB + αTi ⋅ ΔVT                                     (3)

where α is the percentage shareholding by institution i in either the bidder (subscript B) or in the

target (subscript T) and ΔV is the abnormal change in firm value, computed as the product of the


9
  Similar, if somewhat higher, numbers have been documented before by, among others, Bradley, Desai, and Kim
(1988), Jarrell and Poulsen (1989), Jennings and Mazzeo (1993), and Betton and Eckbo (2000).


                                                                                                         18
bidder’s or target’s market value and the corresponding abnormal announcement period return.

The return improvement is the difference between the total abnormal announcement return and

the bidder abnormal announcement period return. This measure thus captures the improvement

in return experienced by a given bidder shareholder due to her ownership stake in the target.

         Table 5 presents the return improvement for institutional investors in the bidder, ordered

once more by the size of their cross-holdings. Part I limits the sample to bidders with total

institutional ownership no less than 20 percent. We find that the average return improvement for

the median institutional shareholder is 0.2 percent, with a median of 0.0 percent. The distribution

of return improvement is somewhat skewed; in five percent of the bidders, the median institution

has a return improvement of 1.7 percent or better, while in one percent of the bidders, the median

institution has a return improvement of 6.2 percent or better. Focusing on bidder institutions with

large cross-holdings, we find that the average return improvement for the institution with the top-

10% cross-holding is 2.5 percent; for the institution with the top-5% cross-holding, it is 3.7

percent. As a reference point, the average bidder announcement return in our sample is −1.2

percent (see Table 1, Panel B).10 Thus, we conclude that, in general, the return improvement
provided by cross-holdings is moderate, but that in some cases, it is large relative to the average

announcement effect.

         Part II of Table 5 presents the return improvement for all shareholders, assuming

individual shareholders have zero cross-holdings. There remain moderate improvements across

bidder shareholders with non-trivial cross-holdings, although as expected the improvements are

not as big as those in Panel A.




10
   These fairly modest return improvements are a direct consequence of the fact that most targets are small relative
to their acquirers; the median relative deal size, which is the ratio of transaction value to market value of the bidder,
is only 10 percent. In untabulated analysis, we calculate return improvements for bids whose relative deal size is in
the top quartile of all bids. Not surprisingly, the average return improvements are substantially larger for this subset
of bids and reach 6.3 percent for the institution with the top-10% cross-holding and 8.4 percent for the top-5% cross-
holding.


                                                                                                                      19
III. D. The effect of cross-holdings on target selection

           In the next three sub-sections, we formally examine the null hypothesis that managers

account for their shareholders’ cross-holdings when making decisions about acquisitions. The

literature on toeholds has shown that the presence of a toehold increases the bidding likelihood,

so we start our investigation by examining the role of cross-holdings in target selection. To

examine the first testable implication of our null hypothesis, we compare the cross-holdings of

bidder shareholders in the actually chosen targets to their cross-holdings in a sample of

alternative targets that were not chosen.

           Our control sample of potential target firms is obtained by first identifying the set of all

CRSP/Compustat firms that were neither targets nor bidders in our merger sample and that have

institutional shareholding data available from CDA. This forms the base set of potential control

firms. For each actual target in our sample, we select a control firm from its Fama-French (1997)

industry that is closest in market capitalization (requiring that the difference does not exceed 25

percent of the sample firm market capitalization) at the fiscal year-end prior to the bid

announcement. 11 Matching is done with replacement and only one control firm is matched to
each sample firm. We are able to match 2,427 control firms to target firms in our sample. We

refer to the matching firms as potential targets.

           In Table 6, Panel A, we present summary statistics for the potential targets, which can be

compared to the corresponding statistics for the actual targets presented in Table 1, Panel D.

There is no statistical difference between the actual and potential target samples across most firm

characteristics, including the extent of institutional shareholding. This suggests that we have

found valid control firms for the targets. The only significant difference between the potential

and actual target firms is that the potential targets tend to have higher market-to-book ratios.

           Table 6, Panel B presents the empirical distribution of cross-holdings by bidder

shareholders in the potential targets. Comparing these figures to those in Panel A of Table 3, it is

11
     Our main inferences remain unchanged if we impose different size matching criteria.


                                                                                                    20
clear that the cross-holdings by bidder shareholders in the actual targets are larger than in the

potential targets (except where the cross-holdings are zero in both samples). Tests of differences

in means and medians show that the cross-holdings by bidder shareholders in the chosen targets

are significantly different from those in the control sample.

        An alternative explanation for the difference in cross-holdings are unobservables, that is,

institutions may invest in firms that are similar along some dimension that we do not observe,

and that same similarity may make those firms more likely to merge. While this explanation is

plausible for within-industry acquisitions, it is less likely to apply to diversifying acquisitions. It

would have to be the case that institutions invest in firms across different industries based on

some unobservable dimension that also makes these firms more likely to merge with each other.

We check whether the difference in cross-holdings for actual versus potential targets holds for

both diversifying and non-diversifying mergers, and indeed it does. We conclude that cross-

holdings by bidder shareholders are an important consideration in bidder management’s choice

of targets.

        In untabulated results, we also examine the time-series of cross-holdings in the four

quarters before a bid announcement. We find no evidence that cross-holdings in either party

increase in the quarters leading-up to the bid. Thus, we find no evidence that institutions can

predict bids or that they systematically increase their holdings in potential merger partners to

trigger (or in anticipation of) a possible deal. Finally, we also confirm that the cross-holdings do

not change significantly during the announcement quarter. If anything, we find that bidder

shareholders with low cross-holdings tend to sell their stakes in the target, while bidder

shareholders with high cross-holdings maintain their positions after the bid announcement.




                                                                                                    21
III. E. The effect of cross-holdings on synergies

           Under the null hypothesis that cross-holdings matter in mergers, we conjecture that

bidders select targets by trading off cross-holdings with synergies, and hence that synergies are

on average lower for bids with higher bidder shareholder cross-holdings. Empirically, it is a

challenge to measure synergies ex ante, suggesting that we could test our second testable

implication by comparing the operating performance of firms with different cross-holdings ex

post. If the conjectured selection effect is true, then mergers associated with higher bidder cross-

holdings will have lower post-merger operating improvements—our proxy for cost-

reduction/efficiency-based synergies—than those associated with low cross-holdings. . To focus

on deals which are important to the bidding firm and its shareholders, we require that the target’s

size is at least five percent of the size of the bidder for these regressions. 12

           Table 7 presents the test results. The dependent variables are industry-adjusted returns on

assets from one-year up to three-years after the merger. The key explanatory variables are the

bidder’s top-20% and median cross-holdings. Given the difficulty of working with post-merger

operating performance, the results are surprisingly strong. There is a significant negative relation

between bidder shareholders’ top-20% cross-holdings and post-merger operating performance.

The estimated effect grows with the time horizon and is significant for two- and three-year

average post-merger ROAs. At the three-year horizon, a two standard deviation change in top-

20% cross-holdings lowers the industry-adjusted ROA by 1.8 percent per year. These results

support our conjecture that bidder management trades-off synergies and cross-holdings in target

selection.


III.F. The effect of cross-holdings on merger outcomes

           We next turn to the deal itself, examining the bidder and target abnormal announcement

period returns, bid premiums, and the likelihood of deal completion as per our third testable


12
     All results are qualitatively unchanged when we include deals with smaller targets in the regressions.


                                                                                                              22
implication. The prior literature has found toeholds to be associated with higher returns to the

bidder, lower bid premiums, and a higher probability of takeover success, and to have an

ambiguous effect on target shareholder returns. 13 We predicted that cross-holdings have a

negative effect on bidder announcement returns, and we predicted an ambiguous effect on

premiums and deal completion. Panels A to D of Table 8 summarize our test results. The key

explanatory variables are once more the bidder’s and target’s median and top-20% cross-

holdings, while other control variables are based on the prior literature.

        Throughout, we find no effect of cross-holdings held by bidder shareholders on either

announcement period returns, bid premiums, or the likelihood of deal completion. This result is

robust in a wide variety of specifications; in untabulated regressions we have used cross-holdings

calculated for alternative percentiles of the bidder’s equity, we have experimented with dummy

variables identifying bidders with extraordinarily high cross-holdings, and we have re-estimated

our regressions for various subsets of the full sample chosen on the basis of deal size. 14 Further,
we have examined whether an effect becomes apparent only after 1992, when the SEC rules

governing shareholder communication changed (SEC (1992)). We find no difference following

the rule change. Focusing on the cross-holdings of bidder blockholders, either individually or as

a group, shows similarly no effect of cross-holdings on any of the outcome variables.

        Given that bidder managers are taking cross-holdings into account in target selection,

they are clearly aware of the cross-holdings, and it seems unlikely that they start ignoring them

subsequently. Rather, the results in Tables 7 and 8 are most consistent with our conjecture that

bidders select targets by trading off cross-holdings with synergies. Since we are unable to

perfectly control for synergies in Table 8, we only observe the net effect of cross-holdings on

13
   On toeholds and bidder returns see Betton and Eckbo (2000), on toeholds and bid premiums see Walkling and
Edmister (1985) and Betton and Eckbo (2000), on toeholds and the probability of takeover success see Walkling
(1985), Jennings and Mazzeo (1993), and Betton and Eckbo (2000), and on toeholds and target shareholder returns
see Eckbo and Langohr (1989), Jarrell and Poulsen (1989), Franks and Harris (1989), Stulz, Walkling, and Song
(1990), and Betton and Eckbo (2000).
14
   We have also repeated the analysis after removing all institutional investors whose investment strategy appears to
be that of an indexer. These “quasi-indexers” are identified following the approach in Bushee (1998). The inferences
are unchanged.


                                                                                                                 23
target selection and on bid aggressiveness. Hence chosen targets with high cross-holdings are

likely to have lower synergies than targets with low cross-holdings, and the data may show, for

example, that targets with high cross-holdings garner no higher premiums than those without.

What this sample selection mechanism cannot explain are the insignificant bidder announcement

returns. Because the benefits of more aggressive bidding accrue only to bidder shareholders with

cross-holdings and not to the bidding firm itself, we had predicted a negative effect of cross-

holdings on bidder announcement returns.

       We do find some evidence in Panels A to C that higher cross-holdings held by target

shareholders in the bidder are associated with higher bidder announcement returns, lower target

announcement returns, and lower bid premiums. This may suggest that large cross-holdings by

target shareholders in the bidder weaken the target’s takeover defenses and lead to a less

expensive acquisition for the bidder. The estimated coefficients on other control variables are in

keeping with expectations.


III.G. The relationship between cross-holdings and governance

       The above results are broadly consistent with the conjecture that managers

opportunistically take advantage of shareholder cross-holdings to reduce shareholder resistance

to empire-building acquisitions. This interpretation also predicts higher cross-holdings for firms

selected as targets, consistent with the results of Section III.D. However, we would expect this

type of managerial behavior to be most prevalent in poorly governed firms. Thus, as per our final

testable implication, we predict that higher bidder shareholder cross-holdings in chosen targets

are associated with bidders that have the worst governance.

       As our proxy for the quality of corporate governance, we use the Gompers, Ishii, and

Metrick (2003) G-index, which is an aggregate measure of the level of shareholder rights in each

firm. We also include a modification to the G-index, the entrenchment- or E-index, in our

analysis. Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2006) develop the E-index by showing that only the six



                                                                                               24
most economically motivated of the 24 provisions in the G-index are significantly associated

with firm value.

        Table 9 presents the correlation matrix between our measures of corporate governance

and our measures of cross-holdings. For comparison, we also include total institutional

ownership in the bidder and the target. Higher levels of the governance indexes indicate worse

governance. Contrary to our fourth testable implication, we find a significant negative correlation

between cross-holdings and the E-index, suggesting that managers in poorly governed firms are

not more likely to pursue targets in which bidder shareholders have large cross-holdings. The

correlations between the G-index and the cross-holdings measures are negative but insignificant.

There is no pattern in the correlations between the governance indexes and total institutional

ownership. The G-index is moderately positively correlated with the bidder’s institutional

ownership, while the E-index has a slightly higher but still moderate negative correlation with

the target’s institutional ownership. One interpretation of the latter finding is that poorly

governed firms avoid targeting firms with a lot of institutional monitoring, perhaps to avoid

inheriting those institutions in a stock-swap. We conclude that our evidence does not support the

alternative explanation that managers use cross-holdings to reduce resistance to empire-building

acquisitions.




IV. Summary and Conclusion

        This paper identifies and measures conflicts of interests among shareholders caused by

differences in their portfolio compositions, and examines their effects in the case of corporate

acquisitions. Diversified shareholders prefer corporate policies which maximize their portfolio

values to policies which narrowly maximize the value of individual firms, and shareholders with

different portfolios disagree about which actions firms should pursue. While the problem of

shareholder heterogeneity examined here is general, the large premiums paid in acquisitions

make it acute in this setting.


                                                                                                25
       We show how to correctly measure the shareholder preferences created by cross-

holdings, and we document their size and effects in takeover data from 1984 to 2002. We find

that the average acquirer’s median institutional shareholder has a cross-holding of 5.3 percent in

the target; the average top-10% cross-holding is above 74 percent; and in five percent of the

acquisitions even the median institution has a cross-holding of 40 percent or more. The average

return improvement experienced by the median institutional shareholder is 0.2 percent, offsetting

about 17 percent of the average bidder announcement return of −1.2 percent. At the same time,

many institutional shareholders of the bidder have no cross-holdings in the target at all, implying

substantial disagreements over the objective function of the bidder.

       We test the null hypothesis that cross-holdings by bidder shareholders matter in mergers,

and find evidence that bidders consider their shareholders’ cross-holding when picking targets.

Further, the operating performance of the merged firm is worse for bids associated with higher

bidder shareholder cross-holdings. We find no observable effect of cross-holdings on the bidding

strategies used by acquirers. Finally, if anything, the target selection result appears driven by

better governed firms rather than poorly governed firms.

       Our results are most consistent with bidder managers selecting targets along the

dimensions of both synergies and cross-holdings, such that chosen targets with high cross-

holdings by bidder shareholders will tend to have lower synergies. With insufficient controls for

synergies, aggressive bidding strategies for high cross-holding (and lower synergy) targets

appear similar to normal bidding strategies for low cross-holding (and higher synergy) targets.

Thus, the direct effect of cross-holdings on acquisition strategy and the indirect effect on synergy

through target selection may effectively cancel each other out and lead to the observed non-

effect. This stands in contrast to effects found in the extant literature for toeholds held directly by

the bidder. However, in the case of direct toeholds, bidder management identifies a high synergy

target and endogenously chooses to establish a toehold. In the case of cross-holdings, bidder

management must take their shareholders’ cross-holdings as given.



                                                                                                    26
References

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, 2006, What Matters in Corporate
      Governance? Harvard Law School working paper.

Betton, Sandra, and B. Espen Eckbo, 2000, Toeholds, Bid-Jumps, and Expected Payoffs in
       Takeovers, Review of Financial Studies 13, 841-882

Bradley, Michael, Anand Desai, and E. Han Kim, 1988, Synergistic Gains from Corporate
       Acquisitions and Their Division Between the Stockholders of Target and Acquiring
       Firms, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 3-40.

Burkart, Mike, 1995, Initial Shareholdings and Overbidding in Takeover Contests, Journal of
       Finance 50, 1491-1515.

Bushee, Brian J., 1998, The Influence of Institutional Investors on Myopic R&D Investment
      Behavior, Accounting Review 73, 305-333.

Carleton, Willard T., James M. Nelson, and Michael Weisbach, 1998, The Influence of
       Institutions on Corporate Governance through Private Negotiations: Evidence from
       TIAA-CREF, Journal of Finance 53, 1335-1362.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Narasimhan Jegadeesh, 1994, Pre-Tender Offer Share Acquisition
     Strategy in Takeovers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 117-129.

Coase, Ronald H., 1960, The Problem of Social Cost, Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1-44

Drèze, Jaques H., 1974, Investment under Private Ownership: Optimality, Equilibrium and
       Stability, in: Allocation under Uncertainty: Equilibrium and Optimality, Jaques H. Drèze
       (ed.), John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Eckbo, B. Espen, and Herwig Langohr, 1989, Information Disclosure, Means of Payment, and
       Takeover Premiums: Public and Private Tender Offers in France, Journal of Financial
       Economics 24, 363-403.

Eckbo, B. Espen, and Savita Verma, 1994, Managerial Share Ownership, Voting Power, and
      Cash Dividend Policy, Journal of Corporate Finance 1, 33-62.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1997, Industry Costs of Capital, Journal of Financial
      Economics 43, 153-193.

Fishman, Michael J., 1988, A Theory of Preemptive Takeover Bidding, Rand Journal of
      Economics 19, 88-101.

Franks, Julian R., and Robert S. Harris, 1989, Shareholder Wealth Effects of Corporate
       Takeovers: The UK Experience 1955-85, Journal of Financial Economics 23, 225-49.




                                                                                            27
Gompers, Paul A., Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate Governance and Equity
     Prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1980, Takeovers, the Free-Rider Problem and the
      Theory of the Corporation, Bell Journal of Economics 11, 42-64.

Hansen, Robert G., and John R. Lott Jr., 1996, Externalities and Corporate Objectives in a World
      with Diversified Shareholder/Consumers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
      31, 43-68.

Hart, Oliver, 1979, On Shareholder Unanimity in Large Stock Market Economies, Econometrica
       47, l057-l083.

Hirshleifer, David, and Sheridan Titman, 1990, Share Tendering Strategies and the Success of
       Hostile Takeover Bids, Journal of Political Economy 98, 295-324.

Jarrell, Gregg A., and Annette B. Poulsen, 1989, Stock Trading before the Announcement of
         Tender Offers: Insider Trading or Market Anticipation?, Journal of Law, Economics and
         Organizations 5, 225-248.

Jennings, Robert H., and Michael A. Mazzeo, 1993, Competing Bids. Target Management
       Resistance, and the Structure of Takeover Bids, Review of Financial Studies 6, 883-909.

Kraus, Alan, and Amir Rubin, 2007, Reducing Managers’ Incentives to Cannibalize: Managerial
       Stock Options When Shareholders Are Diversified, University of British Columbia and
       Simon Fraser University working paper.

Matvos, Gregor, and Michael Ostrovsky, 2006, Cross-Ownership, Returns, and Voting in
      Mergers, Harvard University and Stanford University working paper.

Murphy, Kevin J., 1999, Executive Compensation, in: Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley
      Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), Vol. 3b, Elsevier Science North Holland, 2485-2563.

Rice, Edward M., 2006, What Stock Price Changes Mean When Events Affect Shareholders
       Differently, University of Washington working paper.

Rubin, Amir, 2006, Diversification and Corporate Decisions, Corporate Ownership and Control
       3, 209-212.

Securities and Exchange Commission, 1992, “Regulation of Communication Among
        Shareholders,” Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Release No. 31,326, 57 Fed. Reg.
        48,276, Oct. 16.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1986, Large Shareholders and Corporate Control,
       Journal of Political Economy 94, 461-488.

Singh, Rajdeep, 1998, Takeover Bidding with Toeholds: The Case of the Owner’s Curse, Review
       of Financial Studies 11, 679-704.


                                                                                             28
Smith, Michael P., 1996, Shareholder Activism by Institutional Investors: Evidence from
       CalPERS, Journal of Finance 51, 227-252.

Stulz, René M., Ralph A. Walkling, and Moon H. Song, 1990, The Distribution of Target
       Ownership and the Division of Gains in Successful Takeovers, Journal of Finance 45,
       817-834.

Walkling, Ralph A., and Robert O. Edmister, 1985, Determinants of Tender Offer Premiums,
       Financial Analysts Journal 41, 27-37.

Walkling, Ralph A., 1985, Predicting Tender Offer Success: A Logistic Analysis, Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 461-478.




                                                                                       29
Figure 1
Bidder Institutional Investors’ Cross-holdings in the Target

This figure illustrates how the bidder institutional shareholders’ cross-holdings in the target are measured. We first
rank all bidder institutional investors by their cross-holdings in the target, defined as their percentage ownership of
the target divided by their percentage ownership of the bidder. Using this ranking, we then calculate the marginal
cross-holdings associated with the top 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 percent of institutional shareholdings. In the example
illustrated below, one percent of the bidder’s institutional shareholdings are owned by shareholders with cross-
holdings of at least 116%, and hence the top-1% cross-holding is set to 116 percent. Twenty percent of the bidder’s
institutional shareholdings are by shareholders with cross-holdings of at least 45 percent, and hence the top-20%
cross-holding is 45 percent. Finally, the median institutional shareholder has a cross-holding of 24 percent in the
target, which we call the median cross-holding for short.




                                           Cross-holdings by Bidder Institutional Investors in the Target
                    Cross-holdings
                    in the T arget


  Top-1% Cross-      120%
  holding

                     100%



                      80%



                      60%

   Top-20% Cross-
   holding
                      40%

   Median Cross-
   holding            20%



                       0%
                            0%       10%       20%       30%       40%        50%       60%       70%       80%        90%        100%

                                             Normalized Cumulative Stock Ownership by Bidder Institutional Investors




                                                                                                                             30
Table 1
Summary Statistics on Merger Bids, Bidders, and Targets, 1984-2002

The sample consists of 2,815 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31, 2002. The
bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional holding data in
the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the target prior to the
bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the target. For completed deals, we require that the bidder owns
more than 90 percent of the target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002 millions of dollars, all
percentages are in real numbers.


Panel A: Deal Characteristics
Complete, All Cash, All Stock, Competing, and Diversifying are dummy variables that take the value of one for
completed acquisitions, if only cash is used to pay for the acquisition, if only equity is used, if there are multiple
bids for the same target within one year, if the bidder and target are from two different industries, respectively, and
zero otherwise. Relative Size is the transaction value divided by the market value of bidder assets at the end of the
fiscal year prior to the bid announcement. Toehold measures the percentage of the target’s shares held by the bidder
prior to the bid announcement. Premium is the ratio of the final offer price to the target’s trading price four weeks
prior to the original announcement date minus one.

                                                                     5th                     95th
                                N       Mean       StdDev     Percentile     Median    Percentile

 Complete                   2815         0.753       0.431        0.000        1.000        1.000
 All Cash                   2815         0.256       0.437        0.000        0.000        1.000
 All Stock                  2815         0.415       0.493        0.000        0.000        1.000
 Competing                  2815         0.134       0.341        0.000        0.000        1.000
 Diversifying               2815         0.477       0.500        0.000        0.000        1.000
 Relative Size              2600         0.298       0.653        0.004        0.101        1.081
 Toehold                    2815         0.006       0.043        0.000        0.000        0.000
 Premium                    2508         0.447       0.524       -0.057        0.365        1.160


Panel B: Announcement Period Returns, Synergy, and Total Returns
The abnormal announcement period returns (CAR3) are over days (−1, 1), where day 0 is the date of the initial bid
announcement by the acquiring firm. Daily abnormal stock returns are computed using the market model and the
value-weighted CRSP index. The estimation window is days (−200, −60) prior to the acquisition announcement
date. Following Bradley, Desai, and Kim (1988), the percentage synergy gain is defined as the cumulative abnormal
return over the (−1, +1) event window for a value-weighted portfolio of the target and bidder. The weights for the
bidder and the target are based on the market value of equity two days prior to the bid announcement. The target
weight adjusts for the percentage of target shares held by the acquirer prior to the announcement of the deal, with the
adjustment set to zero for missing toehold values. The dollar value synergistic gain over the same event window (−1,
+1) is defined as the percentage synergy gain times the sum of the market values of equity for the bidder and the
target in million dollars, again adjusted for the percentage of target shares held by the acquirer prior to the
announcement of the deal.

                                                                      5th                    95th
                                N        Mean       StdDev     Percentile    Median    Percentile

 Bidder CAR3                 2815      -0.012        0.085        -0.129      -0.009       0.092
 Target CAR3                 2815       0.196        0.248        -0.072       0.145       0.628
 Synergy ($)                 2815      46.813     1451.867      -624.124       8.261     916.737
 Synergy (%)                 2815       0.020        0.084        -0.082       0.012       0.143



                                                                                                                   31
Panel C: Bidder Characteristics

                                                                  5th                   95th
                                     N   Mean    StdDev    Percentile   Median    Percentile

 Market Capitalization            2815    8901    29487           50      1512       35670
 Market Value Total Assets        2815   20148    57655           87      3390       94310
 Book Value Total Assets          2815   13710    43250           56      1977       60871
 Sales                            2815    5010    11555           33      1087       23364
 Market Leverage                  2808   0.162     0.140       0.000     0.134        0.433
 Book Leverage                    2808   0.227     0.176       0.000     0.204        0.543
 Market-to-Book Ratio             2815   2.068    2.705        0.974     1.398       4.991
 Sales Growth                     2815   0.345     1.155      -0.149     0.136        1.200
 Return on Assets                 2815   0.151    0.177       -0.019     0.143        0.415
 Prior Year Stock Return          2815   0.316     0.802      -0.401     0.193        1.264
 Prior Year Mkt-Adj Return        2815   0.162    0.786       -0.525     0.038       1.091


Panel D: Target Characteristics

                                                                  5th                    95th
                                    N    Mean    StdDev    Percentile   Median     Percentile

 Market Capitalization            2815    1213     4905           13        154        5097
 Market Value Total Assets        2815    4208    22022           25        411       13334
 Book Value Total Assets          2815    3495    20498           17        292       10803
 Sales                            2815   1292      4634           12        177        5823
 Market Leverage                  2810   0.176    0.167        0.000      0.137       0.503
 Book Leverage                    2810   0.223    0.204        0.000      0.185       0.606
 Market-to-Book Ratio             2815   1.672    1.535        0.856      1.207       3.713
 Sales Growth                     2815   0.242    0.940       -0.221      0.103        0.952
 Return on Assets                 2815   0.094    0.195       -0.178      0.105       0.333
 Prior Year Stock Return          2815   0.173    0.816       -0.641      0.080        1.072
 Prior Year Mkt-Adj Return        2815   0.018    0.805       -0.743     -0.077        0.902




                                                                                                32
Table 2
Summary Statistics on Institutional Ownership in Bidders and Targets, 1984-2002

The sample consists of 2,815 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31, 2002. The
bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional holding data in
the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the target prior to the
bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the target. For completed deals, we require that the bidder owns
more than 90 percent of the target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002 millions of dollars, all
percentages are in real numbers.


Panel A: Institutional Ownership in Bidders
Total Institutional Ownership is the fraction of a bidder’s stock that is owned by institutional investors. Total
Blockholder Ownership is the fraction of a bidder’s stock that is owned by block institutional investors with share
ownership no less than five percent. Bidder Institutions Owning Shares in Target gives the total shareholdings in the
bidder by institutions who also own shares in the target. Fraction of Bidder Institutional Ownership Owned by
Institutions with Shares in Target gives the percentage of the bidder’s institutional ownership that is held by
institutions who also own shares in the target.

                                                                                            5th                    95th
                                                        N       Mean      StdDev     Percentile    Median    Percentile

Total Institutional Ownership                        2815       0.464       0.232        0.064       0.485        0.827
Total Blockholder Ownership                          1692       0.153       0.101        0.053       0.125        0.357
Bidder Institutions Owning Shares in Target          2815       0.144       0.142        0.002       0.091        0.442
Fraction of Bidder Institutional Ownership
Owned by Institutions with Shares in Target          2815       0.309       0.242        0.014       0.251        0.790


Panel B: Institutional Ownership in Targets
Total Institutional Ownership is the fraction of a target’s stock that is owned by institutional investors. Total
Blockholder Ownership is the fraction of a target’s stock that is owned by block institutional investors with share
ownership no less than five percent. Target Institutions Owning Shares in Bidder gives the total shareholdings in the
target by institutions who also own shares in the bidder. Fraction of Target Institutional Ownership Owned by
Institutions with Shares in Bidder gives the percentage of the target’s institutional ownership that is held by
institutions who also own shares in the bidder.

                                                                                            5th                    95th
                                                        N       Mean      StdDev     Percentile    Median    Percentile

Total Institutional Ownership                        2815       0.324       0.233        0.016       0.280        0.759
Total Blockholder Ownership                          1764       0.160       0.108        0.054       0.133        0.376
Target Institutions Owning Shares in Bidder          2815       0.179       0.172        0.002       0.123        0.543
Fraction of Target Institutional Ownership
Owned by Institutions with Shares in Bidder          2815       0.535       0.282        0.044       0.551        0.981




                                                                                                                 33
         Table 3
         Summary Statistics on Cross-holdings By Shareholders in Bidders and Targets

         The sample consists of 2,815 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31, 2002. The
         bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional holding data in
         the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the target prior to the
         bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the target. For completed deals, we require that the bidder owns
         more than 90 percent of the target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002 millions of dollars, all
         percentages are in real numbers.


         Panel A: The Cumulative Distribution of Cross-holdings by Bidder Shareholders
         Cross-holdings are defined as the ratio of the shareholder’s percentage ownership in the target divided by her
         percentage ownership in the bidder. We order all institutional investors by their cross-holdings, and then report the
         (marginal) cross-holding for the top 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 percent of institutional shareholdings (labeled as the top-
         1%, top-5%, top-10%, top-20%, and median cross-holdings, respectively). We require that at least 20 percent of the
         bidder’s equity is owned by institutions for this analysis. In addition to the analysis for institutional shareholders, we
         calculate cross-holdings for all the bidder’s shareholders under the conservative assumption that all non-institutional
         investors have zero cross-holdings. Here the percentiles are with respect to all shareholders, and we do not impose
         the requirement that institutional investors own at least 20 percent of the bidder. Bidder Institutional Holdings with
         Cross-holding ≥ 1 gives the total shareholdings in the bidder by institutions whose cross-holdings are larger than
         one. Fraction of Bidder Institutional Holdings with Cross-holding ≥ 1 gives the percentage of the bidder’s
         institutional ownership that is owned by institutions with cross-holdings larger than one. We report cross-holdings
         for percentiles of (the actually observed) institutional investors in Part I and for percentiles of all shareholders in
         Part II of Panel A.


                                                                                                75th         90th         95th          99th
                                                N       Mean       StdDev      Median     Percentile   Percentile   Percentile    Percentile

I: Cross-holding by All Institutional Investors from Bidders with Total Institutional Ownership ≥ 0.2
Top-1% Cross-holding                         2356       4.631      4.895         3.281      6.223         10.216        13.309        22.759
Top-5% Cross-holding                         2356       1.396      1.281         1.154      1.905          2.976         3.740         5.683
Top-10% Cross-holding                        2356       0.747      0.733         0.619      1.139          1.720         2.125         3.065
Top-20% Cross-holding                        2356       0.344      0.451         0.100      0.616          1.027         1.224         1.639
Median Cross-holding                         2356       0.053      0.162         0.000      0.000          0.162         0.397         0.866

II: Cross-holding by All Bidder Shareholders
Top-1% Cross-holding                      2815          2.544        2.567       1.764        3.564         6.023        7.619        11.209
Top-5% Cross-holding                      2815          0.661        0.752       0.431        1.102         1.706        2.168         3.078
Top-10% Cross-holding                     2815          0.295        0.445       0.000        0.533         1.009        1.232         1.689
Top-20% Cross-holding                     2815          0.099        0.236       0.000        0.013         0.402        0.718         1.019
Median Cross-holding                      2815          0.003        0.029       0.000        0.000         0.000        0.000         0.079

Bidder Institutional Holdings with
Cross-holding ≥ 1                           2815        0.041        0.047       0.025        0.058         0.103        0.139         0.217
Fraction of Bidder Institutional
Holdings with Cross-holding ≥ 1             2815        0.101        0.127       0.063        0.135         0.235        0.326         0.619




                                                                                                                                 34
       Panel B: The Cumulative Distribution of Cross-holdings by Target Shareholders
       Cross-holdings are defined as the ratio of the shareholder’s percentage ownership in the bidder divided by her
       percentage ownership in the target. We order all institutional investors by their cross-holdings, and then report the
       (marginal) cross-holding for the top 1, 5, 10, 20, and 50 percent of institutional shareholdings (labeled as the top-
       1%, top-5%, top-10%, top-20%, and median cross-holdings, respectively). We require that at least 20 percent of the
       target’s equity is owned by institutions for this analysis. In addition to the analysis for institutional shareholders, we
       calculate cross-holdings for all the target’s shareholders under the conservative assumption that all non-institutional
       investors have zero cross-holdings. Here the percentiles are with respect to all shareholders, and we do not impose
       the requirement that institutional investors own at least 20 percent of the target. Target Institutional Holdings with
       Cross-holding ≥ 1 gives the total shareholdings in the target by institutions whose cross-holdings are larger than one.
       Fraction of Target Institutional Holdings with Cross-holding ≥ 1 gives the percentage of the target’s institutional
       ownership that is owned by institutions with cross-holdings larger than one. We report cross-holdings for percentiles
       of (the actually observed) institutional investors in Part I and for percentiles of all shareholders in Part II of Panel B.

                                                                                              75th         90th          95th          99th
                                             N        Mean       StdDev      Median     Percentile   Percentile    Percentile    Percentile

I: Cross-holding by All Institutional Investors from Targets with Total Institutional Ownership ≥ 0.2
Top-1% Cross-holding                       1763       4.533       3.984        3.607      5.802           8.834       11.757         20.729
Top-5% Cross-holding                       1763       1.569       1.049        1.412      2.039           2.814        3.410          5.160
Top-10% Cross-holding                      1763       0.953       0.646        0.950      1.301           1.684        2.084          2.986
Top-20% Cross-holding                      1763       0.507       0.440        0.436      0.824           1.071        1.231          1.756
Median Cross-holding                       1763       0.089       0.168        0.005      0.103           0.311        0.484          0.769

II: Cross-holding by All Target Shareholders
Top-1% Cross-holding                    2815          2.069        1.927       1.601        2.953         4.436        5.689          8.494
Top-5% Cross-holding                    2815          0.596        0.640       0.398        1.034         1.528        1.795          2.396
Top-10% Cross-holding                   2815          0.280        0.409       0.018        0.492         0.969        1.124          1.501
Top-20% Cross-holding                   2815          0.099        0.220       0.000        0.043         0.399        0.654          0.968
Median Cross-holding                    2815          0.005        0.033       0.000        0.000         0.000        0.008          0.151

Target Institutional Holdings with
Cross-holding ≥ 1                         2815        0.037        0.043       0.022        0.054         0.094        0.125          0.190
Fraction of Target Institutional
Holdings with Cross-holding ≥ 1           2815        0.135        0.162       0.093        0.175         0.295        0.434          0.927




                                                                                                                                35
Table 4
Summary Statistics on Cross-holdings By Block Institutional Investors in Bidders and Targets

The sample consists of 2,815 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31, 2002. The
bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional holding data in
the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the target prior to the
bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the target. For completed deals, we require that the bidder owns
more than 90 percent of the target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002 millions of dollars, all
percentages are in real numbers.


Panel A: The Cumulative Distribution of Cross-holdings by Bidder Blockholders
Cross-holdings are defined as the ratio of the shareholder’s percentage ownership in the target divided by her
percentage ownership in the bidder. This table focuses on large shareholders, defined as blockholders with
ownership no less than five percent. The sample is restricted to deals with at least one blockholder in the bidder. We
order the blockholders by their cross-holdings, and then report the (marginal) cross-holding for the top 5, 10, 20, 50,
75, and 100 percent of blockholdings (labeled as the top-5%, top-10%, top-20%, median, top-75%, and all cross-
holdings, respectively). We compute two cross-holding measures: for all blockholders, and for all blockholders
combined assuming they exchange side payments and act as a group (combined cross-holding). We present the
empirical distribution of the two measures in Parts I and II of Panel A, respectively.

                                                                                   75th         90th         95th         99th
                                   N      Mean        StdDev      Median     Percentile   Percentile   Percentile   Percentile
I: Cross-holding by All Bidder Blockholders
Top-5% Cross-holding            1692      0.199         0.418       0.000        0.154        0.799        1.135          1.936
Top-10% Cross-holding           1692      0.199         0.418       0.000        0.154        0.799        1.135          1.936
Top-20% Cross-holding           1692      0.181         0.395       0.000        0.125        0.711        1.060          1.834
Median Cross-holding            1692      0.109         0.300       0.000        0.015        0.392        0.820          1.470
Top-75% Cross-holding           1692      0.071         0.245       0.000        0.000        0.156        0.512          1.385
All Cross-holding               1692      0.069         0.243       0.000        0.000        0.149        0.497          1.385

II: Combined Cross-holding by All Bidder Blockholders
Combined Cross-holding        1692       0.121      0.279           0.000        0.084        0.457        0.689          1.385




                                                                                                                    36
Panel B: The Cumulative Distribution of Cross-holdings by Target Blockholders
Cross-holdings are defined as the ratio of the shareholder’s percentage ownership in the bidder divided by her
percentage ownership in the target. This table focuses on large shareholders, defined as blockholders with ownership
no less than five percent. The sample is restricted to deals with at least one blockholder in the target. We order the
blockholders by their cross-holdings, and then report the (marginal) cross-holding for the top 5, 10, 20, 50, 75, and
100 percent of blockholdings (labeled as the top-5%, top-10%, top-20%, median, top-75%, and all cross-holdings,
respectively). We compute two cross-holding measures: for all blockholders, and for all blockholders combined
assuming they exchange side payments and act as a group (combined cross-holding). We present the empirical
distribution of the two measures in Parts I and II of Panel B, respectively.

                                                                                  75th         90th         95th         99th
                                   N      Mean       StdDev      Median     Percentile   Percentile   Percentile   Percentile
I: Cross-holding by All Target Blockholders
Top-5% Cross-holding            1764      0.214        0.379       0.016        0.272        0.722        1.002          1.698
Top-10% Cross-holding           1764      0.213        0.377       0.016        0.270        0.721        1.000          1.675
Top-20% Cross-holding           1764      0.202        0.363       0.012        0.241        0.701        0.986          1.646
Median Cross-holding            1764      0.114        0.269       0.000        0.078        0.377        0.701          1.348
Top-75% Cross-holding           1764      0.077        0.217       0.000        0.019        0.252        0.514          1.070
All Cross-holding               1764      0.073        0.215       0.000        0.015        0.233        0.505          1.070

II: Combined Cross-holding by All Target Blockholders
Combined Cross-holding        1764       0.132      0.251          0.010        0.149        0.433        0.699          1.136




                                                                                                                   37
Table 5
Return Improvement for Bidder Shareholders Around Merger Announcements

The sample consists of 2,815 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31, 2002. The bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s
Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional holding data in the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50
percent of the target prior to the bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the target. For completed deals, we require that the bidder owns more than
90 percent of the target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002 millions of dollars, all percentages are in real numbers. The return improvement
for each bidder institutional shareholder is computed as the difference between her total abnormal announcement return and the bidder abnormal announcement
period return. The total abnormal announcement return for each bidder institutional shareholder is the ownership-weighted average abnormal return on her stakes
in the bidder and the target and is defined in equation (3). The abnormal announcement period returns (CAR3) are over days (−1, 1), where day 0 is the date of
the initial bid announcement by the acquiring firm. Daily abnormal stock returns are computed using the market model and the value-weighted CRSP index. The
estimation window is days (−200, −60) prior to the acquisition announcement date. We report the distribution of return improvement for different institutional
investors based on their cross-holdings as defined in Table 3 Panel A.


                                                                                       75th         90th         95th         99th
                                        N        Mean      StdDev      Median    Percentile   Percentile   Percentile   Percentile

 I. Return Improvement by All Institutional Investors from Bidders with Total Institutional Ownership ≥ 0.2
 Top-1% by Cross-holding             2356        0.066      0.102       0.030         0.102      0.190         0.255        0.427
 Top-5% by Cross-holding             2356        0.037      0.066       0.012         0.053      0.118         0.169        0.284
 Top-10% by Cross-holding            2356        0.025      0.051       0.004         0.032      0.086         0.127        0.216
 Top-20% by Cross-holding            2356        0.014      0.034       0.000         0.012      0.051         0.086        0.149
 Median by Cross-holding             2356        0.002      0.012       0.000         0.000      0.004         0.017        0.062

 II. Return Improvement by All Bidder Shareholders
 Top-1% by Cross-holding            2815      0.051          0.088       0.019        0.078       0.156        0.213        0.380
 Top-5% by Cross-holding            2815      0.023          0.050       0.002        0.026       0.080        0.121        0.221
 Top-10% by Cross-holding           2815      0.012          0.031       0.000        0.008       0.042        0.076        0.149
 Top-20% by Cross-holding           2815      0.005          0.019       0.000        0.000       0.011        0.034        0.091
 Median by Cross-holding            2815      0.000          0.004       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000        0.004
Table 6
The Effect of Cross-holdings on Target Selection

Our control sample of potential target firms is obtained by first identifying all CRSP/Compustat firms that were neither targets nor bidders in our merger sample.
This forms the base set of potential control firms. For each target in our sample, we select a control firm in the same Fama-French (1997) industry with the
closest market capitalization to that of the sample firm (requiring that the difference does not exceed 25% of the sample firm market capitalization) at the fiscal
year-end prior to the bid announcement, and with institutional shareholding data from the CDA. Matching is done with replacement and only one control firm is
matched to each sample firm. We end up with 2,427 control firms for target firms in our sample. Panel A presents the summary statistics of our control sample.
Panel B presents the cumulative distribution of cross-holdings by bidder shareholders in target control firms. The last two columns of each panel present the p-
values of tests for differences in means and medians, respectively, from the corresponding figures for the actual targets, presented in Tables 1 and 3.


Panel A: Target Control Characteristics

                                                                                 5th                      95th                        Median
                                          N        Mean         StdDev    Percentile     Median     Percentile            T-Test        Test

 Market Capitalization                 2427     935.203       3715.906       14.447     146.642     3970.715               1.000        1.000
 Market Value Total Assets             2427    3025.615      15324.166       26.635     361.859     9413.135               0.358        0.153
 Book Value Total Assets               2427    2492.444      14024.565       12.819     248.012     7678.903               0.315        0.009
 Sales                                 2427     983.157       4812.033        6.702     154.140     4065.943               0.528        0.010
 Market Leverage                       2423       0.177          0.178        0.000       0.130        0.527               0.760        0.446
 Book Leverage                         2423       0.231          0.238        0.000       0.185        0.641               0.113        0.602
 Market-to-Book Ratio                  2427       1.940          2.383        0.881       1.277        5.117              <0.001       <0.001
 Sales Growth                          2427       1.065         32.888       -0.250       0.117        1.067               0.220        0.009
 Return on Assets                      2427       0.089          0.242       -0.264       0.112        0.366               0.653        0.242
 Prior Year Stock Return               2427       0.181          0.854       -0.627       0.080        1.184               0.757        0.628
 Prior Year Mkt-Adj Return             2427       0.026          0.839       -0.729      -0.084        1.014               0.753        0.917
 Total Institutional Ownership         2427       0.322          0.231        0.018       0.277        0.758               0.474        0.487
Panel B: The Cumulative Distribution of Cross-holdings by Bidder Shareholders in Target Control Firms

                                                                                   75th         90th           95th         99th             Median
                                    N        Mean      StdDev      Median    Percentile   Percentile     Percentile   Percentile    T-test     Test

 I: Cross-holding by All Institutional Investors from Bidders with Total Institutional Ownership ≥ 0.2
 Top-1% Cross-holding              2023       4.125       5.143      2.479          5.381      9.450        13.648       23.366     0.009    <0.001
 Top-5% Cross-holding              2023       1.166       1.281      0.888          1.601      2.626         3.546        6.213    <0.001    <0.001
 Top-10% Cross-holding             2023       0.581       0.690      0.367          0.938      1.473         1.884        2.953    <0.001    <0.001
 Top-20% Cross-holding             2023       0.242       0.384      0.000          0.387      0.875         1.086        1.516    <0.001    <0.001
 Median Cross-holding              2023       0.025       0.105      0.000          0.000      0.025         0.155        0.629    <0.001    <0.001

 II. Cross-holding by All Bidder Shareholders
 Top-1% Cross-holding             2427      2.194        2.530       1.388        2.952       5.259          7.147       11.465    <0.001    <0.001
 Top-5% Cross-holding             2427      0.512        0.693       0.167        0.870       1.437          1.856        2.880    <0.001    <0.001
 Top-10% Cross-holding            2427      0.208        0.378       0.000        0.277       0.799          1.061        1.533    <0.001    <0.001
 Top-20% Cross-holding            2427      0.059        0.182       0.000        0.000       0.177          0.452        0.940    <0.001    <0.001
 Median Cross-holding             2427      0.001        0.013       0.000        0.000       0.000          0.000        0.012     0.016     0.326




                                                                                                                                                      40
            Table 7
            Cross-holdings and Synergies

            The sample consists of 897 completed acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31,
            2002. The bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional
            holding data in the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns more than 90 percent of the
            target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002 millions of dollars, all percentages are in real
            numbers. We further require that the relative size of the deal is no less than 5 percent and the total institutional
            ownership in the bidder is no less than 20 percent. Columns (1)-(2), (3)-(4), and (5)-(6) are regression results using
            industry-adjusted one-year, two-year, and three-year post-merger annualized returns on assets, respectively, as the
            dependent variables. Pre-merger firm characteristics as explanatory variables are also industry-adjusted. All model
            specifications employ robust standard errors. Superscripts ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the
            1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. P-values are reported in brackets.


                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                               One-year         One-year        Two-year         Two-year        Three-year       Three-year
                                                ROA              ROA             ROA              ROA              ROA              ROA

Bidder Top-20% Cross-holding                    -0.011                            -0.017*                           -0.020**
                                                [0.304]                           [0.072]                           [0.019]
Bidder Median Cross-holding                                       0.009                            0.003                                0.001
                                                                 [0.699]                          [0.912]                              [0.964]
All Cash                                         0.015            0.017            0.014           0.017            0.014               0.017*
                                                [0.198]          [0.132]          [0.195]         [0.120]          [0.174]             [0.094]
All Stock                                        0.022**          0.022**          0.022***        0.022***         0.021***           0.021***
                                                [0.025]          [0.027]          [0.006]         [0.007]          [0.004]             [0.005]
Competing                                       -0.027*          -0.027*          -0.021          -0.020           -0.017              -0.017
                                                [0.085]          [0.085]          [0.186]         [0.190]          [0.223]             [0.230]
Diversifying                                     0.006            0.007           -0.001          -0.000           -0.001              -0.000
                                                [0.512]          [0.445]          [0.857]         [0.978]          [0.840]             [0.995]
Relative Size                                   -0.008           -0.012            0.001          -0.005            0.008               0.002
                                                [0.556]          [0.359]          [0.944]         [0.690]          [0.494]             [0.882]
Bidder Total Institutional Ownership             0.007            0.015           -0.007           0.002           -0.017              -0.006
                                                [0.836]          [0.635]          [0.780]         [0.936]          [0.476]             [0.780]
Bidder Market Capitalization                     0.004            0.002            0.005**         0.003            0.006**             0.003
                                                [0.126]          [0.395]          [0.047]         [0.258]          [0.011]             [0.130]
Bidder Market Leverage                           0.110**          0.106**          0.102***        0.098***         0.102***           0.097***
                                                [0.020]          [0.023]          [0.002]         [0.002]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]
Bidder Market- to-Book Ratio                     0.002            0.002            0.002           0.002            0.001               0.001
                                                [0.280]          [0.267]          [0.424]         [0.403]          [0.482]             [0.451]
Bidder Return on Assets                          0.300***         0.302***         0.280***        0.283***         0.277***           0.281***
                                               [<0.001]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]
Intercept                                       -0.006           -0.002           -0.004           0.001           -0.008              -0.003
                                                [0.793]          [0.942]          [0.834]         [0.965]          [0.619]             [0.860]

Number of Observations                            897              897             897              897              897                897
Adjusted R-squared                               0.151            0.150           0.182            0.179            0.209              0.205
Table 8
The Effects of Cross-holdings on Mergers

The initial sample consists of 2,815 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31,
2002. The bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions database and have institutional
holding data in the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the
target prior to the bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the target. For completed deals, we require
that the bidder owns more than 90 percent of the target after the deal completion. All dollar amounts are in 2002
millions of dollars, all percentages are in real numbers. We further require that the relative size of the deal is no less
than 5 percent. Bidder (Target) CAR3 is over days (−1, 1), where day 0 is the date of the initial bid announcement
by the acquiring firm. Daily abnormal stock returns are computed using the market model and the value-weighted
CRSP index. The estimation window is days (−200, −60) prior to the acquisition announcement date. Premium is the
ratio of the final offer price to the target’s trading price four weeks prior to the original announcement date minus
one. Complete is an indicator variable taking the value of one if the deal is completed, and zero otherwise. Cross-
holdings are defined as the ratio of the shareholder’s percentage ownership in the target divided by her percentage
ownership in the bidder. Bidder (Target) Top-20% (Median) Cross-holding is the (marginal) cross-holding for the
top 20 (50) percent of institutional shareholdings. Complete, All Cash, All Stock, Competing, and Diversifying are
dummy variables that take the value of one for completed acquisitions, if only cash is used to pay for the acquisition,
if only equity is used, if there are multiple bids for the same target within one year, if the bidder and target are from
two different industries, respectively, and zero otherwise. Relative Size is the transaction value divided by the
market value of bidder assets at the end of the fiscal year prior to the bid announcement. Bidder (Target) Total
Institutional Ownership is the fraction of a bidder’s (target’s) stock that is owned by institutional investors. All
accounting values are obtained at the fiscal year-end prior to the announcement of the bid. Columns (1)-(2) are
regression results based on a sample of deals where the total institutional ownership in the bidder is no less than 20
percent. Columns (3)-(4) are regression results based on a sample of deals where both bidder and target total
institutional ownership are no less than 20 percent. All model specifications include year and industry fixed effects
and employ robust standard errors. Superscripts ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively. P-values are reported in brackets.




                                                                                                                      42
       Panel A: The Bidder Announcement Period Return

                                            (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)
                                       Bidder CAR3      Bidder CAR3   Bidder CAR3   Bidder CAR3

Bidder Top-20% Cross-holding             0.008                          0.005
                                        [0.208]                        [0.586]
Bidder Median Cross-holding                              -0.001                        -0.025
                                                         [0.960]                       [0.135]
Target Top-20% Cross-holding                                            0.002
                                                                       [0.803]
Target Median Cross-holding                                                             0.033*
                                                                                       [0.075]
All Cash                                 0.017***         0.016***      0.021***        0.020***
                                        [0.005]          [0.006]       [0.002]         [0.002]
All Stock                               -0.014**         -0.014**      -0.011*         -0.011*
                                        [0.016]          [0.018]       [0.083]         [0.072]
Competing                                0.000            0.000        -0.001          -0.002
                                        [0.989]          [1.000]       [0.836]         [0.809]
Diversifying                             0.001            0.001         0.001           0.001
                                        [0.810]          [0.877]       [0.851]         [0.861]
Relative Size                           -0.007           -0.008        -0.009          -0.009
                                        [0.150]          [0.122]       [0.163]         [0.134]
Bidder Total Institutional Ownership     0.007            0.000        -0.005          -0.019
                                        [0.667]          [0.987]       [0.829]         [0.334]
Target Total Institutional Ownership     0.003            0.010         0.016           0.030
                                        [0.853]          [0.518]       [0.470]         [0.122]
Bidder Market Capitalization             0.006            0.005         0.004           0.004
                                        [0.109]          [0.115]       [0.295]         [0.291]
Target Market Capitalization            -0.009**         -0.008**      -0.008*         -0.007*
                                        [0.021]          [0.034]       [0.070]         [0.075]
Bidder Market Leverage                   0.017            0.016         0.023           0.023
                                        [0.452]          [0.472]       [0.352]         [0.369]
Bidder Market-to-Book Ratio             -0.003*          -0.003*       -0.003*         -0.003*
                                        [0.066]          [0.061]       [0.068]         [0.054]
Bidder Return on Assets                 -0.008           -0.009        -0.002          -0.002
                                        [0.660]          [0.632]       [0.913]         [0.924]
Bidder Prior Year Stock Return          -0.002           -0.002         0.002           0.002
                                        [0.535]          [0.572]       [0.654]         [0.638]
Intercept                               -0.015           -0.017        -0.025          -0.024
                                        [0.471]          [0.434]       [0.275]         [0.297]

Yr, Ind. Dummies                           Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes
Number of Observations                    1379             1379          1071          1071
Adjusted R-squared                        0.075            0.074         0.079         0.082




                                                                                          43
       Panel B: The Target Announcement Period Return

                                            (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)
                                       Target CAR3      Target CAR3   Target CAR3   Target CAR3

Bidder Top-20% Cross-holding            -0.012                          0.012
                                        [0.483]                        [0.556]
Bidder Median Cross-holding                              -0.037                      -0.051
                                                         [0.227]                     [0.157]
Target Top-20% Cross-holding                                           -0.042**
                                                                       [0.036]
Target Median Cross-holding                                                          -0.007
                                                                                     [0.864]
All Cash                                 0.041**          0.042**       0.048**       0.049**
                                        [0.028]          [0.026]       [0.016]       [0.014]
All Stock                               -0.024*          -0.024*       -0.037**      -0.035**
                                        [0.079]          [0.081]       [0.013]       [0.017]
Competing                               -0.027**         -0.026**      -0.025*       -0.024
                                        [0.046]          [0.049]       [0.092]       [0.105]
Diversifying                            -0.023*          -0.023*       -0.027**      -0.025*
                                        [0.060]          [0.063]       [0.039]       [0.059]
Relative Size                            0.016*           0.016*        0.007         0.007
                                        [0.085]          [0.078]       [0.513]       [0.498]
Bidder Total Institutional Ownership     0.017            0.018         0.087*        0.036
                                        [0.674]          [0.660]       [0.086]       [0.467]
Target Total Institutional Ownership     0.042            0.035         0.021         0.065
                                        [0.273]          [0.316]       [0.695]       [0.171]
Bidder Market Capitalization             0.052***         0.052***      0.041***      0.043***
                                       [<0.001]         [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]
Target Market Capitalization            -0.050***        -0.050***     -0.036***     -0.038***
                                       [<0.001]         [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]
Target Market Leverage                   0.022            0.022         0.007         0.018
                                        [0.624]          [0.624]       [0.904]       [0.738]
Target Market-to-Book Ratio             -0.008**         -0.008**      -0.009**      -0.008**
                                        [0.015]          [0.016]       [0.022]       [0.029]
Target Return on Assets                  0.051            0.051         0.047         0.052
                                        [0.151]          [0.147]       [0.255]       [0.199]
Target Prior Year Stock Return          -0.044***        -0.045***     -0.037***     -0.038***
                                       [<0.001]         [<0.001]       [0.002]       [0.001]
Intercept                                0.138***         0.132**       0.040         0.033
                                        [0.009]          [0.012]       [0.463]       [0.544]

Yr, Ind. Dummies                           Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes
Number of Observations                    1381             1381          1072          1072
Adjusted R-squared                        0.151            0.151         0.164         0.162




                                                                                        44
       Panel C: The Bid Premium

                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                                       Premium      Premium      Premium      Premium

Bidder Top-20% Cross-holding            -0.013                     0.050
                                        [0.655]                   [0.114]
Bidder Median Cross-holding                           0.024                     0.030
                                                     [0.651]                   [0.614]
Target Top-20% Cross-holding                                      -0.098***
                                                                  [0.005]
Target Median Cross-holding                                                    -0.072
                                                                               [0.279]
All Cash                                 0.010        0.011        0.026        0.027
                                        [0.761]      [0.742]      [0.361]      [0.352]
All Stock                               -0.020       -0.021       -0.034       -0.032
                                        [0.451]      [0.444]      [0.150]      [0.174]
Competing                                0.023        0.023        0.040        0.042
                                        [0.396]      [0.395]      [0.155]      [0.139]
Diversifying                            -0.030       -0.030       -0.018       -0.016
                                        [0.170]      [0.176]      [0.410]      [0.466]
Relative Size                            0.091***     0.092***     0.081***     0.082***
                                       [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]
Bidder Total Institutional Ownership    -0.015        0.001        0.255***     0.167**
                                        [0.853]      [0.986]      [0.002]      [0.024]
Target Total Institutional Ownership    -0.040       -0.053       -0.104       -0.013
                                        [0.563]      [0.428]      [0.218]      [0.868]
Bidder Market Capitalization             0.093***     0.093***     0.080***     0.085***
                                       [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]
Target Market Capitalization            -0.112***    -0.114***    -0.097***    -0.105***
                                       [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]
Bidder Market Leverage                   0.099        0.100        0.039        0.063
                                        [0.383]      [0.380]      [0.675]      [0.492]
Bidder Market-to-Book Ratio              0.002        0.002        0.008**      0.009**
                                        [0.723]      [0.713]      [0.038]      [0.027]
Bidder Return on Assets                  0.015        0.016       -0.053       -0.044
                                        [0.837]      [0.829]      [0.474]      [0.564]
Bidder Prior Year Stock Return           0.024        0.024       -0.001       -0.002
                                        [0.206]      [0.206]      [0.960]      [0.899]
Intercept                                0.454***     0.460***     0.265***     0.268***
                                       [<0.001]     [<0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]

Yr, Ind. Dummies                          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Number of Observations                   1337         1337         1051         1051
Adjusted R-squared                       0.121        0.121        0.160        0.153




                                                                                 45
       Panel D: The Completion Likelihood

                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                                            Complete     Complete     Complete     Complete

Bidder Top-20% Cross-holding                  0.074                     0.246
                                             [0.544]                   [0.133]
Bidder Median Cross-holding                                0.034                    -0.068
                                                          [0.898]                   [0.842]
Target Top-20% Cross-holding                                           -0.167
                                                                       [0.301]
Target Median Cross-holding                                                          0.517
                                                                                    [0.211]
Premium                                       0.042        0.040        0.062        0.082
                                             [0.701]      [0.711]      [0.719]      [0.634]
All Cash                                     -0.469***    -0.473***    -0.481***    -0.489***
                                            [<0.001]     [<0.001]      [0.001]     [<0.001]
All Stock                                    -0.031       -0.029       -0.057       -0.059
                                             [0.781]      [0.797]      [0.651]      [0.643]
Competing                                    -1.169***    -1.169***    -1.259***    -1.263***
                                            [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]
Diversifying                                  0.109        0.104        0.151        0.153
                                             [0.243]      [0.266]      [0.173]      [0.167]
Relative Size                                -0.038       -0.042        0.002       -0.003
                                             [0.560]      [0.515]      [0.977]      [0.968]
Bidder Total Institutional Ownership          0.737**      0.683**      0.875**      0.463
                                             [0.019]      [0.023]      [0.034]      [0.204]
Target Total Institutional Ownership         -0.074       -0.012       -0.567       -0.092
                                             [0.787]      [0.962]      [0.168]      [0.794]
Bidder Market Capitalization                  0.301***     0.300***     0.351***     0.355***
                                            [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]
Target Market Capitalization                 -0.279***    -0.271***    -0.365***    -0.382***
                                            [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]
Bidder Market Leverage                        0.145        0.140        0.108        0.132
                                             [0.711]      [0.720]      [0.821]      [0.780]
Bidder Market-to-Book Ratio                  -0.005       -0.005        0.013        0.010
                                             [0.843]      [0.818]      [0.647]      [0.733]
Bidder Return on Assets                      -0.285       -0.292        0.065        0.086
                                             [0.260]      [0.249]      [0.817]      [0.760]
Bidder Prior Year Stock Return                0.089        0.091        0.150*       0.152*
                                             [0.178]      [0.171]      [0.074]      [0.068]
Intercept                                     6.271***     6.265***     6.342***     6.435***
                                            [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]     [<0.001]

Yr, Ind. Dummies                              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Number of Observations                       1316         1316         1035         1035
Pseudo R-squared                             0.205        0.204        0.240        0.240




                                                                                     46
       Table 9
       Cross-holdings and Managerial Incentives

       The sample consists of 1,179 acquisitions announced during the period January 1, 1984, to December 31, 2002 with
       available data on measures of corporate governance. The bidders and targets are listed in the SDC’s Mergers and
       Acquisitions database and have institutional holding data in the CDA/Spectrum database. We keep an acquisition if
       the bidder owns less than 50 percent of the target prior to the bid and is seeking to own greater than 50 percent of the
       target. For completed deals, we require that the bidder owns more than 90 percent of the target after the deal
       completion. The G-index is defined based on Gompers et al. (2003), and the E-index is defined based on Bebchuk et
       al. (2006). Superscripts ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels,
       respectively. P-values are reported in brackets.


                                            Bidder Total       Target Total         Bidder            Bidder
                                            Institutional      Institutional       Top-20%            Median
                                             Ownership          Ownership        Cross-holding     Cross-holding        G-index

Target Total Institutional Ownership           0.319***
                                             [<0.001]

Bidder Top-20% Cross-holding                  -0.104***             0.600***
                                             [<0.001]             [<0.001]

Bidder Median Cross-holding                   -0.061**              0.372***          0.608***
                                              [0.036]             [<0.001]          [<0.001]

G-index                                        0.057*              -0.002            -0.030             -0.027
                                              [0.051]              [0.946]           [0.302]            [0.364]

E-index                                       -0.004               -0.125***         -0.114***          -0.071**          0.712***
                                              [0.899]             [<0.001]          [<0.001]            [0.015]         [<0.001]




                                                                                                                           47
