                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  FROM BROWN TO BUSING

                                         Elizabeth Cascio
                                          Nora Gordon
                                           Ethan Lewis
                                           Sarah Reber

                                       Working Paper 13279
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13279


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2007




We thank Bob Margo, Mark Tushnet, and session participants at the 2007 AEA meetings for comments
on an earlier draft of this paper. This research was supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation (Award Number 0519126) and the Spencer Foundation (Award Number 200600131).
The data presented, the statements made, and the views expressed are solely the responsibility of the
authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Elizabeth Cascio, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, and Sarah Reber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
From Brown to Busing
Elizabeth Cascio, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, and Sarah Reber
NBER Working Paper No. 13279
July 2007
JEL No. H00,I20,I28,J15

                                              ABSTRACT

An extensive literature debates the causes and consequences of the desegregation of American schools
in the twentieth century. Despite the social importance of desegregation and the magnitude of the literature,
we have lacked a comprehensive accounting of the basic facts of school desegregation. This paper
uses newly assembled data to document when and how Southern school districts desegregated as well
as the extent of court involvement in the desegregation process over the two full decades after Brown.
We also examine heterogeneity in the path to desegregation by district characteristics. The results
suggest that the existing quantitative literature, which generally either begins in 1968 and focuses on
the role of federal courts in larger urban districts or relies on highly aggregated data, often tells an
incomplete story of desegregation.

Elizabeth Cascio                                      Ethan Lewis
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                     Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall                                 6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755                                     Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                              ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu
elizabeth.u.cascio@dartmouth.edu
                                                      Sarah Reber
Nora Gordon                                           University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Economics                               Department of Public Policy
University of California, San Diego                   School of Public Affairs
9500 Gilman Drive                                     3250 Public Policy Building
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                               Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                              and NBER
negordon@weber.ucsd.edu                               sreber@ucla.edu
I.       Introduction

         In 1954, the Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education 1 that schools racially

segregated by law were unconstitutional. Over the next two decades, federal legislation and

case law continued to clarify requirements for desegregation, and Southern 2 school districts

dismantled their dual school systems—by the early 1970s, schools in the South were more

integrated than in any other region. Despite the vast body of literature on the patterns,

causes, and consequences of school desegregation, studies in this area have been limited by

data availability, relying on samples that are either highly aggregated or not representative of

the typical Southern district, and that often begin only in the late 1960s. In this paper, we

comprehensively document basic facts of when which types of Southern school districts

desegregated, and whether the courts were involved, from Brown through the bulk of

desegregation activity. To do so, we have assembled new district-level panel data which

include nearly the universe of Southern districts, cover more years, and contain information

on court supervision as well as more measures of segregation than data used in the existing

literature.

         The literature does agree that very little happened immediately after the Brown and

Brown II 3 rulings, which were far from clear on the matter of a remedy and left lower federal

courts to desegregate the South on a district-by-district basis. Our data indicate that in 1960,

only 3.2 percent of Southern districts had any blacks in school with whites, and even in

desegregated districts, more than 98 percent of blacks were attending all-black schools. If

Southern school districts did not desegregate immediately following Brown, when did they

desegregate, and why? For a decade, policy was little changed, but in 1964, the Civil Rights


1 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka Kansas, 347 U.S. 483 (1954)
2 In this paper, we refer to the states of the former Confederacy as the South.
3 349 U.S. 294 (1955)




                                                        1
Act (CRA) gave the Justice Department authority to bring lawsuits against school districts

and required non-discrimination by entities receiving federal funding; one year later, Title I

of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) dramatically increased federal

funding for public schools. The Supreme Court then strengthened desegregation

requirements, first requiring districts to take affirmative steps toward eliminating the dual

system, rather than relying on blacks’ exercise of “free choice” to attend identifiably white

schools (Green v. New Kent County, 1968 4 ), and later sanctioning the use of busing to achieve

racial balance (Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg, 1971 5 ).

         This paper demonstrates how districts desegregated alongside these policy

developments. We observe not only how the racial composition of each district’s schools

changed over time, but also when districts came under court supervision, if ever. This

allows us to document the extent to which districts desegregated voluntarily or with direct

court oversight, which previously has not been possible due to data limitations. Because our

analysis is based on district-level data, we are able to construct a variety of segregation

measures and examine the ones most relevant to a given period. We also observe district

demographics prior to most desegregation activity, allowing us to describe heterogeneity in

the paths to desegregation by district characteristics. 6

         Our analysis both confirms some existing findings from other data sources, and

brings to light less-noticed facts about school desegregation. First, most Southern school

districts desegregated at least to some extent before the 1968 Green decision (viewed by many

as the start of “real” desegregation), especially between 1964 and 1966. Second, most of the

4 391 U.S. 430
5 401 U.S. 1
6 Giles (1975a, 1975b) examines heterogeneity in desegregation patterns, but limits his analysis to 1968 and

1970. Several other papers attempt do the same for earlier years, but these are either limited to districts (or
counties) in only a few states (Pettigrew, 1957; Pettigrew and Cramer, 1959) or use state-level aggregate data
(Harris, 1968; Vanfossen, 1968); each of these papers (obviously) cover fewer years than the present study, and
none measure district characteristics before they might be affected by the desegregation process.



                                                       2
desegregation observed between 1956 and 1976 was complete by 1970, suggesting the Swann

ruling may not have been as important, at least in the South, as has been previously

suggested. Third, while supervision by the courts was not uncommon, just under half of

districts were never under court supervision by 1976, and all of them had desegregated, at

least to some extent, before then.

        Finally, Southern school districts did not all desegregate at the same time or in the

same fashion. In particular, controlling for other factors, larger districts were more likely to

be under court supervision both early and ever; over time the enrollment threshold for court

supervision fell. The results also point to a role for the financial incentives provided by CRA

and ESEA after 1964: Poorer districts—which had larger federal grants on the line—were

particularly likely to desegregate between 1964 and 1968. Black enrollment share did not

impede “token” desegregation, but was an important predictor of resistance to more

intensive desegregation, as well as of being under court order in later years. This pattern is

consistent with wanting to avoid exposure to blacks being more important to whites than

caring about the principle of maintaining separate schools. While we do not establish causal

relationships between specific federal policies and desegregation outcomes in this paper,

these findings suggest the existing literature on school desegregation is incomplete and

further investigation into the causes and consequences of school desegregation in the South

is warranted.




                                                3
II.      Background

         In this section, we provide further detail on key policies and federal court decisions

during the period covered by our sample, 1956 to 1976. Due to space constraints, this

discussion is limited. 7

A.       From Brown to the Civil Rights Act

         Though clearly unconstitutional, state laws in the South requiring segregation by race

generally were not repealed after Brown. Few Southern school districts desegregated shortly

after the ruling, in some cases as a result of litigation, with suits filed by families of black

children seeking admission to white schools. The NAACP Legal Defense Fund (LDF) was

able to assist local counsel in some of these suits, and at times it sought out plaintiffs, but the

organization’s limited resources and the costs of serving as plaintiff meant few districts were

under court order when the Civil Rights Act was signed into law. By 1964, a full decade

after Brown, the NAACP had assisted in bringing only 30 cases (Rosenberg, 1991), and only 7

percent of Southern school districts had court-ordered desegregation plans. Another 19

percent of districts had desegregated voluntarily, leaving nearly 75 percent of districts

without any blacks in school with whites. In those districts that did desegregate, plans

required only token desegregation in specified grades.

         We expect that districts desegregated voluntarily when school boards perceived the

benefit of doing so to be greater than the cost. The main benefit of desegregation before the

passage of ESEA was protection from litigation (including both actual suits and the threat of

suits 8 ), but during this period, so few districts were litigated that the benefit to school


7 We refer the reader to Patterson (2001) for an excellent comprehensive overview. Kluger (2004) and Orfield
(1969) focus on earlier aspects of school desegregation.
8 Anecdotal evidence (e.g. Peltason, 1971) suggests that, at least in the South, school districts did not perceive a

significant threat from litigation, particularly given the extensive use of legal tactics to delay meaningful
integration even among districts under court order (p. 45). Peltason suggests that in many cases even if a school



                                                         4
districts of desegregating was arguably small (the “price” of segregation was low). We

therefore expect variation in voluntary desegregation during this period to be driven

primarily by variation in costs, which depend on preferences for segregation.

         Variation in court orders and resulting desegregation depends in large part on how

the LDF and others supporting litigation in the region chose which districts to sue. They

might have considered a variety of factors: the probability of winning (which likely depended

on the extent of resistance in the district as well as legal factors and the judge), the number

of children affected conditional on winning, the availability of an effective plaintiff 9 , and the

potential effect on future cases (getting good precedent and avoiding bad precedent). Being

under court order during this period is less an indicator of being particularly resistant to

desegregation that an indicator that LDF considered the district a good target for other

reasons. 10

B.       Bureaucratic and Judicial Desegregation Policy after CRA

         Enforcement of the Civil Rights Act was arguably at its peak during Johnson’s

presidency. 11 In 1965, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) issued its

first desegregation guidelines for receipt of federal funds, requiring school districts to submit

a court order, a voluntary plan, or an “assurance” that no plan was needed (either because

the district was uni-racial or had already desegregated) as evidence of non-discrimination. 12


board did want to comply with Brown immediately, it would await a court order to do so in order to satisfy
segregationist constituencies (p. 96-99).
9 The LDF did not have standing to sue a district on its own until the passage of the Civil Rights Act. Although

nearly all districts blatantly failed to comply with Brown in the early years, plaintiffs were often difficult to find,
as intimidation by segregationists of blacks asserting their rights was widespread and many blacks “discovered
that ‘to get along, go along.’” (Peltason, 1971, p. 101). Patterson (2001, p. 26) suggests that areas with a higher
share of blacks provided a more supportive environment to plaintiffs: “In those communities where blacks
were in the majority, they could and sometimes did come together and stay together.”
10 In fact, LDF may have originally litigated in districts with weaker preferences for segregation because

plaintiffs would be less intimidated and in order to establish favorable legal precedents early.
11 For discussions of the history of CRA enforcement, see Halpern (1995) and Orfield (2000).
12 At about the same time, the Voting Rights Act of 1965 may also have contributed to changes in how school

boards viewed desegregation by changing who voted, potentially prompting “grassroots” efforts to change the



                                                          5
While limited resources made it difficult for HEW to confirm desegregation in practice, the

agency did terminate funds to districts that failed to submit a plan for the 1965-66 year, and

funding cutoffs for unacceptable plans became more common over time. The amount of

funding on the line was substantial; using data from our sample, we calculate that the median

Southern district stood to gain about 20 percent of its pre-existing level of current

expenditures by complying.

         HEW compliance standards—how much desegregation was required to receive

federal funds—also became more demanding between 1965 and 1968. In 1965, HEW

guidelines were set consistent with existing court orders, requiring plans to move a handful

of black children into white schools; by 1968, districts were required to devise plans to

eliminate racially identifiable schools completely by no later than fall 1969. 13 While some

court orders over this period were more lenient than the HEW standards (Orfield, 1969 and

Orfield, 2000, citing the 1967 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights), the 1966 Fifth Circuit

decision in Jefferson 14 and the 1968 Supreme Court decision in Green toughened the

requirements for court-ordered plans. The Green decision, like the 1968 HEW guidelines,

emphasized outcomes, arguing that simply having a desegregation plan was not enough—it

had to “promise realistically to convert promptly to a system without a ‘white’ school and a

‘Negro’ school, but just schools.”

         Nixon backed off of using funds termination to enforce CRA, and during his

Presidency desegregation requirements grew stronger mainly as a result of Supreme Court



assignment policies of school boards by holding board members accountable to racially diverse constituencies
and by changing the racial composition of school boards themselves.
13 Through 1968, districts could be in full compliance with the law by submitting freedom-of-choice plans,

which allowed students in a district to apply to any school. The small number of blacks that applied to white
schools were often denied admission on supposedly race-blind criteria, and these plans resulted in few black
transfers to whites school (and no white transfers to black schools).
14 U.S. v. Jefferson County Board of Education (372 F. 2d 836, 876 (1966))




                                                      6
rulings. Most important, in 1971 (Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg), the Court reaffirmed Green

and upheld the use of busing to achieve racial balance in a district’s schools.

         The combination of CRA and ESEA clearly increased the benefit to a district of

desegregating—at least enough to satisfy the requirements for CRA compliance. Thus, the

“price” of segregation increased after 1965, although not uniformly across districts; districts

with large numbers of poor children had more federal funding on the line under ESEA and,

all else equal, should have been more likely to desegregate. As the incentives changed and

more districts desegregated voluntarily after 1964, LDF and the Department of Justice

shifted their strategy towards suing districts that failed to desegregate sufficiently on their

own. So a district might have ended up under court order either because it was sued early,

or later, because it was particularly resistant to substantial integration. 15

C.       Previous Research on Desegregation

         Different strands of the literature have emphasized different aspects of this history. 16

In his memoir, Jack Greenberg, a lawyer working for the NAACP LDF exemplifies the view

that legislation and funding—not courts—were important: “HEW, operating at wholesale,

got more blacks into school with whites than our retail lawsuits.” (1994, p. 381). Rosenberg

(1991) has been the primary proponent of the view that courts were ineffective in the

academic literature, noting the difficulty of achieving desegregation with district-by-district




15Districts were rarely, released from court supervision within our sample period.
16In fact, the courts-versus-legislation view is not so dichotomous, and time-series changes in desegregation
cannot straightforwardly be attributed to one or the other source. There may be important interactions among
the courts, the executive and the legislature. For example, Klarman (2004) argues that Brown energized the Civil
Right Movement, helping to make the Civil Rights Act possible. Others have noted that HEW Guidelines for
CRA compliance may have strengthened the courts’ hand in toughening requirements for districts under their
supervision.



                                                       7
lawsuits. 17 Economists also have noted the possibility that CRA and ESEA might have been

important in desegregation, 18 but all of these studies have relied on relatively limited data.

         On the other hand, a large quantitative literature—much of it focused on whether

desegregation caused “white flight”—tends to emphasize the role of the courts, especially

the Green and Swann decisions. For example, Rossell and Armor (1996) write that before

Green, “…substantial majorities of both Black and White students were enrolled in

predominantly one-race schools… However, this began to change after Green, and the

changes accelerated with Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg in 1971,” (emphasis added, p. 271).

Others, for example Farley, Richards, and Wurdock (1980), suggest that busing—and

therefore Swann—was necessary to achieve meaningful integration. 19 It is perhaps not

surprising that research focused on this later period emphasizes the role of the courts, as it

covers a period when the courts got tougher while the Nixon Administration got weaker on

CRA enforcement. 20

         While the literature on school desegregation is large and debates about the causes

and effects of desegregation are extensive, we are not aware of work that comprehensively

documents how school desegregation and court supervision evolved over the two decades

following Brown. We attribute this hole in the literature to the difficulty of bringing together

all the relevant data sources, which we discuss next.




17 For more on the debate among legal scholars and political scientist about the relative importance of litigation
and legislation, see Tushnet (2004) and Klarman (2004).
18 See, for example, Boozer, Krueger, and Wolkon (1992), Clotfelter (2004), Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon

(2006), and Reber (2007).
19 They write, “Within large cities, the residential isolation of blacks from whites prevented integration. Thus in

1970 a federal judge ordered that the enrollment in each of Charlotte’s schools be approximately 71 percent
white and 29 percent black and that busing be used to obtain such ratios. The Supreme Court unanimously
upheld this order [in Swann]… As a result, substantial reductions in segregation were achieved within many
southern districts.” (p. 123).
20 Other examples of quantitative studies emphasizing the courts include Guryan (2004), Reber (2005), Welch

and Light (1987), Lutz (2005), and Coleman, Kelly, and Moore (1975).



                                                        8
III.     Data

         Our empirical analysis draws on many sources; these sources, the sample, and, in a

few cases, how we impute missing data are discussed in detail in Appendix A. Here, we

briefly summarize our data sources and key variables related to desegregation and plan type

and review these descriptive statistics. We refer the reader to Appendix A for information

on our demographic and enrollment variables.

A.       Data on Desegregation and Court Involvement

         As noted above, a key contribution of this research is that we observe whether a

district was desegregating under court order or voluntarily. Our data on court supervision

were originally collected by different organizations to monitor desegregation activity after

Brown. From 1956 to 1964, the Southern Education Reporting Service (SERS)—an

organization of Southern newspaper editors funded by the Ford Foundation—compiled lists

annually on school districts that had a desegregation policy and whether that policy was

court-imposed. In later years, we observe how districts complied with CRA in data collected

by HEW (in 1966) and by the Office for Civil Rights (in 1968, 1970, 1972, and 1976). While

these data provide no information on the contents of a court-ordered plan – this would be

strongly tied to the desegregation requirements of the time – they are sufficient to construct

an indicator for being under court supervision (COURTORDER). 21

         Our desegregation data come from essentially the same sources. Through 1964,

SERS collected data on the number of blacks enrolled with whites for districts that had any

desegregation activity. In 1966, SERS reported these data (mainly collected by the federal


21 We would like to have information on the way in which students were reassigned (e.g., through magnet

schools, re-zoning, and the like), but such data are not consistently available for our sample. Where such data
are available, they are either for larger districts (e.g., Welch and Light, 1987) or start well after the beginning of
our sample period and are based on surveys with some non-response (e.g., U.S. Commission on Civil Rights,
1977; Rossell and Armor, 1996).



                                                           9
Office of Education) for most, but not all, districts. For 1968, 1970, 1972, and 1976, we use

school-level data on enrollment by race from the OCR surveys cited above. We construct

three measures of desegregation from these sources. The indicator variable DESEG

measures the extensive margin of desegregation, i.e., whether any blacks were in school with

any whites in the district. We then construct two measures of desegregation on the intensive

margin: the fraction of blacks attending all-black schools (FRACALLBLACKSCH) and the

dissimilarity index (DISSIM), which indicates the share of students in a district who would

need to change schools in order for each of the district’s schools to have the same racial

composition. 22

         The variables collected by SERS and OCR were generally the ones that captured the

relevant desegregation margins of the time, so the fact that we lack the necessary school-

level data to calculate the dissimilarity index prior to 1968—while the fraction of blacks in

all-black schools captures much activity—is not a major limitation. The dissimilarity index

does have some drawbacks 23 , but on balance is the most appropriate measure for later years

of this analysis. Other segregation indices, such as the exposure index, are mechanically

related to district fraction black, one of our key explanatory variables. The dissimilarity

index also more closely matches the margins of desegregation the courts considered after

1968, as busing and other court-sanctioned remedies often sought to achieve racial balance

across a district’s schools.

B.       Sample Characteristics




22The formula for the dissimilarity index is provided in Appendix A.
23For example, if white enrollment share is low or falling in a district, measured segregation could be low
according to the dissimilarity index even though blacks have little exposure to whites. The exposure index
captures this effect, but is subject to more important limitations discussed below.



                                                      10
         Our analysis focuses on the states of the former Confederacy (the “South”). The

Border region 24 also had a history of dual schools, but states and school districts there had a

different response to Brown. Official policy in Border states was pro-integration soon after

Brown, and desegregation proceeded more quickly there. Unfortunately, segregation data for

the Border region are incomplete, so a full comparison of the two regions is not possible.

Based on Census data, Table 1 shows that in 1960, 58 percent of black school-aged children

lived in the South, while less than 10 percent lived in the Border region. Our sample

excludes Mississippi and Texas due to data limitations, but still covers 80 percent of black

school-aged children in the South and 45 percent in the United States, and is

demographically similar to the universe of Southern states. 25

         Table 2 reports the characteristics of school districts in our sample. Because school

district boundaries are not constant over time, we aggregate to the smallest unit that is

consistently observed over the whole period. This process yields 1,322 districts in the

sampled states each year, less than 8 percent of which experienced boundary changes. We

exclude 208 districts from the sample because the key explanatory variables—average black

enrollment share from in the early 1960s, average total enrollment over the same period,

poverty rate in 1959 (used to calculate Title I ESEA allocations beginning in 1965) and

urbanicity in 1969—are not observed. Districts for which we do not have segregation

measures for at least one even year after 1965 are also excluded (53 of the remaining

districts). Finally, we exclude districts with average black share in enrollment in 1960 to 1963

less than 3 percent (128 of the remaining districts), 26 or with students of only one race in any


24 The Border region includes Delaware, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Oklahoma, and West Virginia.
25 Our sample includes school districts in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia.
26 Such districts raise difficulties in calculating some of the segregation measures; although this excludes a

relatively large number of districts, it does not substantially reduce the sample’s coverage of black students.



                                                        11
year in the sample (6 of the remaining districts). Despite these sample restrictions, the

typical district in our sample looks very similar to the typical district in the region (see

Appendix Table A1).

         As shown in the upper panel of Table 2, the average district in our sample enrolled

7,444 students in the early 1960s, and was 36 percent black and 33 percent poor. One-third

of the sampled districts were majority urban. The size and urbanicity of the districts in our

sample are notably different from the districts used in much of the existing quantitative

literature on school desegregation, which has focused on larger and more often urban

districts. Below, we show that the timeline of school desegregation for such large districts

was different from that for districts in the region overall.

         The bottom panel of Table 2 shows summary statistics on several segregation

measures in selected years. Note that the sample size varies somewhat depending on the

year and outcome. This is mainly due to the fact that the OCR did not survey all districts;

rather, the OCR surveys covered all districts that were supervised by courts or “of interest”

to HEW and a sample of other districts, with the probability of being sampled decreasing

with size. 27 This means that the sample in later years is somewhat biased towards larger

districts and districts that were more resistant to desegregation. Even so, using the sampling

weights does not substantially alter the observed trends in segregation, so the sample appears

representative of districts with more than 300 students, and the characteristics of districts

reporting in each year are quite similar (see Appendix Table A1). We use all the available

districts in each year, not a balanced panel, in order to retain a sample as large and

representative of Southern districts as possible.



27We are also occasionally missing data on some outcomes because not all consolidation partners of a district
are observed in the raw data. See Appendix A.



                                                      12
IV.      Aggregate Trends in Desegregation and Court Supervision

         Figure 1 shows trends in desegregation and court supervision for districts in our

sample. In 1956, two years after Brown, there was virtually no desegregation in Southern

school districts. Only one district had any desegregation 28 ; no district had a court-ordered

desegregation plan. 29 By 1976, all districts had established at least some mixed-race schools,

only three percent of blacks were in all-black schools in the average district, and just over

half of all districts were under the supervision of the courts. How did these changes evolve?

         No Southern district desegregated immediately after Brown, and Figure 1 shows no

spike in litigation and court-ordered plans in the following decade. The share of districts

with court-ordered desegregation plans grew slowly between Brown and the passage of CRA

in 1964, most likely due to resource constraints on the part of would-be litigants. The mid-

1960s through the early 1970s saw large increases in the rate of court supervision,

particularly between 1964 and 1966 (after passage of CRA and ESEA) and again between

1970 and 1972 (after Swann). As noted above, the circumstances under which districts were

placed under court supervision varied over time, with early court orders reflecting that the

district had been singled out as a good case for litigation and later court orders indicating

that desegregation progress in the district was significantly delayed.

         The share of districts with any desegregation—both initiated under court order and

voluntarily—grew slowly through 1964 then jumped from 26 percent in 1964 to 99 percent

in 1966. The increase in court supervision between 1964 and 1966 was not nearly so large;

together these facts indicate that the period of CRA and ESEA implementation was also a

time of significant voluntary desegregation. A sizable gap between the share desegregated


28 This was Hot Springs, Arkansas, where less than one percent of blacks there attended school with any

whites.
29 The standoff at Little Rock High was not until 1957.




                                                     13
and the share under court order persisted, pointing to the importance of voluntary

desegregation throughout the entire sample period. 30 Desegregation on the extensive margin

was nearly complete before court-ordered plans were toughened by Green in 1968.

         Once desegregated on the extensive margin, districts rarely went back; nearly 100

percent of districts were desegregated from 1966 through 1976, so the intensive margins of

desegregation are more relevant for these years. The share of blacks in all-black schools was

just below one through 1964, indicating that those districts that did desegregate on the

extensive margin by 1964 generally had only token efforts. The all-black school all but

disappeared between 1964 and 1970, with the share of blacks attending such schools falling

from 99 to 5 percent. About half of that decline took place pre-Green.

         After the virtual elimination of all-black schools, the dissimilarity index still registers

changes in racial composition and becomes our most relevant desegregation measure for

1970 and later years. It also shows substantial declines in segregation between 1968 (the first

year available) and 1970. In 1968, in the average district 72 percent of black students would

have had to been reassigned to another school in order to replicate the racial composition of

the district as a whole in each school; by 1970, that figure had fallen to 25 percent. While all

measures show continued progress toward integration between 1970 and 1976, Figure 1

shows that these changes were small in comparison to those achieved between 1968 and

1970—notably, before Swann and more widespread use of busing.

         Figure 2 highlights the differences between our full sample and a subsample of

relatively large districts that is similar to the samples employed in some of the existing




30 We find (results not shown) that court orders were quite effective at ensuring desegregation on the extensive

margin and therefore the gap between the fraction of districts with any desegregation and the fraction of
districts with court supervision can be interpreted as the fraction of districts which desegregated voluntarily.



                                                      14
quantitative literature on school desegregation. 31 While trends are broadly similar for the two

groups, a few differences are quite notable. Large districts were significantly more likely to be

under court order. Large districts desegregated on the extensive margin more gradually in the

early 1960s, whereas overall this activity is heavily concentrated between 1964 and 1966 in

the full sample; segregation in larger districts also declined noticeably after 1970 relative to

the full sample, perhaps reflecting the larger impact of Swann among this group. Still, much

desegregation had been achieved even in these districts by 1970.

         Aggregate trends in desegregation in the South for this period have been previously

reported in the literature. However, to our knowledge, we are the first to incorporate

information on whether courts were involved in the desegregation process. We are also the

first to calculate desegregation trends using disaggregated data on a representative sample of

Southern school districts. Previous research has relied on published state aggregates of the

data used here (e.g., Rosenberg, 1991; Orfield, 2000) or constructed regional segregation

statistics from a small individual-level survey (e.g., Boozer, Krueger, and Wolkon, 1992;

Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon, 2006). 32 Using district-level data, we are able to examine

formally how other district characteristics, in addition to enrollment, were related to different

desegregation trends within the South.

V.       Heterogeneity in Desegregation over Time

A.       Methods

31 We follow Welch and Light (1987) in defining large districts those with at least 15,000 students. (Welch and
Light use 1968 enrollment, apply additional criteria and only sample districts between 15,000 and 50,000
enrollment, leaving only 42 districts in the South; we include all 71 Southern districts with more than 15,000
enrollment in the early 1960s.) The Welch and Light (1987) sample has been frequently used by economists
(Gurvan, 2004; Reber, 2005; Weiner, Lutz, and Ludwig, 2007). Other researchers have employed different
sampling criteria but most of the literature excludes smaller districts, in many cases limiting the sample to
metropolitan districts since 1968.
32 This survey is called the National Survey of Black Americans (NSBA). The NSBA is small, with fewer than

100 respondents observed per year, and the question about the racial composition of schools retrospective. As
a result, estimates of year-to-year changes in the extent of school segregation based on the NSBA may be
subject to substantial error. The survey is also not necessarily representative of southern school districts.



                                                      15
         To see which district characteristics predict desegregation outcomes over time, we

estimate OLS regressions with these characteristics as independent variables, one year at a

time. The most basic regression specification is given by equation (1), where d indexes

district and t indexes year (all years refer to the fall of the school year):

OUTCOME d,t = α t + β t FRACBLACK d, pre + γ t LNENROLL d, pre + δ t FRACPOOR d, pre                                (1)
                    + η t URBAN d,1969 + ε d,t

         OUTCOME represents COURTORDER, DESEG, FRACALLBLACKSCH, or

DISSIM, depending on the year under consideration (see below). There are four explanatory

variables of interest: the share of enrollment that is black (FRACBLACK), (the natural log

of) total enrollment (LNENROLL), the poverty rate (FRACPOOR), and urbanicity

(URBAN). As noted above, most of these measures are from 1963 and earlier; we therefore

consider these variables exogenous or pre-determined with respect to subsequent

desegregation outcomes (hence the “pre” subscript). 33

         We would have liked to include controls for residential segregation and direct

measures of attitudes towards race, both of which are likely to have important effects on

school desegregation. The more residentially segregated a district is, the more costly and

difficult it will be to achieve any given level of desegregation in its schools. To the extent

that HEW and the courts take these costs into account when designing and approving

desegregation plans, more residentially segregated areas may desegregate their schools slower

and ultimately less than other areas. Unfortunately, such variables are unavailable at the

school district level, and are thus incorporated into the error term, εd,t. The characteristics we

do observe may partially proxy for these omitted characteristics in some cases. Urban areas


33 The only variable that is not pre-determined is urbanicity, which is measured in 1969. However, because

urbanicity is a dichotomous variable equal to 1 if more than half the district is urban, changes in this variable
over the 1960s are likely to be minimal.



                                                        16
are typically more residentially segregated than rural areas, so urbanicity in particular may

partially proxy for residential segregation.

         In some cases, the specification in equation (1) misses important non-linearities in

the relationship between the dependent and independent variables; in most of the reported

results, therefore, we specify FRACBLACK and enrollment in deciles, as in Equation (2): 34

                                     ~                                                                           (2)
OUTCOME d,t = ~
              α t + BLACK_DEC d, pre β t + ENROLL_DEC d, pre ~
                                                             γt
              ~
            + δ t FRACPOOR d, pre + ~
                                    ηt URBAN d,1969 + ~
                                                      ε d,t

Here, BLACK_DEC and ENROLL_DEC are vectors of dummy variables for deciles two

through ten of FRACBLACK and ENROLL, respectively. We omit the first decile of each

to identify the model. The minimum and maximum values of these deciles are in Appendix

Table B. Equation (2) is the most parsimonious specification that captures the relevant non-

linearities in poverty and enrollment across years and outcomes. 35

         For expositional clarity, we do not present results for every year for which we have

data, but choose years surrounding key pieces of legislation and court cases. The set of

dependent variables considered is not the same in all years; instead, we focus on the

outcomes that were of greatest relevance at the time. Specifically, we present results for

COURTORDER for all years and for DESEG only for years before 1968, because 99.0

percent of districts were desegregated by then. For measures of the intensive margin of

desegregation, we consider FRACALLBLACKSCH in all years and DISSIM only after 1966.

         Because all of the explanatory variables are time-invariant, the change in the

coefficient on a particular characteristic over time indicates the extent to which that
34 The relationship between the outcomes and FRACPOOR, on the other hand, is reasonably well-captured by
the linear specification, so we do not specify the poverty rate in deciles. Linearity in poverty deciles is rejected
at the 5 percent level for only one of the regressions presented below and reported in Table 3 and Appendix
Tables C1 through C5. Results are also similar when poverty decile indicators, rather than FRACPOOR, are
included in the regression.
35 We also experimented with interactions among different categories of poverty, percent black, and

enrollment. These were not consistently substantively or statistically significant, so we do not report the results.



                                                        17
characteristic predicts changes in the outcome variable for the same period. 36 The results show

that there are substantial changes in these coefficients over time, indicating that districts with

different characteristics changed their behavior during different periods. In order to test the

statistical significance of changes in coefficients over time, we also estimate a “stacked”

version of equation (2), including all years in a single regression fully interacting all of the

explanatory variables with year indicators (and including a full set of year dummies). Because

this regression yields the same coefficient estimates as the year-by-year regressions, 37 we do

not report the results separately; we do note substantively and statistically significant changes

in coefficients of interest in the text.

B.       Results

         In the 1950s, there was so little desegregation activity (see Figure 1) that there is little

heterogeneity to explain. We therefore begin our analysis of heterogeneity in 1961. 38 The

results for 1961 are presented in Table 3 and in the top row of Figure 2. To familiarize the

reader with the graphical presentation of the regression coefficients, we discuss the results

for 1961 in some detail before turning to subsequent years.

         The first three columns of Table 3 report the results for equation (1) for

COURTORDER, DESEG, and FRACALLBLACKSCH; columns (4) through (6) report

results of estimating equation (2) for the same outcomes. Comparing columns (1) and (4)

illustrates the utility of the nonlinear specifications in the latter three columns: in column


36 With a constant sample and time-invariant x, regressing the change in y on the change in x yields a coefficient

equal to the coefficient on x in period 2 less the coefficient on x in period 1. In our case, the sample of districts
is not exactly the same in every year, but has the same average characteristics.
37 In the stacked model, standard errors account for arbitrary correlation over time within districts.
38 In 1961 only, district characteristics are current rather than pre-existing. However, so few districts were

desegregated by 1961 and the level of desegregation was so low that it is highly unlikely that major
demographic shifts occurred in response to the desegregation process. In 1958, only 0.4 percent of districts
were under court order and 0.6 percent were desegregated. The pattern observed in 1961 begins to emerge by
1958, with urbanicity and the top decile of enrollment predicting both court order and desegregation; few
coefficients are significant, however.



                                                         18
(1), we control for log enrollment linearly and find it to be statistically significant and

positive, but column (4) reveals that the coefficient in the log-linear specification is driven

solely by districts in the top decile of enrollment. While this particular regression could have

been more parsimonious—for example, including only a top-decile dummy—we include

indicators for each decile to be consistent in the specification across outcomes and years.

         To ease the interpretation of the large number of coefficients in equation (2), we

present the coefficients on the percent black and enrollment deciles graphically. The top row

of Figure 3 plots rescaled versions of the coefficients on the fraction black and enrollment

deciles shown in columns (4) through (6) of Table 3. The upper-left panel corresponds to

column (4), showing the results for the regression with COURTORDER as the dependent

variable; the solid line shows the pattern of coefficients on deciles of fraction black while the

dashed line shows the pattern of coefficients on deciles of enrollment. Because any of the

deciles could have been omitted, the level of the coefficients is not identified; our discussion

therefore focuses on the pattern of coefficients across deciles. 39 To facilitate comparisons of

the average level of the outcome across years—in addition to differential changes by fraction

black and enrollment deciles—we rescale the coefficients so that the average coefficient

across all deciles corresponds to the average level of the outcome that year. 40

         The graphs thus reflect the relatively low rates of court order (Panel A.1) and

desegregation on the extensive margin (Panel A.2) already shown for 1961 in Figure 1.

Districts in the top decile of enrollment were significantly more likely to be under court

order and to have desegregated. About 2.5 percent of districts had desegregated voluntarily


39 Standard errors are given in Appendix Tables C1 through C5 for later years; we focus our discussion only on
significant differences across deciles.
40 This is achieved by adding a constant equal to the average outcome in the data less the average of all the

coefficients (including zero for decile 1) to all the coefficients. Note that the difference between the coefficients
on each decile is maintained. Also note that while the scaled coefficients are plotted in the figures, the original
coefficients are reported in the tables.



                                                         19
(the difference between the share desegregated and the share under court supervision 41 );

districts in the top two deciles of enrollment were most likely to desegregate voluntarily

(Table 3, columns (4) and (5) and Figure 3, Panels A.1 and A.2). The relationship between

fraction black and both court order and any desegregation is slightly U-shaped, with high

and low fraction black districts being somewhat more likely to be both under court order

and desegregated. Panel A.3 (and Table 3, column (6)) indicates that the average share of

blacks in all-black schools was nearly one and did not vary significantly across enrollment or

fraction black deciles. Returning to Table 3, we see that urban districts were significantly

more likely to be under court order and desegregated, while poorer districts were

significantly less likely. In sum, what little desegregation had occurred by 1961 was token and

happened in the largest, primarily urban, lower-poverty districts.

         The next two rows of Figure 3 show rescaled coefficients on enrollment and fraction

black decile indicators from estimation of equation (2) for 1964 and 1966, respectively.

Coefficients and standard errors on urbanicity and fraction poor from the same underlying

regressions are shown in Table 4. 42 Between 1961 and 1964, there was little change in

patterns of court supervision. However, enrollment became positively associated with the

probability of desegregation over nearly the entire range of enrollment, rather than its

previous “threshold” effect. The lowest and highest fraction black districts were somewhat

more likely to desegregate. 43 Most desegregation was voluntary in 1964, and the effects of

fraction black and poverty were more evident for voluntary desegregation than for court-

ordered desegregation, as can be seen by comparing the coefficients on fraction black and


41 In results not reported, we find that nearly all school districts supervised by courts in 1961 had desegregated
on the extensive margin.
42 The full results of estimating equation (2) for these and later years (analogous to those shown in columns (4)

through (6) of Table 3) can be found in Appendix Tables C1 through C5.
43 F-tests reject equality of the coefficients on the sixth and tenth deciles and equality of the coefficients on the

sixth and first deciles at the .01 level.



                                                         20
poverty in the models for desegregation and court orders. Desegregation continued to be

largely token, as evidenced by the high level of blacks in all-black schools, regardless of

district characteristics. The few districts with more substantial desegregation were

concentrated in the first decile of fraction black (Panel B.3); even among desegregated

districts in this group, the median share of blacks in all-black schools (not shown in figure)

was 90 percent.

        While poorer districts had been significantly more segregated prior to 1966, the

poverty rate does not predict desegregation on either the intensive or extensive margin by

1966 (Panels B and C in Table 4). This is consistent with poorer districts—who had the

largest federal grants on the line beginning in 1965—responding to the financial incentives

of CRA and ESEA. All but three percent of districts had at least some desegregation by

1966, and this did not vary systematically with district characteristics (Panel C.2). Districts

across deciles of fraction black desegregated on the extensive margin around the same time

(mostly between 1964 and 1966). On the other hand, districts with higher black shares were

particularly resistant to more meaningful desegregation: such districts had significantly more

blacks in all-black schools in 1966, compared to their low fraction black counterparts (Figure

3, Panel C.3). The probability of being under court order also became positively related to

fraction black in 1966, a pattern that grows stronger over time. The enrollment threshold

for court supervision also continued to fall between 1964 and 1966 (Figure 3, Panel C.1).

        Figure 4 presents the results for 1968 through 1976. The first column, as in Figure 3,

reports results of regressions with COURTORDER as the dependent variable, and (looking

down the entire left-hand column) shows that between 1968 and 1976, enrollment continued

to be consistently and strongly positively related to the probability of being supervised by the




                                                21
courts, with the overall level of supervision rising over time. 44 Higher fraction black districts

continued to lag in reducing the share of blacks in all-black schools in 1968 (Panel A.2), but

in 1970 (and 1976) all-black schools remained in few districts. Because blacker and larger

districts had a higher share of their black students in all-black schools in 1968, these districts

were most responsible for the major aggregate reduction in all-black schools between 1968

and 1970 (see Figure 1). Nonetheless, by 1970, it was still the blackest and largest districts

that maintained any all-black schools (Panels B.2 and C.2).

         The third column of Figure 4 shows how district characteristics related to the

dissimilarity index over time. As noted above, this measure is more sensitive to

desegregation beyond the elimination of all-black schools 45 indicating the extent to which all

schools in the district were racially balanced. Enrollment was positively related to

desegregation as measured by the dissimilarity index consistently from 1968 to 1976. That

is, larger districts would have had to reassign a higher share of black students to achieve

racial balance in every school. This relationship may be due to increased logistical difficulty

of integration in larger districts (which are also likely to be more residentially segregated)

causing districts to voluntarily seek, and courts to accept a higher level of segregation. 46

         The relationship between fraction black and dissimilarity in 1968 (Panel A.3) is

positive and looks similar to the effect of fraction black on the percent of blacks in all-black

schools (Panel A.2). Starting in 1970, when all-black schools were largely eliminated, the

relationship between fraction black and the dissimilarity index is slightly U-shaped (Panels


44 Linearity in deciles of enrollment is rejected at the 5 percent level for regressions with COURTORDER as

the dependent variable in all years.
45 An all-black school could be eliminated by transferring one white there; in practice, schools with very low

white enrollment shares were rare throughout the period. Changes in the share of blacks in all-black schools are
driven primarily by moving larger numbers of blacks to relatively white schools. White students were rarely
required to attend heavily black schools throughout the period.
46 It is also possible that larger districts simply have stronger anti-desegregation tastes, although this seems less

likely given the higher likelihood of desegregating on the extensive margin voluntarily in the early 1960s.



                                                         22
B.3 and C.3), with the whitest and blackest districts more segregated than those in the

middle, suggesting it may be more difficult (or less acceptable to parents) to spread students

of both races across schools evenly when shares of either race are low. While court orders

increased from 1970 and 1976, other changes were small. Finally, note that while fraction

black is strongly positively related to the probability of being under court order in both 1970

and 1976, fraction black is not a strong predictor of segregation. This again suggests that

blacker districts resisted voluntary integration (so ended up under court order) but courts

were relatively effective at inducing integration, thereby reducing the relationship between

fraction black and segregation.



VI.     Discussion

        This paper presents a more complete timeline of the court supervision and

desegregation of Southern schools in the two decades following Brown and shows how

different types of school districts experienced different paths to desegregation. Stylized facts

emerge from this new timeline, most of which have been reported previously in parts of the

literature, but have not been emphasized jointly. We first note that most Southern school

districts desegregated at least to some extent between 1964 and 1966, suggesting that

comprehensive analysis of desegregation must start before 1968, when some data sets and

much of the existing quantitative literature begin. Second, most desegregation was complete

by 1970, suggesting the role of busing (following the Swann ruling in 1971) may not have

been as important as previously suggested. Third, while all districts were desegregated at

least partially by 1976, nearly half of districts were never under court supervision by 1976,




                                               23
suggesting that the need for court involvement to achieve desegregation may have been

overemphasized for the typical Southern district. 47

         Not all districts followed the same path to desegregation. Our analysis of how

district characteristics related to trends in segregation and court involvement provides

suggestive evidence about the effectiveness of desegregation policies, as well as the

preferences and constraints of different districts over time. First, while the experiences of

urban and rural districts were not systematically different, the number of students enrolled

was an important predictor across outcomes and years. The courts were substantially more

involved in the desegregation of the largest school districts throughout the period. At the

same time, larger districts were more likely to voluntarily desegregate on the extensive

margin early, suggesting larger districts were less resistant to desegregation in principle.

Together, these two results are consistent with LDF targeting large districts in hopes of

winning cases in districts where opposition to desegregation was weaker and a large number

of students would be affected upon success. While larger districts achieved token

desegregation earlier, they were slower to eliminate all-black schools and never achieved

racial balance (as measured by the dissimilarity index) to the same extent as their lower-

enrollment counterparts, perhaps because of greater logistical difficulties due to higher

residential segregation and complex transportation requirements.

         Second, districts with high black enrollment shares were particularly resistant to

intensive desegregation, as evidenced by their slower elimination of all-black schools (all-

black schools persisted through 1976 primarily in top-decile fraction black districts) and

higher rate of court supervision in later years. The fact that blacker districts did not lag nearly


47 To say that the role of courts has been overemphasized is not to say that the courts had no role in Southern

desegregation. Indeed, we have presented evidence that courts may have been important in reducing
dissimilarity in large urban districts and in heavily black districts that resisted intensive desegregation.



                                                      24
so much in desegregation on the extensive margin suggests that whites in such districts were

not more opposed to desegregation in principle; rather, they were opposed to significant

exposure to black students.

         Finally, poorer districts lagged substantially in allowing any desegregation by 1964—

suggesting they had stronger segregationist preferences. But poorer districts were particularly

likely to desegregate over the following two years and had caught up by 1966, suggesting

such preferences could be overcome with money—that is, the financial incentives under

CRA and ESEA may have been important. Explaining desegregation activity before 1966 in

particular has received little attention relative to later years and warrants further attention; we

plan to pursue this in future work.

         This contribution to the historical record is particularly timely. Half a century

after Brown, the Supreme Court’s ruling in Parents Involved in Community Schools v.

Seattle School District #1 48 has changed the legal question from what school districts

must do to desegregate their schools to what school districts may do, declaring that school

districts can no longer use race as a “tie-breaker” in assigning students to oversubscribed

elementary and secondary schools. The extent to which districts will be legally permitted

to enforce desegregation plans beyond freedom of choice plans after this ruling is

unclear, 49 and it is too soon to empirically identify the impact of the ruling. It is also

unclear whether ESEA Title I funds could be used to enforce a new interpretation of

CRA prohibiting race-based school assignment formulas. Our historical heterogeneity

results are relevant in considering how districts will respond to the decision already



48Parents Involved in Cmty. Schs. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. #1, 2007 WL 1836531,551 U.S. --- (2007).
49
  The plurality decision is clear that race cannot be used at all as a factor, but Justice Kennedy, concurring with
the judgment, concurred with only parts of the decision, leaving considerable uncertainty in the interpretation
of the ruling.



                                                        25
issued, and how they might respond to enforcement by withholding Title I funds. Would

the same types of districts who accepted desegregation most readily in the twentieth

century be leaders in innovative approaches to maintaining desegregation without using

race as a factor in school assignment (for example, through strategic use of magnet or

charter schools), or have preferences and their correlation with demographics changed

significantly? Might existing district-level school choice measures be more important

than demographics in predicting desegregation in the future? In any case, our findings

suggest that district-level variation in compliance with any change in the law—and in

overall segregation levels following the rulings—is likely to be substantial.




                                            26
References

Ashenfelter, Orley, William Collins, and Albert Yoon. 2006. “Evaluating the Role of Brown
      v. Board of Education in School Equalization, Desegregation, and the Income of
      African Americans.” American Law and Economics Review 8(2): 213-248.

Boozer, Michael, Alan Krueger, and Shari Wolkon. 1992. “Race and School Quality Since
       Brown v. Board of Education.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics,
       269-326.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 2004. After Brown: The Rise and Retreat of School Desegregation. Princeton,
        NJ: Princeton University Press.

Coleman, James, Sara Kelly, and John Moore. 1975. “Trends in School Segregation 1968-
      73.” Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Farley, Reynolds, Toni Richards, and Clarence Wurdock. 1980. “School Desegregation and
        White Flight: An Investigation of Competing Models and Their Discrepant
        Findings.” Sociology of Education 53(3): 123-139.

Giles, Michael W. 1975a. “HEW versus the Federal Courts: A Comparison of School
       Desegregation Enforcement.” American Politics Quarterly 3(1): 81-90.

----. 1975b. “Black Concentration and School District Size as Predictors of School
        Segregation: The Impact of Federal Enforcement.” Sociology of Education 48(4): 411-
        419.

Greenberg, Jack. 1994. Crusaders in the Courts. New York: BasicBooks.

Guryan, Jonathan. 2004. “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates.” American Economic
      Review 94(4): 919-943.

Halpern, Stephen C. 1995. On the Limits of the Law: The Ironic Legacy of the Title VI of the 1964
       Civil Rights Act. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Harris, Edward E. 1968. “Prejudice and Other Social Factors in School Desegregation.”
        Journal of Negro Education 37(4): 440-443.

Klarman, Michael J. 2004. “Brown at 50.” Virginia Law Review 90: 1613-1634.

Kluger, Richard. 2004. Simple Justice. New York: Vintage Books.

Lutz, Byron. 2005. “Post Brown vs. the Board of Education: The Effects of the End of
       Court-Ordered Desegregation.” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion
       Series Working Paper 2005-64.

Orfield, Gary. 1969. The Reconstruction of Southern Education: The Schools and the 1964 Civil
        Rights Act, New York: Wiley-Interscience.



                                               27
----. 2000. “The 1964 Civil Rights Act and American Education.” In Legacies of the 1964 Civil
         Rights Act (Bernard Groffman, ed.), pp. 89-128. Charlottesville and London:
         University of Virginia Press.

Patterson, James T. 2001. Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its
        Troubled Legacy. New York: Oxford University Press.

Peltason, J.W. 1971. 58 Lonely Men: Southern Federal Judges and School Desegregation.
       Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. 1957. “Demographic Correlates of Border-State Desegregation.”
        American Sociological Review 22(6): 683-689.

Pettigrew, Thomas F. and M. Richard Cramer. 1959. “The Demography of Desegregation.”
        Journal of Social Issues 15(Fall): 61-71.

Reber, Sarah J. 2005. “Court-Ordered Desegregation: Successes and Failures in Integration
       Since Brown,” Journal of Human Resources, 40(3): 559-590.

Reber, Sarah J. 2007. “From Separate and Unequal to Integrated and Equal? School
       Desegregation and School Finance in Louisiana,” Manuscript (March).

Rosenberg, Gerald N. 1991. The Hollow Hope: Can Courts Bring About Social Change? Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Rossell, Christine and David Armor. 1996. “The Effectiveness of School Desegregation
   Plans, 1968-1991.” American Politics Quarterly 24(3): 267-302.

Tushnet, Mark. 2004. “Some Legacies of Brown vs. Board of Education.” Virginia Law
   Review 90: 1693-1721.

U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 1977. Reviewing a Decade of School Desegregation, 1966-1975:
       Report of a National Survey of School Superintendents. Washington, DC: the Commission.

Vanfossen, Beth E. 1968. “Variables Related to Resistance to Desegregation in the South.”
       Social Forces 47(1): 39-44.

Weiner, David, Byron Lutz, and Jens Ludwig. 2007. “The Effects of School Desegregation
       on Crime.” Manuscript (February).

Welch, Finis and Audrey Light. 1987. New Evidence on School Desegregation. Washington,
       D.C.: U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.




                                              28
              Figure 1. School Desegregation and Court Supervision
                                               All Southern Districts
1


         Fraction Black in All Black Schools                                                  Any Desegregation




                                                    CRA/ESEA




                                                                                      Swann
                                                                      Green
.8
.6




                                                                                              Court Supervision
.4
.2




                                                                                              Dissimilarity Index
0




     1956                1960                  1964                 1968                  1972                   1976

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Southern Education Reporting Service, Department of Health Education and
Welfare, and Office of Civil Rights data. See Appendix A for details.
                                                            29
                     Figure 2. Desegregation and Court Supervision
                                                Large Southern Districts
1


          Fraction Black in All Black Schools                                                    Any Desegregation
.8




                                                                                                 Court Supervision
.6
.4




                                                     CRA/ESEA




                                                                                         Swann
                                                                        Green
                                                                                                 Dissimilarity Index
.2
0




     1956                 1960                   1964                 1968                   1972                  1976

Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Southern Education Reporting Service, Department of Health Education and Welfare,
and Office of Civil Rights data. Sample includes 71 districts averaging enrollment more than 15,000 students in 1960-1963.
                                                              30
                       Figure 3. Desegregation Outcomes By Decile: 1961-66
                       1. Under Court Order                                   2. Any Desegregation                         3. Proportion Black in all Black Schools




                                                             1




                                                                                                                  1
          1
                           Fraction Black
          .8




                                                             .8




                                                                                                                  .8
          .6               Enrollment




                                                             .6




                                                                                                                  .6
A. 1961
          .4




                                                             .4




                                                                                                                  .4
          .2




                                                             .2




                                                                                                                  .2
          0




                                                             0




                                                                                                                  0
               1   2   3    4    5      6   7   8   9   10        1   2   3     4    5   6    7      8   9   10        1     2    3    4   5    6    7    8    9      10




                                                             1




                                                                                                                  1
          1




                                                             .8




                                                                                                                  .8
          .8
          .6




                                                             .6




                                                                                                                  .6
B. 1964
          .4




                                                             .4




                                                                                                                  .4
          .2




                                                             .2




                                                                                                                  .2
          0




                                                             0




                                                                                                                  0
               1   2   3    4    5      6   7   8   9   10        1   2   3     4    5   6    7      8   9   10        1     2    3    4   5    6    7    8    9      10




                                                                                                                  1
                                                             1
          1
          .8




                                                             .8




                                                                                                                  .8
          .6




                                                             .6




                                                                                                                  .6
C. 1966
          .4




                                                                                                                  .4
                                                             .4
          .2




                                                             .2




                                                                                                                  .2
          0




                                                             0




                                                                                                                  0
               1   2   3    4    5      6   7   8   9   10        1   2   3     4    5   6    7      8   9   10        1     2    3    4   5    6    7    8    9      10



      Notes: Each panel presents results from a single regression with the outcome indicated as the dependent variable and fraction
      poor, urban, and deciles in fraction black and enrollment as explanatory variables (Equation 2). Graphs present the coefficients
      on the fraction black and enrollment deciles. Coefficients have been rescaled so that the average of the coefficients is equal to the
      average of the dependent variable in the sample. See tables in Appendix C for all the coefficients and standards errors.
                        Figure 4. Desegregation Outcomes By Decile: 1968-76
                        1. Under Court Order                           2. Proportion Black in all Black Schools                         3. Dissimilarity Index




                                                              1




                                                                                                                       1
           1
                            Fraction Black
           .8




                                                              .8




                                                                                                                       .8
                            Enrollment
           .6




                                                              .6




                                                                                                                       .6
A. 1968
           .4




                                                              .4




                                                                                                                       .4
           .2




                                                              .2




                                                                                                                       .2
           0




                                                              0




                                                                                                                       0
                1   2   3    4    5      6   7   8   9   10        1     2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9      10        1   2   3     4    5    6    7       8   9   10




                                                              1




                                                                                                                       1
           1




                                                              .8




                                                                                                                       .8
           .8
           .6




                                                              .6




                                                                                                                       .6
B. 1970
           .4




                                                              .4




                                                                                                                       .4
           .2




                                                              .2




                                                                                                                       .2
           0




                                                              0




                                                                                                                       0
                1   2   3    4    5      6   7   8   9   10        1     2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9      10        1   2   3     4    5    6    7       8   9   10
                                                              1




                                                                                                                       1
           1




                                                              .8
           .8




                                                                                                                       .8
           .6




                                                              .6




                                                                                                                       .6
C. 1976
           .4




                                                              .4




                                                                                                                       .4
           .2




                                                              .2




                                                                                                                       .2
           0




                                                              0




                                                                                                                       0
                1   2   3    4    5      6   7   8   9   10        1     2    3    4    5   6    7    8    9      10        1   2   3     4    5    6    7       8   9   10


          Notes: See Figure 3.
                                                                                       32
Table 1 - Comparison of Southern, Border, and Other States

 Variable                                             Sampled States      All South           Border             Other

Fraction of 5-17 Year Olds in 1960:
 Black                                                     0.307             0.309             0.242             0.083
                                                          (0.075)           (0.111)           (0.252)           (0.024)

 Living in Families with <$2000 Annual Income              0.234             0.243             0.139             0.081
                                                          (0.055)           (0.077)           (0.056)           (0.013)

 Residing in Urban Areas                                   0.492             0.501             0.663             0.757
                                                          (0.116)           (0.140)           (0.245)           (0.105)

Racial Segregation of Public Schools:
 Fraction of Blacks in All-Black Schools, 1964             0.984             0.979             0.431               -
                                                          (0.019)           (0.027)           (0.190)

Share of Black 5-17 Year Olds in 1960:
 in Southern and Border Region                            0.679              0.86              0.14                -

 in United States                                         0.451             0.571              0.093             0.336

Number of States                                             9                11                 7                30

Notes: Data are taken from the integrated public-use microdata sample of the 1960 Census (Ruggles et al., 2004), Southern
Education Reporting Service (1967), and U.S. Senate (1965). (See Appendix Table A for further description of sources.)
Underlying data are aggregated to the state level and statistics are weighted by the number of blacks aged 5 ato 17 in the
state in 1960. The sampled states are Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, and Virginia; the South includes these states as well as Mississippi and Texas. Border states are Delaware,
Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Oklahoma, Washington, D.C., and West Virginia.




                                                             33
Table 2 - Sample Characteristics

                                                  Mean             SD            Minimum         Maximum           N

                                                                           District Characteristics

Enrollment, early 1960s (ENROLL)                  7,444           14,075             94               205,363      924

Fraction black, early 1960s (FRACBLACK)           0.359           0.201             0.031              0.979       924

Fraction poor, early 1960s (FRACPOOR)             0.331           0.178             0.000              0.956       924

Majority urban, 1969 (URBAN)                      0.342                                                            924

                                                                           Segregation Measures

Fraction black in all black schools, 1964         0.986           0.065               0                 1          908

Fraction black in all black schools, 1968         0.588           0.374               0                 1          864

Fraction black in all black schools, 1976         0.022           0.091               0                0.891       825

Dissimilarity Index, 1968                         0.689           0.290               0                 1          864

Dissimilarity Index, 1976                         0.201           0.173               0                0.891       825

Notes: Sample consists of all districts at least 3% black in the early 1960s with non-missing desegregation data in at
least one year after 1965. See text and Appendix A for further details, including sources.




                                                            34
Table 3 - Predictors of Court Involvement and School Segregation, 1961

                                           (1)               (2)       (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                Fraction blacks                            Fraction blacks
                                                   Desegregated   in all black                Desegregated   in all black
Dependent variable                   Under CO (=1)     (=1)         schools     Under CO (=1)     (=1)         schools
Mean of dependent variable              0.0259       0.0507         0.9992         0.0259       0.0507         0.9992
s.d. of dependent variable              0.1589       0.2195         0.0063         0.1589       0.2195         0.0063

URBAN                                   0.0350***        0.0650***        -0.000902*       0.0255**         0.0555***        -0.000835*
                                          (0.012)          (0.015)         (0.00048)        (0.011)           (0.016)         (0.00046)
FRACPOOR                                -0.0572**        -0.0737**         -0.000172       -0.0716**        -0.0979***        0.00165**
                                          (0.026)          (0.034)         (0.00076)        (0.029)           (0.038)         (0.00080)
FRACBLACK                               -0.000996         -0.0277          0.00379**
                                          (0.032)          (0.037)          (0.0016)
LN ENROLL                               0.0196***        0.0478***         -0.000281
                                         (0.0071)         (0.0091)         (0.00025)
FRACBLACK: 2nd decile                                                                         -0.0193          -0.0474          0.00301
                                                                                              (0.035)          (0.041)         (0.0019)
FRACBLACK: 3rd decile                                                                       -0.0584**          -0.0472         0.00341*
                                                                                              (0.029)          (0.039)         (0.0018)
FRACBLACK: 4th decile                                                                         -0.0413          -0.0376        0.00340**
                                                                                              (0.030)          (0.040)         (0.0017)
FRACBLACK: 5th decile                                                                      -0.0652***         -0.0707*        0.00403**
                                                                                              (0.025)          (0.037)         (0.0017)
FRACBLACK: 6th decile                                                                         -0.0386        -0.0860**        0.00421**
                                                                                              (0.029)          (0.035)         (0.0017)
FRACBLACK: 7th decile                                                                       -0.0586**        -0.100***        0.00407**
                                                                                              (0.025)          (0.031)         (0.0017)
FRACBLACK: 8th decile                                                                         -0.0121          -0.0184        0.00370**
                                                                                              (0.032)          (0.039)         (0.0017)
FRACBLACK: 9th decile                                                                         -0.0148          -0.0370        0.00364**
                                                                                              (0.028)          (0.032)         (0.0016)
FRACBLACK: 10th decile                                                                        -0.0238          -0.0367        0.00332**
                                                                                              (0.024)          (0.029)         (0.0016)
ENROLL: 2nd decile                                                                           0.000592         -0.00698        -0.000418
                                                                                              (0.010)          (0.011)        (0.00074)
ENROLL: 3rd decile                                                                             0.0217          0.0132          -0.00136
                                                                                              (0.018)          (0.019)         (0.0012)
ENROLL: 4th decile                                                                             0.0110         -0.00129         0.000342
                                                                                              (0.015)          (0.016)        (0.00026)
ENROLL: 5th decile                                                                          -0.000518         -0.00243         0.000188
                                                                                              (0.012)          (0.016)        (0.00038)
ENROLL: 6th decile                                                                          -0.0117**       -0.0196***        0.000398*
                                                                                             (0.0046)         (0.0070)        (0.00021)
ENROLL: 7th decile                                                                            0.00772          0.0127         -0.000233
                                                                                              (0.010)          (0.014)        (0.00032)
ENROLL: 8th decile                                                                            0.00329          0.0382*        -0.000850
                                                                                              (0.011)          (0.023)        (0.00060)
ENROLL: 9th decile                                                                           -0.00174          0.0494*         0.000315
                                                                                              (0.012)          (0.026)        (0.00036)
ENROLL: 10th decile                                                                          0.123***         0.212***         -0.00168
                                                                                              (0.036)          (0.045)         (0.0010)
Constant                                -0.147**         -0.366***         1.002***            0.0351          0.0504*         0.997***
                                         (0.057)          (0.073)          (0.0021)           (0.024)          (0.029)         (0.0016)
N                                          927              927               924                927             927              924
R2                                         0.05             0.12             0.03               0.10             0.16             0.06

Notes: See text for description of sources, variables, and specifications. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, ** significant at 10% level

                                                                     35
Table 4 - Effects of Urbanicity and Poverty on Desegregation and Court Supervision, 1961-1976

Year                                            1961                   1964                   1966                  1968                   1970                   1976

Panel A                                                                             Dependent Variable: Under Court Order (=1)
Mean of dependent variable                     0.0259                 0.0680              0.1456                0.2854                    0.3090                 0.4924
s.d. of dependent variable                     0.1589                 0.2518              0.3529                0.4519                    0.4623                 0.5002

URBAN                                         0.0255**                 0.0199              0.0706***              0.117***               0.0829**                0.0362
                                               (0.011)                (0.016)                (0.025)               (0.035)                (0.035)                (0.038)
FRACPOOR                                      -0.0716**              -0.0959**              -0.139*                0.198*                 0.235**                0.217*
                                               (0.029)                (0.046)                (0.082)                (0.12)                 (0.12)                 (0.13)
N                                                927                     927                   927                   834                    903                    924
R2                                               0.10                   0.15                  0.24                   0.19                   0.17                   0.21

Panel B                                             Dependent variable: Desegregated (=1)                               Dependent variable: Dissimilarity index
Mean of dependent variable                     0.0507              0.2581               0.9904                     0.6891              0.2471                 0.2013
s.d. of dependent variable                     0.2195              0.4378               0.0976                     0.2896              0.2108                 0.1731

URBAN                                         0.0555***               0.119***              0.00583                0.00732                 0.0190              -0.0266***
                                                (0.016)                (0.033)              (0.0075)               (0.016)                (0.013)               (0.0099)
FRACPOOR                                     -0.0979***              -0.518***              -0.0222                 0.102*                -0.0477                0.0309
                                                (0.038)                (0.093)               (0.031)               (0.060)                (0.046)                (0.034)
N                                                 927                    926                   832                   864                    898                    825
R2                                               0.16                   0.25                  0.03                   0.56                   0.43                   0.46

Panel C                                                                   Dependent variable: Fraction of black students in all black schools
Mean of dependent variable                     0.9992                 0.9858               0.7608                 0.5879                  0.0503                 0.0909
s.d. of dependent variable                     0.0063                 0.0649               0.3227                 0.3738                  0.1508                 0.0215

URBAN                                        -0.000835*              -0.0127**             -0.0496***              0.00713               0.0123                 0.00808*
                                              (0.00046)               (0.0053)               (0.019)               (0.022)               (0.010)                (0.0046)
FRACPOOR                                      0.00165**               0.0341**               0.0655                0.181**               0.00132                0.0425*
                                              (0.00080)                (0.014)               (0.056)               (0.078)               (0.043)                 (0.024)
N                                                924                     910                   784                   864                   898                     825
R2                                               0.06                   0.15                   0.54                  0.54                  0.13                   0.16

Notes: All specifications include the full vectors of decile dummies for fraction black and enrollment; estimates of the complete specification are shown in Appendix Tables
C1 through C5. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, ** significant at 10% level



                                                                                      36
Appendix Table A1 - District Characteristics by Year and Sample

                                  1961          1964             1966           1968           1970       1976

                                            Observed in raw data with all pre-existing characteristics:

COURTORDER                        0.024         0.060            0.115          0.259          0.291      0.535
DESEG                             0.049         0.252            0.981          0.991          0.999      1.000
FRACALLBLACKSCH                   0.997         0.967            0.699          0.526          0.046      0.020
DISSIM                                                                          0.659          0.265      0.210
ENROLL                            6704          6705             7086           7375           7291       7633
FRACBLACK                         0.305         0.304            0.309          0.319          0.331      0.361
FRACPOOR                          0.332         0.332            0.326          0.327          0.330      0.338
URBAN                             0.311         0.311            0.322          0.335          0.322      0.337

N (DESEG)                         1,114         1,113             918            973           1,003      893
N (FRACALLBL, DISSIM)             1,111         1,094             890            970            998       881

                                                       Satisfies sample criteria, no imputation:

COURTORDER                        0.026         0.067            0.130          0.287          0.310      0.545
DESEG                             0.051         0.257            1.000          0.991          0.999      1.000
FRACALLBLACKSCH                   0.999         0.986            0.763          0.588          0.050      0.022
DISSIM                                                                          0.689          0.247      0.201
ENROLL                            7444          7446             7564           7751           7593       7865
FRACBLACK                         0.359         0.359            0.351          0.356          0.363      0.382
FRACPOOR                          0.331         0.330            0.326          0.327          0.331      0.341
URBAN                             0.342         0.341            0.346          0.354          0.342      0.340

N (DESEG)                          924           923              795            864               901    835
N (FRACALLBL, DISSIM)              921           908              780            864               898    825

                                            Satisfies sample criteria, with imputation (1966-68 only):

COURTORDER                        0.026         0.067            0.150          0.287          0.310      0.545
DESEG                             0.051         0.257            0.990          0.990          0.999      1.000
FRACALLBLACKSCH                   0.999         0.986            0.763          0.588          0.050      0.022
DISSIM                                                                          0.689          0.247      0.201
ENROLL                            7444          7446             7851           7735           7593       7865
FRACBLACK                         0.359         0.359            0.351          0.357          0.363      0.382
FRACPOOR                          0.331         0.330            0.323          0.328          0.331      0.341
URBAN                             0.342         0.341            0.356          0.353          0.342      0.340

N (DESEG)                          924           923              828            867               901    835
N (FRACALLBL, DISSIM)              921           908              780            864               898    825




                                                         37
Appendix Table A2 - Number of Districts by State, by Year and Dependent Variable

                                 1961           1964          1966          1968         1970             1976

                                        COURTORDER observations, with all pre-existing characteristics:

Alabama                           97             97            72           91            91              97
Arkansas                          138            137           113          119           132             125
Florida                            65            65            62           61            64              56
Georgia                           165            165           141          131           164             158
Lousiana                           64            64            51           55            64              64
North Carolina                    122            122           120          121           120             108
South Carolina                    92             92            91           81            92              92
Tennessee                          79             79            79           74           76              56
Virginia                          105            105           103          99            100             81

                                  DESEG and DISSIM observations, with all pre-existing characteristics:
                               DESEG     DESEG      DESEG          DISSIM          DISSIM         DISSIM

Alabama                           97             97            72           92            90              94
Arkansas                          138            137           113          125           132             124
Florida                            65            65            62           61            64              56
Georgia                           165            165           141          148           164             158
Lousiana                           64            64            51           57            64              64
North Carolina                    122            122           120          121           119             107
South Carolina                    92             92            91           87            91              91
Tennessee                          79             79            79           74           76              55
Virginia                          105            105           103          99            98              76

                                   FRACALLBLACKSCH observations, with all pre-existing characteristics:

Alabama                           97             97            63           92            90              94
Arkansas                          138            137           105          125           132             124
Florida                            65            65            59           61            64              56
Georgia                           165            165           130          148           164             158
Lousiana                           64            64            49           57            64              64
North Carolina                    119            114           118          121           119             107
South Carolina                    92             89            88           87            91              91
Tennessee                          79             77            79           74           76              55
Virginia                          105            102           93           99            98              76




                                                             38
Appendix Table B - Cutpoints of deciles of pre-existing district characteristics

                                     (1)                    (2)                       (3)                   (4)
                                  Minimum               Maximum                    Minimum               Maximum
Decile                              Fraction black, early 1960s                        Enrollment, early 1960s

1st                                  0.031                  0.095                     94                 1,038
2nd                                  0.098                  0.159                   1,048                1,633
3rd                                  0.159                  0.225                   1,648                2,303
4th                                  0.225                  0.279                   2,309                2,950
5th                                  0.279                  0.343                   2,958                3,870
6th                                  0.343                  0.408                   3,870                4,896
7th                                  0.409                  0.467                   4,898                6,274
8th                                  0.468                  0.549                   6,290                8,166
9th                                  0.550                  0.638                   8,171               13,387
10th                                 0.642                  0.979                   13,416              205,363




                                                           39
Appendix Table C1 - Predictors of Court Involvement and School Segregation, 1964

                                                    (1)                            (2)                            (3)
                                                                                                          Percent blacks in
Dependent variable                           Under CO (=1)                 Desegregated (=1)              all black schools
Mean of dependent variable                      0.0680                          0.2581                          0.9858
s.d. of dependent variable                      0.2518                          0.4378                          0.0649

URBAN                                              0.0199                       0.119***                      -0.0127**
                                                   (0.016)                       (0.033)                       (0.0053)
FRACPOOR                                         -0.0959**                     -0.518***                       0.0341**
                                                   (0.046)                       (0.093)                        (0.014)
FRACBLACK: 2nd decile                              0.0150                       -0.137**                      0.0613***
                                                   (0.043)                       (0.066)                        (0.019)
FRACBLACK: 3rd decile                              -0.0381                       -0.0975                      0.0699***
                                                   (0.038)                       (0.067)                        (0.019)
FRACBLACK: 4th decile                              -0.0168                     -0.184***                      0.0701***
                                                   (0.040)                       (0.064)                        (0.019)
FRACBLACK: 5th decile                            -0.0706**                     -0.176***                      0.0764***
                                                   (0.034)                       (0.066)                        (0.019)
FRACBLACK: 6th decile                              -0.0109                     -0.230***                      0.0755***
                                                   (0.036)                       (0.059)                        (0.019)
FRACBLACK: 7th decile                              -0.0350                     -0.183***                      0.0707***
                                                   (0.034)                       (0.061)                        (0.018)
FRACBLACK: 8th decile                             0.00895                        -0.123*                      0.0689***
                                                   (0.040)                       (0.064)                        (0.018)
FRACBLACK: 9th decile                               0.0148                      -0.122**                      0.0687***
                                                   (0.037)                       (0.062)                        (0.018)
FRACBLACK: 10th decile                              0.0269                       -0.0697                      0.0644***
                                                   (0.037)                       (0.064)                        (0.017)
ENROLL: 2nd decile                                0.00512                         0.0437                       -0.00459
                                                   (0.014)                       (0.040)                       (0.0085)
ENROLL: 3rd decile                                0.0367*                      0.0926**                        -0.00539
                                                   (0.021)                       (0.043)                       (0.0065)
ENROLL: 4th decile                                0.0478**                        0.0489                       -0.00133
                                                   (0.024)                       (0.040)                       (0.0070)
ENROLL: 5th decile                                  0.0135                     0.0935**                         -0.0125
                                                   (0.017)                       (0.044)                        (0.011)
ENROLL: 6th decile                                  0.0329                      0.158***                        0.00231
                                                   (0.023)                       (0.049)                       (0.0049)
ENROLL: 7th decile                                0.0312*                       0.155***                        0.00317
                                                   (0.019)                       (0.046)                       (0.0037)
ENROLL: 8th decile                                0.0619**                      0.235***                       -0.00661
                                                   (0.027)                       (0.053)                       (0.0070)
ENROLL: 9th decile                                0.0701**                      0.274***                        0.00347
                                                   (0.030)                       (0.054)                       (0.0057)
ENROLL: 10th decile                               0.313***                      0.489***                       -0.00653
                                                   (0.050)                       (0.058)                       (0.0081)
Constant                                            0.0108                      0.191***                       0.930***
                                                   (0.029)                       (0.054)                        (0.018)
N                                                    927                           926                            910
R2                                                   0.15                          0.25                           0.15

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level,
** significant at 10% level


                                                               40
Appendix Table C2 - Predictors of Court Involvement and School Segregation, 1966

                                                (1)                         (2)                 (3)
                                                                                        Percent blacks in
Dependent variable                        Under CO (=1)             Desegregated (=1)   all black schools
Mean of dependent variable                   0.1456                      0.9904               0.7608
s.d. of dependent variable                   0.3529                      0.0976               0.3227

URBAN                                       0.0706***                     0.00583          -0.0496***
                                              (0.025)                    (0.0075)            (0.019)
FRACPOOR                                      -0.139*                     -0.0222            0.0655
                                              (0.082)                     (0.031)            (0.056)
FRACBLACK: 2nd decile                          0.0276                     -0.0128           0.313***
                                              (0.042)                     (0.012)            (0.049)
FRACBLACK: 3rd decile                       0.0840**                     -0.00107           0.506***
                                              (0.042)                    (0.0025)            (0.043)
FRACBLACK: 4th decile                        0.107**                     -0.00136           0.563***
                                              (0.045)                    (0.0025)            (0.040)
FRACBLACK: 5th decile                          0.0615                     -0.0129           0.635***
                                              (0.043)                     (0.013)            (0.036)
FRACBLACK: 6th decile                        0.118***                     -0.0256           0.680***
                                              (0.043)                     (0.017)            (0.035)
FRACBLACK: 7th decile                          0.0622                    -0.00932           0.665***
                                              (0.039)                     (0.012)            (0.037)
FRACBLACK: 8th decile                        0.152***                    -0.00522           0.695***
                                              (0.045)                     (0.012)            (0.037)
FRACBLACK: 9th decile                        0.213***                    -0.00762           0.701***
                                              (0.049)                     (0.013)            (0.038)
FRACBLACK: 10th decile                       0.189***                    -0.00128           0.723***
                                              (0.049)                     (0.020)            (0.037)
ENROLL: 2nd decile                             0.0132                     0.0260            0.170***
                                              (0.027)                     (0.020)            (0.039)
ENROLL: 3rd decile                            -0.0122                     0.0123             0.108**
                                              (0.019)                     (0.024)            (0.045)
ENROLL: 4th decile                            0.0396                      -0.0126           0.188***
                                              (0.032)                     (0.030)            (0.042)
ENROLL: 5th decile                           0.00168                    -0.000284           0.175***
                                              (0.024)                     (0.026)            (0.041)
ENROLL: 6th decile                           0.166***                     0.0240            0.188***
                                              (0.042)                     (0.020)            (0.040)
ENROLL: 7th decile                          0.0676**                      0.0249            0.228***
                                              (0.033)                     (0.019)            (0.041)
ENROLL: 8th decile                           0.237***                     0.0247            0.188***
                                              (0.047)                     (0.020)            (0.041)
ENROLL: 9th decile                           0.205***                     0.0231            0.287***
                                              (0.045)                     (0.021)            (0.040)
ENROLL: 10th decile                          0.493***                     0.0185            0.292***
                                              (0.057)                     (0.024)            (0.042)
Constant                                    -0.101***                    0.982***            0.0563
                                              (0.031)                     (0.017)            (0.043)
N                                               927                         832                784
R2                                              0.24                        0.03               0.54




                                                          41
Appendix Table C3 - Predictors of Court Involvement and School Segregation, 1968

                                                    (1)                            (2)                           (3)
                                                                           Percent blacks in
Dependent variable                           Under CO (=1)                 all black schools             Dissimilarity index
Mean of dependent variable                      0.2854                           0.5879                       0.6891
s.d. of dependent variable                      0.4519                           0.3738                       0.2896

URBAN                                             0.117***                      0.00713                       0.00732
                                                   (0.035)                       (0.022)                       (0.016)
FRACPOOR                                           0.198*                       0.181**                        0.102*
                                                    (0.12)                       (0.078)                       (0.060)
FRACBLACK: 2nd decile                              0.0867                       0.181***                      0.0511*
                                                   (0.056)                       (0.036)                       (0.028)
FRACBLACK: 3rd decile                             0.186***                      0.369***                      0.168***
                                                   (0.060)                       (0.037)                       (0.030)
FRACBLACK: 4th decile                             0.198***                      0.451***                      0.231***
                                                   (0.059)                       (0.036)                       (0.029)
FRACBLACK: 5th decile                             0.129**                       0.580***                      0.341***
                                                   (0.060)                       (0.035)                       (0.028)
FRACBLACK: 6th decile                             0.238***                      0.654***                      0.429***
                                                   (0.058)                       (0.035)                       (0.026)
FRACBLACK: 7th decile                              0.0786                       0.685***                      0.456***
                                                   (0.059)                       (0.034)                       (0.026)
FRACBLACK: 8th decile                             0.194***                      0.702***                      0.487***
                                                   (0.061)                       (0.036)                       (0.027)
FRACBLACK: 9th decile                             0.192***                      0.794***                      0.562***
                                                   (0.061)                       (0.033)                       (0.025)
FRACBLACK: 10th decile                            0.296***                      0.821***                      0.584***
                                                   (0.071)                       (0.037)                       (0.031)
ENROLL: 2nd decile                                0.0747*                       0.161***                      0.223***
                                                   (0.044)                       (0.049)                       (0.042)
ENROLL: 3rd decile                                 0.0628                       0.205***                      0.255***
                                                   (0.041)                       (0.048)                       (0.042)
ENROLL: 4th decile                                0.235***                      0.276***                      0.304***
                                                   (0.058)                       (0.047)                       (0.043)
ENROLL: 5th decile                                0.166***                      0.243***                      0.299***
                                                   (0.051)                       (0.047)                       (0.042)
ENROLL: 6th decile                                0.375***                      0.242***                      0.293***
                                                   (0.057)                       (0.044)                       (0.040)
ENROLL: 7th decile                                0.285***                      0.246***                      0.315***
                                                   (0.055)                       (0.045)                       (0.040)
ENROLL: 8th decile                                0.481***                      0.280***                      0.352***
                                                   (0.058)                       (0.044)                       (0.040)
ENROLL: 9th decile                                0.348***                      0.328***                      0.397***
                                                   (0.057)                       (0.044)                       (0.040)
ENROLL: 10th decile                               0.555***                      0.334***                      0.459***
                                                   (0.064)                       (0.047)                       (0.041)
Constant                                         -0.183***                     -0.172***                      0.0615*
                                                   (0.045)                       (0.039)                       (0.037)
N                                                    834                           864                           864
R2                                                   0.19                         0.54                          0.56

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level,
** significant at 10% level


                                                               42
Appendix Table C4 - Predictors of Court Involvement and School Segregation, 1970

                                                    (1)                            (2)                           (3)
                                                                           Percent blacks in
Dependent variable                           Under CO (=1)                 all black schools             Dissimilarity index
Mean of dependent variable                      0.3090                           0.0503                       0.2471
s.d. of dependent variable                      0.4623                           0.1508                       0.2108

URBAN                                           0.0829**                         0.0123                         0.0190
                                                  (0.035)                        (0.010)                       (0.013)
FRACPOOR                                         0.235**                        0.00132                        -0.0477
                                                   (0.12)                        (0.043)                       (0.046)
FRACBLACK: 2nd decile                             0.101*                         0.0128                      -0.0679***
                                                  (0.059)                        (0.011)                       (0.021)
FRACBLACK: 3rd decile                            0.213***                        0.0127                       -0.111***
                                                  (0.062)                        (0.010)                       (0.021)
FRACBLACK: 4th decile                            0.192***                      0.0286**                       -0.123***
                                                  (0.059)                        (0.013)                       (0.021)
FRACBLACK: 5th decile                            0.136**                       0.0339**                       -0.126***
                                                  (0.058)                        (0.014)                       (0.022)
FRACBLACK: 6th decile                            0.248***                      0.0547***                      -0.103***
                                                  (0.058)                        (0.016)                       (0.023)
FRACBLACK: 7th decile                            0.158**                       0.0694***                     -0.0843***
                                                  (0.062)                        (0.020)                       (0.026)
FRACBLACK: 8th decile                            0.221***                      0.0552***                     -0.0751***
                                                  (0.061)                        (0.016)                       (0.024)
FRACBLACK: 9th decile                            0.250***                      0.0737***                     -0.0858***
                                                  (0.062)                        (0.017)                       (0.022)
FRACBLACK: 10th decile                           0.252***                       0.175***                        0.0422
                                                  (0.068)                        (0.032)                       (0.033)
ENROLL: 2nd decile                                0.0587                        0.00676                      0.0504***
                                                  (0.052)                        (0.015)                       (0.019)
ENROLL: 3rd decile                               0.101**                       0.0422**                       0.107***
                                                  (0.051)                        (0.020)                       (0.022)
ENROLL: 4th decile                               0.196***                      0.0589***                      0.138***
                                                  (0.055)                        (0.021)                       (0.022)
ENROLL: 5th decile                               0.170***                      0.0580***                      0.175***
                                                  (0.053)                        (0.020)                       (0.020)
ENROLL: 6th decile                               0.358***                      0.0792***                      0.199***
                                                  (0.058)                        (0.018)                       (0.020)
ENROLL: 7th decile                               0.262***                      0.0794***                      0.248***
                                                  (0.057)                        (0.021)                       (0.022)
ENROLL: 8th decile                               0.488***                      0.0732***                      0.292***
                                                  (0.059)                        (0.017)                       (0.019)
ENROLL: 9th decile                               0.343***                      0.0785***                      0.303***
                                                  (0.060)                        (0.017)                       (0.018)
ENROLL: 10th decile                              0.565***                      0.140***                       0.482***
                                                  (0.065)                        (0.020)                       (0.025)
Constant                                        -0.157***                     -0.0688***                      0.113***
                                                  (0.049)                        (0.011)                       (0.019)
N                                                   903                            898                           898
R2                                                  0.17                           0.13                          0.43

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level,
** significant at 10% level

                                                               43
Appendix Table C5 - Predictors of Court Involvement and School Segregation, 1976

                                                    (1)                            (2)                           (3)
                                                                           Percent blacks in
Dependent variable                           Under CO (=1)                 all black schools             Dissimilarity index
Mean of dependent variable                      0.4924                           0.0909                       0.2013
s.d. of dependent variable                      0.5002                           0.0215                       0.1731

URBAN                                              0.0362                        0.00808*                    -0.0266***
                                                   (0.038)                       (0.0046)                      (0.0099)
FRACPOOR                                           0.217*                        0.0425*                        0.0309
                                                    (0.13)                        (0.024)                       (0.034)
FRACBLACK: 2nd decile                             0.143**                       -0.000253                    -0.0926***
                                                   (0.059)                       (0.0045)                       (0.028)
FRACBLACK: 3rd decile                             0.288***                       0.00199                      -0.140***
                                                   (0.063)                       (0.0052)                       (0.028)
FRACBLACK: 4th decile                             0.300***                       0.00702                      -0.163***
                                                   (0.060)                       (0.0070)                       (0.027)
FRACBLACK: 5th decile                             0.281***                       0.00633                      -0.173***
                                                   (0.061)                       (0.0053)                       (0.026)
FRACBLACK: 6th decile                             0.457***                       0.0161**                     -0.156***
                                                   (0.061)                       (0.0072)                       (0.027)
FRACBLACK: 7th decile                             0.425***                       0.00774                      -0.161***
                                                   (0.062)                       (0.0061)                       (0.028)
FRACBLACK: 8th decile                             0.382***                       0.0267**                     -0.142***
                                                   (0.065)                        (0.011)                       (0.029)
FRACBLACK: 9th decile                             0.497***                      0.0388***                     -0.137***
                                                   (0.063)                        (0.013)                       (0.029)
FRACBLACK: 10th decile                            0.603***                      0.0968***                      -0.0587*
                                                   (0.066)                        (0.018)                       (0.032)
ENROLL: 2nd decile                                0.151**                        0.00440                      0.0494***
                                                   (0.067)                       (0.0065)                       (0.012)
ENROLL: 3rd decile                                0.276***                       0.0110*                      0.0693***
                                                   (0.066)                       (0.0064)                       (0.015)
ENROLL: 4th decile                                0.356***                      0.0284***                      0.114***
                                                   (0.065)                        (0.010)                       (0.017)
ENROLL: 5th decile                                0.261***                      0.0306***                      0.152***
                                                   (0.063)                        (0.011)                       (0.015)
ENROLL: 6th decile                                0.389***                      0.0530***                      0.193***
                                                   (0.064)                        (0.014)                       (0.019)
ENROLL: 7th decile                                0.340***                      0.0610***                      0.233***
                                                   (0.064)                        (0.016)                       (0.018)
ENROLL: 8th decile                                0.545***                      0.0405***                      0.252***
                                                   (0.061)                        (0.012)                       (0.019)
ENROLL: 9th decile                                0.415***                      0.0482***                      0.263***
                                                   (0.067)                        (0.013)                       (0.017)
ENROLL: 10th decile                               0.592***                      0.0770***                      0.391***
                                                   (0.073)                        (0.014)                       (0.022)
Constant                                         -0.189***                     -0.0400***                      0.164***
                                                   (0.056)                       (0.0078)                       (0.026)
N                                                    924                            825                           825
R2                                                   0.21                          0.16                          0.46

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level,
** significant at 10% level


                                                               44
Data Appendix

I.       Sources and Key Variables

Complete citations of all documents referenced below are provided under Data References.

A.       Desegregation and Plan Type Data by School District, 1956-1964

For 1956 through 1964, we have hand-entered data on desegregation and plan type from
print publications of the Southern Education Reporting Service (SERS), entitled A Statistical
Summary, State By State, of School Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border Area from 1954
to the Present. 1 These publications give, for all districts desegregated in policy or in practice, 2
the number of blacks attending public school with whites, the total number of black children
enrolled in public schools, and whether desegregation was court-ordered or undertaken
voluntarily by the local school board. Using these data, we are able to construct three
outcome variables: an indicator set to one if the district has a court-ordered plan
(COURTORDER), an indicator set to one if the district had any blacks enrolled in public
schools with whites (DESEG), and the fraction of blacks attending all black schools
(FRACALLBLACKSCH).

For districts not listed in these publications, we assume that COURTORDER and DESEG
are equal to zero and FRACALLBLACKSCH is equal to one. 3 It is difficult to assess the
credibility of this assumption, since no other agencies collected data on desegregation over
the period of interest. SERS data collection strategy is also unclear: according to the 1964
publication, data “were supplied by agencies of the respective states,” but the exact
procedure is not described. However, since there were such low rates of desegregation
during the period, it was most likely not very onerous to collect the data. 4 Two previous
uses of SERS data also suggest the credibility of our assumption and the data collected by
SERS more generally. First, SERS supplied desegregation data to the U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights by contractual agreement (U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1966; p. 30).
Second, the state-level summaries of desegregation activity are considered the best available
data by social scientists and have been previously cited in academic research (e.g., Rosenberg,
1991; Orfield, 2000).




1 We use the data presented in the following versions of this publication: April 15, 1957 (for fall 1956),
November 1957 (for fall 1957), October 1958 (for fall 1958), May 1960 (for fall 1959), November 1960 (for fall
1960), November 1961 (for fall 1961), November 1962 (for fall 1962), 1963-64 (for fall 1963), and November
1964 (for fall 1964). Prior to 1963-64, the relevant publication is entitled A Statistical Summary, State-by-State, of
Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern Schools from 1954 to Present.
2 Districts desegregated in policy but not in practice had freedom of choice plans, where blacks’ option to apply

to white schools was not exercised, or court orders that had not yet taken effect.
3 We compiled lists of districts by state and year from reports of district finances, enrollment, and other

activities published by state departments of education (see Part D of Section I of this Appendix).
4 High rates of desegregation may be why data collected by SERS for the Border region are less complete. It

may also be the reason why SERS relied on a U.S. Office of Education Survey in 1966 (see Section I.B).



                                                         45
B.       Plan Type Data by School District, 1966-1976

For December 1966 and September 1967, we have hand-entered information on school
districts’ compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act from print publications of HEW
entitled Status of Compliance: Public School Districts, Seventeen Southern and Border States. 5 These
publications provide the type of plan submitted and whether the plan was approved by
HEW for all school districts. We set COURTORDER=1 for districts with approved court-
ordered plans and COURTORDER=0 for all other districts. For districts where plans were
not approved as of the date of publication, information is provided on whether federal funds
to the district have been deferred or terminated. We use this information to impute
desegregation variables where missing in 1966 through 1968 (see Section III of this
Appendix).

After 1968, compliance status is provided simultaneously with computer-coded microdata
on enrollment by race in each of a district’s schools, described below. 6

C.       Desegregation Data by School District, 1966-1976

For fall 1966, we have hand-entered information on the number of blacks attending public
school with any whites from a print publication of SERS entitled Statistical Summary of School
Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border States 1966-1967. 7 Most of the data reported
were from computer printouts provided to SERS by the Office of Education (OE) from its
first survey of school desegregation in the South. The universe of the OE survey is not clear
from published documents, but presumably included all districts in the South; SERS reports
the response rate at 80 percent. 8 SERS correspondents were able to fill in data for some
districts where data in the OE survey were missing. For all districts listed in this publication,
we set DESEG=1 if any blacks are reported to be in school with whites. We also calculate
FRACALLBLACKSCH by estimating the total number of blacks in the district with fall
1966 district enrollment times fraction black in the district in the early 1960s (see section D
for sources); the total number of blacks in the district is not reported in the SERS
publication.

For fall 1967, we have hand-entered information on enrollment by race at the school level
from a print publication of the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) entitled Directory, Public
Elementary and Secondary Schools in Large School Districts With Enrollment and Instructional Staff, by
Race: Fall 1967. This survey included all districts “in 11 Southern states (AL, AR, FL, GA,
LA, MS, NC, SC, TN, TX, VA) … that were in the process of desegregating their schools by
voluntary plans or under court order to do so” and all districts with at least 3000 enrollment.
The survey also included all districts in Tennessee and Texas, regardless of size or
compliance status. We do not use the 1967 data directly in our analysis, but do use it to

5 We have located no published data on plans submitted to HEW by school district for the 1965-66 year.
6 For districts included in these samples, we identify districts under court order as those where the “assurance
code” is equal to 3 (1968, 1970, and 1972) or where the “sample code” is equal to 6 (1976).
7 We have located published data on desegregation for the 1965-66 year only for school districts in South

Carolina and Tennessee.
8 Twenty-six percent of districts in the states in our sample, and fourteen percent of districts in our sample,

were not listed in the 1966 SERS publication. For some of these districts, we have been able to impute
DESEG using data from adjacent years; see Section III.



                                                       46
impute desegregation variables where missing in a few cases in 1966 and 1968. We also use
the 1967 data to calculate district fraction black where missing in some cases.
For fall 1968, fall 1970, fall 1972, and fall 1976, we use computer-coded microdata on
enrollment by race at the school level from surveys conducted by OCR. These data were
housed at UCLA and converted from binary to ascii format by Ben Denckla and Sarah
Reber. Like the 1967 survey, the 1968, 1970, and 1972 surveys included all districts
“eliminating racially dual school systems under terms of voluntary plan agreements with
[HEW] or under Federal court order regardless of school district enrollment size” and all
districts with at least 3000 enrollment. Unlike the 1967 survey, these surveys did not include
all districts in Tennessee and Texas, regardless of size or compliance status. However, these
surveys did include smaller districts with the following probabilities: 75% for districts with
1200 to 2999 students, 50% for districts with 600 to 1199 students, 25% for districts with
300-599 students, and 0% for districts with less than 300 students. In addition, the 1968
survey explicitly states that it omitted “ninety-five school districts with Federal funds
terminated (as of August 1968) because of non-compliance with Title VI.” We use the 1967
compliance data described above to identify districts likely to have been omitted from the
survey on this basis. We then impute segregation variables for these districts; the imputation
and its consequences for our estimation sample are described in Section III of this
Appendix. The 1976 survey included districts of “high interest” to OCR, but otherwise
sampled districts to permit estimates representative at the state level. Most districts in the
South were sampled, and characteristics of districts are quite similar to those in previous
years (see Section III of this Appendix).

Using these school level data collected by OCR, we are able to construct DESEG,
FRACALLBLACKSCH, and the dissimilarity index, DISSIM. The formula for the
dissimilarity index is

                          DISSIM ≡
                                        ∑s TOTs %BL s − %BL
                                      2 × TOT × %BL × (1 − %BL )

where TOTs represents total enrollment in school s, TOT is total enrollment in the district,
%BLs represents percent black in school s, and %BL is percent black in the district.

D.      Data on Public School Enrollment, Urban Share, and Child Poverty by School District

We have gathered data on total enrollment and enrollment by race at the school district level
prior to 1964 from annual reports of state departments or superintendents of education.
Data were entered from print publications. 9 We define ENROLL as average fall enrollment
in the district between 1960 and 1963. 10 The years in which enrollment by race are available
differ by state, so we average district fraction black across all available years between 1960

9 Alabama Department of Education (various years), Arkansas Department of Education (various years),

Florida State Superintendent of Public Instruction (various years), Georgia State Department of Education
(various years), North Carolina Education Association (various years), South Carolina State Department of
Education (various years), State Department of Education of Louisiana (various years), Tennessee Department
of Education (various years), Virginia State Board of Education (various years).
10 States report slightly different enrollment concepts in their annual reports, usually fall enrollment or

registration, average daily membership or average daily attendance. We use the measure that is most
consistently reported within the state over time.



                                                    47
and 1963 to arrive at FRACBLACK. For states where enrollment by race is not provided in
these annual reports, we instead use the 1964 and 1966 SERS Statistical Summaries (North
Carolina), 1960 county-level Census data on the racial breakdown of the population of 5 to
17 year olds (Florida, where district boundaries correspond to counties), or the 1967 OCR
Directory data (Arkansas).

District-level poverty rates (FRACPOOR) are calculated in two steps. First, we estimate the
number of Title I eligibles at the school district level as county-level Title I eligibles in 1965-
66, times the fraction of the county Title I entitlement for which the district was eligible in
1965-66. County and school district figures were drawn from Congressional reports entitled
Maximum Basic Grants – Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (published September
1965) and Notes and Working Papers Concerning the Administration of Programs Authorized Under
Title I of Public Law 89-10, The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 As Amended By
Public Law 89-750 (published May 1967), respectively. Because Title I eligibles were primarily
determined by the number of 5 to 17 year olds living in families with incomes under $2000
as of the 1960 Census, we normalize this district-level figure with ENROLL to arrive at the
district-level poverty rate employed in the analysis. 11

Information on the share of the population residing in urban areas of each school district
was primarily taken from the 1970 Census Fourth Count School District Data Tapes, which we
obtained from the National Archives. For all but a handful of districts, this file reports the
share of the population living within the approximate boundaries of the school district which
is urban according to the 1970 Census of Population. We set URBAN=1 for districts with
urban population shares of at least 0.5; URBAN=0 otherwise. For the districts whose urban
share was not reported in these data, we used a second source, the City and County Data Book
Consolidated File, County Data 1947-1977, which reports urban share in each county (ICPSR
Study No. 7736). With the combination of these two sources, it was possible to compute the
urban share in each of the missing districts. 12 Urban share at the school district level is not
available prior to the 1970 Census.

E.       1960 Census Microdata

The 1960 Census microdata used in Table 1 was obtained from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Samples (Ruggles et al, 2004).

II.      School District Reorganization Activities


11This poverty measure is distinct from and predates the federal definition of poverty today.
12There are 19 districts in our sample whose urban population share could not be determined from the school
district data book alone. Two of these districts’ counties were entirely rural according the city and county data
book, so it was inferred that these were rural school districts. For the other 17 districts, we imputed the urban
share of the district from the “residual” urban share in the district’s county (that is, the urban share in the
district’s county but outside any other observed districts in the county). In 11 cases, this residual area was
entirely taken up by one district, so the imputed value should represent the actual urban share in that district.
That leaves six other cases in which two districts were assigned the same urban share imputed from county-
level information. These are Plum Bayou and Linwood in Jefferson County, Arkansas (urban share = 0.709);
Willisville and Emmet in Nevada County, Arkansas (urban share = 0.383); Fountain Hill and Parkdale in
Ashley County, Arkansas (urban share = 0.001).



                                                       48
School districts both consolidate and, less commonly, split apart during our sample period.
We use the state records referenced above to establish a history of these reorganizations.
For each year, we construct a crosswalk between the district (id) and the largest unit to
which the district is party between 1961 and 1976 (agg_id). We then merge this crosswalk to
each data set and collapse key variables (as described below) to the agg_id-year level. Thus,
if districts A and B merge in 1970 to form district C, we will observe A and B jointly as one
observation, geographically identical to district C, prior to 1970. And if district X splits into
districts Y and Z in 1968, we will observe Y and Z jointly as one observation comparable to
X beginning in 1968.

For indicator variables (DESEG, COURTORDER, URBAN), we aggregate to the agg_id-
year level as follows. First, we set the value of the indicator for the agg_id equal to one if any
districts associated with the agg_id are observed to have the indicator set to one. Second, if
all districts associated with the agg_id are observed, and none have the indicator set to one,
the indicator for the agg_id set to zero. Third, if not all districts associated with the agg_id
are observed (as is sometimes the case in the 1966 SERS or OCR desegregation data), and all
observed districts have the indicator set to zero, we code the indicator for the agg_id as
missing. For example, in the 1966 SERS, we code an agg_id as desegregated (DESEG=1) if
at least one of its ids is observed with any blacks in school with whites, not desegregated
(DESEG=0) if all districts are observed and none are desegregated, and missing (DESEG=.)
if no observed districts are desegregated, but not all districts are observed.

Numerical variables (FRACALLBLACKSCH, DISSIM, ENROLL, FRACBLACK,
FRACPOOR) are coded as missing if not all ids associated with an agg_id are observed in
the raw data. Where all districts are observed, we sum up all components of the variables
(e.g., number of blacks attending desegregated schools, total enrollment, etc.), and calculate
values for the agg_id accordingly. For example, in the 1966 SERS, we first calculate
FRACALLBLACKSCH by first calculating the number of blacks attending all black schools
and the total number of blacks across all districts in the agg_id. We then take the ratio of
these sums.

Roughly 7.7 percent of our agg_id-year observations represent multiple districts at some
point during the sample (71 aggregated districts out of a maximum of 924 aggregated
districts under observation). Our findings are robust to omitting these observations. Tables
and graphs limited to districts not re-organized between 1961 and 1976 are available from
the authors on request.

III.     Sample and Imputation

Our estimation sample consists of all districts for which key the explanatory variables are
observed, black share in enrollment is at least 3 percent, and enrollment by race at each of
the district’s schools is observed in at least one year after 1965. Most districts lost from the
sample must be omitted because they are not observed after 1965, not because we lack
information on district characteristics. 13

13 As noted in the text, we lose 208 observations because pre-existing characteristics are not observed. One

hundred eighty-five of these districts are in Arkansas, for which data constraints force us to impute fraction
black from the 1967 OCR survey described above. The omission of these districts is unlikely to impart serious



                                                      49
The first panel of Appendix Table A1 shows characteristics of (aggregated) districts
observed in each survey year and with non-missing data on all explanatory variables
(ENROLL, FRACBLACK, FRACPOOR, URBAN). The second panel of the table shows
characteristics for the sub-sample of these districts which are observed in at least one year
after 1965 and are at least 3 percent black. Not surprisingly, districts that satisfy these
sample criteria have higher black shares on average. They also have a slightly higher
probability of being classified as urban (34.2 percent versus 31.1 percent in 1961) and have
slightly higher enrollment (7,444 versus 6,704 in 1961).

Looking across each panel of Appendix Table A1, one sees that the size of our sample
changes from year to year. The districts under observation also become slightly larger,
blacker, and more urban; applying the OCR sampling weights to the full sample yields
roughly the same pattern. We do not limit attention to a balanced panel because given the
OCR sampling methodology, doing so would weight our entire sample toward districts more
resistant to desegregation.

As also noted above, we have imputed desegregation variables where missing in some cases
for 1966, 1967, and 1968 to minimize changes in sample composition. For districts not
observed in the 1966 SERS, we imputed DESEG=0 if the district was observed in the 1967
OCR as fully segregated and DESEG=1 if the district was observed in the 1964 SERS as
desegregated. For 1967 and 1968, we imputed key segregation measures
(FRACALLBLACKSCH, DISSIM) with previous year values if missing and had federal
funds terminated in 1966 and/or 1967, had federal funds deferred in both 1966 and 1967, or
had federal funds deferred in 1967. As shown in the third panel of Appendix Table A1, the
primary consequence of this imputation is to increase the number of observations on
DESEG in 1966. Indeed, there is no change in the number of observations of desegregation
on the intensive margin, suggesting that many of the same districts are consistently not
observed over these years.

Appendix Table A2 shows the number of observations, by state, year, and dependent
variable, with non-missing dependent variable values and data on all pre-existing
characteristics used in our analysis.




biases on our analysis, since the 1967 OCR survey covered all districts that were in the process of
desegregating.



                                                       50
Data References

Alabama Department of Education. Annual Report for the Scholastic Year Ending June 30, 1966
   and for the Fiscal Year Ending September 30, 1966: Statistical and Financial Data. Montgomery,
   AL. Reports covering 1960/61-1965/66 school years.

Arkansas Department of Education. Report on House Concurrent Resolution No. 58 of the 63rd
   General Assembly, Little Rock, AR. Reports covering 1960/61-1965/66 school years.

Florida State Superintendent of Public Instruction. Ranking of the Counties. Research Report,
    Division of Research. Tallahassee, FL. Reports covering 1962/63, 1964/65, 1965/66
    school years.

Georgia State Department of Education. Annual Reports of the Department of Education
   to the General Assembly of the State of Georgia. Atlanta, GA.. Reports covering
   1961/62, 1963/64 and 1965/66 school years.

North Carolina Education Association. Per Pupil Expenditures for Current Expense: Information
   Provided by Division of Statistical Services State Department of Public Instruction. Raleigh, NC.
   Reports covering 1961/62-1965/66 school years.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
   Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public Use Microdata
   Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population
   Center [producer and distributor], 2004.

South Carolina State Department of Education. Annual Report of the State Superintendent
   of Education of the State of South Carolina. Columbia, SC. Reports covering 1960/61 –
   1965/66 school years.

Southern Education Reporting Service. A Statistical Summary, State-by-State, of Segregation-
   Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern Schools from 1954 to Present, Together With Pertinent
   Data on Enrollment, Teacher Pay, Etc.. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting
   Service, April 15, 1957.

----. A Statistical Summary, State-by-State, of Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern
     Schools from 1954 to Present, Together With Pertinent Data on Enrollment, Teacher Pay, Etc..
     Second Revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting Service, November 1,
     1957.

----. A Statistical Summary, State-by-State, of Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern
     Schools from 1954 to Present, Together With Pertinent Data on Enrollment, Teacher Pay, Etc.. Fifth
     Printing. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting Service, October 15, 1958.

----. A Statistical Summary, State-by-State, of Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern
     Schools from 1954 to Present, Together With Pertinent Data on Enrollment, Teachers, Colleges,
     Litigation, and Legislation. Seventh Revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting
     Service, May 1960.



                                                  51
----. A Statistical Summary, State-by-State, of Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern
     Schools from 1954 to Present, Together With Pertinent Data on Enrollment, Teachers, Colleges,
     Litigation, and Legislation. Eighth Revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting
     Service, November 1960.

----. A Statistical Summary, State By State, of Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern
     Schools from 1954 to the Present, Together with Pertinent Data on Enrollment, Teachers, Colleges,
     Litigation, and Legislation. Tenth revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting
     Service, November 1961.

----. A Statistical Summary, State By State, of Segregation-Desegregation Activity Affecting Southern
     Schools from 1954 to the Present, Together with Pertinent Data on Enrollment, Teachers, Colleges,
     Litigation, and Legislation. Eleventh revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education
     Reporting Service, November 1962.

----. A Statistical Summary, State By State, of School Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and
     Border Area from 1954 to the Present. Thirteenth revision. Nashville, TN: Southern
     Education Reporting Service, 1963-64.

----. A Statistical Summary, State By State, of School Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and
     Border Area from 1954 to the Present. Fourteenth revision. Nashville, TN: Southern
     Education Reporting Service, November 1964.

----. A Statistical Summary, State By State, of School Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and
     Border Area from 1954 to the Present. Sixteenth revision. Nashville, TN: Southern
     Education Reporting Service, February 1967.

State Department of Education of Louisiana. Financial and Statistical Report. Baton Rouge, LA.
    Reports covering 1960/61 – 1965/66 school years.

Tennessee Department of Education. Annual Statistical Report of the Department of Education.
   Nashville, TN. Reports covering 1960/61 – 1965/66 school years.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1978). County and City Data Book
   [United States] Consolidated File: County Data, 1947-1977 [Computer file]. ICPSR version.
   Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census [producer], 1978. Ann
   Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
   1999.

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (1970). 1970 Census
   Fourth Count (Population) School District Data Tapes. Washington, DC.

U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Equal Educational Opportunities
   Programs. Status of Compliance Public School Districts Seventeen Southern and Border States.
   Report No. 1. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, December 1966.




                                                   52
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Office for Civil Rights. Status of
   Compliance Public School Districts Seventeen Southern and Border States. Report No. 7.
   Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1967.

U.S Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Office of Education. Directory, Public
   Elementary and Secondary Schools in Large School Districts With Enrollment and Instructional Staff,
   by Race: Fall 1967. Washington, DC: US GPO, 1969.

U.S. Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Subcommittee on Education.
   Maximum Basic Grants—Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 81-874,
   Title II, and Public Law 89-10, Title I). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
   Office, September 1965.

U.S. Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Subcommittee on Education. Notes
   and Working Papers Concerning the Administration of Programs Authorized Under Title I of Public
   Law 89-10, The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 As Amended by Public Law 89-
   750. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, May 1967.

Virginia State Board of Education. Annual Report of the Superintendent of Public
    Instruction of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Richmond, VA. Reports covering
    1960/61 – 1965/66 school years.




                                                  53
