                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      LARGE HOARDING OF INTERNATIONAL RESERVES AND THE EMERGING
                   GLOBAL ECONOMIC ARCHITECTURE

                                         Joshua Aizenman

                                       Working Paper 13277
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13277


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2007




Prepared for Growth and Business Cycles In Theory And Practice Conference, July 2007, organized
by Pierre-Richard Agenor and Keith Blackburn, the Center for Growth and Business Cycle Research
(CGBCR) at the University of Manchester. This paper extends comments presented at the Brookings
Panel on Economic Activity, 2007. Jesus Sandoval-Hernandez provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Large Hoarding of International Reserves and the Emerging Global Economic Architecture
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 13277
July 2007
JEL No. F02,F1,F15,F31,F32,F33,F36,F4

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes competing interpretations for the large increases in the hoarding of international
reserves by developing countries. While the first phase of the rapid hoarding of reserves in the aftermath
of the East Asian crisis has been dominated by self insurance against exposure to foreign shocks, the
self insurance motive falls short of explaining the hoarding in Asia in the 2000s. These developments
may be a symptom of an emerging new global financial architecture, which is manifested in the proliferation
of decentralized and less cooperative arrangements. The emerging financial configuration of developing
countries in the aftermath of the 1990s crises has been growing managed exchange rate flexibility,
greater monetary independence, and deeper financial integration. Hoarding international reserves is
a key ingredient enhancing the stability of this emerging configuration. While not a panacea, international
reserves help by providing self insurance against sudden stops; mitigating REER effects of TOT shocks;
smoothing overtime the adjustment to shocks by allowing more persistent current account patterns;
and possibly even export promotion, though this mercantilist use of reserves remains debatable due
to possible coordination issues. Countries following an export oriented growth strategy may end up
with competitive hoarding, akin to competitive devaluations. The sheer size of China, and its lower
sterilization costs suggests that China may be the winner of a hoarding game. Hoarding international
reserves may also be motivated by a desire to deal with vulnerability to internal and external instability,
which is magnified by exposure of the banking system to non performing loans. Testing the self insurance
and precautionary motives in the context of China may be challenged by a version of the "peso problem."
Hoarding international reserves and sterilization have been complementing each other during the last
ten years, as developing countries have increased the intensity of both margins.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@cats.ucsc.edu
1.     Introduction

       Since the 1980s, we have witnessed intriguing developments; despite the proliferation of
greater exchange rate flexibility, international reserves-GDP ratios increased substantially.
Practically all the increase in reserves-GDP holding has taken place in developing countries,
mostly concentrating in East Asia. The magnitude of the changes during the last twenty years is
mind-boggling: global reserves increased from about 1 trillion US dollar in 1990, to more than 5
trillion US dollar in 2006. The dramatic hoarding of international reserves was lopsided: while
the International reserves/GDP ratio of industrial countries was overall stable, hovering around
4%, the reserves/GDP of developing countries increased dramatically, from about 5% to about
27% (See Figure 1). Today, about two thirds of the global international reserves are held by
developing countries. Most of that increase has been in Asia, where the reserves/GDP increased
from about 5% in 1980 to about 37% in 2006 (32% in Asia excluding China). The most
dramatic changes occurred in China, increasing its reserve/GDP from about 1% in 1980, to about
41% in 2006. Econometric evaluations suggest several structural changes in the patterns of
reserves hoarded by developing countries. A notable change occurred in the 1990s, a decade
when the international reserves/GDP ratios shifted upwards; a trend that intensified shortly after
the East Asian crisis of 1997-8, but subsided by 2000. Another structural change have taken
place in early 2000s, mostly driven by an unprecedented increase in the hoarding of international
reserves in China, from close to zero during 1998-2000 to more than $ 300 billion in 2006.1 This
dramatic change in Chinese hoarding is underscored by Figure 1b, showing that its reserve/GDP
ratio almost tripled within six years, from about 14% during 1997-2000, to 41% in 2006!
       A useful perspective towards the recent hoarding of international reserves by developing
countries is provided by applying the Trilemma framework. To recall, the Trilemma states that
countries can choose not more than two of the following three attributes: exchange rate stability,
monetary independence, and financial integration [see Frankel (1999) and Obstfeld et al. (2005)].
Developing countries that opted during the late 1980s for exchange rate stability, monetary
independence and financial repression, embraced during the early 1990s growing financial
liberalization. Mexico, Korea and other countries found that the Trilemma is alive and kicking;

1
  See Aizenman and Marion (2003), Bird and Rajan (2003), Aizenman and Lee (2007), Jeanne
(2007), and Cheung and Ito (2007) for econometric evaluation dealing with the emerging
patterns of hoarding reserves.


                                                 1
greater financial integration made the quest for exchange rate stability and monetary
independence unattainable, frequently resulting with deep financial crises, including the 1994-5
Mexican and the 1997-8 East Asian crises. Argentina chose during the early 1990s another
Trilemma combination: exchange rate stability supported by a version of currency-board, and
financial integration. As has been vividly illustrated by the crisis in the early 2000s, this
configuration did not pass the test of time.
       These crises illustrated the downside risk of financial integration and the temporariness
and risks of fixed exchange rates. These developments also validate Diaz-Alejandro’s 1985
conjecture: Good-bye financial repression, hello investment boom, to be followed by a costly
financial crash. It also demonstrated the Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates [dubbed by Obstfeld &
Rogoff (1995)], and the possibility that a pegged exchange rate is a trap in the era of greater
financial integration [see Eichengreen and Masson (1998), Eichengreen (1999), Frankel (1999);
Edwards & Levy Yeyati (2005); Aizenman & Glick (2005)].
       The emerging configuration of developing countries in the aftermath of the 1990s crises
has been growing managed exchange rate flexibility, greater monetary independence, and deeper
financial integration. This raises two important questions: why should the countries affected
adversely by exposure to hot money opt for greater financial integration, and how stable is this
emerging configuration? I discuss both issues in Section 2, pointing out that globalization of
trade set in motion forces that induce endogenous financial globalization, and that hoarding
international reserves is a key ingredient enhancing the stability of the emerging configuration in
an era of greater financial integration. While not a panacea, international reserves helps by
providing several services which include: self insurance against sudden stops and capital flights;
mitigating REER effects of TOT shocks; smoothing overtime the adjustment to shocks by
allowing more persistent current account patterns; and possibly even export promotion, though
the last service remains debatable due to possible coordination issues akin to competitive
devaluations.
        Section 3 discusses the possibility that the large increase in hoarding international
reserves is a symptom of the emergence of a new global financial architecture, which is
manifested in the proliferation of decentralized and less cooperative arrangements. The hoarding
takeoff during the 2000s illustrates also the downside risk of the new global financial




                                                  2
architecture: competitive hoarding akin to competitive devaluations. Section 4 closes with a
discussion of challenges of evaluating and testing the patterns of hoarding international reserves.


2. Hoarding international reserves and the embrace of financial integration
        A remarkable trend of the new configurations is that with few exceptions, countries
stunned by the financial crisis during the 1990s opted to buffer their growing exposure to
financial instability by hoarding international reserves, instead of reducing their financial
integration. While the reserves/GDP of developed countries has remain trendless, that of
developing countries increased substantially from the early 1990s, coinciding with the rapid
financial integration of developing countries [see Aizenman and Lee (2007) for further
Econometric assessment]. The rapid pace of financial globalization remains contentious, as
leading economists question the gain from financial integration [see Rodrik (1998), Stiglitz
(2002)]. Several recent papers have illustrated that the gains from financial integration are
overrated [Gourinchas & Jeanne (2004), Aizenman (2005), Prasad et al. (2006)]. Rodrik (2006)
articulates the benefits associated with increasing the international reserves/external exposure
ratio, asking why most countries have invested more in increasing the numerator of this ratio
[hoarding international reserves], and not in reducing the denominator [lessening external
exposure].
        A possible interpretation of these trends is that like it or not, deeper financial integration
is the unavoidable outcome of rapid trade integration. Trade integration facilitates capital flights
via trade misinvoicing, thus increasing the costs of enforcing financial repression, and forcing
countries to tolerate greater financial integration. Hence, countries that opted for financial
repression as a constrained optimal solution to the public finance problem facing low income
countries [i.e., raising taxes at low costs], may find that deeper trade integration increases the
costs of monitoring and enforcing financial integration to levels that justify financial opening
[Aizenman (2004)]. As the Trilemma and the 1990s have illustrated, the byproduct of this trend
is growing exposure to financial instability. Hoarding international reserves in the aftermath of
financial crises may be viewed as self insurance against sudden stops. It allows fast adjustment
to the growing downside risks of greater financial integration.2 Hoarding international reserves

2
 See Flood and Marion (2002) for an overview of the literature explaining international reserves
applying the buffer stock approach. See Ben-Bassat and Gottlieb (1992) ; Aizenman and


                                                   3
may also provide a solution to the constrained optimal public finance problem of a country
facing the combination of costly tax collection, sovereign risk, and the need to finance critical
public expenditure [Aizenman and Marion (2004)].
       While providing useful services, international reserves management is subject to serious
limitations. These include Moral hazard associated with insurance. First, there is the macro
moral hazard: international reserves may be the target of opportunistic spending in regimes
characterized by political instability and limited monitoring.3 Next, there is the micro moral
hazard, where international reserves subsidize risk taking.4 In addition, there are fiscal costs,
including the direct opportunity cost in the form of the marginal product of public capital and/or
the cost of external borrowing, and the quasi costs of sterilization [Calvo (1991)].
   However, the costs of sterilization have been seen so far as well below the perceived benefits
of monetary stability and the wish to hoard international reserves. Not withstanding concerns
about sterilization costs, Aizenman and Glick (2007) find that hoarding international reserves
and sterilization have been complementing each other during the last ten years, as developing
countries have increased the intensity of both margins. Indeed, there is a significant increase in
the coefficient of sterilization following the 1997-8 crisis, a trend that continues today, and
applies well beyond Asia. These results are illustrated in Figure 2, which shows the coefficient
of marginal sterilization in Korea [and the s.d. bounds around it] which is estimated using a
quarterly rolling regression, controlling for the growth rate of the nominal GDP. Full
sterilization corresponds to the value of negative 1, as depicted by the bold curve. Note the
significant increase in the sterilization in Korea in the aftermath of the 1997-8 crisis. There is
evidence of large sterilization after the Asian crisis for both China and Korea, and to a lesser
degree for Thailand, India and Malaysia. The evidence is consistent with a regime change in
China, which intensified hoarding and sterilization in the early 2000s. There is some evidence
for greater sterilization in Brazil and Mexico in the aftermath of the Mexican crisis. Sterilization
of FDI inflows is less than that of non-FDI inflows. Apparently, sterilizing the hoarding of

Marion (2003, 4); Lee (2004); Aizenman and Lee (2007), Garcia and Soto (2005), Jeanne and
Ranciere (2005) and Rodrik (2006) for precautionary and self insurance models of hoarding
international reserves.
3
  See Aizenman and Marion (2004), showing that countries characterized by greater political
instability and polarization opt to hold less international reserves
4
  see Levy Yeyati (2005) which calls for liquid reserve requirements on banks, and an ex-ante
suspension-of-convertibility clause.


                                                  4
international reserves is easier to implement in courtiers with a higher saving rate and greater
financial repression.
       Another service provided by hoarding international reserves is the mitigation of real
exchange rate [REER] effects of terms of trade [TOT] shocks. TOT volatility leads to REER
volatility, magnifying business cycle volatility. Countries may hoard reserves in order to stabilize
the real exchange rate in the presence of volatile terms of trade shocks and volatile short term
capital flows. The beneficial effect of hoarding reserves to deal with exposure to volatile TOT is
reinforced by the evidence in Aghion et al. (2006), who found that real exchange rate volatility
reduces growth for countries with relatively low levels of financial development. Hence, factors
mitigating real exchange rate volatility may be associated with superior economic performance.
Developing countries are characterized by their limited ability to mitigate TOT shocks by
internal adjustments, or by external hedging. This is the outcome of the amalgamation of
shallow financial systems, lack of sectoral diversification, and sovereign risk and the absence of
proper financial instruments. Aizenman and Riera-Crichton (2006) found that hoarding
international reserves mitigates the REER effects of TOT shocks, and that this alleviation effect
is important especially for exporters of natural resources. Natural resources dependence, on
average, double both the impact of TOT shocks on the REER, and the mitigation associated with
hoarding international reserves. Higher international reserves/GDP may also enhance the
capacity to overtime smooth the adjustment to shocks, allowing more persistent current account
patterns. Such patterns are consistent with the optimal adjustment in the open economy to
shocks, as predicted by the permanent income hypothesis. In contrast, a low level of reserves
may require fast and rigid adjustments of the current account to shocks, where deviations from a
balanced current account position are hard to sustain [see Aizenman (2006)].
       The views linking the large increase in hoarding reserves to the self insurance dealing
with the growing exposure to currency crisis and sudden stops face a well-known contender in a
modern incarnation of mercantilism: the accumulation of international reserves triggered by
concerns about export competitiveness. This explanation has been advanced by Dooley,
Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2004), especially in the context of China. They interpret the
accumulation of reserves as a by-product of promoting exports, which are needed to create better
jobs, thereby absorbing abundant labor in traditional sectors, located mostly in agriculture. While
intellectually intriguing, this interpretation remains debatable. After all, the high export growth is



                                                  5
not new – it is the story of East Asia since the 1950s. Yet the large increase in hoarding reserves
happened mostly after 1997. Aizenman and Lee (2007) tested the importance of precautionary
and mercantilist motives in accounting for the hoarding of international reserves by developing
countries during 1980-2000. While variables associated with the mercantilist motive (like lagged
export growth and deviation from Purchasing Power Parity) are statistically significant, their
economic importance in accounting for the cross country variations in reserve hoarding is small,
and is dwarfed by variables associated with precautionary demand and self insurance.
       The inability of empirical research to validate a robust economic role for mercantilist
hoarding through its impact on the real exchange rate, and the acceleration of large hoardings in
East Asia during 2001-2007 remains a puzzle. Indeed, Bird and Rajan (2003) showed the
limited ability of the self insurance model to account for the recent trends in Asia. This
argument was further reinforced by Jeanne (2007), who applied an elegant utility based welfare
analysis of optimal hoarding of international reserves, and a calibration that allows one to
evaluate the degree to which recent hoarding trends are consistent with the model’s predictions.
Taking the model to the data, the results are intriguing: the levels of reserves observed in many
countries in the recent period (in particular in Latin America), are within the range of the model
predictions. However, the insurance model fails to account for the recent reserves buildup in
emerging market countries -- most of the reserves accumulation took place in Asian emerging
market countries, where the risk of a capital account crisis seemed much too small to justify such
levels of self-insurance.
       In the next section we will place the large hoarding of international reserves in the
context of the possible emergence of a new financial architecture, a process that may also
provide a possible explanation for recent trends in East Asia.


3. Hoarding international reserves and the emerging financial architecture
       The big story of the global economy during the last sixty years has been changes in the
global distribution of economic might, from a unipolar architecture dominated by the US during
the mid part of the 20th century to a multipolar world, with a shifting distribution of economic
growth. The unipolar architecture was dominated by the US centric economic organization:
leading currencies were pegged to the dollar, and the US dictated the global monetary policy
under the Bretton Woods system, 1944-1970. These trends are illustrated in Figure 3 by using



                                                 6
Maddison’s data, which shows that the global GDP share of the West [West Europe, US,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand] have declined from about 57% in the early 1950s to about
43% in the early 2000s, whereas the share of Asia climbed from 15% to about 40%.
Consequently, emerging Asia is rapidly approaching the size of the West.
       Arguably, the emerging decentralization is manifested in the proliferation of
decentralized and less cooperative arrangements. Large hoarding of international reserves by
developing countries may be viewed as one dimension of such arrangements – the
decentralization of the hard currency lender-of-last-resort, from implicit insurance via the
International Financial Institutions [IMF, World Bank, etc…], to self insurance by emerging
markets. The desire to self insure may reflect evolving experience with the downside of deeper
financial integration, manifested by the greater exposure to sudden stops of capital flows [see
Calvo (1998), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) and Hutchison and Noy (2005)], and by the
growing reluctance to rely on centralized solutions provided by IFIs. Yet, by definition self
insurance also implies no central role for the International Financial Institutions. Other
dimensions of the emerging decentralized global architecture are that more countries have
shifted towards managed flexibility of the exchange rate, where there is no central role of the
dollar or any other ‘hard currency,’ as well the proliferation of decentralized inflation targeting
[Rose (2006)].
       An unintended consequence of a decentralized global architecture is frequently the
greater exposure to coordination failure. Countries following export oriented growth strategies
[described by Dooley et al. (2004)] may end up with competitive hoarding to improve their
competitiveness in the OECD countries [Aizenman and Lee (2006)]. Arguably, one may
reconcile both the mercantilist approach [Dooley et al. (2004)] with the limited support of
mercantilism in cross country regressions by taking the perspective of a hoarding game, where
countries following an export oriented growth strategy, competing in the same third market (the
US), may end up with competitive hoarding.5 An example of such a game, akin to Johnson’s
classical (1953) tariff war model, is summarized in Figure 4. In a world with symmetric EMs
competing in similar industries, competitive hoarding tends to dissipate most competitive gains,
leading to a ‘Beggar-yourself’ and excessive hoarding. In an asymmetric world, an emerging

5
 The hoarding may be triggered by more vigorous competition in industries approaching excess
capacity.


                                                 7
market with low enough cost of sterilization may win the hoarding war -- its non cooperative
outcome is superior to the cooperative one, akin to the ‘Beggar-thy-neighbor’ outcome of
asymmetric Tariff Wars [see Aizenman and Lee (2006)].
       Specifically, we consider two Emerging Markets (EMs) H and F, exporting similar
products to a third market, say the US. Hoarding more reserves by each EM would depreciate its
real exchange rate, thereby improving its competitiveness vis-à-vis the other emerging market in
third markets [i.e., the US]. H’s net export is an imperfect substitute of F’s export, and depends
positively on its international reserve hoardings relative to F’s international reserves position.
We assume that H and F would prefer higher exports, thus balancing the gain from export
promotion against the costs of hoarding reserves. The optimal international reserves level in the
absence of competitive hoarding is normalized to 1, and point O in Figure 4 corresponds to the
optimal international reserves hoarding in the absence of mercantilist hoarding. From the point
of view of H, export growth propagated by hoarding international reserves is desirable
[apparently due to externalities like learning by doing, etc…], but it comes at a quadratic cost,
including costly sterilization and other indirect costs. Similar preferences characterize F. Curves
HH and FF are the reaction functions of H and F in the competitive hoarding game. Curve Wo,
Figure 4 is H’s indifference curve -- configurations of (R, R*) where H’s utility equals to the
benchmark of no competitive hoarding, point O. H is worse off relative to the no hoarding
equilibrium at points above curve Wo. The Nash equilibrium of the competitive hoarding game
is depicted by the intersection of curves HH and FF, at point S. The left panel corresponds to the
symmetric case, where both H and F share the same preferences and the same cost functions.
Note that H is worse-off in the symmetric competitive Nash hoarding equilibrium – its welfare at
point S is lower than at point O (the no competitive hoarding equilibrium). By symmetry, the
same applies to F. Competitive hoarding dissipates any competitive gains in the symmetric case,
reducing welfare due to the higher cost of carrying extra international reserves, implying a
‘Beggar-yourself’ outcome. It can be shown that greater substitutability between the exports of
two countries magnifies the negative externality associated with hoarding international reserves,
and that lower sterilization costs increase the ‘excess reserves’ associated with competitive
hoarding.
       In the asymmetric case, if H’s sterilization cost is low enough relative to F’s cost, H
would win the ‘hoarding war’ -- H’s non cooperative outcome is superior to the cooperative one,



                                                  8
akin to the ‘Beggar-thy-neighbor’ results of asymmetric tariff wars. This is depicted by the right
panel of Figure 4, where point S is below the indifference map Wo. It can be shown that
lowering H’s sterilization cost shifts HH (H’s reaction function) to the right, and the indifference
curve Wo upwards. Hence, lower sterilization costs of H would increase the equilibrium
hoarding of H, reducing the hoarding of F. Financial repression of the type observed in China
may reduce its sterilization costs, thereby increasing the intensity of its sterilization, and
ultimately China’s international reserves hoardings. Consequently, competitive hoarding in
circumstances where financial repression reduces the cost of sterilization is consistent with
Jeanne (2007) who found a negative association between hoarding reserves and financial
integration.
       Figure 5 outlines ‘the sources’ of international reserves accumulation in China. It reveals
a complex picture, where hoardings of international reserves accelerated to about an average of a
$ 110 Billion dollar annual increase during 2000-2005, and has been associated with sizable
current account surpluses and inflows of capital of about $ 60 (50) Billion, respectively. These
averages mask the remarkable acceleration of China’s annual hoardings, from close to zero
hoarding during 1998-2000, to about ($100, $200, $250) billion during (2003, 2004, 2006),
respectively. The competitive hoarding model’s predictions are consistent with aggressive
reserves hoarding by China, where large inflows of capital and current account surpluses are
associated with sterilization [see Aizenman and Glick (2007)]. If China’s sterilization costs are
lower than Korea’s and other countries competing with China in the US market, China may win
the hoarding war. The sheer size of China and its low sterilization costs, probably due to
financial repression there, may force Korea and Japan to keep hoarding international reserves in
order to prevent deeper erosion of their competitiveness.6 Arguably, it may also induce Korea
and Japan to invest directly in China, in an attempt to minimize their losses in the hoarding game.



6
  The hoarding model described above is a one shot game, yet its logic applies also in a multi
period environment, where the success of export promotion at time t leads improvement in the
current account at time t+1, inducing more reserves hoarding at time t+1, needed in order to slow
down the real appreciation which tends to be the byproduct of export led growth strategy. The
ultimate speed of the REER adjustment and the needed hoarding in each period is the outcome of
a complex interaction between the speed of reallocation of resources from the declining sector to
manufacturing, and the speed to which prices and wages adjust to market pressure [i.e., the
duration of nominal and real rigidities]. All these issues deserve further investigation.


                                                   9
       These observations may explain also the inability to find a robust economic role for the
mercantilist approach in econometric specifications, as most of its effects tend to dissipate
overtime. Competitive hoarding may also reflect coordination failure. If China is the winner by
virtue of low sterilization costs and size, other Asian countries may be worse off.7 It also
suggests the possibility of gains from regional coordination, possibly in the form of regional
funds, etc. China however, may be less eager to participate in such a fund compared to other East
Asian countries. The competitive hoarding view is also consistent with the interdependence of
the demand for international reserves among ten East Asian countries, reported by Cheung and
Qian (2006). They found that controlling for conventional variables explaining the hoarding of
international reserves, a one dollar increase in international reserves by one country has been
associated with an increase of about .6 dollars by the other nine ‘peer countries.’


4. Concluding Remarks
       I close the paper with a discussion of alternate interpretations of hoarding international
reserves, and the challenges facing empirical research dealing with explaining the evolving
patterns of international reserves.
Exposure to latent domestic instability To put Chinese policies in the perspective of the
historical development of East Asia, one note that the history of Japan and Korea suggest the
near absence of mercantilist hoarding of international reserves during the phase of fast growth,
and the prevalence of export promotion by subsidizing heavily the cost of capital in targeted
sectors. This has been accomplished with the help of the state banking system and occasionally
with the tacit involvement of the central bank. The legacy of subsidized capital has been the
rapid increase in M2, and the accumulation of non performing loans. Floundering economic
growth led to the onset of the large hoarding of reserves both in Japan (after 1992) and Korea
(after 1997), most likely due both to mercantilist motives and to self insurance meant to deal
with the growing fragility of its banking systems. These perspectives suggest that the massive
hoarding of reserves by China may be a hybrid of mercantilist and self insurance motives
[Aizenman and Lee (2006)].


7
  Arguably, the welfare impact of the hoarding game on the US is ambiguous. In the short-run, it
allows cheaper financing of US deficits. Yet, in the intermediate run it may reduce US
competitiveness in the presence of learning by doing externalities.


                                                10
       A possible political economy explanation of Chinese international reserves hoarding
should recognize the challenges confronting the administration there: managing a take-off with
unprecedented global magnitude, facing uncertainty regarding the regime’s survival, growing
income disparities, the accumulation of non performing loans and growing dependency on
international trade. An abundance of savings in China provides the Chinese administration with
the opportunity to mitigate the risk of latent domestic instability by aggressive international
reserves hoarding, reducing both the risk of real exchange rate instability and inflation triggered
by domestic crisis.8 This view is consistent with a 2006 estimation by E&Y, reporting that
Chinese non performing loans were almost at par with its international reserves [see Jim
Peterson’s report at the International Herald Tribune, 9-11-2006]. It also suggests that for
countries averse to real exchange rate volatility and inflation, usable international reserves may
equal international reserves minus short term external debt minus any provisions for the non
performing loans of the domestic banking system.
Testing self-insurance/precautionary model in China and the ‘Peso problem.’ Systematic
attempts to test the self-insurance/precautionary model may be challenged by a version of the
‘Peso problem.’ To exemplify, the probability of a deep crisis in China may be low, but the
potential damage of such a crisis may be immense. China’s take off remains unique due to the
sheer size of the event, tripling China’s global GDP share within 25 years [from about 5% in
1977 to about 15% in 2003, PPP adjusted]. This suggests that little can be inferred by applying
the experience of other countries to guide China regarding its optimal reserves. The econometric
challenges associated with quantifying the self insurance needs of a country are akin to the
challenge of quantifying the optimal design of highways in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Uninformed tourists visiting San Francisco would conclude that highways there are overbuilt,
conjecturing that people there have strange preferences for fortified roads. The data of the last
15 years supports this conjecture. Yet, by looking at data including the San Francisco
earthquake of 1906, tourists would understand the design of highways there, and may ask why
some highways are under built until this day. While China has been reasonably tranquil during

8
 Arguably, if China would face a banking crisis of the type experienced by Argentina, its deep
pocket of international reserves would allow China to deal with a bank run avoiding an
Argentinean type of crisis resolution [i.e., avoiding the collapse of financial intermediation and
higher inflation]. Indeed, one may argue that the sheer size of Chinese international reserves
may prevent a run on its banking system in the first place.


                                                 11
the last twenty years, the regional history of the 20th century is abundant with economic &
political earthquakes; some produced domestically, some internationally.
International reserves and sovereign default Understanding the role of international reserves
for Latin America requires modeling the implications of sovereign default on international
reserves. As a matter of common practice, international reserves are beyond creditors reach.
This implies that for countries contemplating sovereign default, international reserves and
sovereign default may be applied as independent consumption smoothing instruments.
Aizenman and Marion (2004) provided a model and evidence pointing out that in these
circumstances, greater political instability and polarization tend to reduce the hoarding of
international reserves, and increase sovereign borrowing. This interpretation may account for
Jeanne’s observation that in 2000, Latin America held significantly less reserves than the level
predicted by his benchmark model.
Saving and hoarding international reserves With limited integration of national capital markets,
one expects that countries with higher saving rates would opt to hoard more reserves. Hence, the
large gap between the patterns of hoarding reserves observed in Latin America and East Asia
may be also accounted for by the factors explaining the large disparities between their saving
rates.
Diversification and agency problems The lack of deeper diversification of international reserves
may be partially due to agency problems. Central banks may be ‘loss averse,’ as the cost of
holding too few reserves may be much higher than the opportunity cost of international reserves
[Aizenman and Marion (2003)]. If Central Bank’s loss aversion exceeds that of the
representative consumer, a good case can be made for putting some of the international reserves
into a ‘future generation’ fund, managed by the treasury or other agencies.


         To conclude, the profound increase in the hoarding of international reserves by
developing countries during recent years is part of a complex puzzle of shifting global trends.
The quest for a unified theory and empirical specification of international reserves, while
admirable, may not be feasible due to the pace of global changes. It is constructive to view
observed patterns of international reserve hoardings as the aggregation of several motives, with
time dependent weights. Taking such an eclectic approach, the first phase of the rapid hoarding
of reserves in the aftermath of the East Asian crisis has been dominated by self insurance against



                                                12
exposure to foreign shocks. Countries stunned by the 1997 crisis hedged their growing financial
integration with self insurance and aggressive hoarding of international reserves in the aftermath
of the crisis. Yet, the self insurance against sudden stops and currency crises interpretation fails
to account for the reserves buildup in emerging market countries after 2000. These recent
hoarding terns may be better accounted by competitive hoarding, self insurance against latent
domestic and external instability, and exposure to instability associated with growing weaknesses
of Banks’ balance sheets.




                                                 13
                                         References
Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, R. Ranciere and K. Rogoff. (2006). ‘Exchange Rate Volatility and
       Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development,’ NBER WP # 12117.
Aizenman, J., and J. Lee. (2007). ‘International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist
       Views, Theory, and Evidence,’ Open Economy Review, Vol. 11, pp.191-214.
_____________, (2006), ‘Financial versus Monetary Mercantilism – Long-run View of Large
       International Reserves Hoarding,’ NBER WP # 12718.
Aizenman, J. (2006). ‘International reserves management and the current account’, NBER
       Working paper # 12734, forthcoming, Current Account and External Financing, Santiago,
       the Central Bank of Chile, Edited by K. Cowan, S. Edwards and R. Valdés.
____________ (2005). ‘Financial Liberalisations in Latin America in the 1990s: A
       Reassessment’, The World Economy. Vol. 28, pp. 959-983.
_____________ (2004). ‘Financial Opening and Development: Evidence and Policy
       Controversies’, American Economic Review, Vol. 94, 2, pp. 65-70.
Aizenman, J. and D. Riera- Crichton (2006) "Real exchange rate and international reserves in the
       era of growing financial and trade integration," forthcoming, Review of Economics and
       Statistics.
Aizenman, J., N. Marion. (2003). ‘The High Demand For International Reserves In the Far East:
       What is Going On?’ Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 17, pp.
       370–400.
_____________________. (2004). ‘International reserves holdings with sovereign risk and
       costly tax collection.’ Economic Journal. vol. 114, pp. 569-591.
Aizenman, J. and R. Glick. (2007). ‘Sterilization, Financial Liberalization, and Global
       Integration,’ in progress.
_____________ (2005). ‘Pegged Exchange Rate Regimes -- A Trap?’ NBER 11652,
       forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Ben Bassat, A. and D. Gottlieb. (1992). ‘Optimal International Reserves and Sovereign Risk,’
       Journal of International Economics 33, pp. 345-362.
Bird, G., and R. Rajan. (2003). ‘Too Much of a Good Thing? The Adequacy of International
        Reserves in the Aftermath of Crises,’ The World Economy 26 (6), 873-891.
Calvo, G. (1998). ‘Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden
       stops.’ Journal of Applied Economics 1, pp. 35-54.
Calvo, G. (1991). ‘The Perils of Sterilization.’ IMF Staff Papers. Vol. 38 (4), pp. 921-6.
Cheung, Y-W and X. W. Qian. (2006). ‘Hoarding of International Reserves: Mrs Machlup’s
       Wardrobe and the Joneses,’ manuscript, UCSC.
Cheung, Y-W and H. Ito. (2007). ‘Cross-sectional analysis on the determinants of international
       reserves accumulation,’ manuscript.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. (1985). ‘Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash.’ Journal of
       Development Economics. Vol. 19, pp. 1-24.
Dooley, M. P., Folkerts-Landau, D., and P. Garber. (2004). ‘The Revived Bretton Woods
       System: The Effects of Periphery Intervention and Reserve Management on Interest
       Rates and Exchange Rates in Center Countries,’ NBER Working Paper # 10332.
Edwards, S. (2004). ‘Thirty years of current account imbalances, current account reversals, and
       sudden stops.’ IMF Staff Papers Vol. 51, Special Issue, pp. 1-49.
Edwards, S. Levy Yeyati, E. (2005). ‘Flexible exchange rates as shock absorbers.’ European
       Economic Review, Vol. 49 (8), pp. 2079-2105.


                                              14
Eichengreen, B. (1999). ‘Kicking the Habit: Moving from Pegged Rates to Greater Exchange
        Rate Flexibility.’ Economic Journal, March, C1-C14.
Eichengreen , B., and P. Masson. (1998). ‘Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries Seeking
        Greater Exchange Rate Flexibility,’ IMF OWP 98/168.
Flood, R., and N. Marion. (2002). ‘Holding International Reserves In an Era of High Capital
        Mobility,’ in S.n M. Collins and D. Rodrik eds., Brookings Trade Forum 2001, 1-47
        (Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC).
Frankel, J. (1999). ‘No single currency regime is right for all countries or at all times,’ Essays in
        International Finance no. 215, Princeton U. Press.
Garcia, P. S., and C. Soto. (2004). ‘Large Hoarding of International Reserves: Are they worth
        it?’ Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No. 299.
Gourinchas, P.O. and O. Jeanne. (2006). ‘Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation
        Puzzle,’ mimeo, UC Berkeley, Department of Economics.
Hutchison M. & I. Noy. (2005). ‘How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and Banking
        Crises,’ Journal of Money,Credit and Banking, 37, 4, pp. 725-52
Jeanne, O. and R., Rancière, (2006). ‘The Optimal Level of International Reserves for Emerging
        Market Countries: Formulas and Applications,’ IMF Working Paper 06/229
        (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Jeanne, O. (2007). ‘International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much of a Good
        Thing?’ forthcoming, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Johnson, H. G. (1953). ‘Optimal Tariffs and Retaliation,’ Review of Economic Studies 21, pp.
        142–53.
Kaminsky, G., C. Reinhart. (1999). ‘The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-of-
        Payments Problems,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 89, 3, pp. 473-500.
Lee, J. (2004). ‘Insurance Value of International Reserves,’ IMF Working Paper No. 04/175.
Levy Yeyati, E. (2005). ‘Liquidity Insurance in a Financially Dollarized Economy’ NBER WP
        12345.
Obstfeld M. and K. Rogoff (1995). ‘The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates’, Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, Vol. 9, 4, pp. 73-96.
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh and A. M. Taylor. (2005). ‘The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs
        Among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility,’ Review of Economics
        and Statistics 3, pp 423-438.
Prasad, E., Rajan, R. and A. Subramanian, (2006). ‘Foreign Capital and Economic Growth,’
        manuscript, IMF.
Rodrik, D. (1998). ‘Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?’ Essays in International Finance
        no. 207, Princeton Press.
_________ (2006). ‘The social costs of foreign exchange reserves,’ NBRE WP # 11952 .
Rose, A. (2006). ‘ A stable international monetary system emerges: inflation targeting is Bretton
        Woods, reversed. NBRE WP # 12711, forthcoming, Journal of International Money and
        Finance.
Stiglitz, J. (2002). Globalization and Its Discontents, W.W. Norton.




                                                 15
3000

2500
                                                                                            Russia
                                                                                            & Other
2000

1500

1000

500                                                                          Asia ex-China
                                                                                                   China
     0
     1985      1987      1989     1991    1993      1995       1997    1999        2001     2003     2005

                          China    Asia ex-China     Latin America     Russia & Other

             Figure 1a: Foreign Exchange Reserves in Emerging Markets, $billions
45

40
         IR/GDP (%)                                                                    China
35

30
                                                              Asia ex. China
25


20

15
                                                                                    Developing
10

 5                                                                     Industrial

 0
     80      82     84    86      88     90    92        94    96     98      00    02      04     06
           Developing countries           Industrial countries             Asia ex. China          China


                          Figure 1b: aggregate IR/aggregate GDP (%), 1980-2006




                                                    16
                                                                                                KOREA
                                                                  Sterilization Coefficient, 40-Quarter Rolling Regressions

  0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

  -1

-1.2

-1.4

-1.6
       1994q1




                1995q1




                                              1996q1




                                                        1997q1




                                                                     1998q1




                                                                                    1999q1




                                                                                                             2001q1




                                                                                                                          2002q1




                                                                                                                                             2004q1




                                                                                                                                                      2005q1




                                                                                                                                                               2006q1
                                                                                                 2000q1




                                                                                                                                   2003q1
                     Figure 2: Sterilization coefficient, Korea, 1994-2006
  Sterilization Coefficients from 40- quarter rolling regressions, controlling for nominal GDP
                        growth. The bold curve corresponds to full sterilization.
                               Source: Aizenman and Glick (2007)




                                                                              1950-2003 Global GDP shares

                                            0.70


                                            0.60


                                            0.50
                                                                                                           West
                         Global GDP share




                                            0.40


                                            0.30
                                                                                                           E. Asia
                                            0.20


                                            0.10


                                            0.00
                                               50

                                               53

                                               56

                                               59

                                               62

                                               65

                                               68

                                               71

                                               74

                                               77

                                               80

                                               83

                                               86

                                               89

                                               92

                                               95

                                               98

                                               01
                                            19

                                            19




                                            19



                                            19



                                            19




                                            19



                                            19



                                            19
                                            19




                                            19

                                            19



                                            19



                                            19



                                            19

                                            19



                                            19



                                            19



                                            20




                                                                                                    year

                                                       us/world                                            africa/world
                                                       Total 16 East Asian countries/world                 29 western europe+4 western offshots
                                                       latam/world



                                                                                             Figure 3
                                             Global GDP shares, 1950-2004. Source: Maddison’s data


                                                                                               17
  I. The symmetric case:                                  II. The asymmetric case:
      ‘Beggar yourself’                                    ‘Beggar-thy-neighbor’


                                   Figure 4: Competitive hoarding
HH and FF are H and F reaction functions, respectively. The optimal demand for international reserves in
the absence of competitive hoarding is normalized to R = R* = 1. Point S is the noncooperative
equilibrium. Point O corresponds to the cooperative outcome. Curve Wo, the inverted U shaped curve, is
H’s indifference map -- H is indifferent between the cooperative outcome and (R, R*) forming curve Wo.
Points below curve Wo are configurations of (R, R*) where H’s welfare is above H’s welfare in the
cooperative regime.
Panel I (the symmetric case) plots the situation when H’s and F’s preferences and sterilization costs are
identical. For H and F, the non-cooperative outcome [point S] is inferior to the cooperative one [point O].
Panel II (the asymmetric case) plots the situation when H’s sterilization costs are significantly lower than
F’s costs. H’s non-cooperative outcome [point S] is superior to the cooperative one [point O].
See Aizenman and Lee (2006) for further analysis.




                                                    18
Billions U.S.$


                 1050
                 950
                 850

                 750
                 650
                                                                                               IR
                 550
                 450
                                                                                                           ∆ IR
                 350
                 250
                 150

                  50
                  -50    90   91   92     93   94   95   96     97   98   99   00   01    02   03     04    05    06

                        Current account                               Capital and financial account
                        Net errors and omissions                      Foreign Exchange Reserves
                        Increase in Foreign Exchange Reserves




                                                          Figure 5
                                        Chinese hoardings and sources, 1990-2006




                                                              19
