                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAXES AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE:
     EVIDENCE FROM JGTRRA'S TREATMENT OF INTERNATIONAL DIVIDENDS

                                         Mihir A. Desai
                                      Dhammika Dharmapala

                                       Working Paper 13281
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13281


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2007




We thank Lucas Davis, Clemens Sialm, and particularly Alan Auerbach and Jim Hines for helpful
discussions and comments; Barbara Angus, Alex Brill, Ed McClellan, Pam Olson and Phil West provided
invaluable perspective on the legislative history of JGTRRA. Desai acknowledges the financial support
of the Division of Research of Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Mihir A. Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Taxes and Portfolio Choice: Evidence from JGTRRA's Treatment of International Dividends
Mihir A. Desai and Dhammika Dharmapala
NBER Working Paper No. 13281
July 2007
JEL No. F21,G11,G15,H24

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates how taxes influence portfolio choices by exploring the response to the distinctive
treatment of foreign dividends in the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA).
JGTRRA lowered the dividend tax rate to 15% for American equities and extended this tax relief only
to foreign corporations from a subset of countries. This paper uses a difference-in-difference analysis
that compares US equity holdings in affected and unaffected countries. The international investment
responses to JGTRRA were substantial and imply an elasticity of asset holdings with respect to taxes
of -1.6. This effect cannot be explained by several potential alternative hypotheses, including differential
changes to the preferences of American investors, differential changes in investment opportunities,
differential time trends in investment or changed tax evasion behavior.

Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

Dhammika Dharmapala
Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
Weill Hall 5219
735 South State St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
dhammika@umich.edu
1.     Introduction

       Taxes on assets differ substantially and have the potential to alter what assets investors
hold, how they finance their investments and the types of accounts they choose for their
investments. Assessing the efficiency consequences of these taxes requires measuring the
sensitivity of portfolio choices to tax rates. As Poterba (2001, 2002) notes, empirical efforts to
isolate how taxation influences portfolio choice have produced mixed results. Investigating the
relationship between cross-sectional heterogeneity in marginal tax rates and asset holdings is
complicated by the incomplete nature of most household portfolios and because income levels
can influence both risk preferences and marginal tax rates. Investigating how portfolios change
after tax reforms must overcome the possibility that such changes may reflect endogenous supply
responses or other general equilibrium effects that can confound the influence of taxation on
portfolio choices.

       This paper seeks to overcome these empirical difficulties by analyzing a tax reform that
differentially changed the tax treatment of otherwise similar instruments in a manner that is
unlikely to have produced any endogenous supply response. Specifically, the Jobs and Growth
Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA) extended dividend tax relief to companies
domiciled in only a subset of foreign countries, namely those with a suitable tax treaty with the
US (hereafter referred to as “treaty countries”). An examination of the international portfolio
response of American investors to this tax change promises to illuminate whether taxation
significantly influences portfolio choices. Given that the tax reform only affected American
investors, it is difficult to imagine that the reform stimulated a supply response by foreign firms
of the sort that might otherwise confound such an analysis.

       JGTRRA can be interpreted as a natural experiment in which treaty countries constitute a
treatment group, with equities held in those countries experiencing a reduced US personal tax
rate relative to equities held in the control group of nontreaty countries. This paper employs data
on patterns of outbound U.S. foreign portfolio investment (FPI) from the Treasury International
Capital (TIC) reporting system to investigate the responses of US investors to this reform. The
analysis begins by investigating if treaty countries experienced a disproportionate increase in US
equity FPI relative to non-treaty countries in the aftermath of JGTRRA. This analysis reveals a



                                                  1
significant increase for treaty countries relative to non-treaty countries that corresponds to an
elasticity of asset holdings with respect to taxes of about -1.6. This estimated effect is robust to
the inclusion of a number of control variables that measure changes in the quality of the financial
markets in treaty versus nontreaty countries.

       Such an analysis leaves open the possibility that unobservable nontax factors correlated
with treaty status resulted in a changed environment for equity FPI. To test for this possibility, it
is possible to compare equity FPI originating in the US with equity FPI originating in the rest of
the world to see if similar patterns hold for non-US equity FPI. This analysis indicates that non-
US equity FPI does not exhibit similar patterns, casting doubt on the alternative explanation that
opportunities for equity portfolio investment changed in a manner correlated with treaty status.
Similarly, it is possible that American investor preferences changed across treaty status around
this time. Controlling for alternative forms of US investment – US debt FPI and foreign direct
investment (FDI) by US firms – does not change the baseline results. Finally, differences in
underlying time trends in FPI going to treaty and nontreaty countries do not appear to explain
these results, as cross-sectional analyses of annual changes in FPI show no differential changes
for treaty countries, except in the period immediately around JGTRRA.

       A variety of other alternative explanations also cannot account for the results. There is
no evidence of a significantly distinctive stock market return environment in treaty countries.
Excluding countries with recent (and hence potentially endogenous) tax treaties, transition
economies where the dynamics of portfolio investment may be different, and countries that allied
with the US in the 2003 Iraq war similarly does not affect the results. One particularly important
set of considerations in this setting is changed tax evasion behavior that is coincident with
JGTRRA or triggered by it. As discussed below, the fact that information sharing provisions
were the dimension along which treaties were designated to be suitable suggests that such an
alternative explanation is unlikely. Moreover, excluding tax havens or treaty countries with low
levels of tax compliance suggests that changed evasion patterns cannot explain the basic result.

       Beginning with Feldstein (1976), the empirical literature analyzing the effects of taxation
on portfolio choice has typically used cross-sectional analyses of the link between either income




                                                  2
or estimates of the relevant marginal tax rate and observed portfolio choices.1 Several studies,
including King and Leape (1998), Hubbard (1985), Agell and Edin (1990) and Scholz (1994),
emphasize the incomplete nature of most household portfolios and the need to separately isolate
effects of taxes on the probability of owning assets and on portfolio shares. This literature has
typically emphasized the influence of taxation on the probability of asset ownership with only
mixed evidence on the effects of taxation on portfolio shares.

         Poterba and Samwick (2002) analyze recent versions of the Survey of Consumer
Finances and find significant effects for taxation on both ownership and allocation dimensions,
but this effect varies substantially across asset types. Such cross-sectional studies must ensure
that other variables that influence portfolio choice are included, in order to avoid confounding
the tax rate effects. Of particular concern is the role of income in both determining marginal tax
rates and exerting an independent effect on portfolio allocation. Poterba and Samwick (2002)
attempt to address this issue by computing a “first dollar” marginal tax rate that excludes
investment income, and undertake a number of robustness checks to ensure that their results are
not driven by these income effects.

         As Poterba (2001) notes, tax reforms hold the promise of circumventing such concerns by
investigating changes in portfolios to help control for unobservable factors that might cloud
cross-sectional analyses. Scholz (1994) employs the Survey of Consumer Finances panel from
1983 and 1989 to investigate the effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86). TRA86 was a
significant enough to generate strong predictions on portfolio changes across households. Scholz
(1994), however, finds limited evidence of changes in household portfolios. Of course,
hypothesized responses to such dramatic reforms can be confounded by supply responses or
other general equilibrium effects (Poterba, 2001; 2002) as firms change issuance and payout
decisions, especially for a reform as wide-ranging as TRA86. Ideally, a tax reform with clear
consequences for investor after-tax returns and with no effects on supply decisions would more
conclusively isolate tax effects.




1
  This literature uses a conceptual framework based on theoretical models of portfolio allocation in the presence of
taxes (e.g. Domar and Musgrave, 1944; Auerbach and King, 1983).


                                                          3
         JGTRRA’s changed treatment of international dividends provides an empirical setting
that approximates this ideal.2 First, as described below, the reform had clear consequences for
American investor after-tax returns across countries. Second, the division of countries into two
separate groups was driven by regulatory concerns and was unrelated to future changes in
investment opportunities or other regulatory efforts to change investment in these countries
differentially. Finally, given the relatively small share of their stocks held by American
investors, it is unlikely that supply responses by foreign firms would be large. It is similarly
unlikely that the effects of the reform on US investors’ portfolios would have been offset by
clientele effects in asset markets. JGTRRA applied only to US investor returns, leaving non-US
investor tax rates and asset demands unaffected.

         The previous literature has focused on portfolio composition at the household level. For
this study, the nature of JGTRRA suggests that an analysis of aggregate FPI flows is the
appropriate methodology. Implicitly, this involves using a representative agent approach that
examines changes in the international equity portfolio of US investors in the aggregate. This
aggregation comes at a considerable cost, as household level heterogeneity in marginal tax rates
and firm-level heterogeneity in payout policy is obscured. As discussed below, losing this
heterogeneity is likely to bias against finding any results. On the other hand, this representative
agent approach to the question of tax and portfolio choice allows the analysis to circumvent the
econometric issues associated with the incomplete nature of most household portfolios.3

         In addition to estimating the impact of taxes on portfolio choice in general, this paper also
contributes to the literature on the taxation of international portfolio income. Taxes have been
hypothesized to contribute to the limited nature of international diversification. Black (1974)
and Stulz (1981) present models where barriers to international investment are conceptualized as
taxes and are used to explain patterns of “home bias.” Despite this conceptual framing, the role



2
  In a related vein, Chetty and Saez (2005) use JGTRRA to study how dividend paying behavior responds to taxes.
For the difficulty in using large tax reforms to isolate behavioral responses, see the discussion of the Tax Reform
Act of 1986 in Auerbach and Slemrod (1997).
3
  The approach used here – with its focus on patterns of investment rather than on explicit measures of household
portfolios – is similar to the methodology employed in the literature on the effects of tax burdens on mutual fund
inflows (e.g. Bergstresser and Poterba, 2002). The source of identification here is JGTRRA’s differential treatment
of assets, rather than variations in the investment styles of mutual fund managers. The fundamental question being
addressed, namely the sensitivity of investors to after-tax returns, is the same as that in the household portfolio
choice literature.


                                                         4
of taxes in contributing to home bias has received little empirical attention.4 As Graetz and
Grinberg (2003) note, a greater emphasis of the effects of taxation on international portfolio
flows is required to better inform tax policy in this increasingly important area. In particular,
countries contemplating corporate tax integration reforms must consider potential distortions to
international portfolio allocations; the results here indicate that such effects are likely to be
quantitatively large.

           The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 elaborates on the effects of taxes on FPI in the
setting of JGTRRA. Section 3 describes the data and the empirical methodology. Section 4
presents the results. Section 5 discusses the implications and concludes.

2.         JGTRRA’s Treatment of International Dividends

           Prior to JGTRRA, dividends were taxed as ordinary income, at a rate of 38.6% for
taxpayers in the top tax bracket. JGTRRA stipulated that dividends would be taxed at the same
rate as capital gains and reduced the tax rate on capital gains to a maximum of 15%. This lower
rate for dividends applies to dividends paid by domestic corporations and by “qualified” foreign
corporations for the years from 2003 to 2008. A foreign corporation is deemed to be “qualified”
for this purpose if it satisfies one or more of three tests – the “Possessions Test,” the “Market
Test,” and the “Treaty Test.”5 Under the first test, corporations resident in a US possession (such
as Puerto Rico) automatically qualify, as do corporations resident in certain former US territories
that are treated as possessions for tax purposes. Under the second test, dividends from
corporations whose shares are traded in the US are also eligible for the favorable dividend tax
treatment. This includes, for instance, corporations that are cross-listed in the US, or whose
shares are tradable in the US through American Depositary Receipts (ADRs).

           For all other securities, the “Treaty Test” establishes that a corporation resident in a
country with which the United States has a tax treaty meeting certain criteria qualifies for the
lower dividend tax rate. In particular, the corporation must be eligible for the benefits of the
treaty, and the treaty must contain certain information-exchange requirements, and be deemed
“satisfactory” by the US Treasury. The IRS released a list of 52 countries that were deemed to



4
    One exception to this is the analysis of trading strategies in Christoffersen et al. (2005).
5
    See Sheppard (2004), Sheppard and Harty (2004), and Wacker (2004) for more details.


                                                               5
satisfy the “Treaty Test”;6 these countries are referred to below as “treaty” countries, while those
excluded from the list are referred to as “nontreaty” countries.7

         JGTRRA’s favorable tax treatment of dividends was applied to an extensive, but by no
means exhaustive, subset of foreign corporations. For instance, these 52 countries played host to
82% of US outbound equity FPI holdings in 2001 (based on the full sample of 213 countries in
the dataset used in this paper). Even so, a number of significant destinations for US investment –
such as Argentina, Brazil, Malaysia, Singapore, and Taiwan – are excluded from the favorable
tax treatment of dividends. As the empirical approach relies on a within-country comparison of
responses to JGTRRA across the two groups of countries, the absolute amounts of investment
are less important than the relative changes across the two groups of countries.

         JGTRRA’s distinction between treaty and nontreaty countries appears to reflect two
concerns among policymakers.8 Most importantly, the emphasis on information-sharing
provisions was thought to help ensure that cash flows afforded relief were, in fact, truly
dividends. Second, there was some concern over allowing dividend tax relief to income that may
not have been taxed at the corporate level.9 Moreover, the use of treaty status was thought to be a
relatively simple and administratively feasible approach to determining which countries would
be eligible for the favorable tax rates. For the purposes of this analysis, the clarity of the
distinction and the fact that it remained fixed (with no changes to the list of treaty countries until
2006) are important. Of particular significance is that the distinction appears to have been
unrelated to future changes in investment opportunities, or to other regulatory efforts that may
have affected investment patterns.

6
  The initial distinction based on the presence of a suitable treaty was made in early 2003 and was featured in the
press, including The Wall Street Journal, in the summer of 2003. The IRS clarified the precise list of countries in
October 2003 - see IRS Notice 2003-69 (“United States Income Tax Treaties That Meet the Requirements of Section
1(h)(11)(C)(i)(II)”). These countries are also listed in Table 1.
7
  In principle, treaties can be revised to meet JGTRRA’s requirements. In November 2006, the IRS issued Notice
2006-101, adding Bangladesh, Barbados, and Sri Lanka to the list of favored countries; however, this occurred after
the end of the sample period used in this paper.
8
  The legislative history is not altogether clear on the rationale for this distinction. This discussion is based on
exchanges with several policymakers involved in the process. These exchanges suggest that the distinction was also
partly an accident. The initial version of the legislation only afforded relief to domestic corporations. After an
adverse reaction to this aspect of the proposal, the Treaty test was suggested as a simple way of covering most
foreign investment without including all foreign corporations.
9
  Nontreaty status may have been thought to be a rough proxy for those countries with low or zero corporate tax
rates. Although most tax havens are in the nontreaty category, many nontreaty countries have relatively high
corporate tax rates, so it is not clear that there exists a clear correspondence between treaty status and corporate tax
rates.


                                                           6
         In this study, JGTRRA is conceptualized as a natural experiment that changed the
personal tax treatment of assets located in treaty countries but not that of assets located in
nontreaty countries. To clarify the effects of JGTRRA and the underlying empirical
methodology, consider a representative US portfolio investor who faces the top US income tax
rate (denoted tUSP) and holds shares in a corporation resident in a foreign country F. Let rF be the
pretax rate of return in country F. The foreign corporation thus earns a pretax return rF that is
subject to F’s corporate tax (at rate tFC). The remaining income is paid out by the foreign
corporation to its shareholders, including the US-based investor. These dividends would
typically be subject to a withholding tax by country F (at rate tFW). In addition, the US personal
tax applies to the investor’s dividend income (but with a foreign tax credit allowed for
withholding taxes paid to F).

         To simplify the setup, assume, as is generally true in reality, that the foreign withholding
tax rate is no higher than the US personal tax rate on dividends (i.e. tFW ≤ tUSP).10 Then, assuming
that the foreign corporation pays out all its returns as dividends, the US investor would receive
an after-tax return of:

                                    rF(1 - tFC)(1 - tUSP) = 0.614rF(1 - tFC)                                       (1)

before JGTRRA, given the pre-2003 top rate of 38.6% on ordinary income. Now consider the
impact of JGTRRA if F happens to be a treaty country: the US personal tax rate on dividends
becomes 15%, and the investor’s after-tax return is thus:11

                                    rF(1 - tFC)(1 - tUSP) = 0.85rF(1 - tFC)                                        (2)

On the other hand, if F happens to be a nontreaty country, then tUSP remains equal to the top rate
on ordinary income. Under JGTRRA, this rate fell (albeit much less than did the rate for
qualified dividend income) from 38.6% to 35%. Thus, the investor’s after-tax return would
become:

                                    rF(1 - tFC)(1 - tUSP) = 0.65rF(1 - tFC)                                        (3)

10
   Most withholding tax rates imposed by foreign countries on dividends paid to US shareholders are no higher, and
often lower, than 15% - see Anderson (2006, Chart 9.1). Thus, withholding tax rates were a fortiori lower than tUSP
prior to JGTRRA.
11
   A few treaty countries impose withholding tax rates that exceed 15% - see Anderson (2006, Chart 9.1). For such
countries, the post-JGTRRA returns would be rF(1 - tFC)(1 – tFW) < 0.85rF(1 - tFC). Including these countries among
the treaty countries merely creates a bias against the paper’s findings. Furthermore, in the empirical analysis below,
reclassifying these countries as nontreaty countries does not affect the basic results.


                                                          7
A comparison of Equations (1)-(3) shows that the personal tax burden on stock of corporations in
treaty countries fell substantially more than did the corresponding burden on stock of
corporations in nontreaty countries.12

         These equations also clarify that this prediction holds even in a setting where corporate
taxes are fully capitalized into pretax rates of return, as in the model of Gordon (1986). Suppose
that there is a worldwide after-corporate-tax rate of return r*. Even if tFC is fully capitalized – so
that rF = r*/(1 - tFC) – variations in tUSP across countries will still affect US investors’ returns
from holding assets in different countries. With respect to the capitalization of dividend taxes
into stock prices, it is similarly unlikely that US personal taxes would be capitalized into the
prices of foreign equities as US entities typically constitute a small fraction of investors in
foreign stock markets.13

         There are a number of caveats associated with the framework outlined above. First, some
firms do not pay out all earnings as dividends. Even though these firms’ returns will be burdened
by dividend taxes if they are expected to pay dividends at some point in the future, the expiration
of JGTRRA’s provisions in 2008 implies that these dividends may not benefit from favorable tax
treatment. To the extent that the returns from stock are derived as capital gains, this would
simply make it more difficult to find an effect as there was no variation across countries for the
reduced capital gain rate. In addition, the uncertainty over the duration of the tax break created
by JGTRRA’s expiration in 2008 would also potentially weaken any finding.

         Second, the framework sketched above assumes a representative, top-bracket US
investor. In reality, some US investors are in lower tax brackets, and much investment occurs
through tax-exempt vehicles or in tax-advantaged accounts. The presence of such investors also
creates a bias against finding any effect, and the estimated effect can be viewed as a lower bound

12
   An alternative interpretation involves comparisons with the returns from investing in domestic US firms. For
instance, let rUS be the pretax rate of return in the US and tUSC the US corporate tax rate. Suppose that rF(1 - tFC) =
rUS(1 – tUSC); then, prior to JGTRRA, the US investor would be indifferent between investing in a US firm and a
corporation resident in F. After JGTRRA, the investor would remain indifferent if F happens to be a treaty country.
However, the investor would now strictly prefer to invest in a US corporation if F happens to be a nontreaty country.
Under this interpretation, the nontreaty countries constitute a “treatment” group that experiences an increased
personal tax rate relative to that for US assets, while the treaty countries constitute a “control” group for which the
personal tax rate is unchanged relative to that for US assets. However, the substantive implications of the results (in
terms of the relative changes in US holdings of assets in the two groups of countries, and the elasticity of asset
holdings with respect to the personal tax rate) are identical under both interpretations of the natural experiment.
13
   For instance, Figure 1 shows that, for a typical country, US equity FPI holdings constitute no more than 5-10% of
its aggregate stock market capitalization.


                                                          8
as it is averaged across all US investors. Third, the exclusion of certain countries under the
“Treaty Test” may not matter in practice if the dividends from corporations resident in those
countries qualify for favorable treatment under the “Market Test.” Again, this would simply
create a bias against finding any effect of JGTRRA on international portfolio choices.14

         Finally, it is possible that observed responses in security holdings by American investors
might reflect changed payout or stock issuance decisions in response to the tax cut. Endogenous
changes in firms’ payout policies in response to JGTRRA are unlikely as US portfolio investors
generally constitute a small fraction of foreign firms’ investors. If they did occur, however, they
would also likely create a bias against the paper’s findings, as firms would presumably change
payouts in a way that would mitigate the tax penalty. Endogenous issuance responses are
similarly unlikely. Changes in issuance would also be reflected in aggregate market
capitalization, which is included as a control.

3.       Data and Empirical Specification

         The Treasury International Capital (TIC) system reports the portfolio holdings of foreign
securities by US investors, based on periodic surveys of banks, other financial institutions,
securities brokers and dealers.15 The location of the holdings is defined for each of a large
number of countries and territories; the data represent the portfolio holdings of foreign securities
by US investors at the end of each of the following years: 1994, 1997, 2001, 2003, 2004 and
2005. The data are divided into three categories – equity FPI (i.e. holdings of foreign stocks),
long-term debt FPI, and short-term debt FPI (available only from 2001).16

         The TIC data are based on the survey responses of a wide range of financial institutions
and securities brokers and dealers, and so are highly comprehensive. Of particular importance to
this study is that the location of assets (i.e. the country in which the securities owned by US
investors are issued) is likely to be reported very accurately.17 In addition, the data include US


14
   As described below, ADR securities are counted as foreign securities in the data employed here.
15
   These data are available at www.treas.gov/tic/ and are described in more detail in Bertaut, Griever and Tryon
(2006).
16
   The firm-level data from TIC have previously been used to examine the determinants of US investors’ equity
holdings in foreign firms (e.g. Ahearne, Griever and Warnock, 2004; Ammer et al., 2006); the country-level data
have been used to analyze the role of corporate tax rates and corporate governance institutions on the location of US
portfolio investment (Desai and Dharmapala, 2007).
17
   Several concerns have been raised for how this data source categorizes FPI into the U.S., in particular with respect
to custodial arrangements. This difficulty appears less relevant for the case of outbound FPI as there is no reliance


                                                          9
holdings of foreign assets through American Depositary Receipts (ADR’s). While there are some
limitations of the data, particularly with respect to small investors,18 the TIC data are the best
available source of information on FPI by US investors.

         The dependent variable in the basic specification is the log of equity FPI held by US
investors in country i in year t, measured in millions of US$. The independent variable of
interest seeks to capture those observations (at the country-year level) for which the reduced
dividend tax applies. Thus, it is an interaction between an indicator variable (Treatyi) for those
countries listed as treaty countries in Table 1 and an indicator (PostJGTRRAt) for the years after
the enactment of JGTRRA. As JGTRRA was applied to the 2003 tax year, the latter variable is a
dummy for the years 2003, 2004 and 2005.19 The basic empirical specification is thus:

                  Log of Equity FPIit = β(Treatyi*PostJGTRRAt) + Xitγ + µi + νt + εit                               (4)

The central hypothesis that Equation (4) tests is whether US equity FPI is higher in treaty
countries (relative to nontreaty countries) following JGTRRA: i.e. that β > 0. The specification in
Equation (4) also includes country fixed effects (represented by µi) and year effects (represented
by νt); εit is the error term.

         Xit is a vector of time-varying control variables. In the baseline specification, the
following controls are included. The log of GDP per capita (in PPP terms, expressed in nominal
US$) and the log of population are obtained from the World Bank’s World Development




on the reporting of other countries and all reporters are U.S. entities. Bertaut, Griever and Tryon (2006, p. A63)
argue that: “The country attribution of the portfolio asset surveys should be extremely accurate. The annual position
surveys, by design, attempt to collect information by country of issuer . . . precisely identifying each security
issuer’s country of residence – from information supplied by survey reporters as well as from commercial data
sources – is a relatively straightforward task.”
18
   While the data achieve comprehensive coverage of US investors’ holdings through institutions and other reporting
entities, they may not be as comprehensive for small individual investors’ non-institutional holdings of foreign
assets (Bertaut, Griever and Tryon, 2006, p. A67). Such holdings, however, are likely to be relatively small in
magnitude. Second, the data do not include stock swaps and cross-border derivatives positions (although data
collection on the latter began in 2005). Finally, the country of location is defined as the legal residence of the entity
issuing the securities, and may not correspond to the country where the associated “real” economic activity is carried
out. Thus, US investors’ portfolio holdings in small offshore financial centers and tax havens are potentially difficult
to interpret. However, most such countries are excluded from the estimating sample due to missing data, and (as
described in Section 4 below) the results are robust to the exclusion of the remaining havens.
19
   Strictly speaking, the treatment countries to which the reduced dividend tax rate applies include not only the treaty
countries in Table 1, but also US possessions and certain former US territories. However, no FPI data is available
for US possessions, and missing data eliminates the former US territories from the estimating sample. Thus, the
“Possessions Test” does not play any role in the empirical analysis.


                                                          10
Indicators (WDI) database.20 These variables control for changes in countries’ affluence and
size. The log of aggregate stock market capitalization (in nominal US$) controls for changes in
the value and amount of equity available for US investors to hold in a given country.21 As
investment decisions may also be affected by stock market performance, an additional control
variable is a total stock return index constructed by Morgan Stanley Capital International, and
available through Thomson’s Datastream database.22 The index measures annual total returns for
each country’s stock market, assuming that all dividends are reinvested. In addition, a number of
additional control variables are used in various robustness checks, as described in Section 4.

         The data on equity FPI is available (for the years specified above) for 1259 country-year
observations on 213 countries and territories. The majority of these observations involve zero or
negligible amounts of US equity FPI.23 Moreover, the control variables are not available for
many of the observations. In particular, the coverage of the stock return index is limited to those
countries with the largest stock market capitalization. Thus, the primary estimating sample is
considerably smaller, with 291 observations for the 49 countries listed in Table 1. Of these
countries, 38 are treaty countries and the other 11 are nontreaty countries. Summary statistics,
using this sample, for the variables used in the analysis are reported in Table 2. This reduced
sample includes most countries with substantial stock market activity. It also includes a
reasonable mix of treaty and nontreaty countries, with several nontreaty countries that have
substantial economies and levels of US investment. The sample also excludes most small tax
havens and offshore financial centers, for which the interpretation of FPI is potentially
problematic. Finally, because the sample excludes most countries with very small amounts of US
equity FPI, the analysis is less subject to random variations in these values over time.

         Figure 1 provides a simple descriptive perspective on the empirical test used in this
paper. It shows the mean levels of US equity FPI, scaled by aggregate stock market

20
   This is available at http://econ.worldbank.org. Note that while GDP (and certain other variables) are expressed in
nominal terms, the specification includes year effects.
21
   As Kho, Stulz and Warnock (2006) argue, much of this aggregate market capitalization may be tied up in
controlling blocks and unavailable for purchase by minority shareholders, especially in countries with weak investor
protections. Investor protection changes little over time, and is essentially incorporated in the country fixed effect
here.
22
   See www.mscibarra.com for a description of these country level stock returns indices.
23
   Zero values for equity FPI arise either because there is no equity FPI, or because values of FPI under $0.5 million
are not specifically reported in the TIC data. In the analysis, the log of FPI is set equal to zero when FPI is zero.
Note, however, that zero values of equity FPI are almost entirely absent among the countries in the primary
estimating sample.


                                                         11
capitalization, in treaty and nontreaty countries before and after JGTRRA for the 49 countries
listed in Table 1. Prior to JGTRRA, treaty countries had a somewhat larger level of US equity
FPI, relative to their aggregate stock market capitalization. Following JGTRRA, this difference
widened considerably, with FPI scaled by market capitalization in treaty countries increasing
slightly and the corresponding ratio in nontreaty countries decreasing. This simple illustration is
suggestive that the effects hypothesized above are indeed operative.

4.       Results

4.1      Basic Results

         In order to investigate the relevance of the hypothesized effect in the most general
setting, the specification reported in Column 1 of Table 3 employs the full sample of 213
countries and territories. This specification estimates Equation (4) with country and year effects,
but with no control variables. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the country level are
reported in this table and in all of the subsequent longitudinal analysis. The effect of JGTRRA on
US equity FPI holdings in treaty countries (relative to nontreaty countries) is positive and highly
significant.24 Column 2 reports the results of the same specification, with the sample restricted to
observations for which the stock return index is available. Again, the effect of JGTRRA is
positive and significant. In Column 3, a baseline set of controls – GDP, population, aggregate
market capitalization, and stock market returns – is introduced. This has little impact on the
coefficient of interest, which remains positive and significant.

         It is possible that financial market conditions may have changed differentially in treaty
and non-treaty countries at the same time as JGTRRA. For example, changes in the quality and
liquidity of financial markets in treaty and non-treaty countries may influence the speed of
portfolio adjustment. In order to address this possibility, the regression in Column 4 includes
two relevant measures from an updated version of the Beck et al. (2000) database of financial
variables:25 the value of stocks traded in a given country in a given year, scaled by GDP, and the
stock market turnover ratio (i.e. the value of stocks traded in a given country in a given year,
scaled by stock market capitalization). The attractiveness of equity to US investors may also be
24
   As was noted earlier, this sample includes a large number of zero values for equity FPI (which are treated as
zeroes when taking the log of FPI). Using a random-effects Tobit specification leads to similar results. Censoring of
equity FPI at zero is not as much of a concern in the remainder of Table 3 as there is only one zero value of equity
FPI in the sample used in Column 2.
25
   This is available at http://econ.worldbank.org/staff/tbeck


                                                         12
affected by changes in the volatility of stock returns. Thus, a measure of volatility is constructed
using the Morgan Stanley stock return data.26 Changes in the availability of domestic debt
financing from a country’s banking sector may affect the issuance of new equity by that
country’s firms. Thus, the ratio of financial deposits to GDP, also obtained from the updated
version of the Beck et al. (2000) database, is included in the model as a proxy for financial
depth. Changes in FPI may also depend mechanically on a country’s trade deficit; to control for
this, the values of exports and imports relative to GDP are obtained from the World Bank’s WDI
database. Finally, Desai and Dharmapala (2007) show that foreign countries’ corporate tax rates
are an important determinant of the pattern of US equity FPI; thus, this variable is obtained from
PriceWaterhouseCoopers’ Worldwide Summaries of corporate taxation for various years.

         Column 4 of Table 3 reports the results from a specification that includes these additional
controls. The addition of these controls strengthens the estimated effect of JGTRRA in terms of
both magnitude and significance with the size of the coefficient increasing from 0.649 in the
baseline specification to 0.797.27 As such, the estimated effect from the baseline regression does
not appear to reflect other financial market conditions.

         The effect of JGTRRA is fairly large in magnitude, despite the various factors discussed
in Section 2 that would tend to bias the estimate downwards. In the baseline specification, the
estimated coefficient of 0.649 implies that US equity FPI holdings in the average treaty country
rose by over 90%, relative to US equity FPI holdings in the average nontreaty country. The
relative decrease in the dividend tax rate for corporations in treaty countries was also large (the
rate for treaty countries fell from 38.6% to 15% while the rate for nontreaty countries fell to 35%
resulting in a relative decrease of 57%). Consequently, the implied elasticity of equity holdings
with respect to the dividend tax rate is about -1.6.28


26
   The volatility measure is computed using monthly data on dollar returns. The standard deviation is an annualized
measure based on monthly returns for a two year window, including the current year and the previous year.
27
   The result is unchanged if changes in the quality of a country’s communications infrastructure are controlled for,
using either the number of telephone mainlines or the number of (fixed and mobile) telephone subscribers. Both
variables are from the World Bank’s WDI dataset; however, the sample size is reduced due to missing data.
28
   An alternative approach to characterizing the magnitude of the effect is to calculate the elasticity of asset holdings
with respect to investors’ net-of-tax share of returns. Prior to JGTRRA, a top-bracket US investor received 0.614
cents after tax for each dollar of dividends paid by a corporation. As a result of JGTRRA, this net-of-tax share rose
to 0.85 (an increase of 38.4%) for dividends paid by corporations based in treaty countries. The corresponding share
for dividends paid by corporations based in nontreaty countries rose to 0.65 (an increase of 5.9%). Thus, the net-of-
tax share increased by 32.5% more for treaty countries (relative to nontreaty countries), while US equity FPI


                                                           13
         This elasticity is large relative to some of the estimates in the literature on the
responsiveness of portfolio shares to taxes. For instance, Poterba and Samwick (2002) find that
the effect of a household’s marginal tax rate on its direct equity holdings is only statistically
significant in some of their annual cross-sections and those implied elasticities are substantially
smaller than those found here. On the other hand, the results in this paper are consistent with the
estimates in Agell and Edin (1990).29 The elasticity estimated in Table 3 is similar to the
estimates of the sensitivity of FDI to foreign corporate tax rates (e.g. Desai, Foley and Hines,
2003) and to the estimate of the elasticity of US equity FPI to foreign corporate tax rates in Desai
and Dharmapala (2007). As such, the measured response is large relative to some studies on
portfolio choice but is consistent with results on how taxes influence cross-border capital flows.

         In addition to being large in magnitude, the response to JGTRRA’s treatment of
international dividends also appears to have been rapid. Results in Table 5 below indicate that
the differential response of US equity FPI holdings in treaty countries was concentrated in 2003,
with some additional adjustment possibly occurring in 2004 and with no subsequent reversal.
While this represents a quick response, it appears reasonable given that equity holdings can be
readily acquired and liquidated, that JGTRRA created a large tax incentive, and that relatively
financially sophisticated investors are involved. Nonetheless, this rapid response stands in
contrast to the relatively slow portfolio adjustment process that is hypothesized (for example in
Poterba, 2002) to account for the generally small portfolio choice effects of tax reforms that have
been studied in the previous literature.

4.2.     Controlling for Unobserved Changes in Investment Preferences of US Investors

         It is possible that the relative attractiveness to US investors of treaty and non-treaty
countries diverged after JGTRRA for some unobserved reason unrelated to the tax reform. For
instance, it is conceivable that American investors came to value the diversification opportunities
afforded by treaty countries more than those of nontreaty countries around this time. If so, then it
would be expected that this trend would have affected not only FPI by US equity portfolio


holdings in treaty countries increased in relative terms by over 90%. The implied elasticity of asset holdings with
respect to investors’ net-of-dividend-tax share is thus about 2.8.
29
   Agell and Edin (1990), using Swedish data, find a tax elasticity of holdings of common stock that is comparable
to the estimate here. They use an approach that combines responses along the extensive and intensive margins. In
contrast to much of the previous literature, the elasticity measured using JGTRRA is based on changes along the
intensive margin in asset holdings.


                                                         14
investors, but also debt FPI by US bondholders and foreign direct investment (FDI) by US
multinational firms.30

        JGTRRA should not have differentially affected incentives to engage in debt FPI across
treaty status; the top marginal tax rate on ordinary income (including interest income from debt
FPI) fell from 38.6% to 35%, but this change did not differ across treaty and nontreaty countries.
Similarly, the favorable dividend tax rates under JGTRRA apply to all US firms regardless of
where their foreign investments may be located, so the tax reform should not have affected US
firms’ incentives to engage in FDI differentially across treaty and nontreaty countries. As such,
debt FPI and FDI should not be directly affected by JGTRRA’s treatment of international
dividends and can be used as controls that capture otherwise unobservable changes in the
investment climate for US investors.

        Data on FDI are obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA);31 the measure
of FDI is the direct investment position, on a historical cost basis (in millions of US$) of US
firms in each country in a given year.32 Debt FPI is obtained from the TIC database and
represents the long-term debt holdings of US portfolio investors in millions of US$.33 These two
controls are included in the specification in Column 5 of Table 3. Adding FDI and debt FPI as
controls in the model simply strengthens the estimated effect of JGTRRA on equity FPI, in terms
of both magnitude and significance, relative to the baseline specification in Column 3.34 As
such, it is unlikely that unobserved changes to American investment opportunities that are
correlated with treaty status are driving the basic results.

4.3.    Testing for Unobserved Changes in the Environment for Equity FPI

        In addition to the possibility of differential changes in how American investors viewed
the general investment climate between treaty and nontreaty countries, it is also possible that the

30
   Equity FPI and FDI can be conceptualized as alternative channels through which US investors can achieve
international diversification, by either buying foreign stocks or investing in US multinational firms that engage in
FDI overseas (see Gordon and Jun (1993), Errunza, Hogan and Hung (1999) and Desai and Dharmapala (2007)).
31
   This is available at http://www.bea.gov
32
   Note that the sample in Column 5 omits one observation with negative reported FDI; excluding such observations
from the baseline specification in Column 3 leads to consistent results.
33
   Long-term debt is defined as having an original maturity of over one year. The TIC database also includes short-
term debt FPI, but this is not available for all years, so only long-term debt is used in the analysis.
34
   If equity FPI and FDI are chosen jointly, there may be some concern about simultaneity bias in the estimation of
the coefficients in Column 5. However, it is reassuring that the results are very similar both with and without the
FDI and debt FPI controls (comparing Columns 3 and 5).


                                                        15
environment for equity portfolio investment more specifically may have changed differentially
for treaty and nontreaty countries after 2003. For example, changes to disclosure rules or to the
legal rights available to minority shareholders may have been improved in treaty countries
relative to nontreaty countries. To some extent, such changes would be reflected in the controls
for stock market conditions that are included in the baseline specification. However, any
unobserved changes in the climate for equity FPI cannot be tested for simply using US
investment patterns, as they would not affect US debt FPI or FDI. However, any such changes
would presumably be reflected in the patterns of equity FPI by non-U.S. portfolio investors.

           While the TIC data is restricted to US investment, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
collects data on global portfolio holdings through its Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey
(CPIS).35 This dataset includes the aggregate equity holdings of foreign portfolio investors in
each country; these holdings are also broken down by the country of origin of the investors.
Thus, it is possible to compute non-US equity FPI holdings by simply subtracting US holdings
from aggregate worldwide holdings in a given country in a given year. The CPIS data only
covers the years from 2001 to 2005. Summary statistics for the CPIS data are reported in the
lower panel of Table 2; apart from the difference in time periods, the TIC and CPIS data sources
are highly consistent.

           Column 1 of Table 4 begins the analysis by reporting the results from the previous
specification using CPIS data only to establish if these effects are evident in this shorter sample
with slightly different data. The basic result from Table 3 continues to hold, with a positive and
significant effect of JGTRRA. Column 2 of Table 4 reports the results from the same
specification, but with the dependent variable replaced by non-US equity FPI. If the estimated
effect in Table 3 is truly a JGTRRA effect, then it would not be expected to hold for non-US
investors. Conversely, if the result in Table 3 is driven by unobserved changes in the climate for
equity FPI, then these changes should also be reflected in non-US equity FPI. As shown in
Column 2 of Table 4, the coefficient on the interaction term for non-US equity FPI is statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Thus, it appears unlikely that the estimated effect of JGTRRA on
the location of US equity FPI is due to unobserved changes in the environment for equity FPI,
rather than to the tax reform.


35
     This dataset is available at: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/pi/cpis.htm


                                                            16
4.4.    Testing for Differential Time Trends in US Equity FPI

        There still remains a class of alternative explanations for the paper’s main result that
involve US equity FPI in treaty and nontreaty countries following different time trends. For
example, it could be argued that US equity FPI has tended to grow over time due to increasing
international financial integration, with all or most of the increase being directed towards treaty
countries rather than nontreaty countries because of the more favorable investment climate of
treaty countries.

        To explore this question further, Table 5 presents a series of cross-sectional regressions
examining the extent to which annual changes in US equity FPI are related to countries’ treaty
status.36 For each pair of years in the dataset, the specification is:

                          ∆(Log of Equity FPI)i = α + βTreatyi + ∆Xiγ1 + Riγ2+ εi                              (5)

where ∆(Log of Equity FPI)i is the difference between the log of US equity FPI in country i in
year t and the log of US equity FPI in country i in year (t - 1), or the closest previous year for
which data is available. Treatyi is an indicator variable for those countries on the IRS list for tax-
favored status. ∆Xi is a vector of changes in the baseline set of control variables – the logs of
GDP , population, aggregate market capitalization, and stock market returns, while Ri is a vector
of regional dummies.37 The constant term is represented by α and the error term is εi.

        The basic idea underlying these regressions is that if differential time trends for treaty and
nontreaty countries are driving the basic result, then the annual changes in US equity FPI should
generally be higher for treaty countries than for nontreaty countries, even in years unaffected by
the tax reform. In other words, it would be expected that β > 0, and that the effect is generally
statistically significant across all cross-sectional analyses presented in Table 5. In fact, annual
changes in US equity FPI are generally unrelated to countries’ treaty status, except in 2003, the
year that JGTRRA was enacted and came into effect. In 2003, US equity FPI increased more in
treaty countries than in nontreaty countries; in other years, however, there appears to be no
significant difference in the changes in US equity FPI across treaty and nontreaty countries. This
is consistent with a one-time portfolio reallocation towards equity issued in treaty countries as a

36
   Note that Table 5 and all subsequent tables use the paper’s basic TIC dataset, rather than the CPIS data used in
Table 4.
37
   These are based on World Bank classifications; the regions are Europe and Central Asia, Asia and the Pacific, the
Americas, and the Middle East and North Africa, with Africa as the omitted category.


                                                        17
response to JGTRRA in 2003.38 More generally, these results cast doubt on the alternative story
based on differential time trends for treaty and nontreaty countries, as a distinctive trend for
treaty countries is not apparent in the Table 5 results for years other than 2003.39

4.5      Testing for Changes in Stock Market Conditions in 2003

         Stock market conditions in treaty countries may have changed in 2003 in some
discontinuous manner that is not captured by the various stock market control variables used in
the basic analysis. While significant changes to issuance decisions or a significant valuation
change in response to JGTRRA are unlikely given the scope of U.S. investment abroad, it is
possible to conduct some simple tests to see if such effects are operative. Table 6 reports a series
of cross-sectional regressions that examine whether changes in stock market variables in 2003
are related to countries’ treaty status. The stock market variables are market capitalization,
market returns, volatility, the ratio of stock value traded to GDP, and the stock market turnover
ratio. Generally, changes in these variables in 2003 are not significantly different for treaty
countries relative to nontreaty countries. The treaty effect for the ratio of stock value traded to
GDP is of borderline significance, but its sign is the opposite of that required to explain the basic
result (i.e. the stock value traded fell in treaty countries relative to nontreaty countries). Thus, it
does not appear that the paper’s central result is driven by differential changes in stock market
conditions across treaty and nontreaty countries.

4.6.     Testing for Influential Subsets of Countries and Changed Patterns of Tax Evasion

         The previous analyses have considered the possibility that the findings in Table 3 are
driven by systematic differences between treaty and nontreaty countries in terms of the
investment preferences of American investors, the FPI investment climate, trends in investment
generally and market conditions. One final class of alternative explanations is that some other
relevant classification of countries overlaps with treaty status, and that this might explain the

38
   The only other year for which the treaty country variable is of comparable magnitude (albeit statistically
insignificant) is 2004, which is consistent with some delayed portfolio response to JGTRRA.
39
   The most general approach to addressing alternative explanations along these lines is to add country-specific time
trends to the model. When this is done, the estimated JGTRRA effect is no longer statistically significant. This result
is likely attributable to the difficulty of separately identifying both country-specific time trends and the effect of
JGTRRA. Given the short panel (with only 6 years of data) and the fact that all of the years affected by JGTRRA are
in the latter half of the sample period, the JGTRRA effect can easily be confounded with an increasing time trend for
treaty countries. For this reason, the annual cross-sectional regressions may be more illuminating. Moreover, an
increasing time trend in equity FPI in treaty countries would be expected to affect non-US as well as US FPI, but (as
shown in Table 5) this appears not to be the case.


                                                         18
results in Table 3. In this subsection, these possibilities are considered, with particular attention
to changed patterns of tax evasion.

         The first three columns of Table 7 explore the possibility that the baseline results of
Table 3 are driven by influential subsets of countries. First, the estimating sample includes a
number of formerly socialist transition economies, in which US FPI may have grown over time
due to institutional changes and growing familiarity, rather than to JGTRRA. Excluding
transition economies from the sample leads to consistent results, as shown in Column 1 of Table
8.40 The signing of a tax treaty may also be in anticipation of significant increases in FPI:
countries that have recently signed tax treaties with the US may be precisely those in which
future US investment is expected to grow. Thus, Column 2 of Table 7 reports the results using a
sample that excludes countries with tax treaties with the US signed after 1990.41 The basic result
is robust suggesting that the main finding is not driven by the possible endogeneity of tax
treaties.42 Finally, it is possible that US investors switched their portfolios towards countries that
were part of the “coalition” involved in the 2003 Iraq war, and these may have been
disproportionately treaty countries. The specification in Column 3 excludes “coalition” countries
from the sample and this exclusion does not affect the basic result.43

         There are two possible scenarios in which changes in evasion behavior may confound the
paper’s results.44 First, it is possible that there has been a decrease in tax evasion over time for
reasons unrelated to JGTRRA (such as stronger enforcement). This may manifest itself in US
investors who were previously engaging in evasion through tax haven investments abandoning
attempts at evasion and switching their portfolios towards other countries, both treaty and
nontreaty. As tax havens are predominantly nontreaty countries, this development may generate
a spurious relative increase in FPI in treaty countries in the latter part of the sample period. There
are few tax havens in the estimating sample, so this effect is unlikely to be large. Moreover,


40
   Transition economies are defined as those classified by La Porta et al. (1999) as having “Socialist” legal origins.
41
   This is based on hand-collected data on tax treaty dates, kindly provided by Jim Hines.
42
   More generally, it should be noted that the distinction implemented by JGTRRA is not based entirely on the
presence of a treaty, but partly on treaty status and partly on the presence of information-sharing provisions. As
such, some countries classified as nontreaty have treaties but these treaties do not have suitable information-sharing
provisions.
43
   This test uses the list of coalition countries in the White House press release of March 27, 2003 (available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/infocus/iraq/news/20030327-10.html).
44
   For a discussion of how investors may evade home country taxes on returns from FPI, see for example Gordon
and Jun (1993) and Huizinga and Nicodeme (2004).


                                                          19
excluding the remaining tax havens (as defined in Dharmapala and Hines (2006, Table 1,
Column 3)) from the sample does not affect the basic result, as shown in Column 4 of Table 7.
The annual cross sectional results presented in Table 5 are also inconsistent with this hypothesis
of a secular change in tax evasion channeling more investment towards treaty countries.

       Second, it is possible that FPI in treaty countries was mismeasured prior to JGTRRA due
to unreported investments in treaty countries being used for tax evasion purposes. The reduced
tax rates established by JGTRRA may have allowed these investments to emerge into “the
open.” If this were the case, then the results attributed to a behavioral response to JGTRRA
would only represent a correction of mismeasurement. It is inherently difficult to test for this
possibility, given the inability to measure the hidden investment prior to JGTRRA. Nonetheless,
it is possible to test one prediction that would emerge from such an alternative explanation of the
results. If assets in treaty countries were merely becoming visible, the effects documented
previously should be reliant on those countries where such evasion was most likely. This
characteristic can be measured using the tax compliance index in La Porta et al. (1999).
Originally constructed by the World Economic Forum, this index represents the extent of tax
compliance in 1995 in a cross-section of countries. Excluding those treaty countries that have tax
compliance indices one standard deviation or more below the treaty country mean does not
change the basic result, as shown in Column 5 of Table 7.

       More generally, it should be noted that it is unlikely that investors would have engaged in
evasion before JGTRRA through the purchase of stock in treaty countries. The treaty countries
are defined precisely in terms of having strong information-exchange provisions in their tax
treaties with the US; in addition, most of them impose positive withholding taxes on dividends
(e.g. Anderson, 2006, Chart 9.1), which reduce the benefits from evasion, and also generate
information that may increase the probability that the evasion of US tax is subsequently detected.
To the degree that evasion is operative, it appears more reasonable to assume that evasion would
occur through investment in tax haven countries with weak or nonexistent information-exchange
provisions and zero withholding taxes, and that the effect of reduced evasion after JGTRRA
would manifest itself in the form of a transfer of funds from havens to treaty countries. Such a
transfer is part of the JGTRRA effect that this paper seeks to estimate, and represents one of the




                                                20
channels through which JGTRRA increased US equity FPI in treaty countries, rather than being
an alternative explanation for the basic result.45

5.       Discussion and Conclusion

         This paper establishes a quantitatively large effect of JGTRRA’s differential treatment of
foreign-source dividends on US investors’ portfolio choices. It shows that in an empirical setting
where an exogenous tax change is accompanied by limited scope for endogenous supply
responses, it is possible to identify large and significant effects of taxes on portfolio choices. In
particular, US investors’ holdings of lightly-taxed foreign equities increased significantly in a
manner that is consistent with an implied elasticity of asset holdings with respect to the tax rate
of approximately -1.6. This elasticity is considerably larger than most estimates of the
responsiveness of portfolio shares to tax rates.
         These results suggest several avenues for further research. First, while taxes have been
discussed in the theoretical literature on home bias, there has been limited empirical work on
their role in limiting gains from international diversification. These results suggest that taxes can
play in a large role in shaping international portfolio choices. Second, JGTRRA’s provisions
may have changed the incentives for cross-border listings and ADRs. While such potential
responses would not confound the results here, they may have provided for interesting changes
to the ADR market. Third, exploring the heterogeneity of institutional investor responses to
JGTRRA’s treatment of international dividends may illuminate how different types of
institutions respond to tax incentives.
         This paper also has implications for tax policies that seek to achieve corporate tax
integration. Integration has been widely supported by economists as a means of reducing
distortions to firm payout and financing decisions, as discussed in Hubbard (1993). If dividend
relief is not fully extended to foreign dividends, corporate tax integration may give rise to
significant distortions in international portfolios with consequent welfare losses. The results in
this paper show that these international portfolio effects can be quantitatively large.



45
   It is also unlikely that investors simply moved equity held in nontreaty countries to holding companies in treaty
countries. JGTRRA specifically denies its favorable tax treatment of dividends to foreign personal holding
companies, foreign investment companies, and passive foreign investment companies, even if they are located in
treaty countries (Sheppard, 2004). Thus, relocating assets from nontreaty to treaty countries would involve some real
cost in terms of changed diversification patterns or various other frictions.


                                                         21
References

Agell, J., and P.-A. Edin (1990) “Marginal Taxes and the Asset Portfolios of Swedish
        Households” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 92, 47-64.
Ahearne, A., W. L. Griever and F. E. Warnock (2004) “Information Costs and Home Bias: An
      Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities” Journal of International Economics, 62,
      313-336.
Ammer, J., S. B. Holland, D. C. Smith and F. E. Warnock (2006) “Look at Me Now: What
     Attracts U. S. Shareholders?” NBER Working Paper #12500.
Anderson, R. E. (2006) Analysis of United States Income Tax Treaties, WG&L Publishing.
Auerbach, A. J., and M. A. King (1983) “Taxation, Portfolio Choice, and Debt–Equity Ratios: A
      General Equilibrium Model” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, 587–609.
Auerbach, A. J. and J. Slemrod (1997) “The Economic Effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986,”
      Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 589-632.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2000) “A New Database on Financial Development
       and Structure” World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.
Bergstresser, D. B. and J. M. Poterba (2002) “Do After-Tax Returns Affect Mutual Fund
       Inflows?” Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 381-414.
Bertaut, C., W. L. Griever and R. W. Tryon (2006) “Understanding U.S. Cross-Border Securities
       Data” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 92, A59-A75.
Black, F. (1974) “International Capital Market Equilibrium with Investment Barriers” Journal of
       Financial Economics, 1, 337-352.
Chetty, R. and E. Saez (2005) “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the
       2003 Dividend Tax Cut” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 791-834.
Christoffersen, S. E. K., C. Geczy, D. K. Musto, and A. V. Reed (2005) “Cross-border
       Dividend Taxation and the Preferences of Taxable and Non-taxable Investors: Evidence
       from Canada” Journal of Financial Economics, 78, 121-144.
Desai, M. A., C. F. Foley and J. R. Hines Jr. (2003) “Chains of Ownership, Tax Competition,
       and the Location Decisions of Multinational Firms” in H. Herrmann and R. Lipsey, eds.
       Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial Countries
       Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 61-98.
Desai, M. and D. Dharmapala (2007) “Taxes, Institutions, and Foreign Diversification
       Opportunities” NBER Working Paper #13132.
Dharmapala, D. and J. R. Hines, Jr. (2006) “Which Countries Become Tax Havens?” NBER
      Working Paper #12802.
Domar, E. D. and R. A. Musgrave (1944) “Proportional Income Taxation and Risk-Taking”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 58, 388-422.
Errunza, V., K. Hogan and M-W. Hung (1999) “Can The Gains From International
       Diversification Be Achieved Without Trading Abroad?” Journal of Finance, 54,
       2075-2107.


                                              22
Feldstein, M. (1976) “Personal Taxation and Portfolio Composition: An Econometric Analysis”
       Econometrica, 44, 631–649.
Gordon, R. H. (1986) “Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy” American
      Economic Review, 76, 1086-1102.
Gordon, R. H. and J. Jun (1993) “Taxes and the Form of Ownership of Foreign Corporate
      Equity” in A. Giovannini, R. G. Hubbard and J. Slemrod (eds.) Studies in International
      Taxation, University of Chicago Press: Chicago and London, 13-44.
Graetz, M. and I. Grinberg (2003) “Taxing International Portfolio Income” Tax Law Review, 56,
       537-586.
Hubbard, R. G. (1985) “Personal Taxation, Pension Wealth, and Portfolio Composition” Review
      of Economics and Statistics 67, 53–60.
Hubbard, R. G. (1993) “Corporate Tax Integration: A View from the Treasury Department”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7, 115-132.
Huizinga, H. and G. Nicodeme (2004) “Are International Deposits Tax-Driven?” Journal of
       Public Economics, 88, 1093-1118.
Kho, B-C., R. Stulz, and F. E. Warnock (2006) “Financial Globalization, Governance, and the
      Evolution of the Home Bias” NBER Working Paper #12389.
King, M. A., and J. I. Leape (1998) “Wealth and Portfolio Composition: Theory and Evidence”
       Journal of Public Economics, 69, 155–193.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1999) “The Quality of
       Government” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 15, 222-279.
Poterba, J. M. (2001) “Taxation and Portfolio Structure: Issues and Implications” in L. Guiso, M.
       Haliassos, and T. Jappelli (eds.) Household Portfolios MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 103-
       142.
Poterba, J. M. (2002) “Taxation, Risk-Taking and Portfolio Behavior” in A. Auerbach and M.
       Feldstein, Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3 (Amsterdam: North Holland),
       1109-1171.
Poterba, J. M., and A. A. Samwick (2002) “Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition: US
       Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 5-38.
Scholz, J. K. (1994) “Tax Progressivity and Household Portfolios: Descriptive Evidence from
       the Surveys of Consumer Finances” in J. Slemrod (ed.), Tax Progressivity and Income
       Inequality, Cambridge University Press, New York, 219-267.
Sheppard, H. E. (2004) “Reduced Tax Rates on Foreign Dividends under JGTRRA: Ambiguities
      and Opportunities” Journal of International Taxation, 15, 14-27, 62.
Sheppard, H. E., and S. A. Harty (2004) “Tax Treatment of Foreign Dividends under JGTRRA:
      Ambiguities and Opportunities” Journal of International Taxation, 15, 20-27.
Stulz, R. (1981) “On the Effects of Barriers to International Investment” Journal of Finance, 36,
        923-934.




                                               23
Wacker, R. F. (2004) “US Taxation of International Dividends under JGTRRA” The
      International Tax Journal, 30, 19-34.




                                           24
                   Figure 1: JGTRRA and the Location of US Equity FPI
   0.12


    0.1


   0.08


   0.06


   0.04


   0.02


      0
           Treaty Countries,      Non-Treaty                              Treaty Countries,      Non-Treaty
             pre-JGTRRA          Countries, pre-                           post-JGTRRA          Countries, post-
                                   JGTRRA                                                         JGTRRA
                                    Ratio of US Equity FPI to Market Capitalization
Notes: The figure provides the average ratio of aggregate U.S. Equity FPI to Market Capitalization for Treaty and
Nontreaty countries for the years prior and subsequent to JGTRRA. This ratio is a weighted average across countries
in each year and then averaged across the three years prior to JGTRRA that are available in the sample (1994, 1997
and 2001) and subsequent to JGTRRA (2003, 2004 and 2005).
                                 Table 1: List of Sample Countries
Note: The sample is based on the availability of data on US equity FPI and the baseline control variables (notably,
the stock market return index, which is only available for a limited set of countries). “Treaty” countries are defined
based on Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Notice 2003-69 (“United States Income Tax Treaties That Meet the
Requirements of Section 1(h)(11)(C)(i)(II)”), issued in October, 2003, and available at: http://www.irs.gov/irb/2003-
42_IRB/ar09.html. The sample is based on the availability of data on US equity FPI and the baseline control
variables.
                              Treaty Countries                                            Nontreaty Countries
Australia           Greece               Netherlands         Switzerland                  Argentina
Austria             Hungary              New Zealand         Thailand                     Brazil
Belgium             India                Norway              Turkey                       Chile
Canada              Indonesia            Pakistan            United Kingdom               Colombia
China               Ireland              Philippines         Venezuela                    Hong Kong
Czech Republic Israel                    Poland                                           Jordan
Denmark             Italy                Portugal                                         Malaysia
Egypt               Japan                Russia                                           Peru
Finland             Korea (South)        South Africa                                     Singapore
France              Mexico               Spain                                            Sri Lanka
Germany             Morocco              Sweden                                           Taiwan

                  Treaty Countries (Not in the Sample)
Cyprus              Kazakhstan           Romania             Tunisia
Estonia             Latvia               Slovak Republic Ukraine
Iceland             Lithuania            Slovenia
Jamaica             Luxembourg           Trinidad and Tobago
                                          Table 2: Summary Statistics

Notes: US equity FPI is from the TIC dataset, and measures US investors' equity portfolio holdings in millions of US$.
Long-term debt FPI is also from the TIC dataset, and measures US investors debt portfolio holdings with a maturity
greater than one year. US FDI is the direct investment position of US firms in millions of US$ (from the BEA dataset).
GDP per capita (in US$, in PPP terms), population and aggregate market capitalization are from the World Bank’s WDI
database. The stock market return index is drawn from Datastream and is based on MSCI country dollar indices. The
volatility of stock market returns is constructed by annualizing a standard devation based on the trailing 24 months of
monthly returns. The ratio of stock market value traded to GDP, the stock market turnover ratio, and the ratio of
financial deposits to GDP are taken from an updated version of Beck et al. (2000). Exports and imports as a % of GDP
are from the World Bank’s WDI database. The corporate tax rate is the top statutory corporate rate (from the PWC
Worldwide Summaries). (Treaty=1)*(Post-JGTRRA) is an interaction between an indicator variable for those countries
listed as treaty countries in Table 1, and an indicator for the years after the enactment of JGTRRA. For the IMF CPIS
Dataset: US equity FPI is from the IMF's CPIS dataset, and measures US investors' equity portfolio holdings in millions
of US$. Non-US equity FPI is also from the IMF's CPIS dataset, and is obtained by subtracting US equity FPI holdings
from worldwide equity FPI holdings. All other variables are as defined above.

                      Variable                            Mean       Standard Deviation No. of Observations
Primary (TIC) Dataset:
Log of US Equity FPI                                        8.743                     2.317                        291
Log of US Long-term Debt FPI                                7.797                     2.211                        291
Log of US FDI                                               9.051                     1.699                        268
Log of GDP per capita (PPP)                                 9.420                     0.836                        284
Log of Population                                          17.150                     1.372                        285
Log of Aggregate Market Capitalization                     25.360                     1.712                        284
Log of Stock Market Return Index                            6.539                     1.504                        291
Volatility of Stock Market Returns                          0.253                     0.115                        287
Ratio of Stock Market Value Traded to GDP                   0.493                     0.613                        291
Stock Market Turnover Ratio                                 0.720                     0.695                        290
Ratio of Financial Deposits to GDP                          0.656                     0.395                        279
Exports as a % of GDP                                      39.080                    27.420                        247
Imports as a % of GDP                                      38.450                    26.250                        247
Corporate Tax Rate                                         30.090                     7.091                        280
(Treaty=1)*(Post-JGTRRA)                                    0.392                     0.489                        291
IMF CPIS Dataset:
Log of Non-US Equity FPI                                    9.226                     2.300                        235
Log of US Equity FPI                                        8.877                     2.328                        235
Log of GDP per capita (PPP)                                 9.504                     0.830                        235
Log of Population                                          17.210                     1.353                        235
Log of Aggregate Market Capitalization                     25.530                     1.645                        235
Log of Stock Market Return Index                            6.627                     1.547                        235
                            Table 3: The Effect of JGTRRA on the Location of US Equity FPI

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of US equity FPI (from the TIC dataset) for each available year. (Treaty=1)* (Post-JGTRRA) is an
interaction between an indicator variable for those countries listed as treaty countries in Table 1, and an indicator for the years after the
enactment of JGTRRA. Log of GDP per capita (in US$, in PPP terms), log of population and log of aggregate market capitalization are
from the World Bank’s WDI database. The log of the stock market return index is drawn from Datastream and is based on MSCI country
dollar indices. The volatility of stock market returns is constructed by annualizing a standard devation based on the trailing 24 months of
monthly returns. The ratio of stock market value traded to GDP, the stock market turnover ratio, and the ratio of financial deposits to GDP
are taken from an updated version of Beck et al . (2000). Exports and imports as a % of GDP are from the World Bank’s WDI database.
The corporate tax rate is the top statutory corporate rate (from the PWC Worldwide Summaries). The log of US FDI is the direct investment
position of US firms (from the BEA dataset). Log of US long-term debt FPI is from the TIC dataset. Column 1 employs the full sample of 21
countries and territories. In column 2 the sample is restricted to observations for which the stock return index is available. In Column 5, 1
observation with negative FDI is omitted. Robust standard errors (clustered at the country level) in parentheses; * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Dependent Variable:                                                          Log of US Equity FPI
                                          (1)                   (2)                  (3)             (4)                         (5)
(Treaty=1)* (Post-JGTRRA)                0.758    ***          0.691    **          0.649 **        0.797 ***                   0.798    ***
                                       (0.166)               (0.332)              (0.257)         (0.283)                     (0.265)
Log of GDP per capita (PPP)                                                          1.635   *            1.737                 2.430    *
                                                                                   (0.961)              (1.380)               (1.427)
Log of Population                                                                    1.544                0.778                 0.656
                                                                                   (2.449)              (1.653)               (1.534)
Log of Aggregate Market                                                              0.714   ***          0.300                 0.561
Capitalization                                                                     (0.119)              (0.358)               (0.343)
Log of Stock Market Return                                                           0.302   *            0.510    *            0.388
Index                                                                              (0.158)              (0.279)               (0.237)
Volatility of Stock Market                                                                               -0.061
Returns                                                                                                 (0.792)
Ratio of Stock Market Value                                                                               0.393    *
Traded to GDP                                                                                           (0.220)
Stock Market Turnover Ratio                                                                              -0.360
                                                                                                        (0.219)
Ratio of Financial Deposits to                                                                           -0.161
GDP                                                                                                     (0.352)
Exports as a % of GDP                                                                                     0.004
                                                                                                        (0.014)
Imports as a % of GDP                                                                                     0.012
                                                                                                        (0.016)
Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                       -0.016
                                                                                                        (0.012)
Log of US FDI                                                                                                                  -0.116
                                                                                                                              (0.178)
Log of US Long-Term Debt                                                                                                        0.197    *
FPI                                                                                                                           (0.105)
Country and Year Effects?                     Y                     Y                    Y                     Y                    Y
Sample Period                       1994-2005             1994-2005             1994-2005            1994-2005             1994-2005
Observations                              1259                   291                   283                  225                   260
Countries                                   213                    49                   48                    45                    47
R-squared                                  0.96                 0.92                  0.96                  0.97                 0.97
                         Table 4: The Effect of JGTRRA on Non-US Equity FPI

Notes: The dependent variables are the log of US equity FPI and non-US equity FPI (from the IMF CPIS dataset) for
each available year. (Treaty=1)* (Post-JGTRRA) is an interaction between an indicator variable for those countries
listed as treaty countries in Table 1, and an indicator for the years after the enactment of JGTRRA. Log of GDP per
capita (in US$, in PPP terms), log of population and log of aggregate market capitalization are from the World Bank’s
WDI database. The log of the stock market return index is drawn from Datastream and is based on MSCI country dollar
indices. Robust standard errors (clustered at the country level) in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.


Dependent Variable:                             Log of US Equity FPI                 Log of Non-US Equity FPI
                                                        (1)                                    (2)
(Treaty=1)*(Post-JGTRRA)                                          0.339 **                                   0.199
                                                                (0.151)                                    (0.152)
Log of GDP per capita (PPP)                                       1.028                                      2.105 *
                                                                (1.310)                                    (1.119)
Log of Population                                                -1.757                                     -5.567
                                                                (4.158)                                    (4.112)
Log of Aggregate Market                                           0.010                                      0.431 **
Capitalization                                                  (0.170)                                    (0.193)
Log of Stock Market Return Index                                  0.677 ***                                  0.406 ***
                                                                (0.154)                                    (0.154)
Country and Year Effects?                                              Y                                          Y
Sample Period                                              2001-2005                                   2001-2005
Observations                                                        235                                         235
Countries                                                             47                                         47
R-squared                                                          0.99                                        0.99
                                       Table 5: Annual Changes in US Equity FPI

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in log of US equity FPI (from the TIC dataset) for each of the periods given. Treaty=1 is
an indicator variable for those countries listed as treaty countries in Table 1. Log of GDP per capita (in US$, in PPP terms), log of
population and log of aggregate market capitalization are from the World Bank’s WDI database. The log of the stock market return
index is drawn from Datastream and is based on MSCI country dollar indices. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

                                        Change in           Change in           Change in           Change in           Change in
                                        Log of US           Log of US           Log of US           Log of US           Log of US
Dependent Variable:                    Equity FPI          Equity FPI          Equity FPI          Equity FPI          Equity FPI
                                      from 1994 to        from 1997 to        from 2001 to        from 2003 to        from 2004 to
                                          1997                2001                2003                2004                2005
                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
Treaty (=1)                              -0.260               0.146               0.351 **            0.269               0.013
                                        (0.319)             (0.292)             (0.164)             (0.203)             (0.137)
Change in Log of GDP per                 -0.871               2.447 *             1.511              -1.075               0.206
capita (PPP)                            (2.402)             (1.402)             (1.666)             (0.994)             (1.931)
Change in Log of Population              -0.451               2.118              -7.123             13.184               -1.329
                                        (3.139)             (2.430)             (6.234)           (10.145)              (9.322)
Change in Log of Aggregate                0.928 ***           0.291              -0.143               0.311               0.143
Market Capitalization                   (0.105)             (0.405)             (0.196)             (0.233)             (0.171)
Change in Log of Stock                   -0.438 *             1.193 ***           0.739 **            0.620 *             0.617    *
Market Return Index                     (0.245)             (0.329)             (0.308)             (0.339)             (0.362)
Constant                                  1.107 *            -0.500               0.136              -0.145               0.158
                                        (0.618)             (0.508)             (0.310)             (0.216)             (0.218)
Regional Dummies?                             Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                    Y
Observations                                 45                   47                  48                  48                  47
R-squared                                  0.76                0.65                0.46                0.39                0.54
               Table 6: Annual Changes in Stock Market Conditions around JGTRRA

Notes: The dependent variables are the change in the log values from 2001 to 2003 of the following stock market
variables: market capitalization, market returns, volatility, the ratio of stock value traded to GDP, and the stock market
turnover ratio. Treaty=1 is an indicator variable for those countries listed as treaty countries in Table 1. Robust standard
errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.



                                                                    Change in            Change in
Dependent                 Change in                                   Log of              Ratio of           Change in
Variable:                Log of Stock          Change in           Volatility of        Stock Value         Stock Market
                            Market            Log of Stock          the Stock            Traded to            Turnover
                         Capitalization       Return Index         Return Index            GDP                  Ratio
                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)
Treaty (=1)                   0.075               0.092               -0.715               -0.167 *            -0.001
                            (0.172)             (0.130)              (0.549)              (0.098)             (0.189)
Constant                      0.575 ***           0.532 ***            2.040 ***            0.198 *             0.054
                            (0.172)             (0.130)              (0.549)              (0.098)             (0.189)

Regional Dummies?                  Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                    Y
Observations                      48                  49                   48                   49                  49
R-squared                      0.27                 0.12                 0.28                0.17                 0.01
         Table 7: Tests for Influential Subsets of Countries and Changed Patterns of Tax Evasion

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of US equity FPI for each available year. (Treaty=1)* (Post-JGTRRA) is an interaction
between an indicator variable for those countries listed as treaty countries in Table 1 and an indicator for the years after the
enactment of JGTRRA. Log of GDP per capita (in US$, in PPP terms), log of population and log of aggregate market capitalization
are from the World Bank’s WDI database. The log of the stock market return index is drawn from Datastream and is based on
MSCI country dollar indices. Robust standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%.


Dependent Variable:                                                   Log of US Equity FPI
                                                                                                                   Excluding
                                                        Excluding           Excluding                                Treaty
                                    Excluding           Countries           Iraq War           Excluding           Countries
                                    Transition         with Recent          Coalition          Tax Haven         with Low Tax
                                    Countries          Tax Treaties         Countries          Countries          Compliance
                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)
(Treaty=1)*(Post-JGTRRA)               0.662 **            0.714 **           0.698 **            0.740 **            0.705 **
                                     (0.283)             (0.319)            (0.310)             (0.287)             (0.295)
Log of GDP per capita                  1.959               2.255              1.631               1.908 *             1.861
(PPP)                                (1.470)             (1.787)            (1.149)             (1.015)             (1.502)
Log of Population                      1.268               2.016              1.435               0.951               1.576
                                     (2.578)             (2.969)            (3.705)             (2.682)             (2.767)
Log of Aggregate Market                0.673               0.567              0.698 ***           0.696 ***           0.628 **
Capitalization                       (0.428)             (0.349)            (0.135)             (0.128)             (0.316)
Log of Stock Market Return             0.325               0.447              0.431 *             0.339 **            0.409 *
Index                                (0.333)             (0.282)            (0.223)             (0.162)             (0.241)
Country and Year Effects?                  Y                   Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
Sample Period                     1994-2005           1994-2005           1994-2005          1994-2005           1994-2005
Observations                             253                 194                 187                255                 241
Countries                                 43                  33                  32                  43                  41
R-squared                               0.96                0.95                0.95                0.96                0.96
