                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  NEOCLASSICAL FACTORS

                                            Long Chen
                                            Lu Zhang

                                       Working Paper 13282
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13282


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2007




For helpful discussions, we thank Sreedhar Bharath, Gerald Garvey (BGI discussant), Tyler Shumway,
Motohiro Yogo (UBC discussant), Richard Sloan, Scott Richardson, and seminar participants at Barclays
Global Investors, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, UBC PH&N Summer Finance
Conference in 2007, and University of Michigan. Cynthia Jin provided valuable assistance in early
stages of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Long Chen and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Neoclassical Factors
Long Chen and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 13282
July 2007
JEL No. G11,G12,G14,G24,G31,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Building on neoclassical reasoning, we propose a new multi-factor model that consists of the market
factor and factor mimicking portfolios based on investment and productivity. The neo- classical three-factor
model outperforms traditional factor models in explaining the average returns across testing portfolios
formed on momentum, financial distress, investment, profitability, accruals, net stock issues, earnings
surprises, and asset growth. Most intriguingly, winners have higher loadings than losers on both the
low-minus-high investment factor and the high- minus-low productivity factor, which in turn help
explain momentum profits.


Long Chen
321 Eppley
Department of Finance
The Eli Broad Graduate School of Management
Michigan State University
East Lansing
MI 48824
chen@bus.msu.edu

Lu Zhang
Finance Department
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street, ER 7605 Bus Ad
Ann Arbor MI, 48109-1234
and NBER
zhanglu@bus.umich.edu
1        Introduction

The Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) capital asset pricing model (CAPM) cannot explain many
anomalies. For example, DeBondt and Thaler (1985), Fama and French (1992), and Lakonishok,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) show that average returns covary with book-to-market, earnings-to-
price, and long-term prior returns. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) show that stocks with higher
short-term prior returns earn higher average returns. Fama and French (1993, 1996) show that
their three-factor model, which includes the market excess return (M KT ), a mimicking portfolio
based on market equity (SM B), and a mimicking portfolio based on book-to-market (HM L), can
explain many CAPM anomalies. These include average returns across portfolios formed on size and
book-to-market, earnings-to-price, cash flow-to-price, and long-term prior returns. Notably, these
portfolios display strong HM L-loading variations in the same direction as their average returns.

        However, the influential Fama-French (1993) three-factor model leaves important anomalies
unexplained. Most glaringly, Fama and French (1996) show that their model cannot explain Je-
gadeesh and Titman’s (1993) momentum profits. Winners load positively on HM L and losers load
negatively on HM L. This pattern goes in the opposite direction as the average returns, leading
the Fama-French model to exacerbate the momentum anomaly.

        The relation between financial distress and average returns also eludes the Fama-French (1993)
model. Fama and French (1996) conjecture that the average HM L return might be a risk premium
for the relative distress of value firms. The returns of distressed firms tend to move together, mean-
ing that their distress risk cannot be diversified and needs to be compensated with a risk premium.
However, recent studies show that the distress risk is associated with lower average returns (e.g.,
Dichev 1998, Griffin and Lemmon 2002, Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi 2007). Using a compre-
hensive measure of financial distress, Campbell et al. report that more distressed stocks earn lower
average returns despite their higher total volatilities, market betas, and SM B- and HM L-loadings.1

        We show that the momentum and the distress anomalies are related, and are captured by a new
multi-factor model motivated from neoclassical reasoning. The model says that the expected return
on a portfolio in excess of the risk-free rate, E[Rj ] − Rf , is described by the sensitivity of its return
to three factors: M KT , the difference between the return on a portfolio of low investment-to-assets
stocks and the return on a portfolio of high investment-to-assets stocks (IN V ), and the difference
    1
     Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2007) conclude that: “This result is a significant challenge to the conjecture that
the value and size effects are proxies for a financial distress premium. More generally, it is a challenge to standard mod-
els of rational asset pricing in which the structure of the economy is stable and well understood by investors (p. 29).”


                                                            2
between the return on a portfolio of high earnings-to-assets stocks and the return on a portfolio of
low earnings-to-assets stocks (P ROD). Specifically, the expected excess return on portfolio j is:

                      E[Rj ] − Rf = bj E[M KT ] + ij E[IN V ] + pj E[P ROD]                      (1)

in which E[M KT ], E[IN V ], and E[P ROD] are expected premiums, and the factor loadings, bj , ij ,
and pj are the slopes in the time series regression:

                       Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj                          (2)


   In our 1972–2006 sample, IN V and P ROD earn average returns of 0.34% (t = 4.15) and 0.73%
per month (t = 5.67), respectively. These average returns subsist after adjusting for their expo-
sures to traditional factors such as the Fama-French (1993) factors and the Carhart (1997) factors.
We find that the neoclassical three-factor model goes a long way in describing the cross section of
average returns on NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks.

   Most important, the neoclassical model outperforms the Fama-French (1993) model in explain-
ing the average returns of 25 size and momentum portfolios. Using the six-month momentum
definition of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), we find that none of the winner-minus-loser portfolios
across five size quintiles have significant alphas. The alphas, ranging from −0.02% to 0.34% per
month, are all within 1.6 standard errors of zero. For comparison, the five winner-minus-loser
alphas vary from 0.64% (t = 2.77) to 1.02% per month (t = 6.04) in the CAPM and from 0.75%
(t = 2.92) to 1.14% per month (t = 6.07) in the Fama-French model. In total, seven out of the
25 size and momentum portfolios have significant neoclassical alphas, and our model is rejected by
the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989, GRS) test. However, the number of significant alphas is
about half of that in the CAPM (13) and that in the Fama-French model (13).

   One reason for the relative success of the neoclassical model is that winners have higher P ROD-
loadings than losers, meaning that winners are more profitable than losers. More intriguingly, win-
ners also have higher IN V -loadings than losers. The crux is timing. We show that winners (with
high valuation ratios) indeed invest more than losers (with low valuation ratios) at the portfolio
formation month t. But more important, winners invest less than losers in the event time before
month t−8 or t−12, depending on the specific size quintile. Because IN V is rebalanced annually,
the higher IN V -loadings for winners accurately reflect their lower investment than losers several
quarters prior to the monthly portfolio formation.


                                                  3
   The neoclassical model fully captures the negative relation between financial distress and aver-
age returns. The high-minus-low distress decile earns a neoclassical alpha of 0.18% per month (t =
0.83). And the model cannot be rejected using distress deciles by the GRS test (p-value = 0.08).
In contrast, the corresponding alpha is −1.23% (t = −4.15) in the CAPM and −1.34% (t = −5.22)
in the Fama-French (1993) model. And both models are rejected by the GRS test at the 1% level.
The P ROD-loading is the main driver of our model performance: More distressed firms are less
profitable and have lower P ROD-loadings than less distressed firms. Previous studies overlook the
productivity-return relation, and, not surprisingly, find the distress-return relation anomalous.

   Since Fama and French (1996), several other anomaly variables have received much attention,
including earnings surprises, investment, profitability, accruals, net stock issues, and asset growth.
(We provide detailed references later in this section and in Section 2.) We show that the neoclassi-
cal model outperforms traditional factor models in explaining these anomalies, sometimes by a big
margin. For example, in the universe of 25 investment and profitability portfolios, the neoclassical
alphas for the five high-minus-low investment portfolios are all within 1.5 standard errors of zero.
The alpha with the highest magnitude is −0.30% per month (t = −1.45) in the lowest-profitability
quintile. In contrast, the corresponding alpha is −1.01% (t = −4.67) in the CAPM and −0.70%
(t = −3.45) in the Fama-French model. Further, the high-minus-low profitability portfolio in the
highest-investment quintile earns a neoclassical alpha of 0.27% (t = 1.34), whereas the correspond-
ing alpha is 1.22% (t = 4.96) in the CAPM and 1.43% (t = 6.08) in the Fama-French model.

   However, our neoclassical model underperforms the Fama-French (1993) model in explaining
the anomalies formed on valuation ratios such as book-to-market (B/M). While the Fama-French
model explains these anomalies through their HM L factor, the main driver in our model is the IN V
factor. Stocks with higher valuation ratios invest less, load more on the low-minus-high IN V factor,
and earn higher average returns. But empirically, the explanatory power of IN V for valuation-
sorted portfolio returns is not as high as that of HM L. This evidence lends support to Fama
and French (2007), who show that including net stock issues and asset growth in cross-sectional
regressions has little impact on the book-to-market effect. However, the small-growth portfolio only
earns a tiny neoclassical alpha of −0.03% per month (t = −0.10) in contrast to the CAPM alpha
of −0.63% (t = −2.61) and the Fama-French alpha of −0.52% (t = −4.48). We show that the tiny
neoclassical alpha is linked to the abysmally low profitability of the small-growth firms in the 1990s.

   At a minimum, our evidence shows that the neoclassical three-factor model provides a rea-


                                                  4
sonable description of the cross section of average stock returns. This evidence, coupled with the
motivation of our factors from equilibrium asset pricing theory, suggests that the neoclassical model
can be used in many applications that require estimates of expected stock returns. The list includes
evaluating mutual fund performance, measuring abnormal returns in event studies, and estimating
expected returns for portfolio choice and costs of capital for capital budgeting.

    Our work adds to a large finance and accounting literature that studies how investment and
profitability relate to average returns. Fairfield, Whisenant, and Yohn (2003), Richardson and
Sloan (2003), Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004), Anderson and Garcia-Feijóo (2006), Fama and French
(2006, 2007), Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2007), Polk and Sapienza (2007), Lyandres, Sun, and
Zhang (2007), and Xing (2007) show that firms that invest more earn lower average returns. Ball
and Brown (1968), Bernard and Thomas (1989, 1990), Ball, Kothari, and Watts (1993), and Chan,
Jagadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996) show that firms with higher earnings surprises earn higher av-
erage returns. Haugen and Baker (1996), Abarbanell and Bushee (1998), Frankel and Lee (1998),
Dechow, Hutton, and Sloan (1999), Piotroski (2000), Cohen, Gompers, and Vuolteenaho (2002),
and Fama and French (2006, 2007) show that more profitable firms earn higher average returns.

    Our work adds to the literature in two ways. First, we show that the combined effect of prof-
itability and, more surprisingly, investment, substantially reduces abnormal momentum profits. We
also show that the distress anomaly simply reflects the positive earnings-return relation. Second, we
complement Fama and French’s (2006) effort in providing a unifying perspective for many anoma-
lies that are often treated in isolation. While Fama and French derive their testable predictions
from valuation theory, we derive our hypotheses from neoclassical investment theory. To the extent
that there is no over- or under-reaction in our theory, we reinforce Fama and French’s conclusion
that, despite common claims to the contrary, empirical tests in the anomalies literature cannot by
themselves tell us whether the anomalies are driven by rational or irrational forces. In fact, our
theory and tests suggest that the anomalies can be consistent with Efficient Market Hypothesis.

    Our story proceeds as follows. Section 2 motivates our neoclassical factors and discusses our
empirical strategy. Section 3 uses time series tests to show that the neoclassical model helps explain
anomalies. Section 4 reports cross-sectional tests. We conclude in Section 5.


2    Economic Hypotheses and Empirical Strategy

Section 2.1 develops testable hypotheses, and Section 2.2 discusses our empirical strategy.


                                                  5
2.1     Testable Hypotheses

We start from the q-theoretical framework à la Cochrane (1991, 1996). Within this framework, we
derive a characteristics-based expected-return equation (see equation A.8 in Appendix A) — the
two-period simplification of the infinite-horizon equation in Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2007):

                                                     Expected profitability + 1
                             Expected return =                                                                  (3)
                                                    Marginal cost of investment

Thus, the q-theory in its simplest form says that the expected return is the expected profitability
divided by marginal cost of investment (which increases with investment). Equation (3) sheds
light on anomalies because expected returns are directly tied with firm characteristics. Specifically,
investment and expected profitability emerge as the two central drivers of expected returns.

2.1.1     The Investment Hypothesis

Equation (3) says that expected returns decrease with investment-to-assets, given expected prof-
itability. The intuition is perhaps most transparent in the capital budgeting language of Brealey,
Myers, and Allen (2006). Given expected cash flows, higher costs of capital imply lower net present
values of new capital, which in turn mean lower investment-to-assets. More important, investment is
the common driver of many anomalies, including value, net stock issues, accruals, and asset growth:

        The Investment Hypothesis: The negative investment-return relation drives the positive
        relations of average returns with book-to-market and earnings-to-price as well as the
        negative relations of average returns with accruals, net stock issues, and asset growth.


2.1.1.1     Intuition The q-theory gives rise to a direct link between book-to-market and investment-
to-assets. Optimal investment implies that investment-to-assets is an increasing function of marginal
q, which is closely related to average q or market-to-book.2 Reflecting the negative investment-
return relation, value firms earn higher average returns than growth firms. Other valuation ratios
such as earnings-to-price also can capture cross-sectional differences in investment opportunity set,
and are connected to investment policies. In general, firms with higher valuation ratios have more
growth opportunities, invest more, and earn lower expected returns.

    The negative investment-return relation also manifests itself as the net stock issues anomaly,
   2
     More precisely, the marginal q equals the average q under constant returns to scale, as shown in Hayashi (1982)
and Abel and Eberly (1994). But the average q and market-to-book equity are closely correlated, and are identical
in models with all equity financing. See Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2007) for detailed derivations.



                                                         6
the accrual anomaly, and the asset growth anomaly. Ritter (1991), Loughran and Ritter (1995),
and Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995) show that equity issuers underperform matching nonissuers
in post-issue years. Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995) show that firms conducting open
market share repurchases outperform matching firms in post-event years. Pulling together the
earlier evidence, Daniel and Titman (2006) and Pontiff and Woodgate (2006) report a negative
relation between net stock issues and average returns. Fama and French (2007) show that the net
stock issues effect is pervasive and shows up in all size groups.

   The net issues anomaly is often interpreted as investors underreacting to managerial market
timing. But Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2007) argue that the balance-sheet constraint of firms
requires that the uses of funds must equal the sources of funds, meaning that issuers should in-
vest more and earn lower average returns than nonissuers. Lyandres et al. show that adding an
investment factor into the CAPM and the Fama-French (1993) model substantially reduces the
magnitude of the underperformance following initial public offerings, seasoned equity offerings, and
convertible debt offerings. We add to their work in two ways: We follow Fama and French (2007)
in using a more comprehensive net issues measure that takes into account share repurchases. And
besides IN V , we also study the role of P ROD in driving the net issues anomaly.

   Sloan (1996) shows that firms with high accruals earn abnormally low average returns than firms
with low accruals (see also Xie 2001; Fairfield, Whisenant, and Yohn 2003; Richardson, Sloan, Soli-
man, and Tuna 2004; Hirshleifer, Hou, Teoh, and Zhang 2004). Sloan interprets the evidence as
investors overestimating the persistence of the accrual component of earnings only to be systemat-
ically surprised later on. But interpreting accruals as working capital investment, Wu, Zhang, and
Zhang (2007) hypothesize that firms rationally adjust their working capital investment to respond
to discount rate changes. Wu et al. show that adding the investment factor into the CAPM and
the Fama-French (1993) model substantially reduces the magnitude of the accrual anomaly. We
complement their work by using the accruals measure from Fama and French (2007) that adjusts
for the effect of changes in the scale of firms caused by share issues and repurchases. We verify
that investment is important in driving the accrual anomaly, but productivity is not.

   Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2007) show that asset growth, defined as the annual changes in total
assets divided by lagged total assets, strongly predicts future returns with a negative sign. Follow-
ing Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004), Cooper et al. interprets the evidence as investors underreacting
to managerial overinvestment. Our view is that asset growth is arguably the most comprehensive


                                                  7
measure of investment-to-assets, in which investment is simply the changes in total assets.


2.1.1.2     Discussion     Noteworthy, the negative investment-return relation is conditional on ex-
pected profitability. This point is important because expected profitability is not disconnected from
investment-to-assets: More profitable firms invest more both in the data (e.g., Fama and French
1995) and in theory (e.g., Zhang 2005). The conditional nature of the investment-return relation of-
fers the following portfolio interpretation of the investment hypothesis. Sorting on book-to-market,
earnings-to-price, accruals, net stock issues, and asset growth is closer to sorting on investment-to-
assets than sorting on expected profitability. These sorts tend to generate higher magnitudes of
spread in investment-to-assets than in expected profitability. Thus, we can interpret the average
return variations generated from these diverse sorts using their common implied sort on investment.

2.1.2     The Productivity Hypothesis

Complementing the investment hypothesis, equation (3) also says that given investment-to-assets,
firms with higher expected profitability should earn higher expected returns.

        The Productivity Hypothesis: The positive profitability-return relation drives the posi-
        tive relations of average returns with earnings surprises and short-term prior returns as
        well as the negative relation between average returns and financial distress.


2.1.2.1     Intuition As noted, marginal cost of investment equals marginal q, which is basically
average q or market-to-book. Equation (3) then says that the expected return equals the expected
profitability divided by market-to-book. The intuition is exactly analogous to that from the Gordon
(1962) Growth Model. Imagine a two-period version of that model: Price equals expected cash flow
divided by the discount rate. So high expected cash flow (or expected profitability) relative to low
price (or market valuation ratios) means high discount rates. And to the extent that there is no
over- or under-reaction (all the expectations are rational) in our neoclassical model, high discount
rates correspond to high risk (see equation A.10 for the formal link between risk and characteristics).

   Going beyond the discounting intuition from valuation theory, our investment-based theory
provides additional capital budgeting intuition for the positive productivity-return relation. Recall
the original formulation of equation (3) says that the expected return is the expected profitability
divided by an increasing function of investment-to-assets. So high expected profitability relative
to low investment must mean high discount rates: Otherwise firms would observe high net present


                                                   8
values of new capital and invest more. Conversely, low expected profitability relative to high in-
vestment (such as the small-growth firms in the 1990s) must mean low discount rates: Otherwise
these firms would observe low net present values of new capital and invest less.

       The positive productivity-return relation has important portfolio implications. For any sorts
that generate higher magnitudes of spread in expected profitability than in investment-to-assets,
their average return patterns can be explained using the productivity hypothesis. We explore three
such sorts, sorts on earnings surprises, on short-term prior returns, and on financial distress.

       Sorting on earnings surprises can generate a profitability spread between extreme portfolios.
The intuition is that firms that have experienced large, positive earnings surprises are more prof-
itable than firms that have experienced large, negative earnings surprises. Sorting on momentum
also should generate an important spread in profitability.3 The intuition is that shocks to earn-
ings are positively correlated with shocks to stock returns contemporaneously. Firms that just
beat earnings expectations are likely to experience stock price increases, whereas firms that fall
below earnings expectations are likely to experience stock price decreases. The distress anomaly
of Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2007) can be another reflection of the positive productivity-
return relation. The intuition is that less distressed firms are more profitable and should earn higher
average returns, even though they are less levered. And more distressed firms are less profitable
and should earn lower average returns, even though they are more levered.

2.2      Empirical Strategy: Strengths and Weaknesses

We primarily use the Fama-French (1993) portfolio approach to explore our economic hypotheses.
We are attracted to the portfolio approach because of its powerful simplicity. The widespread use of
this approach also allows us to easily compare our empirical results to those from the prior literature.

2.2.1      From Theory to Practice

We construct factor mimicking portfolios based on investment-to-assets and earnings-to-assets,
which, according to equation (3), are pivotal economic determinants of expected returns. Because
these two factors are derived from the partial equilibrium q-theory that studies the optimal invest-
ment of firms, we also include the market factor, M KT , which can be derived from the partial
equilibrium theory of consumption (see, for example, Cochrane 2005, p. 155–156). The resulting
   3
    Liu and Zhang (2007) show that winners have temporarily higher expected profitability and expected growth rates
than losers. The duration of the expected-growth spread also matches roughly the duration of momentum profits.



                                                        9
three-factor specification (M KT + IN V + P ROD), dubbed the neoclassical three-factor model,
can be interpreted as the portfolio implementation of the Arrow-Debreu general equilibrium theory.

   We use the neoclassical three-factor model as a parsimonious and practical model for estimating
expected returns. In the same way that Fama and French (1996) test their three-factor model, we
regress excess returns of a wide range of testing portfolios on the neoclassical factor returns as in
equation (2). If the neoclassical model adequately describes the cross section of average returns,
the intercepts should be statistically indistinguishable from zero.

   The portfolio approach differs from alternative methods that have been used to explore the em-
pirical foundation of investment-based asset pricing. Zhang (2005), Cooper (2006), and Gala (2006)
build full-fledged equilibrium models and examine if model-implied moments match key facts in the
data. This quantitative theory approach à la Kydland and Prescott (1982) is useful to understand
underlying economic mechanisms, but it does not provide an easy-to-use model for calculating
expected returns in practice. Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2007) parameterize the production and
investment technologies of firms in the right-hand-side of equation (3), and use GMM to minimize
the average differences between both sides of the equation. This structural estimation approach
à la Hansen and Singleton (1982) is closely linked to the underlying theory, and it also provides
an empirical expected-return model. But the model is more complicated to implement than most
models in empirical finance. Our portfolio approach can be viewed as a linearized implementation
of Liu et al.’s nonlinear estimation. As noted, although the link between theory and tests is not as
close, we adore the portfolio approach because of its powerful simplicity.

   We also supplement time series tests on sorted portfolios with Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-
sectional regressions on characteristics. We do so for several reasons. First, our empirical analysis
builds on prior studies that use variables such as investment and profitability in cross-sectional
tests (e.g., Fama and French 2006, 2007). Replicating their tests with our sample and variable
definitions is useful for comparison. Second, more important, we motivate IN V and P ROD from
the q-theory, which directly ties expected returns to investment and profitability characteristics.
Thus, using characteristics in cross-sectional regressions can be a more direct test of the theory.
Third, cross-sectional regressions can be more powerful that time series tests in some circumstances
because they provide an easier way to control for all the characteristics simultaneously.

   While sensitive to the differences between time series and cross-sectional tests (see, e.g., Fama
and French 2007, p. 2–3), we view these two methods as closely related. If a variable shows up signif-


                                                 10
icantly in cross-sectional tests, its factor mimicking portfolio is likely to have important explanatory
power in time series tests. We find time series tests easy to interpret because they provide a simple
measure of abnormal returns as the regression intercept. Fortunately, although our test results
from the two approaches sometimes differ in nuances, they provide the same general inferences.

2.2.2   Interpreting Neoclassical Factors

Following Fama and French (1993, 1996), we interpret our neoclassical factors as common factors
in the cross section of returns. While Fama and French pursue a more aggressive interpretation
that their similarly constructed SM B and HM L are risk factors in the context of ICAPM or APT,
we shy away from taking a strong stance on the risk interpretation of our factors.

   On the one hand, the theoretical arguments we use to motivate the two factors are based on
recent developments in equilibrium asset pricing theory, which does not allow any form of mispric-
ing. The crux is that, just like consumption-based asset pricing predicts that aggregate expected
returns covary with business cycles, investment-based asset pricing predicts that expected returns
in the cross section covary with firm characteristics, corporate policies, and events. The latter set of
endogenous relations cannot possibly be captured by consumption-based frameworks because char-
acteristics are not even modeled. Thus, rejecting the CAPM (a canonical consumption-based model)
does not mean rejecting Efficient Market Hypothesis because of the bad-model problem (e.g., Fama
1998). And perhaps because of the lack of readily available measures, behavioralists often use valu-
ation ratios to proxy for mispricing. Interpreting Fama and French’s (1993) factors is controversial
because size and B/M directly involve market equity. But our neoclassical factors are constructed
on economic fundamentals that are less likely to be affected by mispricing, at least directly.

   On the other hand, Polk and Sapienza (2006) show that investor sentiment can affect investment
and hence future profitability through shareholder discount rates. Managerial overconfidence also
can distort corporate investment because hubristic managers tend to overestimate the returns to
their pet projects (e.g., Malmendier and Tate 2005). Our tests cannot rule out these interpretations.

   More important, risk-based and characteristics-based interpretations on any common factor are
not mutually exclusive: In fact, they are the two sides of the same coin. Challenging the Fama
and French (1993) risk interpretation of their SM B and HM L factors, Daniel and Titman (1997)
argue that it is the size and B/M characteristics rather than the covariance structure of returns
that explain the cross section of average returns. However, emerging from investment-based asset



                                                  11
pricing is the fresh insight that characteristics are sufficient statistics of expected returns: The
right-hand-side of equation (3) only involves characteristics. Further, an analytical link exists
between covariances and characteristics (see equation A.10 in Appendix A), meaning that covari-
ances and characteristics are equivalent predictors of returns, at least in theory. But in practice,
characteristics-based models are likely to dominate covariances-based models. The reason is simple:
In a time-varying, dynamic world, characteristics are more precisely measured than covariances.
And a horse race often declares characteristics as the winner. This is the case even in simulated
data generated from dynamic single-factor models (e.g., Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang 2003). Thus,
it is conceivable that the relative success of characteristics-based models in asset pricing tests is
driven by measurement errors in betas rather than systematic mispricing. After all, neoclassical
investment theory predicts that characteristics should covary with expected returns to begin with.


3     Time Series Regressions

We report our main results from time series tests. We first construct the explanatory factors in Sec-
tion 3.1. We then use the neoclassical three-factor model to explain average returns for a wide range
of testing portfolios, including both two-way sorted (Section 3.2) and one-way sorted (Section 3.3).

3.1     The Explanatory Factors

This subsection constructs and reports the properties of the investment and productivity factors.

3.1.1    The Investment Factor, IN V

Following the Fama and French (1993) portfolio approach, we construct IN V from a double (two
by three) sort on size and investment-to-assets. (Appendix B describes our sample construction
and variable definitions in details.) In June of each year t, all NYSE stocks on CRSP are sorted on
market equity (stock price times shares outstanding). We use the median NYSE size to split NYSE,
Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two groups. We also break NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into three investment-to-assets (I/A) groups based on the breakpoints for the low 30%, middle
40%, and high 30% of the ranked values for stocks traded on NYSE. We use NYSE breakpoints
in constructing factors and testing portfolios throughout the paper to help ensure that none of the
portfolios are excessively dominated by micro-caps and small stocks (e.g., Fama and French 2007).

    We form six portfolios from the intersections of the two size and the three I/A groups. Monthly
value-weighted returns on the six portfolios are calculated from July of year t to June of t+1, and


                                                 12
the portfolios are rebalanced in June of t+1. We calculate returns beginning in July of year t to
ensure that investment for year t−1 is known. The IN V factor is designed to mimic the common
variations in returns related to investment-to-assets: IN V is the difference (low-minus-high invest-
ment), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the two low-I/A portfolios and
the simple average of the returns on the two high-I/A portfolios.

   From Table 1, the average IN V return in our sample is 0.34% per month (t = 4.15). Regressing
IN V on M KT generates an alpha of 0.41% per month (t = 5.54) and a R2 of 17%. Regressing
IN V on the Fama and French (1993) model and the Carhart (1997) model reduces the alpha to
0.26% and 0.17% per month (t = 3.66 and 2.39), and increases the R2 to 31% and 35%, respectively.
(The data for the Fama-French factors and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web
site.) Thus, IN V captures average return variations not subsumed by the other common factors.

   IN V has a relatively high correlation of 0.51 with HM L (p-value = 0). This evidence is con-
sistent with Xing (2006), who shows that an investment growth factor contains information similar
to HM L and can explain the value effect roughly as well as HM L. Xing constructs her factor
by sorting on the growth rate of capital expenditure. The average return of her factor is only
0.20% per month, albeit significant. We follow Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2007) in using a more
comprehensive measure of investment that includes both long-term and short-term investments.
As a result, our investment factor earns a higher average return.

   Panel C of Table 1 provides more details on the six size-I/A portfolios underlying the IN V fac-
tor. Sorting on I/A generates a large spread in I/A: Portfolio SLI (small-size and low-investment)
has an average I/A of −3.44% per annum, whereas portfolio SH I (small-size and high-investment)
has an average of 28%. Portfolio SH I is also more profitable than portfolio SLI : The earnings-to-
assets (ROA) of portfolio SH I is 1.17% per quarter versus 0.66% for portfolio SLI . Portfolio SLI
also has a higher average prior 2–12 month return (from July of year t−1 to May of year t) than port-
folio SH I , 22% versus 15%. This evidence partially reflects the fact that low-investment firms have
higher average future returns than high-investment firms. (We follow Fama and French (1993) in
sorting stocks in June on accounting information at the last fiscal year-end to guard against the look-
ahead bias.) The evidence does not mean that low-investment firms have higher average contem-
poraneous returns. In untabulated results, we measure returns over the calendar year t−1 and find
that portfolio SLI has lower average contemporaneous returns than portfolio SH I , 18% versus 27%.




                                                  13
3.1.2    The Productivity Factor, P ROD

We construct P ROD based on earnings-to-assets, ROA. Using cash-flow-to-assets to measure pro-
ductivity does not materially affect our results (not reported). We sort on current profitability, as
opposed to expected profitability. The reason is that profitability is highly persistent (e.g., Fama
and French 1995, 2000, 2006). In particular, Fama and French (2006) show that current profitabil-
ity is the strongest predictor of future profitability, meaning that current profitability is highly
correlated with the expected profitability, to which equation (3) applies.

    Because P ROD is most relevant for explaining momentum profits that are constructed monthly,
we use a similar approach to construct P ROD. In particular, we use quarterly data to measure
ROA. Indeed, using annual sorts on annual earnings-to-assets at the last fiscal year-end yields an
insignificant average return of only five basis points per annum for the productivity factor. This
evidence is consistent with that reported by Fama and French (2007, Table II).

    However, we also find that the original earnings and momentum anomalies do not survive the
frequency change from monthly to annual rebalancing either. Specifically, in June of each year t,
we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints of
the Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SU E) measured at the fiscal year-end of t−1, the average
SU E over the last fiscal year, the annual return over the calendar year t − 1, and the 12-month
return from June of year t−1 to May of year t. Monthly value-weighted returns of these portfolios
are calculated from July of year t to June of year t+1. Untabulated results show that none of these
strategies generate mean excess returns or CAPM alphas that are significantly different from zero.
Because the SU E and momentum anomalies only exist in monthly rebalancing, it seems reasonable
to construct the explanatory P ROD factor in the same frequency.

    Nevertheless, we emphasize that using quarterly earnings to construct P ROD, while using an-
nual investment to construct IN V , is largely driven by data, not by theory. The growing literature
on investment-based asset pricing does predict that earnings and prior returns can be related to
time-varying expected returns.4 However, to the best of our knowledge, the theoretical literature
has so far not addressed the question why earnings and momentum anomalies are more short-lived
than others such as value and investment anomalies. This caveat also applies to our work.
   4
     See Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), Johnson (2002), and Sagi and Seasholes (2007) for recent examples that relate
prior short-term returns to expected returns. Liu and Zhang (2007) document that recent winners have temporarily
higher loadings than recent losers on the growth rate of industrial production. Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2007) show
that an investment-based expected return model can partially explain the earnings anomaly.



                                                        14
   To construct P ROD, each month from January 1972 to December 2006, we categorize NYSE,
Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into three groups based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%,
middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranked values of quarterly ROA from at least four months ago.
The choice of the four-month lag is conservative: Using shorter lags only serves to strengthen our re-
sults (not reported). We use the four-month lag to ensure that the required accounting information
is known before we form the portfolios. We also use the NYSE median market equity each month to
split NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two groups. We form six portfolios from the intersec-
tions of the two size and three ROA groups. Monthly value-weighted returns on the six portfolios
are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. The P ROD factor
is meant to mimic the common variations in returns related to firm-level productivity: P ROD is the
difference (high-minus-low productivity), each month, between the simple average of the returns on
the two high-ROA portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the two low-ROA portfolios.

   From Panel A of Table 1, P ROD earns an average return of 0.73% per month (t = 5.67) from
January 1972 to December 2006. Regressing the P ROD return on the market factor, the Fama and
French (1993) three factors, and the Carhart (1997) four factors yields large alphas of 0.76%, 0.89%,
and 0.66% per month (t = 5.84, 7.04, and 5.43), and R2 s of 1%, 10%, and 22%, respectively. This
evidence means that, like IN V , P ROD also captures average return variations not subsumed by
well-known common factors. Panel B reports that P ROD and W M L have a high correlation of 0.36
(p-value = 0). Intuitively, shocks to earnings are positively correlated with contemporaneous shocks
to returns. Thus, we expect P ROD to have certain explanatory power for momentum profits.

   Intriguingly, the correlation between IN V and P ROD is only −0.06 (p-value = 0.19), meaning
no need to neutralize the two factors against each other. The low correlation is counterintuitive
because one would expect that more profitable firms should invest more and that the two factors
should be negatively correlated. The low correlation results from our use of quarterly earnings to
construct P ROD but annual investment to construct IN V . If we instead use annual earnings data
to construct the productivity factor, we find its correlation with IN V to be −0.20 (p-value = 0).
And if we use quarterly investment data to construct the investment factor, we find its correlation
with P ROD to be −0.33 (p-value = 0). Thus, matching rebalancing frequency increases the posi-
tive correlation between investment and earnings, thereby increasing the magnitude of the negative
correlation between their factor mimicking portfolio returns.

   Panel D of Table 1 provides more details on the six size-ROA portfolios underlying P ROD. Sort-


                                                 15
ing on ROA generates a large spread in ROA: Portfolio SLP (small-size and low-productivity) has
an average ROA of −1.78% per quarter, whereas portfolio SH P (small-size and high-productivity)
has an average ROA of 3.41%. The large ROA spread only corresponds to a modest spread in annual
I/A: 11.4% versus 12.6%. The evidence helps explain the low correlation between IN V and P ROD
reported earlier. And the ROA spread in small firms corresponds to a large spread in prior 2–12
month returns: 9.4% versus 34.8%, helping explain the high correlation between P ROD and W M L.

3.2     Tests on Two-Way Sorted Portfolios

We report time series regressions of two-way sorted testing portfolios formed on size and momen-
tum, size and book-to-market, and investment and profitability. We study momentum and value
portfolios because these are arguably most important anomalies in the cross section. We also study
investment and profitability portfolios because our factors are constructed on these characteristics.

3.2.1     Preliminaries

We start by describing the construction and the basic properties of testing portfolios.


3.2.1.1    The Size-Momentum Portfolios           The 25 size-momentum portfolios are from Ken-
neth French’s Web site. Fama and French (1996) use the “11/1/1” convention to measure momen-
tum. For each month t, stocks are sorted on their prior returns from month t−2 to t−12 (skipping
month t−1), and the subsequent portfolio returns are calculated for the current month t. The 25 size
and 11/1/1-momentum portfolios are formed monthly as the intersection of five portfolios sorted on
size and five portfolios sorted on prior 2–12 month returns. The monthly breakpoints are the NYSE
market equity quintiles, and the monthly prior 2–12 month returns breakpoints are NYSE quintiles.

   Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), we also construct an alternative set of 25 size and mo-
mentum portfolios using the “6/1/6” convention of momentum. For each month t, we use NYSE
breakpoints to sort stocks on their prior returns from month t−2 to t−7 (skipping month t−1),
and calculate the subsequent portfolio returns from month t to t+5. We also use NYSE market
equity quintiles to sort all stocks independently each month into five size portfolios. The 25 size
and 6/1/1-momentum portfolios are formed monthly as the intersection of the five size quintiles
and the five quintiles based on prior 2–7 month returns.

   Table 2 reports large momentum profits, especially in small firms. Panel A uses the “11/1/1”
convention of momentum. The winner-minus-loser (W -L) average return varies from 0.64% per


                                                 16
month (t = 2.16) in the biggest-size quintile to 1.72% (t = 7.63) in the smallest-size quintile. In to-
tal, 16 out of 25 size and momentum portfolios have significant CAPM alphas. The null hypothesis
that the 25 CAPM alphas are jointly zero is strongly rejected by the GRS test: The test statis-
tic (FGRS ) is 6.22 (p-value = 0). More important, the CAPM alphas for the winner-minus-loser
portfolios are significant positive across all five size quintiles. The small-stock W -L strategy, in
particular, earns a CAPM alpha of 1.78% per month (t = 8.23). Consistent with Fama and French
(1996), their three-factor model exacerbates the momentum anomaly: 18 out of 25 Fama-French
alphas are significant. And the Fama-French alphas for the W -L portfolios are all larger than their
corresponding CAPM alphas. In particular, the small-stock W -L strategy earns a Fama-French
alpha of 1.96% per month (t = 7.97). The reason is that losers have higher HM L-loadings than
winners: Losers behave more like value stocks, and the Fama-French model predicts that losers
should earn higher average returns, instead of lower average returns as we see in the data.

   The results from the 25 size and 6/1/6-momentum portfolios are similar, but the magnitude of
momentum profits is smaller than that with the 11/1/1-momentum. The mean excess return of the
W -L portfolio ranges from 0.64% per month (t = 2.82) in the biggest-size quintile to 0.97% (t =
5.48) in the smallest-size quintile. The CAPM fails to explain the average returns of these testing
portfolios: 13 out of 25 individual alphas are significant. And the GRS test rejects the model at the
1% level. In particular, the small-stock W -L strategy earns an alpha of 1.02% per month (t = 6.04).
The Fama-French (1993) model again generates larger pricing errors than the CAPM. The W -L
alpha from the Fama-French model ranges from 0.75% (t = 2.92) to 1.14% per month (t = 6.07).


3.2.1.2   The 25 Investment-Profitability Portfolios            We sort all NYSE, Amex, and NAS-
DAQ stocks into five profitability quintiles each month based on NYSE breakpoints of quarterly
ROA from at least four months ago. Also, we sort all stocks independently in June of each year
into five quintiles based on NYSE breakpoints of investment-to-assets at the last fiscal year-end.
Taking intersections yields 25 investment and profitability portfolios. Their value-weighted returns
are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly.

   Panel A of Table 3 reports descriptive statistics for the 25 investment-profitability portfolios.
High ROA stocks earn higher average returns than low ROA stocks, especially among high invest-
ment firms. And high investment stocks earn lower average returns than low investment stocks,
especially among low ROA firms. The average high-minus-low ROA portfolio return varies from
0.40% per month (t = 1.64) in the lowest-I/A quintile to 1.17% (t = 4.81) in the highest-I/A quin-

                                                  17
tile. The average low-minus-high I/A portfolio return varies from an insignificant 0.16% per month
in the highest-ROA quintile to 0.93% (t = 4.30) in the lowest-ROA quintile. The null hypothesis
that all the CAPM alphas are jointly zero is rejected at the 1% level. Despite their higher average
returns, high ROA firms have lower SM B and HM L loadings than low ROA firms. Consequently,
12 out of 25 portfolios have significant alphas in the Fama-French (1993) model, in contrast to only
five significant alphas out of 25 in the CAPM.


3.2.1.3    The 25 Size-B/M Portfolios         We obtain the 25 Size-B/M portfolios from Kenneth
French’s Web site. These portfolios are the intersections of five size portfolios and five B/M portfo-
lios at the end of each June. The size breakpoints for year t are the NYSE market equity quintiles
at the end of June of t. B/M for year t is the book equity for the last fiscal year-end in t−1 divided
by market equity for December of t−1. The B/M breakpoints are also NYSE quintiles.

   Confirming many previous studies, Panel B of Table 3 shows that value stocks earn higher
average returns than growth stocks. The average high-minus-low (H-L) return is 1.09% per month
(t = 5.08) in the smallest-size quintile versus 0.25% (t = 1.20) in the biggest-size quintile. The
CAPM cannot explain the value premium: 15 out of 25 portfolios have significant alphas and the
GRS statistic is 4.25 (p-value = 0). Further, three out of five H-L strategies have significant alphas.
In particular, the small-stock H-L portfolio earns a positive alpha of 1.32% per month (t = 7.10).

   The Fama and French (1993) model represents an impressive improvement over the CAPM
in capturing the average returns across the 25 size-B/M portfolios. The number of significant
alphas reduces from 15 to only six. The small-stock H-L alpha is reduced to 0.68% per month
(albeit still significant, t = 5.50), which is 48% lower than its CAPM alpha. The reason is that,
as highlighted in Fama and French (1996), their three-factor model generates systematic variations
in factor loadings: Small stocks have higher SM B loadings than big stocks, and value stocks have
higher HM L loadings than growth stocks. The average R2 across the 25 portfolios is 89%, so even
small intercepts are often distinguishable from zero.

3.2.2     Neoclassical Regressions: The Size-Momentum Portfolios

The neoclassical model outperforms traditional models in pricing the size-momentum portfolios.


3.2.2.1    Benchmark Estimation         Table 4 reports the neoclassical regressions of the size and
momentum portfolios. Panel A shows that the W -L 11/1/1-momentum strategy has a significant


                                                  18
alpha of 0.89% per month (t = 3.25) in the smallest size quintile and 0.61% (t = 2.36) in the second
size quintile. But the alphas are insignificant in the three other size quintiles. In contrast, the
W -L alpha is significant across all five size quintiles in both the CAPM and the Fama and French
(1993) model (see Table 2). This performance improvement is noteworthy. For example, although
still significant (t = 3.25), the small-stock W -L alpha of 0.89% per month in the neoclassical model
represents a reduction of 50% in magnitude from its CAPM alpha (1.78%) and a reduction of 55%
from its Fama-French alpha (1.96%). Further, the average magnitude of the W -L alphas in the
neoclassical model is 0.37% per month. In contrast, the magnitude is 1.21% in the CAPM and
1.38% per month in the Fama-French model. Finally, eight out of the 25 individual alphas are
significant, giving rise to an overall rejection of the neoclassical model by the GRS test at the 1%
level. However, the number of significant alphas in the neoclassical model (8) is much lower than
that in the CAPM (16) and that in the Fama-French model (18).

   The results using the 6/1/6-momentum portfolios are largely similar. Although the neoclassical
model is rejected using the 25 portfolios, the number of significant alphas (7) is lower than that in the
CAPM (13) and that in the Fama-French (1993) model (13). More important, none of the five W -L
alphas in our model are significant. In particular, the small-stock W -L alpha is 0.34% per month (t
= 1.53). This neoclassical alpha represents a reduction in magnitude of 67% from the CAPM alpha
(1.02% per month, t = 6.04) and a reduction of 70% from the Fama-French alpha (1.14%, t = 6.07).


3.2.2.2   Sources of Explanatory Power for the Neoclassical Model                     The relative suc-
cess of the neoclassical model in explaining momentum profits derives from two sources. First,
the P ROD-loadings of momentum portfolios go in the right direction in explaining their average
returns. Table 4 shows that winners have higher P ROD-loadings than losers across all five size
groups. The magnitude of the loading spreads, significant in all cases, ranges from 0.64 to 0.88
in Panel A for the 11/1/1-momentum and from 0.45 to 0.61 in Panel B for the 6/1/6-momentum.
This evidence suggests that, not surprisingly, winners are more profitable than losers.

   Second, remarkably, the IN V -loadings also go in the right direction in explaining momentum
profits: Winners have higher IN V -loadings than losers. The magnitude of the loading spreads,
again significant across all size groups, ranges from 0.68 to 0.96 for the 11/1/1-momentum and
from 0.47 to 0.71 for the 11/1/1-momentum. The IN V -loading pattern is counterintuitive: We
would expect that winners with high valuation ratios should invest more and have lower loadings
on the low-minus-high IN V factor than losers with low valuation ratios.

                                                   19
   To understand the driving forces behind these loading patterns, we follow the event-study ap-
proach of Fama and French (1995) to examine how ROA and I/A vary across the testing portfolios.
To preview the results: Winners indeed have higher contemporaneous investment-to-assets than
losers at the portfolio formation month. But more important, winners also have lower investment-
to-assets than losers starting from two to four quarters prior to the portfolio formation. Because
IN V is rebalanced annually, the higher IN V -loadings for winners accurately reflect their lower
investment-to-assets several quarters prior to the portfolio formation.

   Specifically, for each portfolio formation month t = January 1972 to December 2006, we cal-
culate quarterly ROAs and annual I/As for t+m, m = −60, . . . , 60. The ROA and I/A for t+m
are then averaged across portfolio formation months t. ROA is the most recent ROA relative to
portfolio formation month t. Figure 1 reports the details for the 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum
portfolios. The results for the 25 size and 6/1/6-momentum portfolios are similar (not reported).
For a given portfolio, we plot the median ROAs and I/As among the firms in the portfolio.

   From Panel A of Figure 1, although winners have higher I/As at the portfolio formation month
t, winners have lower I/As than losers from month t − 60 to month t − 8. Consistent with this
event-time evidence, Panel B shows that winners have higher contemporaneous I/As than losers
in the calendar time in the smallest-size quintile. We define the contemporaneous I/A as the I/A
at the current fiscal year-end. For example, if the current month is March or September 2003, the
contemporaneous I/A is the I/A at the fiscal year-end of 2003. More important, Panel C shows
further that winners also have lower lagged or sorting-effective I/As than losers in the smallest-size
quintile. We define the sorting-effective I/A as the I/A on which an annual sort on I/A in each
June (as in our construction of IN V ) is based. For example, if the current month is March 2003, the
sorting-effective I/A is the I/A at the fiscal year-end of 2001 because the annual sort on I/A is in
June 2002. If the current month is September 2003, the sorting-effective I/A is the I/A at the fiscal
year-end of 2002 because the applicable sort on I/A is in June 2003. Because IN V is rebalanced
annually, the lower sorting-effective I/As of winners explain their higher IN V -loadings than losers.

   As expected, Figure 1 also shows that winners have higher ROAs than losers for about five
quarters before and 20 quarters after the portfolio formation month (Panel D). In the calendar time,
winners have consistently higher ROAs than losers, especially in smallest-size quintile (Panels E
and F). This evidence explains the higher P ROD-loadings for the winners documented in Table 4.




                                                 20
3.2.2.3   Quarterly Investment Factor          To verify that the annual rebalancing of IN V is in-
deed the driving force of the IN V -loading pattern across momentum portfolios, we experiment
with an alternative investment factor, denoted IN V Q , constructed on quarterly investment data.
To preview the results, the loading pattern is reversed once we replace IN V with IN V Q .

   We measure quarterly investment-to-assets as the change in gross property, plant, and equip-
ment (Compustat quarterly item 42) plus the change in inventory (item 38) divided by lagged total
assets (item 44). This definition is the exact quarterly counterpart of our definition based on annual
data (see Appendix B). Each month from January 1975 to December 2006, we categorize NYSE,
Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into three groups based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%,
middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranked values of quarterly I/A from at least four months ago.
(The starting point of the sample is restricted by the availability of quarterly investment data.)
We also use the NYSE median market equity each month to split all stocks into two size groups.
We form six portfolios from the intersections of the two size and three I/A portfolios and calculate
monthly value-weighted returns on the six portfolios for the current month. IN V Q is the difference
(low-minus-high investment), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the two
low-I/A portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the two high-I/A portfolios.

   The IN V Q factor earns an average return of 0.49% per month (t = 3.56). Table 5 reports
neoclassical factor regressions with IN V replaced by IN V Q . Most important, the W -L portfolios
now have negative, albeit mostly insignificant, loadings on IN V Q . This finding contrasts with
the evidence in Table 4 that the W -L portfolios have significant positive loadings on the annual
investment factor, IN V . The P ROD-loadings are similar across the two tables. As a result of the
negative IN V Q -loadings of the W -L portfolios, the magnitude of the alphas in Table 5 is in general
higher than that in Table 4. In particular, the small-stock W -L 11/1/1-momentum portfolio has
an alpha of 1.28% per month (t = 3.83), which is about 30% higher than the alpha of 0.89% in
Table 4. And the small-stock W -L 6/1/6-momentum portfolio has an alpha of 0.65% per month (t
= 2.54), which is about 48% higher than the alpha of 0.34% in Table 4.


3.2.2.4   Alternative Neoclassical Factor Specifications          To evaluate the relative role of the
neoclassical factors in driving momentum profits, we explore two alternative two-factor specifica-
tions: M KT +IN V and M KT +P ROD. Both IN V and P ROD help reduce the overall magnitude
of the alphas, but P ROD seems more important. For example, Panel A of Table 6 shows that four
out of five W -L 11/1/1-momentum alphas are significant and the average magnitude of these alphas

                                                 21
is 0.96% per month in the two-factor model with M KT and IN V . In contrast, only two out of five
W -L alphas are significant in the two-factor model with M KT and P ROD, although the average
magnitude of these alphas is 0.67% per month. Thus, adding IN V further reduces the average
magnitude of the W -L alphas from 0.67% to 0.37% per month in the benchmark neoclassical model.
From Panel B, using the 6/1/6-momentum portfolios yields largely similar results.

3.2.3   Neoclassical Regressions: The Investment-Profitability Portfolios

The neoclassical model outperforms traditional factor models in explaining the average returns
across the 25 investment-profitability portfolios.

   Panel A of Table 7 reports the neoclassical three-factor regressions. Although the model is
rejected overall with a GRS statistic of 1.68 (p-value = 0.02), only two out of 25 alphas are individ-
ually significant. The number of significant alphas is low relative to that in the CAPM (five) and
to that in the Fama-French (1993) model (12). Further, only one out of five high-minus-low ROA
portfolios (H-LP ) has a significant alpha: The alpha is actually negative, −0.67% per moth (t =
−3.05), so our model appears to overfit. In contrast, three out of five H-LP alphas are significant
in the CAPM, and all five of them are significant in the Fama-French model. More important, the
average magnitude of the H-LP alphas is also lower in our model: 0.34% per month versus 0.71% in
the CAPM and 0.98% in the Fama-French model. Our model also does a good job in describing the
five high-minus-low I/A portfolio (H-LI ) returns. From Panel A, none of the five H-LI alphas are
significant, whereas three out of five are significant in the CAPM and in the Fama-French model.
More important, the average magnitude of the H-LI alphas is also lower in our model: 0.17% per
month versus 0.55% in the CAPM and 0.39% in the Fama-French model.

   As expected, high ROA firms have significantly higher P ROD-loadings than low ROA firms,
and low-investment firms have significantly higher IN V -loadings than high-investment firms. The
systematic variations in the neoclassical factor loadings across the investment-profitability portfolios
(in the same direction as their average returns variation) explain the better empirical performance
of our model relative to the CAPM and the Fama-French (1993) model.

   In the benchmark specification (Panel A of Table 7), the IN V -loadings do not differ significantly
across extreme ROA portfolios, and the P ROD-loadings do not differ significantly across extreme
investment portfolios. The evidence is consistent with the low correlation between IN V and P ROD
(−0.06, see Table 1). Consequently, dropping P ROD from the factor specification makes the high-
minus-low ROA alphas significantly positive, but does not materially affect the high-minus-low

                                                  22
investment alphas (Panel B). And dropping IN V makes the high-minus-low investment alphas
significantly negative, but does not materially affect the high-minus-low ROA alphas (Panel C).

3.2.4   Neoclassical Regressions: The Size-B/M Portfolios

The neoclassical model outperforms the CAPM but underperforms the Fama-French (1993) model
in explaining the average returns of the 25 size-B/M portfolios. But our model does exceptionally
well in explaining the low average return of the small-growth portfolio that consists of firms in the
smallest-size quintile and lowest-B/M quintile.

   Panel A of Table 8 shows that, while the Fama-French (1993) model produces six significant
alphas out of 25 size-B/M portfolios, the neoclassical model produces 11. Further, three out of five
H-L alphas are significant in our model versus only two out of five in the Fama-French model. The
average magnitude of the H-L alphas is also higher in our model: 0.45% versus 0.30% per month.
And the average R2 is lower in our model: 73% versus 91%. But the average magnitude of the 25
alphas is 0.27% per month, which is identical to that from the Fama-French model.

   More intriguingly, the small-growth portfolio earns a CAPM alpha of −0.63% per month (t =
−2.61), a Fama-French alpha of −0.52% (t = −4.48), but only a tiny neoclassical alpha of −0.03%
(t = −0.10). This evidence is impressive because the small-growth anomaly is notoriously difficult
to explain for consumption-based asset pricing. For example, Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004,
Table 4) show that the small-growth portfolio is particularly risky in their two-beta model with both
cash-flow and discount-rate betas exceeding those of the small-value portfolio. As a result, their
two-beta model fails to explain the small-growth anomaly. And the literature has attributed the
abnormally low return for small-growth firms to short-sale constraints and other limits to arbitrage
(e.g., Lamont and Thaler 2003, Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford 2002).

   The neoclassical model clearly dominates the CAPM in explaining the average 25 size-B/M
portfolio returns. In total, 15 out of the 25 CAPM alphas are significant. The small-stock H-L alpha
in the CAPM is 1.32% per month (t = 7.10). Our model reduces this alpha by about 40% to 0.78%
per month, albeit still significant (t = 3.67). The average magnitude of the H-L alphas is 0.81% per
month in the CAPM, and our model reduces this magnitude by about 45% to 0.45% per month.

   The IN V - and P ROD-loadings shed light on the explanatory power of the neoclassical model
for the 25 size-B/M portfolios. From Panel A of Table 8, value stocks have higher IN V -loadings
than growth stocks. The loading spreads, ranging from 0.69 to 1.00, are all at least 4.5 standard


                                                  23
errors from zero. The P ROD-loading pattern is more complicated. The H-L spread in the P ROD-
loading is close to zero across the three middle size quintiles. In the smallest-size quintile, the H-L
portfolio has a significant positive P ROD-loading of 0.27 (t = 2.53) because the small-growth
portfolio has a large negative P ROD-loading of −0.65 (t = −5.16). However, in the biggest-size
quintile, the H-L portfolio has a large negative P ROD-loading of −0.43 (t = −4.21). In particular,
the big-growth portfolio has a positive P ROD-loading of 0.24 (t = 6.49).

   The two-factor neoclassical specifications in Panels B and C in Table 8 further illustrate the
relative roles of P ROD and IN V . The alpha of the small-growth portfolio is −0.57% per month
(t = −2.22) in the two-factor M KT + IN V model, meaning that IN V does not help explain
the portfolio’s low average returns. But the alpha is only −0.15% (t = −0.56) in the two-factor
M KT + P ROD model, meaning that P ROD helps a lot. However, IN V helps reduce the overall
magnitude of the alphas for other portfolios in the 25 size-B/M universe. The average magnitude
of the H-L alphas across the size quintiles is 0.44% per month in the M KT + IN V model (close
to that in the benchmark specification), but is 0.86% in the M KT + P ROD model.

   Somewhat surprisingly, the small-growth portfolio has a lower P ROD-loading than the small-
value portfolio. The evidence seems inconsistent with Fama and French (1995), who document
that growth firms are more profitable than value firms in the 1963–1992 sample. In untabulated
results, we apply their empirical methods to our 1972–2006 sample. We find that growth firms have
persistently higher ROAs than value firms in the biggest-size quintile for 11 years surrounding the
portfolio formation year. But in the smallest-size quintile, growth firms have higher ROAs than
value firms before, but have lower ROAs after the portfolio formation. In the calendar time, a
striking downward spike of ROA appears for the small-growth portfolio over the past decade. The
ROA starts at about 0.50% per quarter in 1997, drops rapidly to about −7% in 2003, before rising
back to 0.50% in 2004. (See also related evidence in Fama and French 2001, 2004.) The dramatic
ROA deterioration of the small-growth firms over the past decade gives rise to their abnormally low
P ROD-loadings. We also verify that the small-stock H-L portfolio has a negative P ROD-loading
in the 1972–1995 sample before the downward spike occurs.

3.3   Tests on One-Way Sorted Portfolios

In this subsection, we test the neoclassical factor model using deciles formed on financial distress,
earnings surprises, accruals, net issues, earnings-to-price, and asset growth. We use earnings-to-
price portfolios as a representative of the array of one-way sorted value and growth portfolios

                                                  24
studied by, for example, Fama and French (1996). All the other anomaly variables have recently
received much attention in the empirical finance and accounting literature.

3.3.1      The Distress Deciles

The neoclassical model is successful in explaining the financial distress anomaly. We form ten
deciles on Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi’s (2007) distress measure. We largely follow their pro-
cedure in constructing the measure (see Appendix B).5 Each month from June 1975 to December
2006, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles using the NYSE breakpoints
of distress from at least four months ago. (The starting point of the sample is restricted by the
availability of the data items required to construct the distress measure.) Monthly value-weighted
portfolio returns are calculated for the current month.

       Panel A of Table 9 reports that, consistent with Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2007), more
distressed firms earn lower average returns than less distressed firms. The high-minus-low (H-L)
distress portfolio has an average return of −0.89% per month (t = −3.04). Controlling for traditional
risk measures only makes matters worse: More distressed firms are riskier than less distressed firms
according to traditional factor models. The market beta of the H-L portfolio is significantly positive,
0.53 (t = 5.79), meaning that its CAPM alpha of −1.23% per month (t = −4.15) has an even higher
magnitude than its average return. In total, five out of ten alphas are significant, leading to an
overall rejection of the model (p-value = 0). The results from the Fama-French (1993) model are
largely similar. The H-L portfolio has a SM B-loading of 0.65 (t = 5.24) and a market beta of
0.43 (t = 5.09). The Fama-French alpha is −1.34% per month (t = −5.22). Further, six out of ten
deciles have significant alphas, and the GRS test rejects the model (FGRS = 3.76, p-value = 0).

       More important, the neoclassical model generates an insignificant alpha of 0.18% per month (t
= 0.83) for the H-L portfolio. Although two out of ten deciles have significant neoclassical alphas,
the model cannot be rejected using the GRS test (FGRS = 1.68 and p-value = 0.08). The P ROD-
loading goes in the right direction in explaining the distress anomaly. More distressed firms have
lower P ROD-loadings than less distressed firms: The loading spread is −1.48 (t = −14.59). This
evidence makes sense because the distress measure has a strong negative relation with profitability
(see equation B.1), meaning that more distressed firms are less profitable than less distressed firms.

       In untabulated results, we directly calculate time series averages of portfolio ROA for the ten
   5
   We have used portfolios formed on Ohlson’s (1980) O-Score and obtained similar results. We also have used Alt-
man’s (1968) Z-score, but the CAPM explains well the average Z-score portfolio returns in our sample (not reported).


                                                        25
distress deciles. We measure portfolio ROA as the value-weighted average ROAs across all the
stocks in a given portfolio, in which the weights are given by the market equity to be consistent
with the calculations of portfolio returns. The portfolio average ROA decreases monotonically from
3.43% per quarter for the lowest-distress decile, to 1.74% for the fifth decile, and further to −2.15%
per quarter for the highest-distress decile. The average ROA spread of 5.58% per quarter between
the two extremes is more than 25 standard errors from zero.

   From Panel A of Table 9, the highest-distress decile also has a lower IN V -loading than the
lowest-distress decile: The loading spread is −0.53 (t = −3.10). In untabulated results, we calcu-
late time series averages of portfolio I/A for the distress deciles. We measure portfolio I/A as the
value-weighted average I/As across all the stocks in a given portfolio, in which the weights are given
by the market equity. We find that the average I/A is 11.83% per annum in the highest-decile and
8.88% in the lowest-distress decile. The I/A-spread of 2.95% per annum is significant (t = 2.55).
Thus, the IN V -loading is consistent with the underlying investment pattern. One possible reason
for the investment pattern is that the distress measure has a positive loading on the market-to-book
(see equation B.1), meaning that more distressed firms can be high-investing growth firms.

3.3.2   The Earnings Surprises Deciles

The neoclassical factor model outperforms traditional factor models in explaining the earnings
anomaly, the “granddaddy” of underreaction events in the language of Fama (1998, p. 286). To
construct the testing portfolios, we rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks each month based
on the NYSE breakpoints of their most recent past SU E. Monthly value-weighted returns on the
SU E portfolios are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly.

   From Panel B of Table 9, sorting on SU E produces an average-return spread of 1.17% per
month (t = 8.05) between the two extreme deciles. The CAPM alpha of the H-L SU E portfolio
is 1.22% per month (t = 8.50). Eight out of ten portfolios have significant alphas, and the CAPM
is strongly rejected by the GRS test. The Fama-French (1993) model cannot explain the earnings
anomaly either: Eight out of ten alphas are significant and the model is also rejected by the GRS
test (FGRS = 9.64, p-value = 0). And the H-L SU E portfolio alpha remains at 1.22% per month
(t = 8.00). The neoclassical model reduces the alpha from 1.22% per month to 0.89%, which rep-
resents a reduction of 27%. But the alpha remains significant (t = 6.24). The overall performance
of the model is also improved: The number of significant alphas across the deciles is reduced to
four, although the model is still rejected by the GRS test (FGRS = 4.57, p-value = 0).

                                                 26
   Our model improves on the traditional factor models because the H-L SU E portfolio has a
positive P ROD loading of 0.33 (t = 5.07). In untabulated results, we find that the average portfolio
ROA increases from 1.12% per quarter for the lowest-SU E decile to 1.68% for the fifth SU E decile
and further to 2.60% for the highest-SU E decile. The average ROA spread between the two extreme
deciles is only 1.48% per quarter, albeit significant (t = 12.16). This low magnitude of the ROA
spread helps explain why our model is only partially successful in explaining the earnings anomaly.

3.3.3   The Accrual Deciles

In June of each year t, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles based on the
NYSE breakpoints of accruals at the last fiscal year-end of t−1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio
returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t+1. Panel A of Table 10 shows that,
consistent with Sloan (1996), high accrual firms earn lower average returns than low accrual firms
and the average H-L accrual portfolio earns an average return of −0.52% per month (t = −4.13).
The CAPM and the Fama-French (1993) model cannot explain the accrual anomaly: The average
H-L accrual portfolio earns a CAPM alpha of −0.55% per month (t = −4.41) and a Fama-French
alpha of −0.57% (t = −4.35). The zero-cost portfolio has traditional factor loadings all close to zero.

   In the neoclassical model, the H-L accrual portfolio has near zero loadings on M KT and P ROD
but a negative IN V -loading of −0.51 (t = −5.33). As a result, the zero-cost portfolio earns an
alpha of −0.38% per month (t = −2.97) in our model, which represents a reduction in magnitude
of about 33% from its Fama-French alpha. The GRS test still rejects our model, however. In
untabulated results, we find that the average portfolio I/A increases monotonically from 4.86%
per annum for the lowest-accrual decile to 9.47% for the fifth decile and further to 20.06% for the
highest-accrual decile. The significant I/A-spread of 15.21% per annum between the two extremes
(t = 6.61) explains the IN V -loading pattern across the accrual deciles.

3.3.4   The Net Stock Issues Deciles

In June of each year t, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles based on the
NYSE breakpoints of net stock issues at the last fiscal year-end. Monthly value-weighted portfolio
returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t+1. From Panel B of Table 10, firms
with high net issues earn lower average returns than firms with low net issues: The H-L net issues
portfolio earns an average return of −0.96% per month (t = −5.23). The CAPM cannot explain
this anomaly: The H-L alpha is −1.11% per month (t = −4.68), seven out of ten deciles have


                                                  27
significant alphas, and the GRS test rejects the model. The Fama-French (1993) model reduces the
magnitude of the alpha to −0.83% per month (t = −4.01). The reason is that the H-L portfolio
has a negative HM L-loading of −0.53 (t = −5.06), meaning that, sensibly, high net issues firms are
likely to be growth firms and low net issues firms are likely to be value firms. But the Fama-French
model still leaves three out of ten alphas significant and is rejected by the GRS test.

   The neoclassical model outperforms traditional factor models in explaining the net issues
anomaly. Although the model is rejected by the GRS test, only one out of ten alphas is significant.
Noteworthy, the H-L net issues portfolio earns an insignificant neoclassical alpha of −0.29% per
month (t = −1.31). The IN V -loading goes in the right direction in explaining the anomaly: The
H-L portfolio has an IN V -loading of −0.75 (t = −4.97). The IN V -loading pattern is consistent
with the underlying investment pattern. In untabulated results, we find that the average portfolio
I/A increases monotonically from 6.35% per annum for the lowest net issues decile to 9.15% for the
fifth decile and further to 27.43% for the highest net issues decile. And the I/A-spread of 21.08%
per annum is more than ten standard errors from zero.

   Somewhat surprisingly, the P ROD-loading also goes in the right direction in explaining the new
issues anomaly: The H-L portfolio has a P ROD-loading of −0.57 (t = −6.69). In untabulated
results, we find that at the portfolio formation in June of each year, the highest net issues decile has
a lower average ROA than the lowest decile: 0.97% versus 2.02% per quarter. The ROA spread of
−1.06% is highly significant (t = 15.11). Timing does not seem to be the culprit: At the last fiscal
year-end t−1 when net issues are measured, the highest decile also has a lower average ROA than
the lowest decile: 0.83% versus 1.96% per quarter. Our evidence differs from Loughran and Ritter
(1995) and Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2007), who report that equity issuers are more profitable
than matching nonissuers (although the magnitude of the profitability spread is much smaller than
that of the investment spread). Our evidence differs because our net issues measure also includes
share repurchases. And our evidence makes sense in light of Lie (2005), who shows that firms
announcing repurchases exhibit superior operating performance relative to industry peers.

3.3.5   The Asset Growth Deciles

In June of each year t, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles based on
the NYSE breakpoints of asset growth at the last fiscal year-end t − 1. Consistent with Cooper,
Gulen, and Schill (2007), Panel A of Table 11 reports that the highest asset growth decile earns a
lower average return than the lowest decile with an average return spread of −0.79% per month (t

                                                  28
= −4.63). This average return spread is lower than the level of 1.05% reported by Cooper et al.
because we use follow the prescription of Fama and French (2007) in using the NYSE breakpoints
of asset growth to avoid excessive influence of micro-caps.

   The CAPM cannot explain the asset growth anomaly: Seven out of ten asset growth deciles
have significant alphas and the GRS test rejects the model. And the H-L asset growth portfolio
has a CAPM alpha of −0.92% per month (t = −5.52). Except for the highest asset growth decile,
the Fama-French (1993) model makes all the alphas insignificant. The main source of success in
their model is that high asset growth firms have lower HM L-loadings than low asset growth firms.
But the H-L portfolio still has an alpha of −0.46% per month (t = −3.16).

   The neoclassical model further reduces in magnitude the H-L alpha to −0.37% per month,
albeit significant (t = −2.46). But the model is still rejected by the GRS test. The main source of
our explanatory power is the lower IN V -loadings of high asset growth firms than those of low asset
growth firms. In particular, the H-L portfolio has an IN V -loading of −1.39 (t = −14.06). The
IN V -loading pattern reflects the underlying investment pattern. In untabulated results, we find
that the average portfolio I/A increases monotonically from −5.22% per annum for the lowest asset
growth decile to 6.36% for the fifth decile and further to 32.97% per annum for the highest decile.
The spread of 38.19% per annum between the two extremes is more than nine standard errors
from zero. It seems safe to say that both asset growth and our I/A measure capture fundamental
firm-level investment. IN V fails to fully explain the asset growth anomaly because asset growth is
a more comprehensive measure of investment than our I/A measure.

3.3.6   The Earnings-to-Price Deciles

Fama and French (1996) show that their model can explain average returns of portfolios sorted on
valuation ratios such as earnings-to-price, cash flow-to-assets, and dividend-to-price. We report the
results for ten earnings-to-price (E/P ) deciles. The E/P portfolio data are from Kenneth French’s
Web site. The results for portfolios formed on other valuation ratios are similar (not reported).

   From Panel B of Table 11, the highest E/P decile earns a higher average return than the low-
est E/P decile: 0.31% versus 1.00% per month, meaning that the H-L E/P portfolio earns an
average return of 0.69% per month (t = 2.92). The CAPM cannot explain the E/P anomaly: The
H-L alpha is 0.82% per month (t = 3.55), six out of ten alphas are significant, and the CAPM is
rejected by the GRS test (p-value = 0.01). Remarkably, none of the ten alphas are significant in



                                                 29
the Fama-French (1993) model, which cannot be rejected by the GRS test (p-value = 0.57). And
the H-L E/P portfolio earns a Fama-French alpha of only −0.13% per month (t = −0.90). The
main source of the extreme success for the Fama-French model is that high E/P stocks have higher
HM L-loadings than low E/P stocks: The H-L portfolio has an HM L-loading of 1.41 (t = 23.06).

    In contrast, the performance of our neoclassical model leaves much to be desired. Three out
of ten E/P deciles have significant alphas and the GRS test rejects the model at the 1% level.
In particular, the H-L E/P portfolio earns an alpha of 0.60% per month (t = 2.46). Our model
gains some explanatory power for the E/P portfolios through their IN V loadings. The H-L E/P
portfolio has an IN V -loading of 0.71 (t = 3.97). In untabulated results, we confirm that the high-
est E/P decile invests less than the lowest E/P decile on average only by 2.67% per annum. The
magnitudes of the I/A spread and the subsequent IN V -loading spread are not large enough to
bring our model performance up to a level comparable to the Fama-French (1993) model.


4    Cross-Sectional Regressions

We supplement our time series tests with Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional tests. To facilitate
comparison with Fama and French (2007), we follow their test design. With a few exceptions, the
general inferences from the cross-sectional tests are similar to those from our earlier time series tests.

    At the end of each June from 1972 to 2006, we allocate NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
to three size groups, micro-caps, small stocks, and big stocks. The breakpoints are the 20th and
50th percentiles of the June market cap for NYSE stocks. Panel A of Table 12 shows averages
and standard deviations of returns for the value-weighted and equal-weighted micro, small, and big
portfolios from July 1972 to December 2006. We also report time series averages of the number of
stocks and the percent of aggregate market cap in each portfolio. On average, micro-caps include
59% of all stocks, but the micro-caps account for only about 2.83% of the market value of all sample
stocks. For comparison, big stocks include 21% of all stocks but account for 91% of the total market
cap. Consequently, the micro-caps dominate the equal-weighted market returns, whereas the big
stocks dominate the value-weighted market returns.

    Table 12 also reports averages of the standard deviations of the annual cross section of returns
and the anomaly variables. Fama and French (2007) observe that, for returns and all anomaly vari-
ables, the micro-cap group has the largest cross-sectional dispersion, followed by the small-stock
group, and then by the big-stock group. While replicating their evidence in our 1972–2006 sample,


                                                   30
we show that their observation also applies to our annual I/A and quarterly ROA measures. The
evidence means that micro-caps have enormous influence in cross-sectional regressions. But their
influence is more limited in time series tests because we value-weight portfolio returns.

   Following Fama and French (2007), we explain the cross section of monthly returns from July
of year t to June of t + 1 using anomaly variables observed in June of t or the fiscal year-end of
t−1. The exceptions are momentum and quarterly ROA, which are both updated monthly (as in
sorts). We include the market cap and book-to-market (ln(MC) and ln(B/M), respectively, both in
logs) in the regressions to proxy for the SM B- and HM L-loadings. The idea is that current size
and book-to-market are more timely proxies for the loadings than unconditional regression slopes
(see Fama and French 1997). Panel A of Table 13 replicates Fama and French’s (2007, Table IV)
cross-sectional tests in our sample. In Panel B, we perform the tests after replacing their asset
growth and profitability with our I/A and quarterly ROA measures, respectively.

   Table 13 shows that the value effect is reliable across all size groups in our 1972–2006 sample,
even after we include other anomaly variables such as share issuance, asset growth in cross-sectional
regressions. With Fama and French’s (2007) variable definitions (Panel A), the average slopes for
ln(B/M) are 0.26 (t = 3.14) and 0.21 (t = 2.38) for small and big stocks, respectively. The average
slope for micro-caps is smaller, 0.14 (t = 2.00). With our I/A and ROA measures (Panel B), the
average slopes for ln(B/M) are about 0.47, all of which are more than 4.2 standard errors from zero.

   The average momentum slopes in Panel A are similar to those from Fama and French (2007).
The average slope for micro-caps (0.32, t = 1.89) is about half the size and more than 3.6 standard
errors below the slope for small stocks (0.77, t = 3.81) and more than 1.8 standard errors below
the slope for big stocks (0.65, t = 2.66). However, once we control for I/A and quarterly ROA, the
average momentum slope is only reliable in small stocks (0.50, t = 2.13). The slope in big stocks
is close (0.48, t = 1.80), but the slope in micro-caps is not impressive (0.18, t = 0.93).

   The net stock issues show strong marginal explanatory power in all size groups in both panels
of Table 13. From Panel A, the average slopes range from −1.47 to −1.64, all of which are more
than −4.4 standard errors from zero. And the slopes differ by less than 0.6 standard errors. The
slopes vary more in Panel B from −0.64 (t = −1.46) in micro-caps to −1.96 (t = −3.30) in small
stocks. And the two are more than 1.8 standard errors apart. The dummy variable for zero net
stock issues shows more explanatory power in our tests than in those of Fama and French (2007).
In Panel A, the average slope only shows up significant in micro-caps (−0.24, t = −3.23). But the


                                                  31
slope is also reliable (−0.34, t = −2.30) for small stocks in our tests.

   Consistent with Fama and French (2007), we find that the relation between accruals and average
returns is not pervasive. In Panel A, the average slope for positive accruals is only reliable in small
stocks (−1.05, t = −3.47), which is more than 2.7 standard errors from the slope in micro-caps
(−0.22, t = −1.09). Once we use our I/A and ROA in Panel B, even the strong slope in small
stocks is reduced to −0.50, which is less than 1.2 standard errors from zero. The average slopes
for negative accruals are all within 1.2 standard errors of zero in Panel A. In Panel B, the slope is
−1.00 (t = −3.37) in micro-caps but is within 0.4 standard errors of zero in small and big stocks.

   We also confirm that the negative relation between asset growth and average returns is not
pervasive in cross-sectional regressions. The relation is strong in micro-caps (−1.23, t = 8.38),
substantially weaker but statistically reliable in small stocks (−0.48, t = −2.33), and probably
non-existent in big stocks (−0.43, t = −1.89). And the average slope for big stocks is −3.6 stan-
dard errors from the average slope for micro-caps. Consistent with our earlier time series tests,
I/A has a weaker explanatory power for future returns than asset growth. The average slope of
I/A is only reliable in micro-caps (−0.89, t = −3.75) and is close to zero in small and big stocks.
In untabulated results, the I/A slope for micro-caps moves up to −1.07 (t = −5.89) if we use
profitability to replace quarterly ROA in the regression. But the slopes for small and big stocks,
both around −0.15, are within 0.8 standard errors of zero. As noted, asset growth can probably
be interpreted as the most comprehensive measure of fundamental investment. Our earlier time
series results are likely to be enhanced if we use asset growth to construct the IN V factor. Our
investment measure is from our earlier work in Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2007). And we have
not searched around for the investment measure that yields the strongest results possible.

   The positive relation between (annual) profitability and average returns in the 1972–2006 sam-
ple is in line with (but somewhat weaker than) the relation in the 1963–2006 sample estimated by
Fama and French (2007). From Panel A, the average slope estimated from all stocks is reliable
(0.69, t = 2.39). But the slopes, ranging from 0.22 to 0.68 for micro-caps, small stocks, and big
stocks, are all within 1.5 standard errors of zero. In contrast, Panel B shows a much more powerful
relation between the positive quarterly ROA and average returns. The average slopes, ranging
from 5.19 in big stocks to 49.96 in micro-caps, are all more than 4.5 standard errors from zero.
And the average slope estimated from all stocks is 35.76 (t = 15.20). We also find some evidence
that negative quarterly ROA is associated with lower average returns, at least in micro-caps.


                                                  32
5     Conclusion

Motivated from neoclassical reasoning, we propose a new multi-factor model that includes the mar-
ket factor, the low-minus-high investment factor, and the high-minus-low productivity factor. We
show that the neoclassical three-factor model outperforms traditional factor models in explaining
the average returns across portfolios formed on momentum, financial distress, investment, profitabil-
ity, accruals, net stock issues, earnings surprises, and asset growth. At a minimum, the neoclassical
model seems to provide a reasonable description of the cross section of average stock returns.

5.1    Applications

Our pragmatic approach à la Fama and French (1996) means that, in principle, our neoclassical
model can be used in many applications that require estimates of expected returns. Examples in-
clude portfolio choice, portfolio performance evaluation, measurement of abnormal returns in event
studies, and the cost of capital estimates. These applications primarily depend on the empirical
performance of our model. The motivation of our factors from equilibrium asset pricing theory also
raises the likelihood that the performance of the neoclassical model can persist in the future.

    Regressing the excess returns of a target portfolio on the neoclassical factors can provide the ex-
posures of the portfolio to the factors. The expected return estimate on the portfolio can be obtained
by summing the products of the regression slopes and their historical average premiums for their cor-
responding factors. The estimate then can be used to guide portfolio choice and capital budgeting
decisions. A similar procedure also can be used to evaluate the performance of a managed portfolio.
The intercept from regressing the excess return of the managed portfolio on the neoclassical factors
is the estimated average abnormal return of the portfolio. This abnormal return can be used to judge
whether the manager has done a good job in generating average returns greater than the average
returns from the passive management of combining the neoclassical factors that we have identified.

    The voluminous literatures in empirical corporate finance and capital markets research in ac-
counting have used factor models to measure abnormal performance following corporate events.
The intercepts from the market regression and the Fama-French (1993) three-factor regression
are used to measure average abnormal returns. Our evidence suggests that the intercepts from the
neoclassical three-factor regressions also can do a reasonable job identifying abnormal performance.

    For example, using the CAPM alpha as the measure of abnormal performance, Agrawal, Jaffe,
and Mandelker (1992) document that stockholders of acquiring firms suffer a significant loss of


                                                  33
about 10% over the five post-merger years. Because mergers and acquisitions are a form of capital
investment from the perspective of bidders, we conjecture that the post-merger underperformance
reflects the negative relation between investment and expected returns. Using the neoclassical
model is likely to yield more precise estimates of abnormal performance.

5.2   Open Questions

We take the pragmatic approach in constructing common factors motivated from neoclassical eco-
nomics. While useful in providing a parsimonious factor model for practical purposes, this approach
leaves a more fundamental question unanswered. The neoclassical factors are constructed directly
on firm characteristics. Although we show formally that these characteristics are linked to risk, our
investment-based asset pricing approach does not directly characterize the nature of or quantify
the amount of the underlying risk. (And as noted, investment-based asset pricing has so far not ad-
dressed the question why earnings and momentum anomalies are more short-lived than, for example,
value and investment anomalies.) Our basic philosophy is that, rather than determining unobserv-
able expected returns from equally unobservable risk as in traditional asset pricing literature, we
infer unobservable expected returns from observable firm characteristics and corporate policies.

   We can link risk to the real economy even in investment-based partial equilibrium models. Carl-
son, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004) relate the risk of value-minus-growth strategies to operating
leverage. The higher operating leverage of value firms than that of growth firms makes the cash flows
of value firms covary more with economic downturns than the cash flows of growth firms. Zhang
(2005) argues that it is more costly for firms to downsize than to expand their productive capac-
ity. Because value firms are stuck with more unproductive capital than growth firms in recessions,
the cash flows of value firms covary more with economic downturns than the cash flows of growth
firms. Johnson (2002) shows that the curvature of log price-dividend ratio with respect to expected
growth is convex, meaning that the log price-dividend ratio is more sensitive to changes in expected
growth when expected growth is high. Sagi and Seasholes (2006) relate this expected-growth risk to
revenue growth volatility, costs, and growth options. However, because investors are not explicitly
modeled, these papers fall short of quantifying the underlying risk related to the investor behavior.

   A promising direction for future research can link investment-based asset pricing to the long
run risk literature (e.g., Bansal and Yaron 2004; Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad 2005). The long
run risk literature characterizes the risk that investors are afraid of, whereas investment-based asset
pricing connects the risk to firm characteristics and corporate policies. General equilibrium models,

                                                  34
in which investors and firms are jointly modeled, hold the promise of understanding more funda-
mental driving forces of risk. However, because of their complex structures, constructing general
equilibrium models that can be implemented empirically remains elusive.



                                            References

 Abel, Andrew B. and Janice C. Eberly, 1994, A unified model of investment under uncertainty,
     American Economic Review 84 (1), 1369–1384.

 Abarbanell, Jeffrey S. and Brian J. Bushee, 1998, Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis
    strategy, The Accounting Review 73 (1), 19–45.

 Agrawal, Anup, Jeffrey F. Jaffe, and Gershon N. Mandelker, 1992, The post-merger performance of
     acquiring firms: A re-examination of an anomaly, Journal of Finance XLVII (4), 1605–1621.

 Altman, Edward I., 1968, Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate
     bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 23, 589–609.

 Anderson, Christopher W., and Luis Garcia-Feijóo, 2006, Empirical evidence on capital invest-
    ment, growth options, and security Journal of Finance 61 (1), 171–194.

 Ball, Ray and Philip Brown, 1968, An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers, Journal
      of Accounting Research 6, 159–178.

 Ball, Ray, S. P. Kothari, and Ross L. Watts, 1993, Economic determinants of the relation between
      earnings changes and stock returns, The Accounting Review 68 (3), 622–638.

 Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
     puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

 Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2005, Consumption, dividends, and
     the cross-section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.

 Berk, Jonathan B, Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options,
     and security returns, Journal of Finance, 54, 1153–1607.

 Bernard, Victor L. and Jacob K. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price
     response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting Research Supplement 27, 1–48.

 Bernard, Victor L. and Jacob K. Thomas, 1990, Evidence that stock prices do not fully reflect the
     implications of current earnings for future earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics
     13, 305–340.

 Brealey, Richard A., Stewart C. Myers, and Franklin Allen, 2006, Principles of corporate finance,
     8th edition, Irwin McGraw-Hill.

 Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, Bad beta, good beta, American Economic
    Review 94 (5), 1249–1275.

 Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2007, In search of distress risk, working paper,
    Harvard University.

                                                 35
Carhart, Mark M. 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52 (1),
    57–82.

Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price
    dynamics: Implications for the cross section of returns, Journal of Finance 59 (6), 2577–2603.

Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2006, Corporate investment and asset price
    dynamics: Implications for SEO event studies and long-run performance, Journal of Finance
    61 (3), 1009–1034.

Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies,
   Journal of Finance 51 (5), 1681–1713.

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
    economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.

Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model, Jour-
    nal of Political Economy 104, 572–621.

Cochrane, John H., 2005, Asset pricing, revised edition, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
    New Jersey.

Cohen, Randolph B., Paul A. Gompers, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2002, Who underreacts to cash-
   flow news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions, Journal of Financial
   Economics 66, 409–462.

Cooper, Ilan, 2006, Asset pricing implications of non-convex adjustment costs and irreversibility
   of investment, Journal of Finance 61 (1), 139–170.

Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2007, Asset growth and the cross-section
   of stock returns, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional vari-
    ation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52 (1), 1–33.

Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible information,
    Journal of Finance 61, 1605–1643.

DeBondt, Werner F. M. and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact? Journal of
   Finance 40 (3), 793–805.

Dechow, Patricia M., Amy P. Hutton, and Richard G. Sloan, 1999, An empirical assessment of
    the residual income valuation model, Journal of Accounting and Economics 26, 1–34.

Dichev, Ilia, 1998, Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? Journal of Finance 53, 1141–1148.

Fairfield, Patricia M., Scott Whisenant, and Terry Lombardi Yohn, 2003, Accrued earnings and
     growth: Implications for future profitability and market mispricing, The Accounting Review
     78, 353–371.

Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance, Journal of
   Financial Economics 49, 283–306.



                                               36
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
   Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
   bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and
   returns, Journal of Finance L (1), 131–155.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanation of asset pricing anomalies,
   Journal of Finance LI (1), 55–84.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry cost of equity, Journal of Financial
   Economics 43, 153–193.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Forecasting profitability and earnings, Journal of
   Business 73 (2), 161–175.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm charac-
   teristics or lower propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3–43.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2004, New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates,
   Journal of Financial Economics 73, 229–269.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2006, Profitability, investment, and average returns,
   Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491–518.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2007, Dissecting anomalies, forthcoming, Journal of
   Finance.

Frankel, Richard and Charles M. C. Lee, 1998, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and
    cross-sectional stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283–319.

Gala, Vito D., 2006, Investment and returns, working paper, London Business School.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a given
    portfolio, Econometrica 57 (5), 1121–1152.

Gomes, Joao F., Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Equilibrium cross section of returns, Journal
   of Political Economy 111 (4), 693–732.

Gordon, Myron J., 1962, The Investment, Financing, and Valuation of the Corporation, The Irwin
    Series in Economics, Homewood, Illinois.

Griffin, John M. and Michael L. Lemmon, 2002, Book-to-market equity, distress risk, and stock
     returns, Journal of Finance LVII (2), 2317–2336.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables estimation
   of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 50, 1269–1288.

Haugen, Robert A. and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants of expected
   stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401–439.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s marginal and average q: A neoclassical interpretation, Economet-
    rica 50 (1), 213–224.

                                              37
Hirshleifer, David, Kewei Hou, Siew Hong Teoh, and Yinglei Zhang, 2004, Do investors overvalue
    firms with bloated balance sheets? Journal of Accounting and Economics 38, 297–331.

Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open
    market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181–208.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
    Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.

Johnson, Timothy C., 2002, Rational momentum effects, Journal of Finance LVII (2), 585–608.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, 1982, Time to build and aggregate fluctuations, Econo-
   metrica 50 (6), 1345–1370.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapolation,
    and risk, Journal of Finance 49 (5), 1541–1578.

Lamont, Owen A. and Richard H. Thaler, 2003, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in
   tech stock carve-outs? Journal of Political Economy 111 (2), 227–268.

Lie, Erik, 2005, Operating performance following open market share repurchase announcements,
     Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 411–436.

Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
    portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13–37.

Liu, Laura Xiaolei and Lu Zhang, 2007, Momentum profits, factor pricing, and macroeconomic
     risk, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Liu, Laura Xiaolei, Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang, 2007, Investment-based expected stock re-
     turns, working paper, University of Michigan.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23–51.

Lyandres, Evgeny, Le Sun, and Lu Zhang, 2007, The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-
    based explanation, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment, Jour-
   nal of Finance 60 (6), 2661–2700.

Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2002, Limited arbitrage in equity markets,
    Journal of Finance 57 (2), 551–584.

Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy, Journal
    of Accounting Research 18 (1), 109–131.

Piostroski, Joseph D., 2000, Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information
    to separate winners from losers, Journal of Accounting Research 38, Supplement: Studies on
    accounting information and the economics of the firm, 1–41.

Polk, Christopher and Paola Sapienza, 2006, The stock market and corporate investment: A test
    of catering theory, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Pontiff, Jeffrey and Artemiza Woodgate, 2006, Share issuance and cross-sectional returns, forth-
    coming, Journal of Finance.

                                               38
 Richardson, Scott A. and Richard G. Sloan, 2003, External financing and future stock returns,
     working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

 Richardson, Scott A., Richard G. Sloan, Mark T. Soliman, and Irem Tuna, 2005, Accrual reliabil-
     ity, earnings persistence, and stock prices, Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 437–485.

 Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 46,
     3–27.

 Titman, Sheridan, K. C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns,
     Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.

 Sagi, Jacob S. and Mark S. Seasholes, 2007, Firm-specific attributes and the cross-section of
      momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 389–434.

 Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
     of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425–442.

 Sloan, Richard G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows about
     future earnings? The Accounting Review 71 (3), 289–315.

 Spiess, Katherine D. and John Affleck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock returns
     following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243–267.

 Wu, Jin G., X. Frank Zhang, and Lu Zhang, 2007, The accrual anomaly: Exploring the optimal
     investment hypothesis, working paper, University of Georgia, University of Michigan, and
     Yale School of Management.

 Xie, Hong, 2001, The mispricing of abnormal accruals, The Accounting Review 76 (3), 357–373.

 Xing, Yuhang, 2007, Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory: An empirical investiga-
     tion, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

 Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60 (1), 67–103.




A     A Two-Period q-Theory Model of Expected Returns
We derive the q-theory expected-returns model à la Cochrane (1991, 1996). We use a two-period
simplification of the dynamic model derived by Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2007). See their paper for a
more detailed exposition including the derivation and estimation in the infinite-horizon framework.
    Firms use capital and a vector of costlessly adjustable inputs to produce a perishable output
good. Firms choose the levels of these inputs each period to maximize their operating profits,
defined as revenues minus the expenditures on these inputs. Taking the operating profits as given,
firms then choose optimal investment to maximize their market value.
    There are only two periods, t and t + 1. Firm j starts with capital stock kjt , invests in period
t, and produces in both t and t + 1. The firm exits at the end of period t + 1 with a liquida-
tion value of (1 − δj )kjt+1 , in which δj is the firm-specific rate of capital depreciation. Operating


                                                  39
        profits, πjt = π(kjt , xjt ), depend upon capital, kjt , and a vector of exogenous aggregate and firm-
        specific productivity shocks, denoted xjt . Operating profits exhibit constant returns to scale, that
        is, π(kjt , xjt ) = π1 (kjt , xjt )kjt , in which numerical subscripts denote partial derivatives. The ex-
        pression π1 (kjt , xjt ) is therefore the marginal product of capital.
            The law of motion for capital is kjt+1 = ijt + (1 − δj )kjt , in which ijt denotes capital investment.
        We use the one-period time-to-build convention: Capital goods invested today only become pro-
        ductive at the beginning of the next period. Investment incurs quadratic adjustment costs given
        by (a/2)(ijt /kjt )2 kjt , in which a > 0 is a constant parameter. The adjustment-cost function is
        increasing and convex in ijt , decreasing in kjt , and exhibits constant returns to scale.
           Let mt+1 be the stochastic discount factor from time t to t + 1, which is correlated with the
        aggregate component of xjt+1 . Firm j chooses ijt to maximize the market value of equity:
                    Cash flow at period t
                                                                                                 
                  z            }|            {                                              
                 
                                                               Cash flow at period t+1          
                                     
                                    a ijt 2               z                }|              {
          max π(kjt , xjt ) − ijt −         kjt + Et mt+1 π(kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )kjt+1  .                  (A.1)
          {ijt } 
                                   2 kjt                                                        
                                                                                                 
                 
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 
          |                                                 {z                                                   }
                                      Cum dividend market value of equity at period t

        The first part of this expression, denoted by π(kjt , xjt ) − ijt − (a/2)(ijt /kjt )2 kjt , is net cash flow
        during period t. Firms use operating profits π(kjt , xjt ) to invest, which incurs both purchase costs,
        ijt , and adjustment costs, (a/2) ( ijt / kjt )2 kjt . The price of capital is normalized to be one. If
        net cash flow is positive, firms distribute it to shareholders, and if net cash flow is negative, firms
        collect external equity financing from shareholders. The second part of equation (A.1) contains the
        expected discounted value of cash flow during period t + 1, which is given by the sum of operating
        profits and the liquidation value of the capital stock at the end of t + 1.
              Taking the partial derivative of equation (A.1) with respect to ijt yields the first-order condition:
Marginal cost of investment at period t                                                            
              z  }|
                   {                              Marginal benefit of investment at period t+1
                    ijt                                   z              }|            {           
              1+a                =      Et mt+1           π1 (kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )           ≡ qjt.       (A.2)
                    kjt

        The left side of the equality is the marginal cost of investment, and the right side is the marginal
        benefit commonly dubbed marginal q, denoted qjt . To generate one additional unit of capital at
        the beginning of next period, kjt+1 , firms must pay the price of capital and the marginal adjust-
        ment cost, a(ijt /kjt ). The next-period marginal benefit of this additional unit of capital includes the
        marginal product of capital, π1 (kjt+1 , xjt+1 ), and the liquidation value of capital net of depreciation,
        1 − δj . Discounting this next-period benefit using the pricing kernel mt+1 yields the marginal q.
            To derive asset pricing implications from this two-period q-theoretic model, we first define the
        investment return as the ratio of the marginal benefit of investment at period t + 1 divided by the
        marginal cost of investment at period t:
                                                                 Marginal benefit of investment at period t+1
                                                                           z              }|            {
                              I                                            π1 (kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )
                             rjt+1                      ≡                                                            (A.3)
                             | {z }                                               1 + a (ijt /kjt )
           Investment return from period t to t+1                                 |       {z      }
                                                                      Marginal cost of investment at period t


                                                                 40
        Following Cochrane (1991), we divide equation (A.2) by the marginal cost of investment:
                                                      I
                                                            
                                              Et mt+1 rjt+1   = 1.                                                    (A.4)

           We now show that under constant returns to scale, stock returns equal investment returns.
        From equation (A.1) we define the ex-dividend equity value at period t, denoted pjt , as:
                                                                                              
                                                                  Cash flow at period t+1
                                                           z                }|              {
                         pjt                =      Et mt+1 π(kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )kjt+1  , (A.5)
                        |{z}
             Ex dividend equity value at period t

        The ex-dividend equity value, pjt, equals the cum-dividend equity value—the maximum in equation
                                                                                      S
        (A.1)—minus the net cash flow over period t. We can define the stock return, rjt+1 , as

                                                                               Cash flow at period t+1
                                                                     z                }|               {
                                 S                                   π(kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )kjt+1
                                rjt+1                   =                                                       ,     (A.6)
                                | {z }                          Et [mt+1 [π(kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )kjt+1 ]]
                 Stock return from period t to t+1              |                     {z                     }
                                                                        Ex dividend equity value at period t

        in which the ex-dividend market value of equity in the numerator is zero in this two-period setting.
           Dividing both the numerator and the denominator of equation (A.6) by kjt+1 , and invoking the
        constant returns assumption yields:

                   S             π1 (kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )          π1 (kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )    I
                  rjt+1 =                                               =                                 = rjt+1 .
                            Et [mt+1 [π1 (kjt+1 , xjt+1 ) + (1 − δj )]]          1 + a(ijt /kjt )

        The second equality follows from the first-order condition given by equation (A.2). Because of this
        equivalence, in what follows we use rjt+1 to denote both stock and investment returns.
            The marginal product of capital in the numerator of the investment-return equation (A.3) is
        closely related to earnings, so expected returns increase with earnings. Specifically, earnings equals
        operating cash flows minus capital depreciation, which is the only accrual in our model. Let ejt
        denote earnings, then:
                                                    Operating cash flows
                                                        z }| {
                                          ejt   ≡       π(kjt , xjt )        −          δj kjt          .             (A.7)
                                         |{z}                                           | {z }
                                    Earnings                                     Capital depreciation


             Using equation (A.7) to rewrite equation (A.3) yields:
                            Average product of capital                               Expected profitability
                                z      }|       {                                       z       }|      {
                                Et [πjt+1 /kjt+1 ]      +       1 − δj                  Et [ejt+1 /kjt+1 ] +   1
   Et [rjt+1 ]    =                                                        =                                          (A.8)
   | {z }                              1 + a(ijt /kjt )                                     1 + a(ijt /kjt )
Expected return                        |     {z      }                                      |      {z     }
                                 Marginal cost of investment                         Marginal cost of investment

        Given the market-to-book ratio in the denominator, equation (A.8) predicts that the expected
        return increases with the expected profitability. Haugen and Baker (1996) and Fama and French
        (2006) show that, controlling for market valuation ratios, firms with high expected profitability


                                                                    41
 earn higher average returns than firms with low expected profitability. Further, the magnitude of
 the profitability-return relation equals 1/(1 + a(ijt /kjt )) = kjt+1 /pjt , which is inversely related to
 market capitalization, pjt .
     As emphasized in Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2007), equation (A.8) expresses expected returns
 purely in terms of characteristics. In other words, characteristics are sufficient statistics of expected
 returns. To show that characteristics and covariances are the two sides of the same coin, we follow
 Cochrane (2005, p. 14–16) to rewrite equation (A.4) as the beta-pricing form:

                                         Et [rjt+1 ] = rf t + βjt λmt                                (A.9)

 where rf t is the risk-free rate, βjt ≡ −Covt [rjt+1 , mt+1 ]/Vart [mt+1 ] is the amount of risk, and
 λmt ≡ Vart [mt+1 ]/Et [mt+1 ] is the price of risk. Combining equations (A.8) and (A.9) yields:
                                                                     
                                         Et [ejt+1 /kjt+1 ] + 1
                                 βjt =                          − rf t /λmt                     (A.10)
                                             1 + a(ijt /kjt )

 which provides an analytical link between covariances and characteristics.


 B     Sample Construction and Variable Definitions
 Monthly returns, dividends, and prices are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
 and accounting information from the Compustat Annual and Quarterly Industrial Files. The sample
 is from January 1972 to December 2006. The starting date of the sample is restricted by the avail-
 ability of quarterly earnings data. Following Fama and French (1993, 2007), we exclude financial
 firms (SIC codes between 6000 and 6999) and firms with negative book value of equity in year t−1.
     We define investment-to-assets (I/A) as the annual change in gross property, plant, and equip-
 ment (Compustat annual item 7) plus the annual change in inventories (item 3) divided by the
 lagged book value of assets (item 6). Changes in property, plant, and equipment capture capital
 investment in long-lived assets used in operations over many years such as buildings, machinery,
 furniture, and other equipment. Changes in inventories capture capital investment in short-lived
 assets used in a normal operating cycle such as merchandise, raw materials, supplies, and work in
 progress. We define earnings-to-assets (ROA) as the quarterly earnings (Compustat quarterly item
 8) divided by last quarter’s assets (item 44).
    Book equity is the shareholder equity plus balance sheet deferred taxes (item 74) and invest-
 ment tax credit (item 208 if available) minus the book value of preferred stock. The shareholder
 equity is common equity (item 60), or if not available, its liquidation value (item 235). Depending
 on data availability, redemption (item 56), liquidation (item10), or par value (item 130), in this
 order, is used to represent the book value of preferred stock.
     We construct the distress measure following Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2007, the third
 column in Table 4):

     Distress(t) ≡ −9.164 − 20.264 N IM T AAV Gt + 1.416 T LM T At − 7.129 EXRET AV Gt
+ 1.411 SIGM At − 0.045 RSIZEt − 2.132 CASHM T At + 0.075 M Bt − 0.058 P RICEt                       (B.1)




                                                     42
in which
                                      1 − φ2                                                 
           N IM T AAV Gt−1,t−12 ≡          12
                                              N IM T At−1,t−3 + · · · + φ9 N IM T At−10,t−12     (B.2)
                                      1−φ
                                       1−φ                            11
                                                                                     
           EXRET AV Gt−1,t−12 ≡               EXRET   t−1 + · · · + φ    EXRET  t−12             (B.3)
                                      1 − φ12

The coefficient φ = 2−1/3 , meaning that the weight is halved each quarter. N IM T A is net in-
come (COMPUSTAT quarterly item 69) divided by the sum of market equity and total liabilities
(item 54). The moving average N IM T AAV G is designed to capture the idea that a long his-
tory of losses is a better predictor of bankruptcy than one large quarterly loss in a single month.
EXRET ≡ log(1 + Rit ) − log(1 + RS&P500,t ) is the monthly log excess return on each firm’s equity
relative to the S&P 500 index. The moving average EXRET AV G is designed to capture the idea
that a sustained decline in stock market value is a better predictor of bankruptcy than a sudden
stock price decline in a single month. T LM T A is the ratio of total liabilities divided by the sum of
market equity and total liabilities. SIGM A is the volatility of each firm’s daily stock return over
the past three months. RSIZE is the relative size of each firm measured as the log ratio of its
market equity to that of the S&P 500 index. CASHM T A, used to capture the liquidity position of
the firm, is the ratio of cash and short-term investments divided by the sum of market equity and
total liabilities. M B is the market-to-book equity. P RICE is the log price per share of the firm.
    Following Fama and French (2007), we measure accruals as the change of operating working
capital per split-adjusted share from year t−1 to t divided by book equity per split-adjusted share
at year t. Operating working capital is current assets (Compustat annual item 4) minus cash and
short-term investment (item 1) minus current liabilities (item 5) plus debt in current liabilities
(item 34). And we measure net stock issues as the the natural log of the ratio of the split-adjusted
shares outstanding at the fiscal year-end in t−1 divided by the split-adjusted shares outstanding at
the fiscal year-end in t−2. The split-adjusted shares outstanding is Compustat shares outstanding
(25) times the Compustat adjustment factor (item 27). Profitability is earnings (income before
extraordinary, item 18) minus dividends on preferred stocks (item 19), if available, plus income
statement deferred taxes (item 50), if available, in t−1, divided by book equity for t−1.
    In time series tests with sorts, we follow Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2007) and measure asset
growth of year t as the change of total assets (Compustat annual item 6) from t−1 to t divided
by the total assets from year t−1. To facilitate comparison with Fama and French (2007), we use
their definition of asset growth in cross-sectional regressions. Specifically, we measure asset growth
of year t as the natural log of the ratio of assets per split-adjusted share at the fiscal year-end in
t−1 divided by assets per split-adjusted share at the fiscal year-end in t−2.
   Following Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), we define SU E as the unexpected earnings
(the change in quarterly earnings per share from its value four quarters before) divided by the
standard deviation of unexpected earnings over the prior eight quarters.




                                                  43
                                             Table 1 : Properties of IN V and P ROD, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     Investment-to-assets, I/A, is the annual change in gross property, plant, and equipment (Compustat annual item 7) plus the annual change in inventories (item
     3) divided by the lagged book value of assets (item 6). In each June from 1972 to 2006, all NYSE stocks on CRSP are sorted on market equity (stock price times
     shares outstanding), and the median NYSE size is used to split NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two groups, small and big. We also break NYSE, Amex,
     and NASDAQ stocks into three investment-to-assets groups using the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranked investment-to-
     assets. From the intersections of the two size and the three investment-to-assets groups, we construct six size-I/A portfolios, denoted SLI , SM I , SH I , BLI , BM I ,
     and BH I . Monthly value-weighted returns on the six portfolios are calculated from July of year t to June of year t+1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June
     of year t + 1. IN V is the difference (low-minus-high investment), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the two low-I/A portfolios (SLI
     and BLI ) and the simple average of the returns on the two high-I/A portfolios (SH I and BH I ). Earnings-to-assets, ROA, is quarterly earnings (Compustat
     quarterly item 8) divided by one-quarter-lagged assets (item 44). Each month from January 1972 to December 2006, we sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
     into three groups based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and the high 30% of the ranked quarterly ROA from at least four months ago.
     We also use the NYSE median each month to split NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two groups. We form six portfolios from the intersections of the
     two size and the three ROA groups. Monthly value-weighted returns on the six portfolios are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced
     monthly. P ROD is the difference (high-minus-low productivity), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the two high-ROA portfolios (SH P
     and BH P ) and the simple average of the returns on the two low-ROA portfolios (SLP and BLP ). The Fama-French (1993) factors M KT , SM B, HM L, and the
     momentum factor W M L are from Kenneth French’s Web site. For each portfolio from the two double sorts, we report the mean monthly percent excess returns
     and their t-statistics, average number of firms, average market equity in millions, average book-to-market equity, average prior 2–12 month percent returns (r 11 ,
     from July of year t − 1 to May of year t), average annual percent I/A, and average quarterly percent ROA. The t-statistics (in parentheses) are adjusted for
     heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations in Panel A.
44




                 Panel A: Factor Regressions of IN V and P ROD                              Panel B: Correlation Matrix (p-value in Parenthesis)
                Mean           α     βM KT     βSM B     βHM L βW M L          R2                    P ROD       M KT       SM B     HM L W M L
      IN V       0.34        0.41     −0.15                                   0.17          IN V       −0.06     −0.41      −0.09      0.51     0.18
               (4.15)      (5.54)   (−9.20)                                                            (0.19)    (0.00)     (0.06)   (0.00)   (0.00)
                             0.26     −0.09     0.05    0.23                  0.31          P ROD                −0.08      −0.26    −0.08      0.36
                           (3.66)   (−5.24)   (2.18)  (9.09)                                                     (0.08)     (0.00)   (0.12)   (0.00)
                             0.17    −0.08      0.05    0.25        0.09      0.35          M KT                              0.26   −0.45    −0.07
                           (2.39)   (−4.61)   (2.19) (10.12)      (5.37)                                                    (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.14)
      P ROD      0.73        0.76     −0.05                                   0.01          SM B                                     −0.29      0.02
               (5.67)      (5.84)   (−1.73)                                                                                          (0.00)   (0.62)
                             0.89     −0.06   −0.24   −0.18                   0.10          HM L                                              −0.11
                           (7.04)   (−1.92) (−6.02) (−3.93)                                                                                   (0.02)
                             0.66     −0.03   −0.24   −0.13         0.22      0.22
                           (5.43)   (−0.93) (−6.56) (−2.91)       (7.96)
                        Panel C: Details of the Six Size-I/A Portfolios                                  Panel D: Details of the Six Size-P ROD Portfolios
                                                                         11
                Mean t(Mean) # Firms             Size      B/M       r        I/A ROA                  Mean t(Mean) # Firms            Size    B/M       r 11    I/A   ROA
         I                                                                                     P
      SL         0.91        3.08       909       261      1.45    22.43 −3.44       0.66   SL           0.02      0.06       1081    267       1.16    9.44    11.35 −1.78
      SM I       0.81        2.90       850       290      1.09    17.63  6.86       0.97   SM P         0.75      2.79        655    301       1.13   18.48    11.37  1.30
      SH I       0.52        1.61       892       290      1.05    14.97 27.97       1.17   SH P         1.24      4.06        631    302       0.69   34.78    12.58  3.41
      BLI        0.69        3.07       152     8,948      0.81    17.90 −1.62       1.59   BLP          0.23      0.88        143 8,278        0.95   13.13     9.68 −0.35
      BM I       0.56        2.61       299     9,592      0.67    15.94  6.96       1.98   BM P         0.42      2.01        265 10,018       0.81   15.78     9.31  1.33
      BH I       0.40        1.52       240     8,143      0.59    16.38 23.57       2.01   BH P         0.47      2.05        266 12,308       0.41   23.73    10.99  3.36
            Table 2 : Summary Statistics and Traditional Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on 25 Size and
                11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios and on 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum Portfolios, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ), the Fama-French (1993) factors, and the 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum portfolios are obtained from Kenneth
     French’s Web site. Fama and French use the “11/1/1” convention to measure momentum: The monthly constructed portfolios are the intersections of five
     portfolios formed on market equity and five portfolios formed on prior (2–12) return. The monthly size breakpoints are the NYSE market equity quintiles, and the
     monthly prior (2–12) return breakpoints are NYSE quintiles. We also use an alternative set of 25 size and momentum portfolios, in which momentum is measured
     using the “6/1/6” convention. For each portfolio formation month t, we sort stocks on their prior returns from month t−2 to t−7 based on NYSE breakpoints
     (skipping month t−1), and calculate the subsequent portfolio returns from month t to t+5. FGRS is the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) F -statistic testing
     that the intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.

                     Panel A: 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios                                                   Panel B: 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum Portfolios
            L        2       3     4      W W -L           L        2       3      4     W W -L          L        2       3      4      W W -L           L        2       3      4    W W -L
                           Mean                                          t(Mean)                                         Mean                                          t(Mean)
     S −0.19      0.65    0.91 1.08      1.52    1.72 −0.49 2.40 3.61 4.16 4.68 7.63                   0.33    0.74    0.85    0.95    1.30    0.97    0.86 2.52 3.07 3.40 3.93 5.48
     2 −0.07      0.55    0.82 1.02      1.32    1.40 −0.19 2.00 3.28 3.96 3.96 5.99                   0.19    0.63    0.74    0.82    1.09    0.91    0.53 2.24 2.80 3.08 3.29 4.71
     3 0.12       0.46    0.66 0.79      1.23    1.11 0.34 1.76 2.78 3.34 3.94 4.17                    0.26    0.54    0.66    0.74    0.99    0.73    0.77 2.05 2.69 3.01 3.21 3.46
     4 0.14       0.54    0.57 0.79      1.07    0.93 0.40 2.03 2.42 3.37 3.69 3.19                    0.29    0.50    0.60    0.67    0.99    0.71    0.89 1.96 2.53 2.87 3.43 3.10
     B 0.17       0.45    0.31 0.55      0.81    0.64 0.53 1.90 1.45 2.56 3.07 2.16                    0.13    0.43    0.39    0.50    0.77    0.64    0.46 1.91 1.91 2.41 2.94 2.82
                             α                            t(α) (FGRS = 6.22, pGRS = 0)                                     α                              t(α) (FGRS = 3.56, pGRS = 0)
     S   −0.84 0.16 0.46         0.61    0.94    1.78   −3.43 0.99 2.95          3.82   4.61   8.23   −0.34 0.20 0.34          0.43    0.68    1.02   −1.43 1.21 2.07         2.63   3.48   6.04
     2   −0.76 0.02 0.33         0.51    0.68    1.45   −3.76 0.16 2.47          3.75   3.77   6.30   −0.50 0.07 0.21          0.29    0.44    0.95   −2.63 0.49 1.61         2.22   2.59   5.01
45




     3   −0.54 −0.06 0.18        0.31    0.61    1.15   −2.71 −0.49 1.59         2.64   3.83   4.34   −0.39 0.00 0.15          0.23    0.37    0.76   −2.22 0.00 1.41         2.21   2.52   3.61
     4   −0.50 0.01 0.09         0.30    0.50    1.00   −2.38 0.06 0.86          3.10   3.51   3.43   −0.34 −0.03 0.10         0.17    0.40    0.74   −1.91 −0.25 1.06        2.04   3.19   3.20
     B   −0.41 0.00 −0.13        0.11    0.28    0.69   −2.06 0.00 −1.49         1.17   2.17   2.33   −0.41 −0.04 −0.05        0.05    0.23    0.64   −2.53 −0.43 −0.80       0.69   2.05   2.77
                                            Fama-French (1993) three-factor regressions: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + sj SM B + hj HM L + εj
                             a                             t(a) (FGRS = 5.75, pGRS = 0)                                   a                              t(a) (FGRS = 3.62, pGRS = 0)
     S   −1.18   −0.26    0.06   0.26    0.78    1.96   −5.74   −2.42    0.64    3.22   6.98   7.97   −0.63   −0.16   −0.02 0.11       0.51    1.14   −3.43   −1.67   −0.26 1.45     5.40   6.07
     2   −0.97   −0.33   −0.01   0.21    0.64    1.61   −5.43   −3.04   −0.10    2.74   5.86   6.30   −0.68   −0.24   −0.09 0.02       0.38    1.05   −4.09   −2.74   −1.30 0.34     4.05   5.00
     3   −0.71   −0.38   −0.15   0.02    0.60    1.31   −3.35   −3.52   −1.74    0.23   5.05   4.42   −0.53   −0.28   −0.14 −0.01      0.35    0.87   −2.93   −2.83   −1.58 −0.19    3.72   3.72
     4   −0.66   −0.27   −0.21   0.06    0.51    1.17   −2.78   −2.09   −2.30    0.76   3.95   3.55   −0.43   −0.26   −0.16 −0.03      0.41    0.84   −2.05   −2.42   −1.94 −0.43    3.86   3.18
     B   −0.44   −0.10   −0.21   0.08    0.41    0.85   −2.00   −0.74   −2.40    0.91   2.97   2.58   −0.36   −0.04   −0.06 0.06       0.39    0.75   −2.03   −0.44   −1.04 0.91     3.35   2.92
                             b                                               s                                             b                                               s
     S    1.18    0.94    0.89 0.90      0.98   −0.20 1.19 0.91 0.84 0.89 1.10 −0.09                   1.18    1.02    0.96    0.96    1.04   −0.15 1.20 0.98 0.94 0.96 1.12 −0.08
     2    1.26    1.05    0.98 0.98      1.07   −0.19 0.90 0.73 0.66 0.72 0.95 0.05                    1.25    1.08    1.03    1.02    1.10   −0.15 0.87 0.75 0.70 0.72 0.93 0.06
     3    1.26    1.08    1.00 0.99      1.07   −0.19 0.54 0.45 0.43 0.40 0.69 0.15                    1.22    1.10    1.05    1.03    1.08   −0.15 0.58 0.46 0.42 0.47 0.72 0.14
     4    1.29    1.16    1.07 1.06      1.04   −0.25 0.27 0.14 0.13 0.12 0.44 0.17                    1.24    1.13    1.07    1.04    1.07   −0.17 0.24 0.15 0.17 0.21 0.44 0.21
     B    1.20    0.99    0.97 0.96      1.00   −0.20 −0.15 −0.21 −0.23 −0.28 −0.06 0.09               1.08    0.97    0.93    0.94    1.01   −0.07 −0.12 −0.20 −0.21 −0.20 −0.03 0.09
                             h                                        R2                                                   h                                        R2
     S    0.35    0.52    0.50   0.41    0.09   −0.26    0.76    0.88    0.90    0.91   0.88   0.03 0.28       0.43    0.42    0.36    0.10   −0.18    0.80    0.91    0.92   0.93   0.92   0.03
     2    0.19    0.45    0.43   0.35   −0.06   −0.26    0.81    0.87    0.90    0.92   0.90   0.03 0.15       0.36    0.37    0.30   −0.03   −0.17    0.83    0.92    0.93   0.94   0.93   0.02
     3    0.17    0.42    0.45   0.38   −0.08   −0.25    0.72    0.85    0.88    0.87   0.87   0.03 0.13       0.37    0.38    0.31   −0.06   −0.19    0.79    0.88    0.90   0.93   0.91   0.03
     4    0.21    0.41    0.44   0.34   −0.08   −0.29    0.66    0.81    0.86    0.88   0.82   0.03 0.10       0.34    0.37    0.28   −0.08   −0.18    0.72    0.85    0.89   0.92   0.87   0.03
     B    0.07    0.18    0.15   0.08   −0.18   −0.25    0.63    0.73    0.86    0.86   0.76   0.02 −0.06      0.03    0.04    0.01   −0.24   −0.18    0.70    0.84    0.93   0.92   0.84   0.01
          Table 3 : Summary Statistics and Traditional Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on 25 Investment and
                      Profitability Portfolios and on 25 Size and Book-to-Market Portfolios, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ), the Fama-French (1993) three factors, and the 25 size and book-to-market portfolios are from Kenneth
     French’s Web site. We sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into five quintiles each month based on NYSE breakpoints of quarterly ROA from at least
     four months ago. Also, we sort all stocks independently in June of each year into five quintiles based on NYSE breakpoints of investment-to-assets at the last
     fiscal yearend. From taking intersections, we form 25 investment and profitability portfolios, whose value-weighted returns are calculated for the current month.
     FGRS is the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) F -statistic testing that the intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.

                     Panel A: 25 Investment and Profitability Portfolios                                             Panel B: 25 Size and Book-to-Market Portfolios
                P                           P      P        P                          P      P
              L       2      3       4    H H-L           L       2      3       4   H H-L               L      2        3      4     H H-L           L      2      3       4    H H-L
                            Mean                                       t(Mean)                                          Mean                                      t(Mean)
     LI    0.42 0.82 0.55 0.93 0.82              0.40 1.26 2.96 1.92 3.57 2.79 1.64                S   0.10   0.81    0.88    1.07   1.19   1.09    0.25   2.40   3.10   4.05   4.21   5.08
     2     0.54 0.66 0.76 0.38 0.74              0.20 1.60 2.39 3.12 1.58 2.97 0.83                2   0.34   0.66    0.90    1.00   1.04   0.69    0.93   2.27   3.51   4.06   3.77   3.27
     3     0.08 0.47 0.42 0.74 0.62              0.54 0.24 1.72 1.43 2.97 2.62 2.29                3   0.41   0.72    0.74    0.84   1.07   0.66    1.22   2.70   3.14   3.67   4.12   2.86
     4    −0.22 0.32 0.58 0.59 0.60              0.82 −0.64 1.20 2.05 2.31 2.24 3.37               4   0.51   0.58    0.79    0.84   0.92   0.42    1.68   2.28   3.30   3.72   3.65   1.93
     H I −0.51 0.32 0.21 0.42 0.66               1.17 −1.39 1.01 0.67 1.46 2.15 4.81               B   0.40   0.61    0.59    0.65   0.65   0.25    1.67   2.68   2.75   3.13   2.80   1.20
     H-LI −0.93 −0.49 −0.34 −0.51 −0.16               −4.30 −2.24 −1.38 −2.84 −0.87
                           α                             t(α) (FGRS = 3.17, pGRS = 0)                                     α                           t(α) (FGRS = 4.25, pGRS = 0)
      I
     L      −0.18 0.30 0.04 0.43 0.25            0.43   −0.89 1.90 0.25 2.95 1.60           1.75   S −0.63    0.21    0.37    0.60   0.70   1.32   −2.61   1.03   2.15   3.64   3.82   7.10
     2      −0.08 0.16 0.30 −0.09 0.24           0.32   −0.38 1.03 2.17 −0.76 1.80          1.33   2 −0.38    0.09    0.40    0.53   0.53   0.91   −2.07   0.57   2.96   3.78   3.18   4.83
     3      −0.55 0.01 −0.09 0.26 0.14           0.69   −2.71 0.06 −0.46 1.99 1.31          3.00   3 −0.27    0.17    0.27    0.40   0.59   0.86   −1.74   1.45   2.32   3.16   3.71   3.96
     4      −0.85 −0.16 0.07 0.07 0.04           0.89   −4.19 −1.01 0.41 0.55 0.36          3.87   4 −0.13    0.04    0.30    0.39   0.45   0.58   −1.14   0.37   2.68   3.33   3.06   2.82
     HI     −1.19 −0.24 −0.35 −0.17 0.02         1.22   −5.53 −1.25 −1.86 −1.21 0.19        4.96   B −0.11    0.13    0.16    0.26   0.25   0.36           1.48   1.54   2.18   1.61   1.81
46




                                                                                                                                                   −1.29
     H-LI   −1.01 −0.54 −0.39 −0.59 −0.23               −4.67 −2.47 −1.68 −3.26 −1.22
                                           Fama-French (1993) three-factor regressions: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + sj SM B + hj HM L + εj
                              a                            t(a) (FGRS = 3.32, pGRS = 0)                                   a                           t(a) (FGRS = 3.08, pGRS = 0)
      I
     L      −0.53 −0.08 −0.30 0.22        0.16   0.69   −2.97 −0.55 −1.64 1.64       1.01   3.01   S −0.52 0.08 0.09 0.23 0.16 0.68 −4.48 0.88 1.35 3.31 2.16 5.50
     2      −0.31 −0.16 0.05 −0.26        0.22   0.52   −1.56 −0.97 0.35 −2.03       1.50   2.10   2 −0.21 −0.12 0.05 0.09 −0.07 0.15 −2.63 −1.55 0.67 1.23 −0.93 1.42
     3      −0.70 −0.42 −0.44 0.13        0.24   0.94   −3.59 −2.45 −2.28 0.95       2.17   4.36   3 −0.03 −0.05 −0.12 −0.09 −0.02 0.01 −0.37 −0.58 −1.50 −1.13 −0.22 0.08
     4      −1.02 −0.37 −0.19 0.05        0.30   1.32   −4.97 −2.22 −1.19 0.39       2.84   5.74   4 0.11 −0.17 −0.07 −0.05 −0.11 −0.22 1.33 −1.87 −0.83 −0.56 −1.06 −1.84
     HI     −1.24 −0.54 −0.67 −0.16       0.19   1.43   −6.15 −2.78 −3.26 −1.14      1.57   6.08   B 0.17 0.04 −0.02 −0.13 −0.26 −0.43 2.75 0.55 −0.28 −1.75 −2.34 −3.34
     H-LI   −0.70 −0.46 −0.37 −0.39       0.03          −3.45 −2.06 −1.44 −2.16      0.19
                             b                                           s                                                b                                          s
     LI      1.21   1.15   1.12    1.06   1.14 −0.08 0.64       0.29   0.21 0.14 0.19 −0.45        S   1.08   0.95    0.91    0.88   0.99 −0.09 1.32 1.29 1.06 0.99 1.05 −0.27
     2       1.21   1.11   1.00    0.99   0.98 −0.23 0.49       0.16   0.13 0.10 0.04 −0.45        2   1.13   1.04    0.99    0.97   1.09 −0.04 0.98 0.86 0.74 0.71 0.85 −0.12
     3       1.21   1.06   1.14    1.02   0.92 −0.29 0.44       0.25   0.10 −0.01 −0.06 −0.50      3   1.06   1.08    1.02    1.01   1.12 0.05 0.73 0.51 0.41 0.38 0.51 −0.22
     4       1.22   1.02   1.09    1.05   1.00 −0.21 0.48       0.15   0.20 −0.09 −0.08 −0.56      4   1.06   1.11    1.10    1.04   1.16 0.10 0.40 0.22 0.18 0.19 0.18 −0.21
     HI      1.26   1.19   1.16    1.16   1.15 −0.11 0.51       0.33   0.40 0.02 0.17 −0.35        B   0.95   1.05    1.00    1.00   1.05 0.10 −0.29 −0.22 −0.23 −0.21 −0.11 0.18
     H-LI    0.05   0.04   0.04    0.10   0.01      −0.13       0.04   0.19 −0.13 −0.02
                               h                                          R2                                              h                                         R2
     LI    0.46 0.54 0.50 0.29 0.11 −0.34                0.72   0.75   0.64   0.73   0.73   0.09   S −0.34    0.04    0.28    0.44   0.68   1.02    0.92   0.94   0.95   0.94   0.94   0.70
     2     0.29 0.47 0.37 0.25 0.03 −0.25                0.68   0.67   0.72   0.74   0.75   0.13   2 −0.39    0.19    0.45    0.58   0.79   1.18    0.95   0.94   0.93   0.93   0.94   0.78
     3     0.18 0.63 0.52 0.20 −0.13 −0.31               0.68   0.64   0.61   0.72   0.78   0.18   3 −0.47    0.27    0.53    0.69   0.86   1.32    0.95   0.90   0.89   0.89   0.88   0.79
     4     0.19 0.29 0.37 0.04 −0.39 −0.57               0.68   0.65   0.66   0.78   0.86   0.19   4 −0.43    0.29    0.55    0.64   0.83   1.25    0.94   0.88   0.87   0.88   0.86   0.76
     HI    0.00 0.41 0.45 0.00 −0.28 −0.28               0.71   0.65   0.65   0.79   0.84   0.06   B −0.39    0.16    0.31    0.63   0.80   1.19    0.94   0.89   0.85   0.88   0.78   0.62
     H-LI −0.46 −0.12 −0.05 −0.30 −0.39                  0.10   0.01   0.02   0.09   0.09
     Table 4 : Neoclassical Factor Regressions (Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj ) for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on
        25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios and on 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum Portfolios, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ), the market factor, and the 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum portfolios are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
     To form the 25 size and 6/1/6-momentum portfolios, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into five quintiles each month t based on NYSE breakpoints
     of prior 2–7 months returns (month t−2 to t−7), and calculate the subsequent portfolio returns from month t to t+5. Also, we sort all stocks independently each
     month into five market equity quintiles based on NYSE breakpoints. We form 25 portfolios from taking intersections. All portfolio returns are value-weighted.
     We report the neoclassical factor regressions: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj . See Table 1 for the description of the investment factor IN V
     and the productivity factor P ROD. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. FGRS is the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)
     F -statistic testing that the intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.


             L      2      3      4     W W -L          L      2      3      4    W W -L          L        2     3      4     W W -L         L        2      3       4     W W -L
                                                               Panel A: 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios
                            a                           t(a) (FGRS = 3.74, pGRS = 0)                              b                                         R2
     S    0.12   0.38 0.50 0.57 1.01 0.89             0.37   1.86 2.72 3.06 4.10 3.25           1.18    0.97   0.94   1.00   1.20   0.01   0.67    0.64   0.64     0.66   0.63   0.24
     2    0.09   0.21 0.27 0.42 0.70 0.61             0.38   1.21 1.81 2.71 3.25 2.36           1.25    1.04   1.00   1.04   1.29   0.04   0.76    0.71   0.73     0.74   0.70   0.19
     3    0.28   0.03 0.09 0.11 0.51 0.23             1.27   0.21 0.70 0.81 2.77 0.73           1.17    1.04   0.98   0.99   1.24   0.07   0.75    0.76   0.77     0.79   0.74   0.18
     4    0.32   0.07 −0.04 0.05 0.26 −0.06           1.36   0.46 −0.37 0.46 1.52 −0.18         1.13    1.06   0.99   1.03   1.19   0.06   0.72    0.77   0.81     0.85   0.77   0.19
     B    0.03   0.01 −0.29 −0.24 −0.04 −0.07         0.12   0.05 −2.81 −2.60 −0.27 −0.19       1.06    0.89   0.90   0.94   1.09   0.03   0.65    0.70   0.83     0.85   0.78   0.09
47




                           i                                          t(i)                                        p                                         t(p)
     S   −0.42 0.24     0.33    0.41   0.31   0.73   −2.18 1.87    2.98   3.50   2.15   5.09   −1.04   −0.41 −0.24 −0.18 −0.26 0.78 −7.28 −4.07 −2.76 −2.36 −2.52 5.38
     2   −0.59 0.02     0.24    0.26   0.12   0.71   −4.18 0.20    2.41   2.57   0.99   4.88   −0.80   −0.26 −0.05 −0.03 −0.08 0.72 −8.28 −2.87 −0.64 −0.46 −0.88 5.40
     3   −0.65 0.04     0.18    0.23   0.08   0.73   −4.62 0.39    2.21   2.88   0.76   4.12   −0.74   −0.14 0.02 0.14 0.08 0.82 −7.47 −1.85 0.25 2.61 1.03 5.38
     4   −0.76 0.06     0.18    0.28   0.20   0.96   −5.20 0.70    2.62   4.27   2.12   4.72   −0.67   −0.11 0.08 0.18 0.21 0.88 −5.90 −1.29 1.12 3.48 2.44 4.91
     B   −0.50 −0.04    0.09    0.26   0.18   0.68   −3.47 −0.47   1.50   4.89   1.98   3.19   −0.31    0.01 0.16 0.31 0.33 0.64 −2.78 0.14 3.18 7.04 3.84 3.54
                                                                Panel B: 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum Portfolios
                            a                           t(a) (FGRS = 2.03, pGRS = 0)                              b                                         R2
     S    0.53   0.50 0.50 0.56        0.87 0.34      1.72   2.42 2.59 2.88      3.72 1.53      1.22    1.07   1.03   1.05   1.23   0.00   0.68    0.68   0.68     0.68   0.67   0.23
     2    0.27   0.26 0.26 0.30        0.54 0.27      1.15   1.62 1.76 1.96      2.71 1.19      1.25    1.10   1.06   1.08   1.28   0.03   0.77    0.77   0.77     0.77   0.74   0.18
     3    0.32   0.17 0.14 0.16        0.40 0.07      1.48   1.23 1.08 1.40      2.35 0.28      1.18    1.05   1.02   1.04   1.23   0.05   0.78    0.80   0.81     0.83   0.77   0.16
     4    0.36   0.12 0.06 0.06        0.34 −0.02     1.66   1.02 0.58 0.61      2.29 −0.07     1.12    1.03   1.01   1.02   1.19   0.07   0.77    0.83   0.85     0.88   0.81   0.15
     B    0.05   0.04 −0.11 −0.11      0.16 0.10      0.29   0.32 −1.51 −1.56    1.28 0.38      0.98    0.90   0.88   0.91   1.07   0.10   0.73    0.82   0.90     0.91   0.83   0.07
                           i                                          t(i)                                        p                                         t(p)
     S   −0.37 0.12 0.21        0.23 0.17     0.55   −1.95 0.93 1.69      1.88 1.23     4.59   −0.94   −0.45 −0.34 −0.30 −0.34 0.60 −6.85         −4.59 −3.79 −3.57 −3.63 5.11
     2   −0.57 0.00 0.11        0.13 −0.01    0.56   −3.86 0.05 1.15      1.28 −0.06    4.60   −0.71   −0.25 −0.13 −0.08 −0.13 0.59 −6.77         −3.12 −1.75 −1.21 −1.57 5.00
     3   −0.58 −0.07 0.07       0.13 −0.04    0.54   −4.08 −0.87 0.89     1.58 −0.39    3.75   −0.63   −0.18 −0.02 0.02 −0.02 0.61 −6.43          −2.47 −0.31 0.33 −0.22 4.83
     4   −0.70 −0.11 0.09       0.15 0.01     0.71   −5.09 −1.53 1.28     2.31 0.15     4.83   −0.55   −0.14 0.00 0.07 0.06 0.61 −5.49            −1.91 0.01 1.42 1.01 4.48
     B   −0.55 −0.17 −0.02      0.06 −0.08    0.47   −5.15 −2.45 −0.62    1.29 −1.11    3.25   −0.31   −0.02 0.10 0.17 0.14 0.45 −3.99            −0.28 2.48 5.75 2.17 3.63
     Table 5 : Neoclassical Factor Regressions with the Quarterly Investment Factor (Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V Q + pj P ROD + εj )
         for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios and on 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum
                                                 Portfolios, 1/1975–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ), the market factor, and the 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum portfolios are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
     See Table 5 for the description of the 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum portfolios. We construct the quarterly investment factor, denoted IN V Q , using quarterly
     investment data. The quarterly investment-to-assets is the change in gross property, plant, and equipment (Compustat quarterly item 42) plus the change in
     inventory (item 38) divided by lagged total assets (item 44). The sample is from January 1975 to December 2006. The starting point of the sample is restricted
     by the availability of quarterly investment data. We categorize NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into three groups each month based on the NYSE breakpoints
     for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranked values of quarterly I/A from at least four months ago. We also use the NYSE median each month to
     split all stocks into two size groups, and form six portfolios from the intersections of the two size and three I/A portfolios. Monthly value-weighted returns on
     the six portfolios are calculated for the current month. The IN V Q factor is the difference (low-minus-high investment), each month, between the average of the
     returns on the two low-I/A portfolios and the average of the returns on the two high-I/A portfolios. See Table 1 for the description of the productivity factor
     P ROD. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. FGRS is the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) F -statistic testing that the
     intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.


            L       2      3      4      W W -L           L      2        3      4      W W -L           L        2     3       4     W W -L         L        2      3       4     W W -L
                                                                  Panel A: 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios
                            a                             t(a) (FGRS = 4.61, pGRS = 0)                                   b                                          R2
     S 0.09 0.40 0.56 0.76              1.36    1.28 0.27 2.11 3.05 3.64               4.74    3.83    1.20    0.94   0.90    0.94   1.13 −0.08    0.67    0.66   0.65     0.65   0.63   0.21
     2 0.00 0.16 0.26 0.50              1.01    1.01 0.01 0.94 1.71 2.94               3.77    3.06    1.30    1.03   1.00    1.03   1.24 −0.06    0.75    0.72   0.74     0.74   0.71   0.17
48




     3 0.17 −0.07 0.04 0.07             0.69    0.51 0.71 −0.48 0.29 0.49              3.14    1.37    1.23    1.04   0.97    1.00   1.23 0.01     0.73    0.78   0.79     0.80   0.75   0.15
     4 0.14 −0.07 −0.12 −0.08           0.45    0.31 0.51 −0.46 −1.06 −0.81            2.27    0.75    1.21    1.06   0.99    1.03   1.16 −0.05    0.69    0.78   0.83     0.87   0.77   0.15
     B −0.08 −0.09 −0.35 −0.22          0.06    0.14 −0.29 −0.57 −3.25 −2.10           0.38    0.35    1.08    0.87   0.89    0.91   1.08 0.00     0.61    0.69   0.83     0.84   0.78   0.09
                        i                                            t(i)                                                 p                                         t(p)
     S   −0.01   0.35   0.32    0.16   −0.25   −0.24   −0.06   1.85     2.16   1.34   −1.51   −1.07   −1.05   −0.35 −0.18 −0.16 −0.31      0.74   −7.16   −4.37 −2.45 −1.92 −2.48 4.51
     2   −0.09   0.26   0.28    0.16   −0.40   −0.31   −0.53   1.84     2.40   1.55   −2.34   −1.53   −0.82   −0.20 0.03 0.02 −0.15        0.67   −7.67   −2.64 0.46 0.30 −1.27 4.13
     3   −0.11   0.30   0.33    0.23   −0.31   −0.21   −0.77   2.87     3.42   3.34   −2.31   −1.03   −0.73   −0.07 0.10 0.22 0.04         0.77   −6.22   −1.07 1.79 4.28 0.45 4.13
     4   −0.03   0.36   0.37    0.35   −0.24   −0.21   −0.17   3.93     5.22   5.84   −2.03   −0.85   −0.67   −0.03 0.17 0.28 0.18         0.85   −4.80   −0.34 2.90 6.07 1.73 3.86
     B    0.14   0.27   0.12    0.10   −0.17   −0.31    0.90   2.85     2.15   1.23   −1.54   −1.28   −0.32    0.05 0.19 0.34 0.31         0.62   −2.39    0.64 3.70 6.97 3.25 3.05
                                                                      Panel B: 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum Portfolios
                            a                             t(a) (FGRS = 3.40, pGRS = 0)                                   b                                          R2
     S 0.50 0.51 0.54 0.65              1.14    0.65 1.59 2.46 2.68 3.06               4.33    2.54    1.25    1.05   1.01    1.03   1.19 −0.06    0.68    0.70   0.68     0.68   0.68   0.22
     2 0.15 0.18 0.20 0.28              0.73    0.57 0.63 1.17 1.31 1.75               3.07    2.01    1.30    1.11   1.06    1.09   1.28 −0.02    0.76    0.78   0.77     0.78   0.75   0.17
     3 0.21 0.03 0.03 0.10              0.55    0.34 0.92 0.24 0.21 0.83               2.76    1.10    1.23    1.07   1.04    1.05   1.23 0.00     0.77    0.81   0.83     0.84   0.78   0.14
     4 0.22 −0.02 −0.09 −0.03           0.49    0.27 0.88 −0.18 −0.86 −0.33            2.85    0.79    1.18    1.04   1.02    1.03   1.18 0.00     0.74    0.83   0.87     0.89   0.82   0.12
     B −0.09 −0.06 −0.18 −0.15          0.26    0.35 −0.40 −0.46 −2.20 −2.02           2.17    1.21    1.00    0.89   0.88    0.92   1.08 0.08     0.70    0.82   0.90     0.90   0.85   0.09
                        i                                            t(i)                                                 p                                         t(p)
     S   −0.01   0.24   0.22    0.14   −0.24   −0.23   −0.05   1.24     1.46   0.99   −1.53   −1.11   −0.95   −0.42 −0.30 −0.28 −0.38      0.57   −6.80   −4.79 −3.51 −3.10 −3.29 4.53
     2   −0.10   0.21   0.21    0.14   −0.33   −0.23   −0.55   1.52     1.59   1.15   −2.09   −1.25   −0.72   −0.20 −0.07 −0.03 −0.15      0.56   −6.19   −2.89 −1.06 −0.43 −1.51 3.95
     3   −0.07   0.24   0.29    0.19   −0.32   −0.24   −0.52   1.91     2.88   2.09   −2.27   −1.46   −0.62   −0.11 0.06 0.08 −0.05        0.57   −5.53   −1.87 1.14 1.62 −0.61 3.69
     4   −0.08   0.24   0.32    0.24   −0.27   −0.19   −0.59   2.61     3.91   4.02   −2.73   −1.01   −0.56   −0.08 0.09 0.14 0.03         0.59   −4.53   −1.14 1.68 3.25 0.39 3.52
     B    0.01   0.11   0.12    0.05   −0.33   −0.34    0.08   1.29     2.90   1.46   −5.32   −2.13   −0.31   −0.01 0.11 0.19 0.07         0.38   −3.12   −0.12 2.67 5.63 1.34 2.87
           Table 6 : Alternative Two-Factor Specifications of Neoclassical Regressions (Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + εj and
      Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + pj P ROD + εj ) for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum and 25 Size and
                                                6/1/6-Momentum, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ), the market factor, the 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum, and the 25 size and book-to-market portfolios are from
     Kenneth French’s Web site. See Table 1 for the description of the investment IN V factor and the productivity P ROD factor, and Table 2 for the description of
     the 25 size and 6/1/6-momentum portfolios. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. FGRS is the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken
     (1989) F -statistic testing that the intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.


                           Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + εj                                               Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + pj P ROD + εj
             L       2       3     4     W W -L          L      2      3     4     W W -L          L      2     3     4    W W -L           L      2     3      4    W W -L
                                                                 Panel A: 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum Portfolios
                           a                            t(a) (FGRS = 4.81, pGRS = 0)                           a                            t(a) (FGRS = 5.03, pGRS = 0)
49




      S   −0.75 0.03 0.30        0.42   0.79   1.54   −2.69 0.20 1.93      2.60   3.79   6.60   −0.08 0.48 0.65 0.76      1.15    1.23   −0.29 2.51 3.65 4.28       4.91   4.69
      2   −0.58 −0.01 0.23       0.40   0.63   1.21   −2.62 −0.04 1.70     2.84   3.38   4.98   −0.19 0.22 0.38 0.54      0.75    0.94   −0.89 1.30 2.60 3.65       3.59   3.68
      3   −0.33 −0.09 0.11       0.22   0.58   0.91   −1.49 −0.69 0.93     1.84   3.54   3.11   −0.02 0.05 0.18 0.21      0.55    0.57   −0.09 0.34 1.39 1.69       3.07   1.93
      4   −0.24 −0.03 0.02       0.20   0.43   0.67   −1.04 −0.20 0.21     2.07   2.83   2.08   −0.03 0.10 0.04 0.17      0.35    0.38   −0.14 0.68 0.35 1.70       2.20   1.19
      B   −0.23 0.02 −0.16       0.02   0.23   0.46   −1.05 0.12 −1.75     0.23   1.68   1.42   −0.20 −0.01 −0.25 −0.12   0.04    0.25   −0.90 −0.07 −2.42 −1.26    0.33   0.75
                                                                 Panel B: 25 Size and 6/1/6-Momentum Portfolios
                           a                            t(a) (FGRS = 2.73, pGRS = 0)                           a                            t(a) (FGRS = 2.65, pGRS = 0)
      S   −0.26   0.12 0.22      0.31   0.58   0.84   −0.97   0.68 1.33    1.84   2.87   4.55    0.35 0.55 0.60 0.67      0.95    0.59    1.30 2.82 3.26 3.62       4.29   2.86
      2   −0.32   0.05 0.15      0.23   0.44   0.76   −1.54   0.32 1.17    1.69   2.47   3.79    0.01 0.26 0.31 0.36      0.54    0.53    0.03 1.67 2.15 2.47       2.80   2.39
      3   −0.20   0.02 0.12      0.18   0.39   0.58   −1.00   0.14 1.09    1.70   2.56   2.52    0.06 0.13 0.17 0.22      0.38    0.32    0.29 0.99 1.41 1.97       2.31   1.32
      4   −0.10   0.01 0.06      0.11   0.40   0.49   −0.47   0.07 0.67    1.35   3.07   1.96    0.04 0.07 0.10 0.13      0.35    0.31    0.19 0.62 0.97 1.43       2.45   1.16
      B   −0.21   0.03 −0.03     0.03   0.27   0.48   −1.18   0.26 −0.51   0.49   2.39   1.93   −0.20 −0.04 −0.13 −0.08   0.12    0.32   −1.14 −0.34 −1.71 −1.27    1.02   1.27
     Table 7 : Neoclassical Factor Regressions (The Benchmark Specification Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj and Two
     Alternative Two-Factor Specifications Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + εj and Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + pj P ROD + εj ) for Monthly
                  Percent Excess Returns on 25 Investment and Profitability Portfolios, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ) and the market factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
     into five quintiles each month based on NYSE breakpoints of quarterly ROA from at least four months ago. Also, we sort all stocks independently in June of
     each year into five quintiles based on NYSE breakpoints of investment-to-assets at the last fiscal year-end. From taking intersections, we form 25 investment and
     profitability portfolios, whose value-weighted returns are calculated for the current month. See Table 1 for the description of the investment factor IN V and the
     productivity factor P ROD. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. FGRS is the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) F -statistic
     testing that the intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.


              LP      2     3     4   H P H-LP         LP      2     3      4   H P H-LP     LP      2     3      4   H P H-LP        LP      2      3     4   H P H-LP
                                                        Panel A: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj
                             a                         t(a) (FGRS = 1.68, pGRS = 0.02)                      b                                        R2
      I
     L     0.14    0.19 −0.17 0.04 −0.12 −0.25  0.61        1.10 −1.00    0.25 −0.68 −1.02 1.24 1.11 1.08       1.09 1.21 −0.03      0.71   0.71   0.60 0.74   0.74   0.28
     2     0.56    0.27 0.17 −0.34 −0.11 −0.67  2.64        1.35 1.23 −2.37 −0.72 −3.05 1.18 1.01 0.98          1.01 1.04 −0.14      0.73   0.63   0.70 0.75   0.79   0.43
     3     0.30    0.28 −0.13 0.10 −0.05 −0.35  1.48        1.19 −0.53    0.68 −0.43 −1.69 1.14 0.91 1.01       0.97 0.96 −0.17      0.76   0.57   0.55 0.72   0.79   0.46
     4             0.16 0.11 0.07 0.11 0.14 −0.16           0.86 0.56     0.50 0.86 0.60 1.15 0.93 1.01         1.00 1.05 −0.10      0.74   0.67   0.62 0.78   0.84   0.30
50




          −0.03
     H I −0.17     0.26 −0.03 −0.08 0.10 0.27 −0.87         1.35 −0.11 −0.55 0.81 1.34 1.18 1.02 1.02           1.09 1.16 −0.02      0.77   0.64   0.60 0.82   0.87   0.39
     H-LI −0.30    0.08 0.15 −0.12 0.21        −1.45        0.38 0.59 −0.67 1.16          −0.06 −0.09 −0.06     0.00 −0.04           0.25   0.15   0.08 0.25   0.21
                             i                                       t(i)                                  p                                          t(p)
     LI      0.51 0.56 0.50 0.55 0.34 −0.17           4.31 5.96 4.42     4.94 3.16 −1.19   −0.70 −0.16 0.01 0.21      0.30   0.99   −6.02 −1.88 0.11 2.89      4.30 8.92
     2       0.03 0.17 0.50 0.50 0.25 0.23            0.21 1.79 5.24     5.71 3.48 1.63    −0.85 −0.23 −0.11 0.06     0.33   1.18   −8.85 −1.71 −1.49 0.84     4.83 12.60
     3      −0.41 0.08 0.08 0.06 0.01 0.41           −3.47 0.69 0.81     0.67 0.08 3.60    −0.89 −0.40 0.01 0.18      0.26   1.15   −9.81 −2.98 0.09 2.43      4.22 12.27
     4      −0.38 −0.06 −0.03 −0.17 −0.41 −0.03      −3.01 −0.52 −0.33 −2.12 −5.86 −0.24   −0.88 −0.39 −0.03 0.09     0.14   1.01   −9.72 −4.53 −0.34 1.32     2.36 9.74
     HI     −0.87 −0.56 −0.43 −0.56 −0.74 0.12       −7.13 −4.44 −3.14 −6.56 −9.80 0.96    −0.88 −0.36 −0.18 0.20     0.31   1.19   −9.59 −3.12 −1.32 2.93     5.39 12.00
     H-LI   −1.37 −1.12 −0.94 −1.12 −1.08           −11.50 −8.20 −5.53 −10.72 −8.71        −0.18 −0.20 −0.20 −0.01    0.01          −1.65 −1.99 −1.35 −0.17    0.16
                          Panel B: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + εj                              Panel C: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + pj P ROD + εj
                             a                          t(a) (FGRS = 2.23, pGRS = 0)                        a                          t(a) (FGRS = 2.67, pGRS = 0)
      I
     L      −0.44 0.05 −0.16 0.21     0.13   0.58    −2.27 0.34 −0.89   1.57    0.82   2.31 0.37 0.45 0.06 0.29 0.04 −0.33 1.62 2.59 0.34 1.98 0.26 −1.34
     2      −0.15 0.08 0.08 −0.30     0.16   0.31    −0.72 0.46 0.64 −2.37      1.19   1.26 0.57 0.34 0.40 −0.11 0.00 −0.57 2.85 1.80 2.79 −0.80 0.02 −2.64
     3      −0.45 −0.05 −0.12 0.25    0.16   0.61    −2.15 −0.30 −0.63  1.88    1.46   2.65 0.11 0.31 −0.09 0.13 −0.05 −0.16 0.53 1.38 −0.38 0.90 −0.41 −0.72
     4      −0.76 −0.17 0.08 0.15     0.22   0.98    −3.59 −1.05 0.47   1.15    1.97   3.98 −0.21 0.13 0.09 −0.01 −0.08 0.13 −1.07 0.71 0.47 −0.05 −0.63 0.56
     HI     −0.90 −0.04 −0.18 0.08    0.36   1.26    −4.21 −0.19 −0.90  0.64    3.04   5.04 −0.57 0.01 −0.23 −0.34 −0.24 0.32 −2.88 0.03 −0.95 −2.18 −1.82 1.68
     H-LI   −0.46 −0.09 −0.02 −0.13   0.23           −2.35 −0.43 −0.07 −0.80    1.32        −0.94 −0.44 −0.29 −0.63 −0.29     −4.06 −2.04 −1.23 −3.24 −1.44
     Table 8 : Neoclassical Factor Regressions (The Benchmark Specification Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj and Two
     Alternative Two-Factor Specifications Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + εj and Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + pj P ROD + εj ) for Monthly
                             Percent Excess Returns on 25 Size-B/M Portfolios, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (Rf ), the market factor, and the 25 size-B/M portfolios are from Kenneth French’s Web site. See Table 1 for the
     description of the investment factor IN V and the productivity factor P ROD. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. FGRS is
     the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) F -statistic testing that the intercepts of all 25 portfolios are jointly zero, and pGRS is its associated p-value.


             L      2     3      4     H H-L           L      2      3      4     H H-L           L      2      3          4     H      H-L       L      2      3       4     H     H-L
                                                            Panel A: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + pj P ROD + εj
                          a                          t(a) (FGRS = 3.00, pGRS = 0)                                    b                                           R2
     S −0.03 0.58 0.46         0.64   0.75   0.78   −0.10 2.29 2.30 3.37         3.70   3.67    1.36   1.18   1.06       0.99   1.04   −0.32    0.66   0.64   0.66 0.65      0.63   0.31
     2  0.02 0.20 0.38         0.48   0.50   0.48    0.09 1.15 2.52 3.26         2.84   2.36    1.35   1.14   1.03       0.97   1.07   −0.28    0.76   0.75   0.73 0.70      0.68   0.30
     3  0.06 0.16 0.17         0.29   0.48   0.43    0.31 1.22 1.37 2.19         2.81   1.96    1.26   1.10   0.97       0.93   1.02   −0.24    0.79   0.81   0.77 0.72      0.67   0.24
     4  0.08 −0.07 0.17        0.29   0.26   0.18    0.57 −0.64 1.49 2.47        1.65   0.77    1.21   1.09   1.01       0.94   1.02   −0.18    0.86   0.85   0.79 0.76      0.70   0.21
51




     B −0.20 −0.09 0.05        0.14   0.20   0.40   −2.22 −0.99 0.47 1.09        1.16   1.90    0.99   1.00   0.89       0.81   0.85   −0.15    0.89   0.87   0.78 0.67      0.58   0.20
                      i                                          t(i)                                                p                                           t(p)
     S   −0.26   0.09   0.33   0.44   0.54   0.80   −1.57   0.63   2.65   3.62   3.96   5.68   −0.65 −0.53 −0.31 −0.29 −0.37 0.27              −5.16 −4.53 −3.28 −3.42 −3.91 2.53
     2   −0.45   0.02   0.25   0.33   0.50   0.95   −3.56   0.18   2.69   3.21   3.84   6.81   −0.28 −0.16 −0.10 −0.12 −0.24 0.04              −3.13 −2.01 −1.37 −1.51 −2.67 0.37
     3   −0.50   0.06   0.26   0.36   0.50   1.00   −4.39   0.71   3.24   3.84   3.62   6.45   −0.16 −0.02 −0.01 −0.06 −0.14 0.02              −1.90 −0.28 −0.11 −0.71 −1.33 0.13
     4   −0.40   0.13   0.29   0.42   0.56   0.96   −5.72   1.76   3.83   4.83   5.20   7.04   −0.06 0.07 0.02 −0.09 −0.05 0.01                −1.07 1.15 0.23 −1.19 −0.58 0.07
     B   −0.22   0.19   0.18   0.29   0.47   0.69   −3.98   3.13   2.45   3.45   3.65   4.51    0.24 0.18 0.05 0.01 −0.19 −0.43                 6.49 4.48 0.83 0.12 −2.12 −4.21
                   Panel B: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + ij IN V + εj                                             Panel C: Rj − Rf = aj + bj M KT + pj P ROD + εj
                          a                          t(a) (FGRS = 3.11, pGRS = 0)                                    a                             t(a) (FGRS = 4.34, pGRS = 0)
     S −0.57 0.14 0.21         0.40   0.44   1.01   −2.22 0.61 1.18       2.40   2.49   5.50   −0.15 0.62     0.62       0.84   1.00    1.15   −0.56 2.61     3.18    4.50   4.92   5.42
     2 −0.21 0.06 0.29         0.38   0.30   0.51   −1.09 0.42 2.09       2.85   1.85   2.83   −0.19 0.21     0.50       0.63   0.73    0.92   −0.96 1.26     3.41    4.24   4.18   4.44
     3 −0.07 0.14 0.16         0.24   0.37   0.44   −0.45 1.22 1.41       2.00   2.42   2.12   −0.18 0.19     0.29       0.46   0.71    0.89   −1.05 1.48     2.34    3.46   4.31   4.02
     4  0.03 −0.01 0.18        0.21   0.21   0.18    0.23 −0.09 1.67      1.89   1.49   0.92   −0.10 −0.01    0.30       0.48   0.52    0.62   −0.75 −0.10    2.63    4.06   3.30   2.67
     B 0.00 0.06 0.09          0.15   0.04   0.05   −0.04 0.76 0.86       1.24   0.27   0.23   −0.30 0.00     0.13       0.27   0.42    0.72   −3.48 −0.02    1.21    2.07   2.55   3.46
Table 9 : Summary Statistics and Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on
 Deciles Formed on Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi’s (2007) Distress Measure and Deciles
                  Formed on Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SU E)

The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate, the Fama-French (1993) three factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. See Table 1 for the description of the investment IN V factor and the productivity P ROD factor. The distress
measure is defined in Appendix B. We sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks at the beginning of each month
into ten deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints of failure probability four months ago. For the SU E portfolios, we
rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles at the beginning of each month by their most recent past
SU E based on the NYSE breakpoints. SU E is defined as unexpected earnings (the change in quarterly earnings per
share from its value announced four quarters ago) divided by the standard deviation of unexpected earnings over the
prior eight quarters. Monthly value-weighted returns on the failure probability and SU E portfolios are calculated
for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. We also report the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken
(1989) F -statistic (FGRS ) testing that the intercepts of all testing portfolios are jointly zero and its associated p-value
in parenthesis.

              Low         2       3        4        5        6        7       8         9     High       H-L          FGRS
                              Panel A: The Distress Deciles, 6/1975–12/2006, 379 Months
Mean         0.93    0.86      0.74    0.58     0.58     0.72      0.70    0.48     0.34      0.04     −0.89
t(Mean)      3.83    3.70      3.31    2.64     2.56     3.01      2.80    1.88     1.06      0.10     −3.04
α            0.32    0.27      0.13   −0.02    −0.04     0.08      0.03   −0.20    −0.50     −0.91     −1.23       2.73 (0)
β            0.96    0.92      0.95    0.94     0.98     1.01      1.05    1.07     1.31      1.49      0.53
t(α)         2.31    2.15      1.22   −0.19    −0.43     0.73      0.27   −1.73    −2.84     −4.00     −4.15
a            0.32    0.37      0.13    0.00    −0.05     0.00      0.02   −0.30    −0.60     −1.03     −1.34       3.76 (0)
b            0.93    0.90      0.98    0.96     1.02     1.04      1.04    1.11     1.28      1.36      0.43
s            0.13   −0.09     −0.13   −0.13    −0.13     0.00      0.04    0.04     0.31      0.79      0.65
h           −0.03   −0.13      0.03    0.00     0.05     0.12      0.01    0.14     0.08     −0.02      0.01
t(a)         2.37    3.25      1.26    0.01    −0.54     0.02      0.16   −2.30    −3.56     −5.65     −5.22
a            0.00    0.02     −0.20   −0.22    −0.09     0.09      0.30    0.12     0.21      0.18      0.18    1.68 (0.08)
b            1.00    0.95      1.00    0.97     0.98     1.01      1.02    1.03     1.23      1.35      0.35
i            0.07    0.10      0.20    0.09     0.00     0.03     −0.07   −0.16    −0.22     −0.46     −0.53
p            0.36    0.26      0.30    0.20     0.06    −0.03     −0.30   −0.31    −0.76     −1.12     −1.48
t(a)         0.00    0.15     −1.73   −2.21    −0.89     0.73      2.49    0.92     1.47      1.06      0.83
t(b)        30.36   26.61     32.49   40.57    39.10    24.77     32.26   31.97    34.83     29.19      6.54
t(i)         0.68    1.08      3.28    1.24     0.04     0.34     −0.92   −1.82    −2.16     −3.66     −3.10
t(p)         4.93    3.32      5.87    3.74     0.99    −0.51     −5.18   −5.35   −10.27    −15.30    −14.59
                               Panel B: The SU E Deciles, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months
Mean        −0.10    0.16      0.15    0.15     0.24     0.61      0.60    0.88     0.89      1.07      1.17
t(Mean)     −0.41    0.67      0.59    0.61     1.01     2.62      2.64    3.82     3.75      4.78      8.05
α           −0.62   −0.34     −0.38   −0.36    −0.26     0.11      0.11    0.39     0.39      0.60      1.22       9.74 (0)
β            1.02    1.00      1.06    1.02     1.00     0.99      0.96    0.97     0.99      0.93     −0.09
t(α)        −6.58   −3.62     −3.82   −3.60    −2.94     1.33      1.38    4.41     3.96      6.79      8.50
a           −0.59   −0.31     −0.36   −0.31    −0.31     0.12      0.11    0.42     0.41      0.63      1.22       9.64 (0)
b            1.02    0.99      1.03    0.96     1.00     0.99      0.99    0.97     1.00      0.94     −0.08
s           −0.06   −0.02      0.09    0.12     0.07    −0.05     −0.10   −0.06    −0.07     −0.11     −0.05
h           −0.04   −0.04     −0.05   −0.09     0.06    −0.01      0.02   −0.04    −0.01     −0.03      0.01
t(a)        −6.13   −3.01     −3.36   −2.94    −3.21     1.34      1.39    4.95     4.37      6.74      8.00
a           −0.45   −0.25     −0.06   −0.16    −0.14     0.11     −0.05    0.16     0.26      0.43      0.89       4.57 (0)
b            0.99    0.96      1.00    0.98     0.99     0.99      0.98    1.01     1.00      0.95     −0.04
i           −0.17   −0.24     −0.30   −0.17    −0.04     0.02      0.08    0.17     0.02      0.02      0.19
p           −0.12    0.01     −0.26   −0.18    −0.13    −0.01      0.17    0.21     0.16      0.21      0.33
t(a)        −4.58   −2.30     −0.56   −1.41    −1.36     1.10     −0.52    1.87     2.71      4.89      6.24
t(b)        41.94   31.84     33.99   40.74    40.44    48.26     46.68   46.74    40.86     36.92     −1.07
t(i)        −2.55   −3.21     −4.50   −2.99    −0.51     0.40      1.22    2.84     0.35      0.36      1.88
t(p)        −2.79    0.23     −4.82   −3.15    −2.55    −0.19      3.98    4.13     3.24      5.22      5.07



                                                             52
 Table 10 : Summary Statistics and Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns
  on Ten Accruals Deciles and Ten Net Stock Issues Deciles, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate, the Fama-French (1993) three factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of the investment IN V factor and the productivity P ROD factor.
Accruals are measured as the change of operating working capital per split-adjusted share from year t − 1 to t divided
by book equity per split-adjusted share at t. Operating working capital is current assets (Compustat annual item 4)
minus cash and short term investment (item 1) minus current liabilities (item 5) plus debt in current liabilities (item
34). We measure net stock issues as the the natural log of the ratio of the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the
fiscal yearend in t−1 (item 25 times the Compustat adjustment factor, item 27) divided by the split-adjusted shares
outstanding at the fiscal yearend in t − 2. In June of each year t, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into ten deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints of accruals and net stock issues measured at the end of last fiscal
yearend. Monthly value-weighted returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1. We also report the
Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) F -statistic (FGRS ) testing that the intercepts of all testing portfolios are jointly
zero and its associated p-value in parenthesis.

              Low         2       3        4         5       6       7        8       9    High     H-L         FGRS
                                               Panel A: The Accrual Deciles
 Mean        0.73     0.61     0.50    0.53       0.57    0.56    0.53    0.53     0.47    0.22   −0.52
 t(Mean)     2.59     2.35     2.14    2.44       2.68    2.51    2.23    2.11     1.74    0.74   −4.13
 α           0.14     0.05     0.00    0.05       0.11    0.07    0.01   −0.02    −0.11   −0.41   −0.55       3.00 (0)
 β           1.17     1.11     1.01    0.94       0.90    0.97    1.03    1.08     1.15    1.25    0.07
 t(α)        1.27     0.61    −0.06    0.78       1.47    1.11    0.15   −0.19    −1.17   −3.46   −4.41
 a           0.10     0.14     0.01    0.00       0.05    0.02   −0.02   −0.03    −0.10   −0.47   −0.57       3.22 (0)
 b           1.12     1.06     1.01    0.98       0.95    1.01    1.05    1.07     1.11    1.19    0.07
 s           0.29     0.07    −0.06   −0.06      −0.05   −0.07   −0.01    0.10     0.14    0.33    0.04
 h           0.02    −0.14    −0.01    0.09       0.11    0.09    0.05    0.01    −0.03    0.04    0.02
 t(a)        0.91     1.62     0.11    0.03       0.55    0.26   −0.28   −0.34    −1.06   −3.95   −4.35
 a           0.17     0.22     0.13    0.14       0.22    0.13    0.08    0.14     0.09   −0.21   −0.38       2.96 (0)
 b           1.18     1.08     0.98    0.93       0.88    0.95    1.01    1.03     1.08    1.17    0.00
 i           0.05    −0.16    −0.14   −0.05      −0.14   −0.09   −0.14   −0.32    −0.41   −0.47   −0.51
 p          −0.06    −0.13    −0.11   −0.09      −0.06   −0.02   −0.01   −0.03    −0.03   −0.01    0.06
 t(a)        1.24     2.15     1.61    1.79       2.34    1.68    1.06    1.44     0.80   −1.57   −2.97
 t(b)       39.51    53.32    46.24   44.23      42.49   49.00   51.84   49.60    38.13   38.41   −0.14
 t(i)        0.51    −2.37    −2.38   −1.02      −2.04   −1.84   −2.52   −4.17    −5.95   −5.10   −5.33
 t(p)       −1.20    −2.77    −2.51   −2.14      −1.38   −0.49   −0.27   −0.56    −0.63   −0.13    0.96
                                        Panel B: The Net Stock Issues Deciles
 Mean         1.00    0.82     0.77    0.57       0.27    0.70    0.72    0.78     0.24    0.04   −0.96
 t(Mean)      4.36    3.65     3.34    2.45       1.01    2.99    2.94    2.95     0.81    0.13   −5.23
 α            0.54    0.37     0.32    0.11      −0.28    0.21    0.20    0.22    −0.36   −0.57   −1.11       3.97 (0)
 β            0.91    0.89     0.88    0.90       1.07    0.96    1.02    1.10     1.18    1.20    0.29
 t(α)         4.02    2.72     2.16    0.69      −1.82    1.85    2.03    2.08    −2.11   −3.73   −4.68
 a            0.32    0.24     0.24   −0.02      −0.19    0.13    0.17    0.22    −0.27   −0.51   −0.83       3.18 (0)
 b            1.06    1.00     0.94    0.98       1.03    1.02    1.04    1.08     1.10    1.12    0.06
 s            0.05   −0.08    −0.01    0.05      −0.05   −0.01    0.01    0.10     0.08    0.17    0.12
 h            0.40    0.26     0.15    0.23      −0.15    0.15    0.06    0.00    −0.17   −0.13   −0.53
 t(a)         2.94    1.91     1.60   −0.13      −1.41    1.18    1.67    1.97    −1.57   −3.32   −4.01
 a            0.25    0.12     0.15   −0.06       0.07    0.05    0.20    0.41     0.27   −0.04   −0.29    2.26 (0.02)
 b            0.98    0.94     0.92    0.95       0.99    0.97    1.00    1.04     1.02    1.06    0.09
 i            0.24    0.14     0.15    0.18      −0.31    0.00   −0.14   −0.27    −0.64   −0.52   −0.75
 p            0.21    0.20     0.12    0.11      −0.24    0.16    0.05   −0.10    −0.42   −0.36   −0.57
 t(a)         1.86    0.91     0.87   −0.46       0.52    0.45    1.80    3.44     1.75   −0.27   −1.31
 t(b)        35.55   32.41    23.46   23.27      29.09   35.74   38.81   37.30    27.53   35.66    1.95
 t(i)         2.50    1.32     1.84    2.36      −3.35   −0.03   −2.05   −3.39    −5.36   −5.25   −4.97
 t(p)         3.11    2.67     1.82    1.32      −3.78    2.77    1.18   −1.88    −7.43   −6.90   −6.69



                                                           53
 Table 11 : Summary Statistics and Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns
on the Asset Growth Deciles and the Earnings-to-Price Deciles, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate, the Fama-French (1993) three factors, and the earnings-to-price
portfolio returns are from Kenneth French’s Web site. See Table 1 for the description of the investment factor IN V
and the productivity factor P ROD. In June of each year t, we sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten
deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints of asset growth measured at the end of last fiscal year t − 1. Asset growth
of year t is the change of total assets (item 6) from t − 1 to t divided by total assets from year t − 1. Monthly
value-weighted returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1. The earnings-to-price deciles are
formed on earnings-to-price ratios at the end of each June using NYSE breakpoints. The earnings used in June of
year t are total earnings before extraordinary items (Compustat annual item 18) for the last fiscal yearend in t − 1.
Market equity is price times shares outstanding at the end of December of t − 1. We also report the Gibbons, Ross,
and Shanken (1989) F -statistic (FGRS ) testing that the intercepts of all testing portfolios are jointly zero and its
associated p-value in parenthesis.

             Low         2       3       4       5        6       7        8        9    High      H-L         FGRS
                                        Panel A: The Asset Growth Deciles
Mean        0.95     0.76     0.77    0.61    0.62    0.62     0.61    0.52      0.47    0.16    −0.79
t(Mean)     3.46     3.24     3.54    3.03    2.99    2.93     2.75    2.19      1.70    0.50    −4.63
α           0.39     0.27     0.31    0.18    0.17    0.17     0.13    0.00     −0.12   −0.53    −0.92       4.33 (0)
β           1.11     0.97     0.90    0.85    0.89    0.90     0.96    1.03      1.18    1.35     0.25
t(α)        3.08     2.88     3.39    2.33    2.41    2.18     1.95   −0.02     −1.34   −4.51    −5.52
a           0.10     0.05     0.06    0.00    0.05    0.02     0.09    0.06      0.06   −0.35    −0.46    2.45 (0.01)
b           1.15     1.05     1.02    0.94    0.95    0.98     1.00    1.00      1.08    1.21     0.06
s           0.37     0.12     0.00   −0.03   −0.04   −0.04    −0.08    0.01      0.06    0.25    −0.12
h           0.39     0.32     0.38    0.28    0.19    0.23     0.06   −0.09     −0.28   −0.30    −0.69
t(a)        0.93     0.57     0.76    0.04    0.68    0.31     1.47    0.83      0.68   −3.32    −3.16
a           0.28     0.18     0.13    0.04    0.08    0.08     0.10    0.07      0.21   −0.08    −0.37    2.02 (0.03)
b           1.18     1.04     0.96    0.89    0.92    0.91     0.96    1.00      1.07    1.22     0.04
i           0.57     0.47     0.38    0.31    0.19    0.06    −0.06   −0.27     −0.73   −0.82    −1.39
p          −0.17    −0.14     0.03    0.02    0.02    0.09     0.07    0.05     −0.04   −0.14     0.03
t(a)        2.15     1.79     1.38    0.50    1.08    0.99     1.38    0.95      2.54   −0.69    −2.46
t(b)       35.66    47.44    40.09   46.60   40.18   50.57    50.88   58.93     60.52   50.21     1.09
t(i)        7.08     7.05     5.56    5.32    3.35    0.98    −1.63   −5.61    −12.53   −9.69   −14.06
t(p)       −2.93    −3.00     0.41    0.36    0.62    1.75     1.92    1.33     −1.27   −3.08     0.47
                                       Panel B: The Earnings-to-Price Deciles
Mean        0.31     0.40     0.59    0.57    0.55    0.64     0.83     0.80     0.83    1.00     0.69
t(Mean)     1.06     1.68     2.58    2.64    2.48    2.98     3.93     3.72     3.63    3.84     2.92
α          −0.31    −0.11     0.11    0.11    0.08    0.21     0.40     0.37     0.39    0.51     0.82    2.48 (0.01)
β           1.23     1.02     0.95    0.91    0.92    0.86     0.84     0.85     0.87    0.97    −0.25
t(α)       −2.73    −1.39     1.14    1.29    0.90    2.00     4.03     3.54     3.24    3.36     3.55
a           0.06     0.01     0.09    0.07   −0.07   −0.04     0.12     0.04    −0.04   −0.07    −0.13    0.86 (0.57)
b           1.06     0.99     0.99    0.96    1.02    0.99     1.00     1.00     1.06    1.19     0.13
s          −0.02    −0.14    −0.16   −0.14   −0.13   −0.04    −0.10     0.03     0.06    0.23     0.25
h          −0.57    −0.16     0.05    0.08    0.25    0.38     0.45     0.51     0.65    0.84     1.41
t(a)        0.71     0.11     0.93    0.89   −0.79   −0.42     1.47     0.44    −0.35   −0.63    −0.90
a          −0.14    −0.32    −0.15   −0.08   −0.06    0.01     0.11     0.18     0.36    0.46     0.60       2.63 (0)
b           1.15     1.03     0.97    0.94    0.94    0.91     0.91     0.90     0.90    1.00    −0.15
i          −0.50     0.02     0.06    0.12    0.13    0.28     0.41     0.36     0.23    0.20     0.71
p           0.05     0.27     0.31    0.19    0.13    0.11     0.16     0.05    −0.08   −0.05    −0.10
t(a)       −1.14    −4.04    −1.46   −1.01   −0.62    0.10     1.08     1.66     2.64    2.97     2.46
t(b)       35.40    51.53    40.59   44.17   35.88   32.27    33.56    25.82    19.96   21.41    −2.11
t(i)       −6.62     0.47     0.87    2.27    1.93    3.58     7.31     5.36     2.26    1.64     3.97
t(p)        0.95     7.69     5.50    4.75    2.22    1.68     2.76     0.86    −1.03   −0.50    −0.72




                                                         54
         Table 12 : Value- and Equal-Weighted Average Monthly Returns, and Averages and Cross-Section Standard Deviations of
                                            Anomaly Variables, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     The table shows averages of monthly value-weighted (VW) and equal-weighted (EW) average stock returns, and monthly cross-section standard deviations of
     returns for all stocks (Market) and for Micro, Small, Big, and All but Micro stocks. The table also shows the average number of stocks and the average percent of
     the total market capitalization (market cap) in each size group each month. Finally, we report the averages of annual EW average values and annual cross-section
     standard deviations of the anomaly variables used as independent variables in cross-sectional regressions (Table 13). We assign stocks to size groups at the end
     of June each year. Micro-cap stocks (Micro) are below the 20th percentile of NYSE market cap at the end of June, Small stocks are between the 20th and 50th
     percentiles, and Big stocks are above the NYSE median. All but Micro combines Small and Big stocks. The firm characteristics, which are used to predict the
     monthly returns for July of year t to June of year t+1 in cross-sectional regressions are: ln(MC), the natural log of market cap (in millions) in June of t; ln(B/M),
     the natural log of the ratio of the book equity for the last fiscal year-end in t−1 divided by the market equity in December of t−1; NS (net stock issues), the
     change in the natural log of the split-adjusted shares outstanding from the fiscal year-end in t−2 to t−1; Ac/B (accruals), the change in operating working capital
     per split-adjusted share from t−2 to t−1 divided by book equity per split-adjusted share in t−1; Mom (momentum), the cumulative stock return from month
     m−12 to m−2; dA/A (asset growth), the change in the natural log of assets per split-adjusted share from t−2 to t−1; and Y/B (profitability), equity income
     in t−1 divided by book equity for t−1. Zero NS is a dummy variable that is one if NS is zero and zero otherwise. Neg Y is one if equity income is negative
     and zero otherwise. Neg Ac/B is Ac/B for firms with negative accruals (zero otherwise) and Pos Ac/B is Ac/B for firms with positive accruals (zero otherwise).
     I/A is the annual change in gross property, plant, and equipment plus the annual change in inventories divided by the lagged book assets. ROA is the quarterly
     earnings divided by last quarter’s assets. Except for ln(MC), ln(B/M), Zero NS, and Neg Y, all the other variables are in percent. Appendix B provides more
     detailed variable definitions.

                                                      Panel A: Average Monthly Values, January 1972–December 2006
55




                                       % of Total       VW Return              EW Return           Cross-section Std
                           Firms      Market Cap      Ave      Std Dev      Ave        Std Dev       Dev of Returns
       Market                3286         100.00      0.98         4.58     1.45           5.93                 15.43
       Micro                 1946           2.83      1.33         6.59     1.69           6.69                 17.92
       Small                  662           6.35      1.17         5.97     1.18           6.04                 11.44
       Big                    677          90.82      0.97         4.51     1.09           5.02                  8.86
       All but Micro         1340          97.17      0.97         4.56     1.13           5.43                 10.28
                                                        Panel B: Average of Annual EW Average Values, 1972–2006
                          ln(MC)        ln(B/M)      Mom       Zero NS       NS      Neg Ac/B              Pos Ac/B      dA/A      Neg Y       Y/B       I/A      ROA
       Market                4.39          −0.34     14.08         0.16     4.74         −6.85                   8.00      6.99      0.24     −0.74     10.40     0.57
       Micro                 3.06          −0.18     12.20         0.22     4.97         −8.75                   9.53      4.50      0.33     −7.91      9.48    −0.14
       Small                 5.38          −0.49     17.67         0.10     4.89         −4.60                   6.86     11.19      0.14      7.71     12.28     1.18
       Big                   7.32          −0.63     16.00         0.06     3.69         −3.38                   4.50     10.24      0.08     12.54     11.08     1.77
       All but Micro         6.36          −0.56     16.83         0.08     4.32         −3.98                   5.67     10.70      0.11     10.09     11.70     1.47
                                                Panel C: Average of Annual Cross-Section Standard Deviations, 1972–2006
                          ln(MC)        ln(B/M)      Mom       Zero NS       NS      Neg Ac/B              Pos Ac/B      dA/A      Neg Y       Y/B       I/A      ROA
       Market                1.98            0.94    51.40         0.35    13.45          18.72                 14.49     24.69      0.41     38.42     18.79      3.63
       Micro                 1.08            0.97    56.20         0.39    14.31          21.83                 16.48     26.83      0.45     44.81     19.85      4.14
       Small                 0.38            0.83    46.42         0.28    12.52          13.73                 11.79     22.20      0.32     24.50     18.14      2.89
       Big                   0.93            0.77    35.11         0.23    10.57           9.58                  8.06     17.81      0.24     15.97     15.17      2.05
       All but Micro         1.21            0.81    41.50         0.26    11.72          11.94                 10.21     20.19      0.29     21.09     16.77      2.54
              Table 13 : Average Slopes and t-Statistics from Monthly Cross-Sectional Regressions, 1/1972–12/2006, 420 Months

     This table shows average slopes and their t-statistics from monthly cross-sectional regressions to predict stock returns. The anomaly variables at the last fiscal
     year-end of t − 1 (except for momentum and ROA) are used to predict returns from July of year t to June of t + 1. Momentum (Mom) for month m is the
     cumulative return from month m−12 to m−2. ROA is the quarterly earnings divided by last quarter’s assets. The ROA used in the current month’s regression
     is from at least four months ago. Table 12 contains other variable definitions. Int is the average intercept and R2 is the average adjusted R2 . The t-statistics (t)
     for the average regression slopes use the time series standard deviations of the monthly slopes. In Panel A, we replicate the cross-sectional regressions in Fama
     and French (2007, Table IV) on our sample. In Panel B, we report the cross-sectional regressions after replacing dA/A with I/A and Y/B with ROA.

                                             Panel A: Replicating the Cross-Sectional Regressions in Fama and French (2007)
                                            Int   ln(MC)    ln(B/M)      Mom     Zero NS        NS    Neg Ac/B     Pos Ac/B     dA/A         Neg Y     Pos Y/B       R2
      Market                   Average     2.42    −0.20        0.19     0.40       −0.15    −1.66        −0.19        −0.35    −1.14          0.12         0.69    0.03
                               t           6.83    −4.67        2.96     2.37       −2.31    −6.99        −1.11        −1.89    −8.98          1.04         2.39
      Micro                    Average     3.39    −0.51        0.14     0.32       −0.24    −1.64        −0.21        −0.22    −1.23          0.07         0.22    0.02
                               t           9.11    −7.49        2.00     1.89       −3.23    −5.78        −1.02        −1.09    −8.38          0.62         0.61
      Small                    Average     1.71    −0.06        0.26     0.77       −0.18    −1.47         0.33        −1.05    −0.48         −0.03         0.52    0.04
                               t           3.29    −0.78        3.14     3.81       −1.81    −4.46         1.19        −3.47    −2.33         −0.19         1.07
      Big                      Average     1.51    −0.06        0.21     0.65       −0.10    −1.64        −0.12        −0.67    −0.43         −0.20         0.68    0.08
                               t           3.37    −1.35        2.38     2.66       −0.98    −4.72        −0.35        −1.89    −1.89         −1.00         1.33
      All but Micro            Average     1.50    −0.05        0.24     0.74       −0.16    −1.57         0.03        −0.89    −0.45         −0.07         0.62    0.06
                               t           3.55    −1.24        3.09     3.53       −1.97    −5.85         0.11        −3.32    −2.53         −0.44         1.49
      Micro−Small              Average     1.68    −0.45       −0.12    −0.45       −0.06    −0.17        −0.53         0.83    −0.75          0.11        −0.30
                               t           3.79    −5.10       −1.99    −3.68       −0.50    −0.51        −1.63         2.74    −3.11          0.65        −0.51
      Micro−Big                Average     1.88    −0.45       −0.07    −0.33       −0.14     0.01        −0.08         0.45    −0.80          0.27        −0.46
56




                               t           4.21    −5.47       −0.85    −1.86       −1.10     0.01        −0.22         1.20    −3.02          1.41        −0.77
      Micro−All but Micro      Average     1.90    −0.46       −0.10    −0.42       −0.08    −0.07        −0.23         0.67    −0.78          0.14        −0.40
                               t           4.92    −5.87       −1.64    −3.24       −0.69    −0.20        −0.80         2.43    −3.61          0.98        −0.77
      Small−Big                Average     0.20     0.00        0.05     0.12       −0.08     0.18         0.45        −0.38    −0.05          0.17        −0.16
                               t           0.44     0.03        0.75     0.84       −0.65     0.43         1.12        −1.01    −0.17          0.78        −0.30
                                                  Panel B: Cross-Sectional Regressions Using Our I/A and ROA Measures
                                            Int   ln(MC)    ln(B/M)      Mom     Zero NS        NS    Neg Ac/B     Pos Ac/B       I/A    Neg ROA       Pos ROA       R2
      Market                   Average     1.75    −0.15        0.51     0.31       −0.21    −0.90        −0.77        −0.09    −0.59         −0.56        35.76    0.04
                               t           4.91    −3.47        7.21     1.78       −2.77    −3.03        −3.36        −0.38    −3.31         −4.27        15.20
      Micro                    Average     1.95    −0.25        0.47     0.18       −0.19    −0.64        −1.00         0.00    −0.89         −0.60        49.96    0.03
                               t           5.30    −3.43        5.36     0.93       −2.28    −1.46        −3.37         0.00    −3.75         −4.42        13.74
      Small                    Average     1.63    −0.12        0.46     0.50       −0.34    −1.96        −0.17        −0.50    −0.04         −0.14        23.08    0.05
                               t           2.71    −1.16        4.24     2.13       −2.30    −3.30        −0.38        −1.15    −0.13         −0.67         5.19
      Big                      Average     0.93    −0.01        0.48     0.48       −0.18    −1.41        −0.15        −0.16     0.09         −0.20        20.39    0.08
                               t           1.93    −0.17        4.89     1.80       −1.28    −2.68        −0.23        −0.32     0.29         −1.09         4.80
      All but Micro            Average     1.11    −0.03        0.48     0.52       −0.28    −1.60        −0.10        −0.35    −0.05         −0.13        20.10    0.06
                               t           2.52    −0.57        5.78     2.39       −2.77    −3.59        −0.28        −0.89    −0.20         −0.76         7.05
      Micro−Small              Average     0.32    −0.13        0.01    −0.33        0.15     1.31        −0.84         0.50    −0.85         −0.47        26.88
                               t           0.62    −1.23        0.08    −1.78        0.94     1.84        −1.71         1.07    −2.51         −2.42         5.25
      Micro−Big                Average     1.03    −0.24       −0.01    −0.30       −0.01     0.76        −0.86         0.16    −0.98         −0.40        29.57
                               t           2.16    −2.61       −0.09    −1.25       −0.05     1.12        −1.30         0.31    −2.42         −2.14         5.22
      Micro−All but Micro      Average     0.84    −0.22       −0.01    −0.34        0.09     0.96        −0.90         0.35    −0.84         −0.48        29.86
                               t           2.12    −2.62       −0.09    −1.93        0.71     1.55        −2.13         0.84    −2.68         −2.98         7.01
      Small−Big                Average     0.71    −0.11       −0.02     0.02       −0.16    −0.55        −0.02        −0.33    −0.13          0.06         2.69
                               t           1.21    −1.03       −0.17     0.10       −0.82    −0.87        −0.03        −0.61    −0.33          0.27         0.41
     Figure 1 : Earnings-to-Assets and Investment-to-Assets (Contemporaneous and Lagged) for the 25 Size and 11/1/1-Momentum
                                             Portfolios, 1972:Q1 to 2006:Q4, 140 Quarters

     The 25 size and 11/1/1-momentum portfolios from Kenneth French’s Web site are constructed monthly as the intersections of five quintiles formed on market
     equity and five quintiles formed on prior 2–12 month returns (skipping one month). The monthly size breakpoints and the monthly momentum breakpoints are
     NYSE quintiles. For each portfolio formation month t = January 1972 to December 2006, we calculate quarterly ROAs and annual I/As for t+m, m = −60, . . . , 60.
     The ROA and I/A for t + m are then averaged across portfolio formation months t. ROA and I/A are defined in Table 1. ROA is the most recent ROA relative
     to portfolio formation month t. In Panel B, I/A is the current year-end I/A relative to month t. For example, if the current month is March 2003, then I/A is
     measured at the fiscal year-end of 2003. In Panel C, the lagged I/A is the I/A on which an annual sorting on I/A in each June is based. For example, if the
     current month is March 2003, then the lagged I/A is the I/A at the fiscal year-end of 2001. If the current month is September 2003, the lagged I/A is the I/A
     at the fiscal year-end of 2002. For a given portfolio, we plot the median ROAs and I/As among the firms in the portfolio.


               Panel A: Event-Time Annual I/A                                  Panel B: Calendar-Time Annual I/A                             Panel C: Calendar-Time Annual I/A (Lagged)
      10                                                                20                                                              20

                                                                        18                                                              18
       9                                        Big−Winner
                                                                        16                                 Small−Winner                 16
       8                                                                14                                                              14                               Small−Loser


       7                                                                12                                                              12

                                                                        10                                                              10
       6
                                                                         8                                                               8
       5                                                                 6                                                               6
57




                                                                         4                                                               4
       4                            Big−Loser
             Small−Winner                                                2                                                               2
       3
                                                                         0                                                               0            Small−Winner
                                                Small−Loser                          Small−Loser
       2                                                                −2                                                              −2
      −20    −15    −10     −5     0       5        10        15   20        1975     1980        1985    1990    1995    2000   2005          1975    1980    1985    1990        1995   2000   2005
                                 Quarter                                                                 Year                                                         Year


             Panel D: Event-Time Quarterly ROA                               Panel E: Calendar-Time Quarterly ROA                              Panel F: Calendar-Time Quarterly ROA
       2
                                                  Big−Winner             6                                                               6                            Big−Winner
      1.8

      1.6                                                                                          Small−Winner
                                                                         4                                                               4
      1.4

      1.2    Big−Loser                                                   2                                                               2

       1
                                                                         0                                                               0
      0.8

      0.6                        Small−Winner
                                                                        −2                                                              −2
      0.4                                                                                                                                                                     Big−Loser

      0.2                                                                           Small−Loser
                                                                        −4                                                              −4
                                           Small−Loser
        0
       −20   −15    −10     −5     0       5        10        15   20        1975     1980        1985    1990    1995    2000   2005          1975    1980    1985    1990        1995   2000   2005
                                 Quarter                                                                 Year                                                         Year
