                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DIFFERENCES IN GOVERNANCE PRACTICES BETWEEN U.S. AND FOREIGN FIRMS:
               MEASUREMENT, CAUSES, AND CONSEQUENCES

                                             Reena Aggarwal
                                                Isil Erel
                                               René Stulz
                                            Rohan Williamson

                                          Working Paper 13288
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13288


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2007




We are grateful for comments from Marcus Caylor, Art Durnev, Mara Faccio, Allen Ferrell, Wayne
Guay, David Hirshleifer, Jon Karpoff, Christo Karuna, Pedro Matos, Antoinette Schoar, Jérôme Taillard,
Marc Weinstein, and Marc Zenner. We thank participants at seminars at Case Western Reserve University,
McMaster University, MIT, Northeastern University, Queens University, the University of California
at Irvine, the University of Iowa, the University of South Florida, and the University of Southern California,
as well as participants at the NYSE/World Bank/University of Virginia Conference on Emerging Markets,
the Wharton Conference on Corporate Governance and Globalization, and the 2007 Western Finance
Association Meetings. We are grateful to Javier Ayala for research assistance. An earlier version of
the paper was circulated under the title, "Do U.S. firms have the best corporate governance? A cross-country
examination of the relation between corporate governance and shareholder wealth". The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Differences in Governance Practices between U.S. and Foreign Firms: Measurement, Causes,
and Consequences
Reena Aggarwal, Isil Erel, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 13288
August 2007
JEL No. G30,G32,G34,G38,K22

                                             ABSTRACT

Using an index which increases as a firm adopts more governance attributes, we find that 12.7% of
foreign firms have a higher index than matching U.S. firms. The best predictor for whether a foreign
firm adopts more governance attributes than a comparable U.S. firm is whether the firm comes from
a common law country. We show that the value of foreign firms is negatively related to the difference
between their governance index and the index of matching U.S. firms. This relation is robust to various
approaches to control for the endogeneity of corporate governance and is consistent with the hypothesis
that foreign firms are valued less because country characteristics make it suboptimal for them to invest
as much in governance as comparable U.S. firms. Overall, our evidence suggests that firm-level governance
attributes are complementary to rather than substitutes for country-level investor protection, so that
better country-level investor protection makes it optimal for firms to invest more in internal governance.
Our evidence supports the view that minority shareholders of a typical foreign firm would benefit
from an increase in investment in governance, but that the firm's controlling shareholder and possibly
other stakeholders would not.

Reena Aggarwal                                      René Stulz
Georgetown University                               The Ohio State University
Finance Group                                       Fisher College of Business
McDonough School of Business                        806A Fisher Hall
G 04, Old North                                     2100 Neil Avenue
Washington, DC 20057                                Columbus, OH 43210-1144
aggarwal@georgetown.edu                             and NBER
                                                    stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Isil Erel
Department of Finance                               Rohan Williamson
The Ohio State University                           Georgetown University
832 Fisher Hall                                     Finance Group
2100 Neil Avenue                                    McDonough School of Business
Columbus, OH 43210                                  G 04 Old North
erel_1@cob.osu.edu                                  Washington, DC 20057
                                                    WILLIARG@georgetown.edu
            Differences in Governance Practices between U.S. and Foreign Firms:
                          Measurement, Causes, and Consequences


    Using the well-known definition of Shleifer and Vishny (1997), governance consists of the

mechanisms which insure that shareholders receive a return on their investment. Governance depends

both on country-level as well as firm-level mechanisms. The country-level governance mechanisms

include a country’s laws, its culture and norms, and the institutions which enforce the laws. Firm-level or

internal governance mechanisms are the mechanisms that operate within the firm. Firm-level governance

mechanisms are costly, so that the adoption of internal governance mechanisms or attributes by a firm is

an investment, and the payoffs from that investment differ across countries and across firms (see, e.g.,

Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2007), Fulghieri and Suominen (2006), John and Kedia (2006)).

    The U.S. is recognized to have extremely high financial and economic development, to have strong

investor protection, and to protect property rights well. On theoretical grounds, it is not clear whether the

characteristics of the U.S. make firm-level investment in governance more or less advantageous for U.S.

firms relative to firms from countries which do not have the same high level of development and investor

protection as the U.S. One possibility is that foreign firms would invest less in firm-level governance if

they were in the U.S. because firm-level governance and country-level investor protection are substitutes.

An alternative possibility is that investment in firm-level governance is less productive in countries with

poor economic development and weak investor protection than it is in the U.S., so that firm-level

governance and investor protection are complements. Though there is a considerable literature that

compares the quality of institutions across countries, there is no systematic comparison of firm-level

investment in governance between the U.S. and foreign countries and furthermore there is no

investigation of whether differences in firm-level governance between foreign firms and comparable U.S.

firms have implications for the valuation of foreign firms.

    We find strong evidence that foreign firms invest less in governance than comparable U.S. firms, so

that investment in firm-level governance is higher when a country becomes more economically and

financially developed and better protects investor rights. Further, to the extent that institutional and


                                                     2
development weaknesses reduce a foreign firm’s investment in corporate governance compared to a U.S.

firm, we would expect the value of the foreign firm to be lower. As expected, we find that the value of

foreign firms measured by Tobin’s q is negatively related to the size of their governance investment

shortfall relative to U.S. firms.

    To conduct our investigation, we need information about firm-level corporate governance attributes

for a large number of firms across a large number of countries. Further, we would like measures of

individual governance attributes to be computed in the same way across all these firms. Two widely

known governance rankings include both U.S. and foreign firms. One of these two rankings, the Standard

and Poor's ranking, focuses on disclosure. The other one, produced by Institutional Shareholder Services

(ISS), uses a comprehensive inventory of governance attributes. We use the ISS governance attributes in

this paper. By doing so, we can analyze 44 common governance attributes for 2,234 non-U.S. firms and

5,296 U.S. firms covering 23 developed countries. To compare firm-level governance across the U.S. and

foreign countries, we have to create our own index making sure that the governance attributes included

are relevant both for U.S. firms and foreign firms. We call it the GOV Index. One can reasonably disagree

both with the governance attributes ISS focuses on and with the index we compute. It is obviously true, as

Jack and Suzy Welch argue, that “Good governance comes down to a lot more than a point system.”1

However, if the index were to convey no information, we would simply find that the index we use is not

related to firm value.

    The GOV index satisfies our requirement of providing a firm-level governance measure that is

comparable across countries. To evaluate the governance a foreign firm would have if it were in the U.S.,

we use a propensity score matching method and show that foreign firms generally have a lower GOV

index than if they were U.S. firms. We define the governance gap to be the difference between the

governance index of a foreign firm and the governance index of a comparable U.S. firm, so that a firm

with a positive governance gap has a higher value of the GOV index than its matching U.S. firm. Only


1
 “A dangerous division of labor,” by Jack and Suzy Welch, Business Week, November 6, 2006. For an academic
version of this argument, see Arcot and Bruno (2006).


                                                    3
12.7% of foreign firms have a positive governance gap. Strikingly, 86.1% of these firms come from

Canada and the U.K., so that firms from countries more similar to the U.S. are the ones that are the most

likely to invest more in governance than comparable U.S. firms. Such a result is inconsistent with the

hypothesis that investor protection and internal governance mechanisms are substitutes.

    Having compared the governance of foreign and U.S. firms, we turn to the question of whether the

governance gap helps explain a firm’s valuation. It could be that the governance differences are unrelated

to firm value because the governance attributes we focus on are not value relevant for foreign countries.

Alternatively, the governance attributes we use might not capture the dimensions of governance that are

important for shareholder wealth maximization. Our results are inconsistent with either of these

hypotheses. We find that the value of foreign firms, measured by Tobin’s q, increases as their GOV index

shortfall relative to the index of matching U.S. firms falls.

    A firm’s governance is chosen by those who control the firm to maximize their welfare. Most foreign

firms have a controlling shareholder (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999), so that we focus on

the decisions of controlling shareholders for simplicity. Since investments in corporate governance reduce

the controlling shareholder’s ability to extract private benefits from the firm, investments in corporate

governance are more costly for the controlling shareholder than they are for minority shareholders. The

controlling shareholder’s choice of governance mechanisms depends on firm and country characteristics.

He will find investments in governance more valuable if he expects the firm to have to raise funds

externally because investments in governance reduce the cost of external capital. It follows that the

controlling shareholder’s choice of an optimal governance mechanism raises an endogeneity issue. High q

firms have greater investment opportunities and hence are more likely to raise external funds. As a result,

high q firms might invest more in governance, so that instead of having investments in governance

increase q it is possible that a higher q would make the firm invest more in governance. Like other

authors, we control for growth opportunities, but there could still be a relation between q and governance

because of other growth opportunities that we may fail to control for. To address this issue, we use two

distinct approaches. First, we use an instrumental variable approach. With this approach, the negative


                                                       4
relation between a foreign firm’s governance index shortfall and its q still holds. Second, we devise an

experiment inspired by Rajan and Zingales (1998). If internal governance is more costly for foreign firms

than for U.S. firms, we expect that the foreign firms comparable to the U.S. firms that benefit the most

from investing in internal governance will find it optimal to invest less in governance than these U.S.

firms because such investment is more expensive for them and they will suffer a loss of value as a result.

We can therefore use regression analysis to investigate whether a foreign firm’s q is negatively related to

the governance index value it would have in the U.S. We find that this is the case. Such a coefficient is

not subject to an endogeneity bias because we are measuring the governance of a U.S. firm and the

valuation of a foreign firm.

    In addition to investigating the value relevance of differences in the governance index between

foreign firms and comparable U.S. firms, we also consider the value relevance of specific governance

provisions. We focus on provisions that have attracted considerable attention in the literature and among

policymakers. We find that firms which do not have an independent board, an audit committee ratified

annually, and an audit committee comprised solely of outsiders, have a lower value when their U.S.

matching firm has these governance attributes. In contrast, neither board size nor separation of the

chairman and CEO functions are value relevant.

    Our paper contributes to a growing literature on the determinants and value relevance of firm-level

governance attributes. This literature has been reviewed extensively (see, for instance, Becht, Bolton, and

Roell (2003), and Denis and McConnell (2003)). A subset of this literature uses corporate governance

indices as we do. In the U.S., authors have shown that firm value is related to indices of firm-level

governance attributes (e.g., Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), Bebchuk,

Cohen, and Ferrell (2005)). Most importantly, from our perspective, Brown and Caylor (2006) show that

the ISS index is value relevant in the U.S. and Aggarwal and Williamson (2006) demonstrate that changes

in the index are associated with changes in firm value in the U.S. In an international setting, Durnev and

Kim (2005) use the Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia (CLSA) corporate governance ratings and

demonstrate that they are value relevant. The CLSA ratings cover 24 emerging countries and newly-


                                                    5
emerging countries for 2000 and provide ratings for 494 companies. Francis, Khurana, and Pereira (2005)

show that disclosure-related governance attributes measured by the Standard & Poor’s rankings affect

firms’ cost of capital across the world. Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2007) show that country

characteristics are important determinants of firm-level governance indices for firms outside the U.S. A

couple of contemporaneous papers examine the relation between firm level governance provisions and

firm value across countries using ISS data. Bruno and Claessens (2007) find that companies with strong

corporate governance rely heavily on external finance. Chhaochharia and Laeven (2007) show that firms

that adopt corporate governance provisions beyond those that are mandated by the country or corporate

norms gain a positive valuation impact for their efforts. Though the results of many of these papers are

complementary to the results of this paper, no paper compares the internal governance of foreign firms to

the internal governance of comparable U.S. firms and derives the implications of that comparison for the

value of these foreign firms.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we derive the hypotheses to be tested. In Section III, we

describe the governance data used and the sample of firms. In Section IV, we show that on average firms

in foreign countries invest less in governance than firms in the U.S. and investigate the determinants of

this governance index shortfall. We report in Section V that firm value is positively related to the

governance gap after controlling for firm characteristics and that the governance gap effect is not

subsumed by other firm-level and country-level governance measures. In Section VI, we investigate how

firms differ across the world in relation to specific governance attributes and show that these attributes are

related to firm value. We report on the robustness of our results in Section VII and conclude in Section

VIII.



II. Firm value, country characteristics, and firm-level governance

    In this section, we first discuss the determinants of firm-level governance. We then draw implications

for how firm-level governance differs across countries and how firm value is related to firm-level

governance.


                                                      6
II. A. The determinants of firm-level governance

    In this paper, we follow a growing literature which uses a simple cardinal measure of internal

governance, the number of governance attributes selected by a firm among a specified set of governance

attributes. For most firms, the controlling shareholder chooses the firm’s governance attributes to

maximize his welfare rather than the welfare of the firm’s minority shareholders. A controlling

shareholder extracts private benefits from the firm. The extent to which a controlling shareholder can

extract these benefits depends on the institutions in the firm’s country as well as on the firm’s choice of

corporate governance attributes. By choosing more corporate governance attributes for the firm, the

controlling shareholder reduces his ability to extract private benefits from the firm and therefore incurs

private costs.

    Better governance has a positive impact on the present value of the cash flows that accrue to minority

shareholders for several reasons. First, since better governance reduces the controlling shareholder’s

private benefits, the minority shareholders receive a larger fraction of the cash flows generated by the

firm. Second, better governance increases the proceeds from issuing equity, so that equity can be used to

finance more investments. Third, to the extent that the discretion of the controlling shareholder to take

actions that divert corporate assets is more limited as the firm adopts more corporate governance

attributes, the cost of debt may also fall for the firm. Finally, it is more likely that firm decisions will be

made to maximize shareholder wealth.

    Though adopting better governance has benefits for the minority shareholders, the adoption of

governance attributes imposes costs on them as well. First, these costs include out-of-pocket costs

resulting from the adoption of governance attributes. For instance, it is costly to change a firm’s charter,

to use external auditors, or to have outside directors. Second, a firm may have to incur expenses to ensure

that its adoption of governance attributes is credible. Third, the adoption of governance attributes may

limit the flexibility of management.

    The costs and benefits for minority shareholders resulting from the adoption of governance attributes

depend both on firm and on country characteristics. In particular, investing more in governance will be


                                                      7
more valuable for firms that require more external funding and less valuable for firms which have more

assets that could be used for the benefit of controlling shareholders at the expense of minority

shareholders. Therefore, we expect firms with better growth opportunities and fewer fixed assets to invest

more in governance. The benefits of investing in governance decrease and the costs increase as a

country’s institutions are weaker and its economic and financial development lower. With better financial

development, access to external finance is cheaper. Further, with good institutions, governance measures

are more likely to be credible and commitments by the firm are more likely to be enforceable by minority

shareholders. Finally, with poor economic development, it is more expensive to find individuals with the

skills and training required to perform functions (such as high quality auditing) which are essential for

good internal governance.

    We denote by Bij(GOVij, Hj, Fi) the net benefit of the adoption of governance attributes for

shareholders reflected in the firm’s share price. This benefit falls as the costs of adopting governance

attributes increases. We assume that this net benefit is an increasing concave function of GOVij and

depends on the firm’s and on the country’s characteristics. The adoption of more attributes reduces the

value of the private benefits extracted by the controlling shareholder of the firm. We denote the

controlling shareholder’s private cost of investing in governance attributes by PCij(GOVij, Hj, Fi). For

simplicity, we assume that the only benefit the controlling shareholder receives from more governance

attributes is through the value of his stake in the firm. We assume that PCij(GOVij, Hj, Fi) is an increasing

convex function of GOVij, so that the private cost of adopting governance attributes for the controlling

shareholder is an increasing convex function of the number of attributes adopted.

    The controlling shareholder maximizes his own welfare and chooses the firm’s investment in

governance, i.e., the firm’s choice of GOVij, accordingly. With our notation, the market value of the

firm’s shares is higher because of the adoption of governance attributes by Bij(GOVij, Hj, Fi). If the

controlling shareholder holds a fraction αij of the firm’s shares, his net benefit from investing in

governance, SCij, is the contribution of the firm’s investment in internal governance to the value of his

shares in the firm, αijBij(GOVij, Hj, Fi), minus his private cost from the firm’s investment in internal


                                                     8
governance, PCij(GOVij, Hj, Fi). The controlling shareholder’s gain from the firm’s investment in

governance is less than what it would be if he were a minority shareholder with the same stake because he

bears private costs from that investment. The controlling shareholder chooses GOVij to maximize SCij.

With our assumptions, SCij is a concave function of GOVij, so that there is a unique value of the

governance index which maximizes the contribution of internal governance to firm value. With our

assumptions, the optimal value of GOVij solves the following equation:



                               ∂Bij (GOVij , H j , Fij )       ∂PCij (GOVij , H j , Fij )
                         αij                               =                                       (1)
                                      ∂GOVij                            ∂GOVij

    Figure 1 shows the intersection of the marginal benefit curve (the left-hand side of the equation) and

marginal private cost curve (the right-hand side of the equation) which determines the controlling

shareholder’s choice GOVij. It necessarily follows from Figure 1 that the controlling shareholder’s private

cost of adopting governance attributes reduces the firm’s investment in governance.



II. B. Cross-country implications

    We now consider the cross-country implications of our analysis of the determinants of internal

governance for both the level of internal governance and also for the relation between firm value and

internal governance.

    It is reasonable to view the U.S. as a country in which private benefits of control are smaller than in

most countries. If lower private benefits of control simply shift the marginal cost function of governance

attributes to the right in Figure 1, then everything else equal, our analysis predicts that GOV is higher in

countries with lower private benefits of control. To the extent that the private benefits of control are low

in the U.S., we would expect U.S. firms to have a higher value for GOV than comparable firms elsewhere.

However, the minority shareholders’ net benefit from investment in governance could be lower or higher

in the U.S. than elsewhere. Presumably, the fact that private benefits are low in the U.S. reduces the gain

for shareholders from investing in governance since governance investments reduce private benefits less


                                                                    9
than they would in countries in which private benefits are high, but at the same time, the fact that the U.S.

is highly developed with good institutions may also mean that investments in governance are more

productive.

    In Figure 1, an improvement in investor protection has two effects. First, it shifts the marginal private

cost curve of the controlling shareholder to the right because his ability to extract private benefits from

the firm is lowered. This effect necessarily increases the firm’s investment in internal governance.

Second, an improvement in investor protection shifts the net marginal benefit curve to the right if internal

governance and investor protection are complements and to the left if they are substitutes. Consider first

the case where internal governance and investor protection are complements. In this case, it follows that

an improvement in investor protection increases GOV as well as increases the contribution to firm value

of internal governance. Hence, in this case, we expect that firm value is positively related to GOV. We

consider next the case where internal governance and investor protection are substitutes. In this case, the

net benefit curve moves to the left as investor protection increases, so that GOV may increase or fall as

investor protection increases, but the contribution to firm value of internal governance necessarily falls.

As a result, if investor protection and internal governance are substitutes, firm value and GOV may be

negatively related in the cross-section. Such an outcome would occur if GOV increases as investor

protection improves but internal governance and investor protection are substitutes.

    Following Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2007), we would expect that greater financial and economic

development increases the benefits of investing in internal governance because it reduces the cost of

external finance. Additionally, it decreases the costs of investing in internal governance by reducing the

costs of the inputs to investment in internal governance. In Figure 1, economic and financial development

shift the net benefit curve to the right, increase GOV, and increase the contribution of internal governance

to firm value.




                                                     10
III. Firm-level governance attributes and the governance index

    In this section, we first describe the sample of firms covered by ISS. We then summarize the

governance attributes used in our study and show how we aggregate these attributes to form an index.



III. A. Sample firms

    ISS started providing the Corporate Governance Quotient (CGQ) for U.S. companies in 2002 and for

international companies in 2003. The CGQ rankings are a relative measure of a firm’s investment in

internal governance, i.e., its adoption of governance attributes, and indicate the firm’s investment in

governance relative to firms in its industry or within an index in which the firm is included. To compute

these indices (which we do not use in this paper), ISS collects information on governance attributes for a

large number of U.S. and foreign companies. The information on governance attributes collected by ISS

forms the raw material of this study.

    The international coverage includes non-U.S. firms that are part of the following indices: 1) the MSCI

EAFE index which covers 1,000 stocks in 21 developed countries outside North America and captures

85% of the total market capitalization for these countries; 2) the FTSE All Share Index which consists of

the FTSE 100, FTSE 250 and FTSE SmallCap indices and captures 98% of the U.K. market; 3) the FTSE

All World Developed index which includes the largest firms in the developed markets; and 4) the

S&P/TSX index which represents 71% of the market capitalization of the Toronto Stock Exchange.

There is considerable overlap among the indices. In this paper, we focus exclusively on the 2005 sample

because it includes more firms and has fewer missing attributes for individual firms than the earlier

samples. There are 2,234 foreign firms in our sample. The three countries with the largest number of

firms covered are Japan (589), U.K. (530) and Canada (168). The three countries with the smallest

number of firms covered are Portugal (14), Ireland (16) and New Zealand (18).

    The U.S. coverage was substantially expanded in 2003. Firms are covered if they are included in any

of the following indexes: the Standard and Poor’s 500 index, the Standard and Poor’s SmallCap 600

index, and the Russell 3000 index. The Russell 3000 index captures 98% of the market capitalization of


                                                   11
the U.S. markets. In addition, a number of firms are covered as long as they file on EDGAR. ISS

excludes firms that have not filed a proxy in the last 18 months. In order to be included, a company has to

both be a U.S. company and also be incorporated in a U.S. state. This means that companies like Tyco

and Ingersoll-Rand that are part of the S&P 500 are not included because they are incorporated in

Bermuda. 5,296 U.S. companies are covered in 2005. The U.S. sample is described in greater detail in

Aggarwal and Williamson (2006).



III. B. Governance attributes

    ISS compiles 64 governance attributes for each U.S. firm and 55 attributes for foreign firms. How a

firm fares for each attribute is determined by an examination of the firm’s regulatory filings, annual

reports, and website. Firms do not pay to get rated but can access their ratings and check for accuracy.

Firms can only change their ratings by making and publicly disclosing changes to their governance

structure. For each attribute, ISS evaluates whether a firm meets a threshold level of implementation of

the attribute and considers that the firm has that attribute if it meets the threshold. We exclude 11 of the

55 foreign firm attributes from our analysis because either none of the firms satisfied minimally accepted

criteria for these attributes or ISS replaced them with some other attributes for the U.S. sample in 2005.

We use 44 attributes that are common for both U.S. and foreign firms.

    The 44 attributes we select cover four broad sub-categories: 1) Board (25 attributes), 2) Audit (three

attributes), 3) Anti-takeover (six attributes), and 4) Compensation and Ownership (10 attributes). Board

attributes attempt to capture the aspects of the functioning of the board of directors that relate to board

independence, composition of committees, size, transparency, and how work is conducted; Audit includes

questions regarding the independence of the audit committee and the role of auditors; Anti-takeover

provisions are from the firm’s charter and bylaws and refer to dual-class structure, role of shareholders,

poison pill and blank check preferred; and Compensation and Ownership deals with executive and

director compensation issues related to options, stock ownership and loans, and how these types of

compensation are determined and monitored.


                                                    12
    Table 1 provides a description of the threshold used by ISS for each of the 44 governance attributes

for the full sample of non-U.S. firms for a firm to have an acceptable level of governance for that

attribute.   The governance attributes are arranged by sub-categories.       There are several minimally

accepted standards that are met by most firms. For example, seven of the 25 board-related criteria are met

by more than 80 percent of the non-U.S. firms in our sample. These standards include: the CEO serves on

the board of two or fewer companies, board size is greater than five but less than 16, the CEO is not listed

as having a related-party transaction, the chairman and the CEO are separated or there is a lead director,

shareholders vote on directors selected to fill vacancies, the board typically cannot amend bylaws without

shareholder approval, and the board does not ignore shareholder proposals. For the three audit-related

attributes, 83.9% of the firms in our sample pay consulting fees to auditors that are lower than audit fees;

for 35.3% of the firms the audit committee is comprised solely of independent directors; and for 58.4% of

the firms auditors are ratified at the most recent meeting.

    More than 90% of the firms meet four of the six anti-takeover provisions: a single class of common

stock, shareholders can call special meetings, and the company either has no poison pill or has a poison

pill that was approved by shareholders, the company is not authorized to issue blank check preferred.

Only 7% of the firms require a simple majority to approve mergers implying that the remaining 93% of

firms require a supermajority. Shareholders can act by written consent in 11.5% of our sample firms.

More than half the firms meet four of the ten attributes related to compensation and ownership: no

interlocks among compensation committee members (98.9%), all stock-incentive plans adopted with

shareholder approval (92.8%), all directors with more than one year of service own stock (55.4%), and

repricing is prohibited (54%).



III. C. Corporate governance index construction

    We use the 44 individual attributes to create our GOV index for each company. The index assigns a

value of one to a governance attribute if the company meets the threshold level for that standard and zero

otherwise. In contrast to prior studies in the literature, our index is computed for U.S. firms and foreign


                                                     13
firms using the same criteria. It is common in the literature to use additive indices (e.g., Gompers, Ishii,

and Metrick (2003), Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell (2004), Bebchuk and Cohen (2005)). Brown and Caylor

(2006) use this approach to construct a governance index based on ISS governance attributes for the U.S.

We express our index as a percentage. If a firm satisfies all 44 governance attributes, its GOV index

would equal 100%. If an attribute is missing, the attribute is eliminated and the value of the index

represents the percentage of non-missing attributes that the firm satisfies.

    We also consider the individual governance attributes that have received the most attention in the

academic literature and from observers. Admittedly, these attributes are arbitrary, but we include Board

Independence: board is controlled by more than 50% independent outside directors; Board Size: the board

has more than five members but less than 16; Chairman/CEO Separation: chairman and CEO are

separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure: annually elected board (no staggered board); Audit

Committee Independence: audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders; Auditor

Ratification: auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting; and Stock Classes: only one class of

common stock (no dual class).



IV. Cross-country comparisons of firm-level governance

    We first describe the sample of firms for which the firm-level governance attributes are available. We

then investigate how investment in governance differs across countries focusing on a comparison between

the U.S. and foreign firms.



IV. A. Characteristics of sample firms

    Table 2 provides descriptive statistics (medians) on a number of firm-specific variables by country

including market capitalization (Mkt. Cap.) in millions of U.S. dollars, total assets (Assets) in millions of

U.S. dollars, whether a firm is cross-listed in the U.S. (ADR is a dummy variable that takes a value of one

if the firm is cross-listed in the U.S.), and Tobin’s q. Tobin’s q is defined as ((total assets + market value

of equity – total common equity – deferred taxes)/ total assets). All foreign firm-level data are obtained


                                                     14
from Worldscope and Datastream, while U.S. firm-level data is from Compustat. We use stock prices at

the end of 2004 and 2004 accounting data, taking the perspective that the governance attributes published

by ISS in 2005 were in effect in 2004.

    The median market capitalization and total assets are $1,767 million and $2,561 million respectively

for the non-U.S. sample. There is considerable variation in the size of the firms in a country based on

these two size proxies. Firms in Greece, New Zealand, the U.K., and the U.S. tend to be the smallest.

However, U.K. and U.S. have low median size values because the coverage for these two countries is

much broader and, therefore, captures a much more diverse set of firms compared to other countries

where mostly large firms are covered. On average, French and Swedish firms are the largest based on

market capitalization; French and Italian firms are the largest based on total assets. The median q for the

non-U.S. sample ranges from a low of 1.10 for Italy to a high of 1.49 for both Norway and Sweden and

1.51 for U.K. The U.S. has the largest median q at 1.52. In our sample, more than half the firms from

Austria, Canada and Ireland are cross-listed. Our sample covers more than 70% of the Worldscope

market capitalization for all countries except Hong Kong (60%) and the Netherlands (52%).



IV. B. Differences in investment in governance across countries: Comparison of country averages

    The average values of GOV for non-U.S. firms and for U.S. firms are 50% and 59%, respectively, as

seen in Table 3. Figure 2 and Table 3 show that Canada (68%), the U.S. (59%), Finland (56%),

Switzerland (55%) and the U.K. (55%) are the countries with the highest average governance index.

Countries with the lowest average governance index are Belgium (39%), Portugal (39%), Italy (41%) and

Norway (41%). These results indicate that there is a wide degree of variation in the average value of GOV

across countries. Every country except Canada has a lower average index than the U.S. and the difference

is statistically significant at the 1% level.




                                                    15
IV. C. Differences in governance across countries: Comparison using matched pairs

      There is an obvious problem of interpretation when one compares country averages of the GOV

index: we are comparing governance for firms with different characteristics. As shown in Table 2, median

firm size differs widely across countries. Differences in firm size can result from differences in country-

level governance attributes. Perhaps more importantly, firm-level governance attributes have costs and

benefits. If costs of governance attributes have a fixed component but benefits are proportional to firm

size, one would expect larger firms to invest more in firm-level governance. In fact, in the U.S. there is a

strong correlation between GOV and firm size measured by assets (approximately, 0.50). Consequently,

by comparing GOV across countries with different types of firms, we may be comparing apples to

oranges.

      To make our comparison of the governance of U.S. firms with the governance of foreign firms more

precise, we match firms based on industry and closest propensity scores (p-scores). Drucker and Puri

(2005) argue that this econometric method is superior because this matching employs fewer restrictions.

Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), Rubin (1997), and Conniffe, Gash, and O’Connell (2000), among others,

have shown this approach to be more accurate. In order to implement this method, we calculate each

firm’s propensity score, which is simply equal to the probability that a firm with given characteristics is a

foreign firm. This probability is calculated by using observable firm characteristics of both U.S. and non-

U.S. firms, namely log of total assets (SIZE), two-year average sales growth (SGROWTH), two-year

average research and development expense to sales (R&D/SALES), cash to assets (CASH/ASSETS),

capital expenditures to assets (CAPEX/ASSETS), property, plant and equipment to sales (PPE/SALES),

earnings before interest and taxes to sales (EBIT/SALES), long-term debt plus short-term debt to assets

(DEBT/ASSETS), as well as industry dummies, in a probit regression.

      Of the 2,138 foreign firms that could be matched to U.S. counterparts based on industry and p-scores,

490     firms   that   operate   in   regulated   industries   (specifically,   in   Utilities,   Transportation,

Telecommunication Service, Insurance, Energy, and Banking) are excluded from the analysis.




                                                      16
    We define a firm’s governance gap, GOV GAP, as the difference between its GOV index value and

the index value of its matching U.S. firm. Table 3 also shows the average difference between the GOV

index of foreign firms and their matching U.S. counterparts for the p-score matching method. It is

immediately clear that matching has an impact on the size of the governance index difference. For

instance, the only country with a positive difference with the U.S. when comparing averages is Canada.

The difference in the index average between the U.S. and Canada drops from 9% to 6% when Canadian

firms are matched with U.S. firms based on p-scores and industry. Further, when we match firms, the

governance gap of foreign firms is worse than when we simply compare averages of the GOV index

across countries. Part of the reason is that the U.S. sample contains a large number of smaller firms and

smaller firms typically have worse governance when measured by an index like GOV.

    We also show in Table 3 the number of firms in each country that invest less in governance than their

matching U.S. firm, the number of firms in each country that invest more in governance than their

matching U.S. firm, and, finally, the percentage of firms in a country that invest more in governance than

their matching U.S. firm based on the propensity score method. Across the world, 87.3% of firms invest

less in governance than their matching U.S. firm. Strikingly, 86.1% of the firms that invest more in

governance than their matching U.S. firm are in two countries, Canada and the U.K. Our sample has 22

non-U.S. countries. Only 15 countries have at least one firm that has better governance than its matching

U.S. firm. There are only three countries with more than five firms that have a positive index gap:

Canada, Finland, and the U.K. Canada is the country with the largest fraction of firms investing more in

governance than their U.S. counterpart. It is the only country with a majority of firms with a positive gap,

since Table 3 shows that 72.3% of the firms have a positive gap with the propensity score matching

method. In the case of Finland, 29.2% of the firms have a positive gap. Finally, for the U.K., the

percentage is 24.4%. Strikingly, two of the three countries with the largest percentage of firms with a

positive gap are common law countries.




                                                    17
IV. D. Firm and country characteristics and the GAP

    We saw in Section II that the governance gap, GOV GAP, defined as the difference between a firm’s

GOV index value and the index value of its matching U.S. firm, depends on firm and country

characteristics. We expect firms more likely to need access to external finance to have a lower gap. Also,

we expect a firm’s gap to be higher if its country is more economically and financially developed. Finally,

depending on whether internal governance and investor protection are substitutes or complements, we

expect the gap to be decreasing or increasing with investor protection.

    For each firm, we measure its GOV index and the GOV index of its matching U.S. firm. Before we

turn to the governance gap, it is useful to look at the relation between these two indices. If firm

characteristics make it optimal for some firms to invest more in governance than others, we would expect

a positive relation between a firm’s GOV index and the GOV index of its U.S. matching firm. We find

that this is the case. When we regress GOV index on the GOV index of the matching firm and a constant

using country fixed effects, the GOV index of the matching firm has a coefficient of 0.043 significant at

the 10% level. The size of this coefficient is small. To the extent that country characteristics explain a

large fraction of the variation in internal governance across non-U.S. countries as shown in Doidge,

Karolyi, and Stulz (2007), a large coefficient would be surprising. However, we cannot exclude the

concern that imperfections in matching lead to an attenuation bias.

    Table 4 compares firm and country characteristics for firms with a positive governance gap versus

firms with a negative governance gap. In this analysis, we require additional information in order to

compute Tobin’s q, which reduces the sample size slightly (only by 46 observations). The first two

columns of Table 4 report the medians for the firms with a negative governance gap, i.e., firms that invest

less in internal governance as measured by GOV than their U.S. counterpart, and for the firms with a

positive governance gap. Similar to previous work in the corporate governance literature (e.g., Gompers,

Ishii, and Metrick (2003), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Durnev and Kim (2005)), we use

Tobin’s q as the measure of firm value. It has the interpretation of the value created in excess of the cost

of the assets. We find that the q of firms which invest more in governance than their matching U.S. firms


                                                    18
is significantly greater than the q of firms which invest less. In the next section, we examine this valuation

difference in greater detail.

    The firms with a positive gap differ from those with a negative gap in many other ways besides

having a higher q. In particular, the firms with a positive gap have a market capitalization and total assets

that are smaller than the firms with worse governance. They also have greater sales growth, R&D to sales,

cash to assets, debt/assets, and closely-held ownership, but their capital expenditures are significantly

lower.

    We also investigate how country characteristics differ between firms with a positive gap and firms

with a negative gap. The firms which invest more in governance than their U.S. counterparts come from

countries with greater stock market capitalization to GDP, with common law, with a better judicial

system, and with better laws and regulations to curb self-dealing by insiders. This result is completely

inconsistent with the view that firm-level governance and country-level investor protection are substitutes

and is supportive of the role of financial development (but not economic development) discussed in

Section II. For comparison with Durnev and Kim (2005), we use the product of the index of rule of law

and of the anti-director index of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) (as revised in

Djankov, La Porta, Lopes-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (DLLS, 2006)) as a measure of the quality of the

judicial system. We also use the anti self-dealing index from DLLS. Firms with a positive governance gap

come from countries where these variables have higher values.

    We report in Table 4 estimates of probit regressions in which the dependent variable takes a value of

one if a foreign firm has better governance than its matching U.S. counterpart and equals zero otherwise.

Few firm characteristics are systematically related to the probability that a firm has a positive governance

gap. We find that firms with high R&D are more likely to have a positive gap and firms with high cash to

assets ratio are less likely to have a positive governance gap. When we control for the anti-self-dealing

index, we also find that larger firms are less likely to have positive governance gap. Not surprisingly,

firms with greater sales growth are more likely to have a positive gap. We find that in these regressions

the measures of investor protection are significant predictors of a firm’s governance relative to its U.S.


                                                     19
matching firm, so that firms in countries with higher investor protection are more likely to have a positive

gap. By far, the most important variable in predicting whether a firm will have a positive GOV GAP is the

common law dummy variable. Though we do not report the probit regression in a table, we find that

adding common law to a regression without investor protection variables doubles the pseudo R-square of

the regression. In other words, the legal origin of the country in which a firm is incorporated explains

more than all other variables in the regression about whether the firm will invest more in governance than

its matching U.S. firm.

     We also investigate, but do not report, the determinants of the size of a firm’s GOV GAP for firms

that have a negative gap. We find that variables that make it more likely that a firm will have a positive

governance gap reduce the size of the governance index shortfall for firms that have a shortfall.



V.       Firm value and internal governance

     We have now seen that the typical foreign firm invests less in governance than a comparable U.S.

firm, but some foreign firms invest more than comparable U.S. firms. We show that firms that invest

more in governance than their matching U.S. firm have higher value, in the sense that they have a higher

Tobin’s q, than the firms that invest less. In this section, we examine the relation between firm value and

the index more deeply. We want to test the prediction in Section II that there should be a positive relation

between GOV and Tobin’s q in the cross-section given that we show in Section III that internal

governance and investor protection are complements. Further, we would like to understand whether there

is a linear relation between firm value and the governance gap, so that any increase in the governance gap

is associated with a higher firm value. Alternatively, it could be that firm value falls as a firm’s

governance index shortfall relative to its U.S. matching firm increases, but that the value of a firm with a

positive gap does not increase as the size of the gap increases. In this case, only a foreign firm’s GOV

shortfall relative to the GOV index of its matching firm would be value relevant.

     A relation between firm value and the governance gap raises many questions. First, it could simply be

that the governance index is correlated with observable firm characteristics that explain q (firm


                                                    20
characteristics omitted variable problem). To address this issue, we need to examine the relation between

firm value and the governance gap controlling for firm characteristics. Second, it could be that each firm

has optimal internal governance given its characteristics, so that a relation between firm value and the

governance gap just indicates that variables which affect a firm’s choice of internal governance also affect

the firm’s value (endogeneity problem). Third, if good investor protection and greater economic and

financial development make greater investments in internal governance optimal, a relation between firm

value and the governance gap could be due to the impact of these country characteristics on firm value

rather than to a separate impact of internal governance on firm value (country characteristics omitted

variable problem). We address the first two problems in the first sub-section and the third problem in the

second sub-section.



V. A.   Firm value, the governance GAP, and firm characteristics

    In this section, we relate firm value to the governance gap. We use the governance index of the U.S.

matching firm as a regressor. If the relation between q and a firm’s governance index is due to the firm

characteristics that explain the governance index, we would expect much of that effect to be captured by

the governance index of the U.S. matching firm. Tobin’s q can differ across firms because of industry and

country characteristics rather than because of differences in firm characteristics. To account for industry

and country sources of heterogeneity, we use industry and country fixed-effects. We employ an estimator

that allows for clustering of the residuals at the country level.

    Regression (1) of Table 5 shows estimates when we regress Tobin’s q on the governance index a firm

would have if it were a U.S. firm, GOV_US, the governance index gap, GOV GAP, and firm size

measured by the log of total assets, SIZE. The regression estimates show a strong positive relation

between a firm’s GOV GAP and its q. A firm’s Tobin’s q is positively related to GOV_US, but the

coefficient on GOV_US is much larger than the coefficient on GOV GAP. Finally, q is negatively related

to firm size.




                                                       21
      To evaluate whether the relation to firm value depends on the sign of the GOV GAP, regression (2)

separates GOV GAP into a negative GAP and a positive GAP. We find that the coefficient on negative

GAP is positive and significant at the 1% level. Consequently, firms with a greater index shortfall relative

to their U.S. matching firm have lower value. In contrast, the coefficient on positive GAP is positive but

insignificant.

      In regression (1), GOV_US should capture the relation between governance and firm value if the firm

were a U.S. firm. As a result, the significance of GOV GAP has to be explained by the fact that the firm

does not make the governance choices that a U.S. firm would make or because there is a matching error.

If all firms choose GOV optimally given firm characteristics and country characteristics do not matter,

perfect matching would imply that GOV GAP is equal to zero for each firm since each firm would choose

GOV equal to the GOV of the U.S. matching firm. Matching errors would imply that in some cases a

foreign firm is matched with a U.S. firm that chooses optimally a higher GOV index than the foreign firm

because of differences in firm characteristics and in other cases it is matched with a U.S. firm that chooses

a lower GOV index. As a result, matching errors would be expected to lead to an average of GOV GAP

close to zero. Since the average GOV GAP is significantly negative for all countries but Canada, it is

implausible that matching mistakes explain the relation between GOV GAP and firm value.

      In light of the endogeneity concerns which are endemic in the governance literature, a more plausible

explanation for the relation between q and GOV GAP than matching errors is that we do not observe

important firm-specific characteristics that affect the foreign firm’s choice of governance as well as its q.2

However, in our setting, such an explanation seems less likely than is typical in regressions that have q as

an explanatory variable. Since we control for a firm’s governance if it were a U.S. firm, a relation

between GOV GAP and q induced by unobserved firm characteristics would have to result from

systematic unobserved firm characteristics correlated with q for foreign firms but not for U.S. firms. Such

a systematic bias seems to stretch belief. Nevertheless, we address this endogeneity problem by

instrumenting GOV GAP. A good instrument would be one that is uncorrelated with the unobserved firm

2
    See Hermalin and Weisbach (2003).


                                                     22
characteristics which affect the firm’s GOV GAP but which has a highly significant regression coefficient

in a regression of GOV GAP on the instrument, on GOV_US, and on size.3 We use as our instrument the

average GOV GAP of the other firms in the same industry and in the same country.4 Since we already

control for the effect of industry on q through industry fixed effects, there is no reason to believe that the

instrument will be correlated with unobserved firm characteristics which affect the choice of internal

governance. However, the regression used to test if the instrument is a useful instrument yields a t-statistic

on the instrument in excess of 10, so that the instrument is useful. We reproduce regression (3) using the

instrumental variable. The regression treats each country as a cluster but does not use country fixed

effects since the instrumental variable is the intersection of an industry and a country. The coefficient on

GOV GAP is close in value to the coefficient in the OLS regression and the coefficient is significant at the

10% level.

       In regressions (1) to (3), we estimate the coefficient on GOV GAP controlling only for GOV_US and

size. Having few variables in the second stage regressions makes it easier for the instrument to have a

high t-statistic in the first stage regression, but it could be that the success of the instrumental variable

regression is simply explained by the fact that GOV GAP proxies for firm characteristics. We also would

expect firm characteristics to be related to q directly rather than through the governance variables. In

regression (4), we control for other firm characteristics generally used in the literature in q regressions.

We control for two-year average sales growth (SGROWTH), two-year average research and development

expense to sales (R&D/SALES), two-year average foreign sales to total sales (FOREIGN SALES/SALES),

cash to assets (CASH/ASSETS), capital expenditures to assets (CAPEX/ASSETS), property, plant and

equipment to sales (PPE/SALES), earnings before interest and taxes to sales (EBIT/SALES), and a

measure of leverage corresponding to long-term debt and debt due in less than a year to assets

(DEBT/ASSETS). Similar to prior work we winsorize extreme percentiles (1st and 99th) of q, SGROWTH,

R&D/SALES, and FOREIGN SALES/SALES.


3
    See Wooldridge (2002), p. 84.
4
    For the use of a similar instrument in a different context, see John, Litov, and Yeung (2007).


                                                            23
    Regression (4) shows that adding these control variables does not affect the coefficient on GOV GAP,

but it reduces the coefficient on GOV_US. The control variables have the signs one would generally

expect based on the previous literature. In Regression (5), we split GOV GAP into a positive and a

negative component. The values of the coefficients on the two components of GOV GAP are not

meaningfully different from their values in Regression (2). It follows that the coefficient on GOV GAP as

well as the coefficients on the positive and negative components of GOV GAP are robust to controlling

for firm characteristics. In Regression (6), we estimate Regression (4) instrumenting GOV GAP as we did

in Regression (3). The coefficient on GOV GAP is positive and significant at the 10% level. Interestingly,

the coefficient on GOV_US is no longer significant.

    The evidence in this sub-section shows that there is a robust relation between GOV GAP and q as well

as a robust relation between negative GAP and q. These relations hold when we control for the index

value the foreign firm would have in the U.S. and for firm characteristics as well as when we allow for the

endogenous determination of the foreign firm’s governance. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis

that foreign firms with a negative governance gap invest less in governance than would be required to

maximize the wealth of their minority shareholders if they were U.S. firms, so that firm characteristics

alone cannot explain these firms’ underinvestment in governance relative to U.S. firms.



V. B.   Country characteristics and the relation between firm value and GOV GAP

    We saw in Section II that, for firms with controlling shareholders, a foreign firm’s internal

governance is not chosen to maximize the wealth of minority shareholders but rather to maximize the

welfare of the controlling shareholder. The ability of the controlling shareholder to extract private benefits

is strongly determined by a country’s investor protection, so that if investor protection is weaker,

improvements in firm-level governance will be costlier for the controlling shareholder. Our evidence in

Section IV showing that firms in countries with better investor protection are less likely to have a

negative governance GAP is consistent with this hypothesis. However, with this perspective, it could be

that a country’s institutions lead to an optimal firm ownership structure as well as an optimal firm-level


                                                      24
governance regime. With this view, therefore, a firm in a given country with a given governance index

would have the optimal governance index for that firm. It would follow that, even though the firm could

increase its value for minority shareholders by choosing more governance attributes keeping ownership

by the controlling shareholder unchanged, the firm does not really have this option because if it increases

its investment in internal governance, it makes the controlling shareholder worse off and its existing

ownership structure suboptimal. With this view, there would be an optimal level of GOV that would be

explained by country-level variables given the firm’s other governance attributes. We explore the

implications of this view in this sub-section.

    We first address the issue that country characteristics are known to affect the use of other governance

mechanisms. In particular, the literature shows that both insider ownership (see La Porta, Lopez-de-

Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) and Stulz (2005) for further references) and the adoption of ADR programs

depend on country characteristics. Cross-listing enables a firm to have better governance by borrowing

external governance attributes from the U.S. (e.g., Stulz (1999)). It is well-known that there is a positive

relation between firm value and whether a firm has adopted an ADR program (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz

(2004)). In regression (1) of Table 6, we therefore add these governance mechanisms to our regression (4)

of Table 5 to make sure that internal governance has a distinct role to play. Adding these two additional

governance measures has no impact on the coefficient of GOV GAP even though both measures have

positive significant coefficients. In other words, internal governance as measured by our GOV index has a

distinct role in a corporation and does not proxy for the presence of other governance mechanisms. In

Regression (2), we split GOV GAP into a positive and negative value. We find that the negative value has

a positive significant coefficient, but the positive value does not.

    To establish better the unique role of internal governance, we re-estimate the regression without GOV

GAP. If firm fundamentals in a country with good investor protection make high investment in internal

governance valuable for a firm, the same firm will be at a disadvantage in a country with poor investor

protection in which such a high investment in internal governance is not optimal. Hence, we expect the

value of firms that would have high governance in the U.S. to be lower abroad. We find that this is the


                                                      25
case with Regression (3). Such a result is reminiscent of the result of Rajan and Zingales (1998) that

industries which raise more external capital in the U.S. grow less in countries with poor financial

development. In that paper, they use the amount of external capital raised in the U.S. as a benchmark for

optimal external funding with good financial development and then show that industries that optimally

would raise more external funding if their country were financially developed are at a disadvantage if

their country is not as financially developed as the U.S. Here, we conduct a similar experiment. The

results of this experiment are not subject to an endogeneity problem since we are using as our regressor

the governance index of a different firm than the governance index of the firm whose q we are measuring.

Not surprisingly, the result only holds provided that we include all the control variables used in

Regression (1). This is not surprising since, if we control for few firm characteristics, GOV_US proxies

for firm characteristics that we know are positively related to q.

    In the next regression, Regression (4), we add to Regression (1) a measure of economic development,

GDP per capita, a measure of financial development, the stock market’s capitalization divided by GDP,

and a proxy for investor protection, a dummy variable that takes value one if a country is a common law

country. These measures have been widely used in the literature. We see that none of the added variables

has a significant coefficient. The coefficient on GOV GAP falls from 1.279 to 0.872, but that fall is due to

the removal of the country fixed effects rather than to the addition of development and investor protection

variables. The significance of the GOV GAP coefficient falls as well, from the 1% level to the 5% level.

Regression (5) shows, however, that the reason for the decrease in the coefficient on GOV GAP is the

dramatic decrease in the coefficient on the positive component of GOV GAP. The coefficient on the

negative component of GOV GAP is little affected by the change in regression specification, but the

coefficient on the positive component of GOV GAP falls from 1.310 to 0.243. In the next two regressions,

we re-estimate Regression (5) using first the legal variable used by Durnev and Kim (2005), which is the

product of the index of rule of law and of the anti-director index of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,

and Vishny (1998) (as revised in DLLS), instead of the common law dummy variable and then the anti-

self-dealing index of DLLS. We see that the same results hold, namely the coefficient on the negative


                                                     26
component of GOV GAP remains large in absolute value and significant at the 1% level, but now the

coefficient on the positive component of GOV GAP even becomes insignificantly negative.

      Our regressions suggest that, when investor protection is good, there is no independent relation

between internal governance mechanisms and firm value. However, investor protection fails to explain

the relation between the negative governance gap and firm value. Our regressions do not support the

hypothesis that there is an optimal level of internal governance determined by a country’s level of

investor protection alone after controlling for firm characteristics. All the results in this section suggest

that firm value increases when a firm’s governance index shortfall relative to its matching U.S. firm falls.

The interpretation of this result is that firms are worth more when their controlling shareholders find it

optimal to invest more in governance and that the amount they choose to invest in governance is not

determined by their country’s investor protection alone. This result is consistent with the hypothesis that

how much controlling shareholders choose to invest in governance depends on their wealth and

preferences as well as on firm and country characteristics. Our results do not imply that a greater

investment in governance would make controlling shareholders better off, but they are consistent with the

hypothesis that minority shareholders would be better off if firms with controlling shareholders were to

invest more in corporate governance.



VI.      Individual Governance Attributes

      So far, we have focused on the governance index and the relation between firm value and that index.

When academics and other observers focus on corporate governance, they do not pay close attention to 44

attributes. Instead, they tend to focus on a handful of attributes that draw considerable attention.

Therefore, we also consider individual governance attributes that we believe have received the most

attention in the academic literature and from observers. Admittedly, the choice of these attributes is

arbitrary. The seven attributes include, Board Independence: board is controlled by more than 50%

independent outside directors; Board Size: the board has more than five members but less than 16;

Chairman/CEO Separation: chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure:


                                                     27
annually elected board (no staggered board); Audit Committee Independence: audit committee comprised

solely of independent outsiders; Auditor Ratification: auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting; and

Stock Classes: only one class of common stock (no dual class).

    We report in Table 7 the country averages for the seven governance attributes. We see in that table

that U.S. firms rate highly on board independence and audit committee independence. In contrast, as

expected, U.S. firms tend to rate poorly compared to most countries on the separation of the functions of

the chairman of the board and of the CEO. Though most countries have a lower proportion of firms

without a staggered board than the U.S., four countries (Canada, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden) have a

much higher proportion of such firms than the U.S. More than half the countries have a higher proportion

of firms than the U.S. meeting the minimum satisfactory threshold for board size. Finally, fifteen

countries have a higher percentage of firms with one class of stock than the U.S.

    Are these governance attributes related to firm value? Or, to put it differently and to use an example,

are the foreign firms that separate the functions of chairman of the board and of CEO worth more? To

examine this issue, we re-estimate the last regression of Table 5 in two different ways. First, we re-

estimate the regression substituting individual governance attributes for GOV. Second, we re-estimate the

regression including all the individual governance attributes. As in Table 5, we use the governance

attribute of the matching firm, the positive governance gap, and the negative governance gap.

    Panel A of Table 8 shows the regression estimates when we introduce one individual attribute at a

time. We see that separation of the functions of chairman of the board and CEO is not related to firm

value. Neither are board size and stock classes. Board independence is significantly related to firm value.

A firm whose board does not meet the board independence requirement is worth less when its matching

U.S. firm meets that requirement. Our evidence is related to the evidence of Dahya, Dimitrov, and

McConnell (2006). They find that board independence is positively related to firm value in the countries

with poor investor protection when firms have a controlling shareholder. However, their sample includes




                                                    28
less developed countries in contrast to ours.5 We find that board independence matters for developed

countries. The strength of the board independence result is surprising in light of the U.S. evidence which

fails to find a strong relation between board independence and firm value.6 Not having a staggered board

when the matching U.S. firm has a staggered board is also associated with higher value. Bebchuk and

Cohen (2005) document the costs associated with entrenched boards. We also find that audit committee

independence is associated with higher value. Finally, not having annual audit ratification when the

matching U.S. firm has it is costly, but having annual audit ratification when the matching U.S. firm does

not does not lead to higher firm value. Panel B of Table 8 shows the estimates for the coefficients of the

individual governance attributes when all the attributes are included as explanatory variables. The same

coefficients are significant as in the regressions with the individual attributes.



VII.     Alternative specifications

    In this Section, we investigate the robustness of the results presented so far. We present some of the

results of that investigation in Table 9.

    Our analysis has focused on comparing the governance of foreign firms to the governance of

matching U.S. firms. An alternative approach would be to compare the governance/value relation for

foreign and U.S. firms. In columns (1) and (2), we report regression (1) of Table 6 where GOV is the

governance variable for foreign firms and the same regression without Closely-held, ADR, and Foreign

Sales for U.S. firms. Since the regression controls for firm characteristics, the coefficient of GOV is a

measure of the value relevance of internal governance given firm characteristics. We see that the

coefficient of GOV is positive and significant in both regressions.

    A concern is that only selected firms have a GOV index. We investigate (but do not report regression

estimates) whether the significance of the GOV index could be accounted for by a selection bias. Using all

firms for which data is available on Worldscope to estimate regression (1), we estimate a probit

5
  Our sample differs from theirs also because we do not limit firms to those with a controlling shareholder and
because we have many more firms than they do.
6
  See Bhagat and Black (2002).


                                                         29
regression for which the dependent variable is one if the firm has a GOV index. The explanatory variables

are a firm’s asset size and its number of employees. Using Heckman’s two-stage approach, we find that

the GOV index is still significant when we account for selection.

    In regression (3), we use an index which adds up the seven governance attributes discussed in Section

VI as our governance index. We call this index GOV7. We see that the coefficient on GOV7 is positive and

significant, but smaller than the coefficient on GOV.

    All the results discussed so far on the relation between internal governance and firm value used a

specific propensity score model. In regression (4), we use an alternative matching approach which does

not rely on the propensity score. For each foreign firm, we choose as a matching firm the U.S. firm in the

same industry that has the closest amount of assets. We see that the results are similar to the results

obtained when we use propensity matching. We also estimate different propensity score models but do

not report the results in the table. In particular, the literature has used different measures of leverage when

comparing firms across countries (see, for instance, Rajan and Zingales (1995)). Using different measures

of leverage does not alter our conclusions. It is important to note, however, that the significance and

magnitude of the coefficient on the positive governance gap in our q regressions is sensitive to the

matching procedure. In contrast, the significance and magnitude of the coefficient on the negative

governance gap is robust across all our investigations. It follows that one should be cautious in making

too much of the results that there is no positive relation between a positive governance gap and firm

value.

    A legitimate concern is whether our results depend on the inclusion of some countries with a large

number of firms in our sample. In particular, the three countries with the largest number of firms, in

descending order, are Japan, the U.K., and Canada. We estimate our regressions removing one of these

countries at a time (in columns (5)-(7) of Table 9). It is immediately clear that removing one of these

countries has no impact on our conclusions.

    So far, our regressions have not controlled for a valuation benchmark. We would expect a firm to be

worth more if it is in an industry that has a higher q. We add as an explanatory variable the median q of


                                                      30
the firm’s industry globally in column (9). We find that our results are essentially the same with that

added variable.



VIII.   Conclusion

    In this paper, we compare the governance of foreign firms to the governance of comparable U.S.

firms using propensity scores. We find that it is quite important, when comparing the governance of

foreign firms and U.S. firms, to do so by comparing apples to apples, namely firms with similar

characteristics. Comparisons based on country averages of firm-level governance indices understate the

magnitude of the differences in investment in internal governance across countries because small firms,

which typically invest less in internal governance, are overweighted in the U.S. We call the difference in

governance between a foreign firm and its matching U.S. firm the governance gap. For the typical foreign

firm, the governance gap is negative in that the foreign firm invests less in internal governance than its

matching U.S. firm. A foreign firm is much less likely to have a negative governance gap in a country

with good investor protection, so that there is clear evidence that investment in internal governance and

investor protection are complements rather than substitutes.

    We find that the governance gap is strongly related to firm value. Firms which invest less in internal

governance than their matching U.S. firm are worth less and their value shortfall increases with their

internal governance investment shortfall. We conclude that a firm’s underinvestment in governance

compared to its matching U.S. firm cannot be explained by unobserved firm characteristics which would

make it optimal for the foreign firm to invest less in internal governance. With our experimental design,

an endogeneity explanation for our result based on firm characteristics would require a systematic bias in

the ability of observed firm characteristics to explain internal governance and firm value in foreign

countries compared to the U.S. In other words, foreign firms that invest less in internal governance than

U.S. firms would have unobserved characteristics not present in their matching U.S. firms that make such

a lower investment optimal. Such an explanation seems implausible. A more plausible explanation is that

the underinvestment in governance is driven by country characteristics.


                                                    31
    Country characteristics therefore play an extremely important role in explaining why the typical

foreign firm invests less in internal governance than its matching U.S. firm. Our results suggest that

investor protection is a crucial determinant in the intensity of investment in internal governance, so that

the ability of controlling shareholders to extract private benefits from firms plays a critical role in their

evaluation of the benefits and costs of investments in internal governance. However, neither investor

protection nor other country characteristics completely explain the relation between a firm’s internal

governance investment and its value. It could be that our proxies and regression specifications fail to

identify the channel through which country characteristics exogenously lead to an optimal level of

internal governance. However, more likely, firms typically underinvest in internal governance because

doing so is optimal for their controlling shareholder and suboptimal for their minority shareholders. An

increase in a typical foreign firm’s investment in internal governance would make minority shareholders

better off, but would not make its controlling shareholder better off. Further, in countries which place

greater weight on the interests of stakeholders, an improvement in internal governance might also

adversely affect these stakeholders.




                                                     32
References

Aggarwal, Reena, and Rohan G. Williamson, 2006, Did new regulations target the relevant corporate
     governance attributes? Working Paper, Georgetown University.

Arcot, Sridhar R., and Valentina G. Bruno, 2006, One size does not fit all, after all: Evidence from
      corporate governance, Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Alma Cohen, 2005, The costs of entrenched boards, Journal of Financial
     Economics 78, 409-433.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, 2005, What matters in corporate governance?
     Working Paper, Harvard Law School.

Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton and Ailsa Roëll, 2003, Corporate governance and control, in Handbook of
     the Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris and René Stulz, North-
     Holland.

Bhagat, Sanjay, and Bernard Black, 2002, The non-correlation between board independence and long-
     term firm performance, Journal of Corporation Law 27, 231-273.

Brown, Lawrence D., and Marcus L. Caylor, 2006, Corporate governance and firm valuation, Journal of
    Accounting and Public Policy July-Aug, 409-434.

Bruno, Valentina G. and Stijn Claessens, 2007, Corporate governance and regulation: Can there be too
     much of a good thing? Working Paper #WPS 4140, World Bank Policy Research.

Chhaochharia, Vidhi and Luc Laeven, 2007, The invisible hand of corporate governance, Working Paper,
     International Monetary Fund.

Conniffe, Denis, Vanessa Gash, and Philip J. O’Connell, 2000, Evaluating state programmes: “Natural
     experiments” and propensity scores, The Economic and Social Review, 31, 283-308.

Dahya, Jay, Orlin Dimitrov, and John J. McConnell, 2006, Dominant shareholders, corporate boards and
     corporate value: A cross-country analysis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Denis, Diane, & John J. McConnell, 2003. International corporate governance. Journal of Financial and
     Quantitative Analysis, 38, 1, 1-36.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (DLLS), 2006, The
     law and economics of self-dealing, Working Paper, Harvard University.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Why foreign firms that list in the U.S. are
     worth more? Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2007, Why do countries matter so much for
     corporate governance? Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Drucker, Steven and Manju Puri, 2005, On the benefits of concurrent lending and underwriting, Journal
     of Finance, 60, 2763-2799.




                                                 33
Durnev, Art, and E. Han Kim, 2005, To steal or not to steal: Firm attributes, legal environment, and
     valuation, Journal of Finance 60, 1461-1493.

Francis, Jere R., Inder K. Khurana, and Raynolde Pereira, 2005, Disclosure incentives and effects on cost
      of capital around the world, Accounting Review, 80, 1125-1162.

Fulghieri, Paolo, and Matti Suominen, 2006, Corporate governance, finance, and the real sector, Working
     Paper, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Gilson, Ronald J., 2005, Controlling shareholders and corporate governance: Complicating the
      comparative taxonomy, ECGI–Law Working Paper No. 49/2005.

Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices, The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 107-155.

Hansmann, Henry, and Reinier Kraakman, 2003, The end of history for corporate law, in J. Gordon and
     M. J. Roe eds.: Are Corporate Governance Systems Converging?, University of Chicago Press.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, 2003, Boards of Directors as an endogenously
    determined institution: A survey of the economic literature, Economic Policy Review 9, 7-26.

John, Kose, and Simi Kedia, 2006, Institutions, markets and growth: A theory of comparative corporate
      governance, unpublished working paper, New York University.

John, Kose, Lubomir Litov, and Bernard Yeung, 2007, Corporate governance and risk taking, Working
      Paper, New York University.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership around the world, Journal
     of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (LLSV), 1998, Law
     and finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure? Some evidence
     from international data, Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic
     Review 88, 559-586.

Rosenbaum, Paul, and Donald Rubin, 1983, The central role of the propensity score in observational
     studies for causal effects, Biometrika 70, 41-55.

Rubin, Donald, 1997, Estimating causal effects from large data sets using propensity scores, Annals of
     Internal Medicine 127, 757-763.

Scott, Hal S., and George S. Dallas, 2006, Mandating corporate behavior: Can one set of rules fit all?
      Working Paper, Standard and Poor’s.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 52,
      737-783.




                                                   34
Stulz, René M., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance and cost of capital, Journal of Applied Corporate
      Finance 12, 8-25.

Stulz, René M., 2005, The limits of financial globalization, Journal of Finance 60, 1595-1638.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2002, Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data, MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.




                                                   35
                                     Figure 1
                   Determination of optimal value of GOV index




Dollars                                                          Marginal private cost for
          Marginal net benefit of GOV                            controlling shareholder




                         Optimal value of GOV                             GOV index
                         index




                                       36
                                              Figure 2
                                     Governance Scores by Country

Values on the vertical axis represent the mean of the firm level governance index for a particular country.
GOV is the percentage of 44 governance attributes that a firm meets based on the attributes that have non-
missing data. Mean governance scores are reported for each of the 23 countries as of 2005. The information
is based on 1,714 non-U.S. firms and 4,070 U.S. firms from non-regulated industries.




 80%


 70%


 60%


 50%


 40%


 30%


 20%


 10%


  0%
                       y




            Sw d




                      ay
            ng e
                     nd




           Be ly
                    SA




                       d




            Ze g


                     en




           Po m

                        l
          A ce



                        a




         on ore
           itz m




             er s
          K nd




                     lia




                       k
                       n




            N n
                     da




                    ga
                    nd




                      c
                    tri
                    an




        ew on

                     n
       Ne lan




                    ar
                    ai




                   pa



                  Ita
        Sw do




                   iu
                    e
                  an




                   w
                  ed
                ala
                 na




                  la




                 tra
      ted nla




               rtu
                Sp
                 U




                 re

                ap
                 m
                us
                la

                m




                K




                Ja




               lg
               or
              Ire
               er
                g




              Fr
             Ca




             us




              G
             en
              er
            Fi




             A
             in




             g
          th

          G




          D



         Si
        H
     N
   ni
  U




                                                      37
                                                  Table 1
                    Foreign Firms Satisfying Minimally Acceptable Governance Standards

The 44 governance attributes in the GOV44 index are divided into four sub-categories: Board, Audit, Anti-takeover,
and Compensation & Ownership. For each attribute we report the percentage of firms that satisfy the minimally
acceptable governance standard in 2005. The sample consists of 2,234 foreign firms.

      Minimally Acceptable Corporate Governance Standard                              % of Foreign Firms
                                                                                      Meeting Criterion
      BOARD
 1.   All directors attended 75% of board meetings or had a valid excuse                     77.8%
 2.   CEO serves on the boards of two or fewer public companies                              91.7%
 3.   Board is controlled by more than 50% independent outside directors                     32.6%
 4.   Board size is at greater than five but less than 16                                    84.3%
 5.   CEO is not listed as having a related-party transaction                                93.5%
 6.   No former CEO on the board                                                             75.1%
 7.   Compensation committee comprised solely of independent outsiders                       28.9%
 8.   Chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director                             89.8%
 9.   Nominating committee comprised solely of independent outsiders                         15.8%
10.   Governance committee exists and met in the past year                                   14.0%
11.   Shareholders vote on directors selected to fill vacancies                              83.5%
12.   Governance guidelines are publicly disclosed                                           53.9%
13.   Annually elected board (no staggered board)*                                           24.9%
14.   Policy exists on outside directorships (four or fewer boards is the limit)              4.0%
15.   Shareholders have cumulative voting rights                                              1.6%
16.   Shareholder approval is required to increase/decrease board size                       56.8%
17.   Majority vote requirement to amend charter/bylaws (not supermajority)                   3.5%
18.   Board has the express authority to hire its own advisors                               44.7%
19.   Performance of the board is reviewed regularly                                         44.7%
20.   Board approved succession plan in place for the CEO                                    21.5%
21.   Outside directors meet without CEO and disclose number of times met                    10.1%
22.   Directors are required to submit resignation upon a change in job                       1.9%
23.   Board cannot amend bylaws without shareholder approval or can only do
      so under limited circumstances                                                        98.1%
24.   Does not ignore shareholder proposal                                                  100.0%
25.   Qualifies for proxy contest defenses combination points                                0.2%

      AUDIT
26.   Consulting fees paid to auditors are less than audit fees paid to auditors             83.9%
27.   Audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders                              35.3%
28.   Auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting                                        58.4%

      ANTI-TAKEOVER
29.   Single class, common                                                                   93.2%
30.   Majority vote requirement to approve mergers (not supermajority)                        7.0%
31.   Shareholders may call special meetings                                                 99.7%
32.   Shareholder may act by written consent                                                 11.5%
33.   Company either has no poison pill or a pill that was shareholder approved              98.6%
34.   Company is not authorized to issue blank check preferred
                                                                                             95.0%


                                                          38
      COMPENSATION & OWNERSHIP
35.   Directors are subject to stock ownership requirements                         12.2%
36.   Executives are subject to stock ownership guidelines                          15.0%
37.   No interlocks among compensation committee members                            98.9%
38.   Directors receive all or a portion of their fees in stock                     17.5%
39.   All stock-incentive plans adopted with shareholder approval                   92.8%
40.   Options grants align with company performance and reasonable burn rate        78.5%
41.   Company expenses stock options                                                42.6%
42.   All directors with more than one year of service own stock                    55.4%
43.   Officers’ and directors’ stock ownership is at least 1% but not over 30% of
      total shares outstanding                                                      28.1%
44.   Repricing is prohibited                                                       54.0%




                                                        39
                                                         Table 2
                                                   Descriptive Statistics
The table provides descriptive statistics for each country. The first column, # of firms, is the number of firms from
each country that are in the sample in 2005. Median values are reported for market capitalization (Mkt. Cap.) and
Assets in millions of U.S. dollars, and q is Tobin’s q defined as ((total assets + market value of equity – total
common equity – deferred taxes)/ total assets). % ADR is the percentage of firms that are cross-listed. % of WScope
Mkt Cap is the percentage of the market capitalization of all firms in Worldscope for a country represented by our
sample firms. The total row refers only to non-U.S. firms in the sample.


                                # of                                                                   % of WScope
  Country                                    Q           Mkt. Cap.          Assets       % ADR
                               firms                                                                    Mkt Cap.
  Australia                     119         1.41            1,513           1,846          27%             77%
  Austria                        19         1.21            1,874           4,542          53%             81%
  Belgium                        25         1.16            2,831           4,010          16%             80%
  Canada                        168         1.38            1,864           2,443          64%             77%
  Denmark                        22         1.39            2,314           1,481          9%              80%
  Finland                        31         1.24            1,634           2,363          16%             87%
  France                         83         1.27            6,593           9,295          39%             84%
  Germany                        85         1.27            3,954           7,524          29%             74%
  Greece                         44         1.14             719             779           9%              79%
  Hong Kong                     110         1.28            1,780           2,497          45%             60%
  Ireland                        16         1.24            4,376           3,553          56%             85%
  Italy                          71         1.10            4,216           12,222         14%             82%
  Japan                         589         1.15            2,019           3,795          13%             81%
  Netherlands                    47         1.28            2,702           3,124          40%             52%
  New Zealand                    18         1.48             817             741           17%             71%
  Norway                         21         1.49            1,343           1,335          43%             77%
  Portugal                       14         1.13            3,400           5,168          29%             86%
  Singapore                      67         1.11            1,033           1,368          16%             95%
  Spain                          54         1.34            3,822           4,049          17%             88%
  Sweden                         43         1.49            4,461           4,293          21%             85%
  Switzerland                    58         1.31            2,824           3,253          28%             89%
  U.K.                          530         1.51             690             907           18%             88%
  U.S.A.                       5,296        1.52             317             386
  World excluding U.S.A.       2,234        1.28            1,767           2,561          24%




                                                            40
                                                                               Table 3
                                             Quality of Governance by Country and Relative to U.S.-Matched Firms
The governance score for a firm is the percentage of governance attributes for which the firm meets or exceeds the minimum satisfactory standard on the 44 ISS
attributes (described in Table 1) for 2005. The sample consists of 1,714 non-U.S. firms (the number reduces to 1648 after p-score and industry matching) and 4,070
U.S. firms from non-regulated industries. The t-statistic measures the difference between the governance index for firms in a country relative to the U.S. Firms are
compared using 1) country averages of sample firms and 2) averages with firms matched with propensity score (P-score) and industry affiliation. GOV Gap is the
difference in the GOV score of the foreign firm and the U.S. matched firm and the average for all firms in a country is reported below. # of Pos. Gap and # of Neg.
Gap represents the number of firms that are better/worse than the U.S. matched firm in terms of the quality of governance. The last column represents the
percentage of firms in each country whose quality of governance is better that its U.S. match. *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.
                                         Country Averages                                                    P-score and Industry Matching
                                                                                                                                         # of Pos.      % of Firms
Country                   GOV                GOV Gap                 t-stat        GOV Gap             t-stat        # of Neg. Gap
                                                                                                                                           Gap        with Pos. Gap
Australia                 48%                 -11%                -18.00***          -16%           -16.13***              78                4            4.88%
Austria                 46%                  -13%                -18.41***           -18%         -5.47***              9                0              0.00%
Belgium                 39%                  -20%                -11.40***           -27%         -10.24***             18               1              5.26%
Canada                  68%                   9%                  14.42***           6%            6.34***              31              81              72.32%
Denmark                 45%                  -14%                  -1.79*            -20%         -5.11***              11               2              15.38%
Finland                 56%                   -3%                 -7.73***           -5%          -2.98***              17               7              29.17%
France                  48%                  -11%                -11.91***           -21%         -17.36***             62               0              0.00%
Germany                 50%                   -9%                -15.92***           -18%         -18.05***             62               2              3.13%
Greece                  45%                  -14%                -19.32***           -18%         -7.32***              16               1              5.88%
Hong Kong               44%                  -15%                -27.13***           -21%         -17.50***             72               2              2.70%
Ireland                 51%                   -8%                 -3.06***           -10%         -3.16***              9                1              10.00%
Italy                   41%                  -18%                -25.88***           -27%         -19.45***             38               0              0.00%
Japan                   43%                  -16%                -82.05***           -23%         -59.64***            481               1              0.21%
Netherlands             51%                   -8%                 -6.19***           -16%         -11.34***             38               2              5.00%
New Zealand             43%                  -16%                 -9.79***           -18%         -5.90***              11               1              8.33%
Norway                  41%                  -18%                -13.64***           -24%         -10.81***             13               0              0.00%
Portugal                39%                  -20%                -13.50***           -26%         -9.36***              7                0              0.00%
Singapore               45%                  -14%                -17.74***           -21%         -12.51***             46               2              4.17%
Spain                   46%                  -13%                -13.28***           -17%         -10.80***             33               0              0.00%
Sweden                  43%                  -16%                -17.25***           -21%         -12.00***             34               0              0.00%
Switzerland             55%                   -4%                 -3.56***           -11%         -7.49***              43               3              6.52%
U.K.                    55%                   -4%                -10.79***           -7%          -13.37***            307              99              24.38%
U.S.                    59%
Total (w/o U.S.)        50%                   -9%                                    -15%         -47.82***           1436              209             12.68%

                                                                                41
                                                          Table 4
                            Comparison of Firms with Better Governance than U.S. Matching Firms

The reported median values of firm characteristics for negative and positive gap firms are based on industry and propensity score
matching. Estimates of probit regressions for non-regulated firms where the dependent variable takes a value of one for positive gap
firms. SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and are winsorized at 1% and 99%;
SIZE (natural log of total assets), CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES, DEBT/ASSETS, CLOSELY HELD,
ADR dummy, GDPPC (GDP per capita) and MarketCap/GDP are included. Common Law dummy equals one for a country with
common law; the Rule of Law and the Anti-Director indices are from LLSV (1998) and DLLS (2006), respectively; the Anti-Self-
Dealing Index is also from DLLS (2006). p-values obtained from chi-squared tests for differences in medians are in parentheses for
the descriptive statistics. Probit regressions include industry dummies and standard errors are corrected for country-level clustering (t-
statistics are in parentheses). *, **, *** reflects significance at 10%, 5% and 1% .levels.

                                                 Descriptive Statistics                                 Probit Regressions
                                Negative Gov. Gap Positive Gov. Gap Difference between                LHS: Positive Gap Dummy
                                # of Firms.= 1393   # of Firms = 206 Neg. and Pos. Gap                       (N=1555)
Q                                       1.28                    1.57                  -0.29
                                                                                  (0.00)***
MKT. CAP ($ millions)                 1565.25                 1173.45                391.80
                                                                                   (0.01)***
GOV                                     0.46                    0.64                  -0.18
                                                                                   (0.00)***
SIZE, assets ($ millions)             2197.94                 1187.47               1010.47           -0.007    -0.011    -0.022
                                                                                   (0.00)***          (1.19)   (2.03)** (4.99)***
SGROWTH                                 0.05                    0.08                  -0.03           0.010     0.019     0.041
                                                                                   (0.00)***          (0.40)    (1.00) (2.60)***
PPE/SALES                               0.00                    0.00                   0.00           0.001     0.001     0.002
                                                                                      (0.38)          (0.55)    (0.36)    (0.89)
R&D/SALES                               0.24                    0.35                  -0.10           0.201     0.215     0.220
                                                                                   (0.00)***        (2.72)*** (2.93)*** (2.44)**
FOREIGN SALES/SALES                     0.11                    0.06                   0.05           0.023     0.025     0.036
                                                                                      (0.29)          (0.87)    (0.90)    (1.11)
CASH/ASSSETS                            0.03                    0.04                  -0.01           -0.209    -0.223    -0.294
                                                                                   (0.00)***        (5.05)*** (4.88)*** (5.00)***
CAPEX/ASSSETS                           0.26                    0.24                   0.02           -0.038    -0.029    -0.056
                                                                                   (0.05)**           (0.63)    (0.42)    (0.71)
EBIT/SALES                              0.08                    0.09                  -0.01           0.001     0.000     0.001
                                                                                      (0.13)          (0.83)    (0.16)    (0.35)
DEBT/ASSETS                             0.21                    0.24                  -0.04           0.010     0.019     0.014
                                                                                    (0.05)**          (0.29)    (0.64)    (0.35)
CLOSELY HELD                            0.40                    0.48                  -0.08           -0.045    -0.042    -0.008
                                                                                   (0.00)***          (1.14)    (1.34)    (0.19)
ADR                                     0.00                    0.00                   0.00           0.018     0.043     0.070
                                                                                   (0.01)***          (1.12)    (1.50)    (1.59)
GDPPC                                  10.19                   10.19                   0.00           0.013     -0.066    -0.096
                                                                                     (0.000)          (0.15)    (0.69)    (0.90)
MarketCap/GDP                          94.88                  131.53                 -36.65           -0.000    -0.000    -0.000
                                                                                   (0.00)***         (2.15)**   (1.59)    (1.18)
Common Law                                0                      1                      -1            0.235
                                                                                   (0.00)***        (4.29)***
Rule of Law*Anti-Director              31.43                   40.00                  -8.57                     0.013
                                                                                   (0.00)***                  (5.14)***
Anti-Self Dealing Index                 0.48                    0.86                  -0.38                               0.224
                                                                                  (0.00)***                             (3.25)***
Adj. R-squared                                                                                         0.26      0.23      0.18
                                                                     42
                                                           Table 5
                                   Tobin’s q, Firm Governance, and Firm Characteristics

The table shows estimates of regressions of firm value (Tobin’s q, winsorized at 1% and 99%) on differences in governance
between a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm based on industry and propensity scores obtained from a probit analysis.
GOV_US is the governance index for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap of
a firm from its matching U.S. counterpart if negative and if positive, respectively. GOV. GAP includes both negative and
positive gap. SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and winsorized at 1%
and 99%; SIZE (natural log of total assets), CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES and DEBT/ASSETS
are included for control. All regressions include industry and country dummies (except for the two-stage least squares
regressions which do not have country dummies) and standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the
country level (t-statistics are in parentheses). In regressions (3) and (6), GOV GAP is instrumented with the average GOV GAP of
the other firms in the same industry in the same country. F-statistics test the hypothesis that the corresponding coefficients are
equal to each other. *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.

                                  (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
GOV_US                          2.023           2.031           1.777             0.959             0.967             0.806
                              (4.48)***       (4.55)***       (2.85)***          (2.15)**          (2.23)**           (1.27)
GOV. GAP                        1.307                           1.114             1.235                               1.046
                              (3.91)***                        (1.80)*          (3.70)***                            (1.82)*
NEGATIVE GAP                                     1.358                                               1.283
                                              (3.53)***                                           (3.51)***
POSITIVE GAP                                     1.063                                               1.009
                                                (0.98)                                              (1.10)
SIZE                            -0.161          -0.161          -0.171            -0.085            -0.085           -0.107
                              (5.92)***       (5.92)***       (8.71)***         (3.37)***         (3.36)***        (5.78)***
SGROWTH                                                                           0.246              0.246            0.272
                                                                                  (1.46)            (1.46)           (1.48)
R&D/SALES                                                                         2.179              2.172            2.196
                                                                                (2.94)***         (2.85)***         (2.75)**
FOREIGN
SALES/SALES                                                                       0.120              0.119            0.179
                                                                                  (1.34)            (1.29)          (1.91)*
CASH/ASSETS                                                                       2.353              2.355            2.168
                                                                                (7.34)***         (7.31)***        (7.52)***
CAPEX/ASSETS                                                                      3.057              3.060            3.567
                                                                                (3.83)***         (3.84)***        (4.69)***
PPE/Sales                                                                         -0.010            -0.010           -0.015
                                                                                  (1.16)            (1.17)          (1.87)*
EBIT/SALES                                                                        0.027              0.027            0.027
                                                                                (8.64)***         (8.45)***        (6.98)***
DEBT/ASSETS                                                                       0.062              0.062            0.173
                                                                                  (0.23)            (0.23)           (0.71)
Constant                        2.844           2.850           3.106             1.658              1.663            1.972
                              (7.35)***       (7.35)***       (5.35)***         (4.97)***         (4.98)***        (4.14)***

Observations                     1599            1599            1527             1599               1599             1527
Adj R-Squared                    0.24            0.24            0.24             0.37               0.37             0.34




                                                                43
                                                        Table 6
                                    Firm Value, Governance, and Country Characteristics

The table shows estimates of regressions of firm value (Tobin’s q, winsorized at 1% and 99%) on differences in governance between
a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm based on industry and propensity scores obtained from a probit analysis. GOV_US is the
governance index for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap of a firm from its
matching U.S. counterpart if negative and if positive, respectively. GOV. GAP includes both negative and positive gap. SGROWTH
(sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and winsorized at 1% and 99%; SIZE (natural log of
total assets), CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES and DEBT/ASSETS are included for control. CLOSELY
HELD is the percentage of shares closely held and ADR dummy equals one if for firms cross-listed in the U.S. Common Law dummy
equals one for a country with common law; the Rule of Law and the Anti-Director indices are from LLSV (1998) and DLLS (2006),
respectively; the Anti-Self-Dealing Index is also from DLLS (2006).All regressions include industry fixed effects and the first three
regressions also include country fixed effects. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the country level (t-
statistics are in parentheses). *, **, *** reflects significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.




                                                                44
                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)
GOV_US                        0.911      0.910        -0.358     0.520       0.562       0.224       0.267        0.386      0.437
                             (2.08)**   (2.13)**     (1.72)*     (1.11)      (1.37)      (0.41)      (0.55)       (0.80)     (1.08)
GOV GAP                       1.279                              0.872                   0.542                    0.727
                            (3.76)***                           (2.48)**                 (1.34)                  (1.98)*
NEGATIVE GAP                               1.273                               1.031                   0.694                   0.911
                                        (3.55)***                           (3.56)***                (2.27)**               (3.91)***
POSITIVE GAP                               1.310                               0.243                  -0.025                    0.021
                                           (1.23)                              (0.23)                  (0.02)                  (0.02)
SIZE                           -0.101      -0.101     -0.092      -0.108      -0.107       -0.094     -0.093      -0.105      -0.105
                            (3.27)***   (3.24)***   (3.33)***   (4.15)***   (4.09)***   (3.42)***   (3.39)***   (4.33)***   (4.31)***
SGROWTH                        0.278       0.278       0.273       0.283       0.286       0.263       0.266       0.278       0.282
                               (1.63)      (1.62)     (1.61)       (1.68)      (1.71)      (1.52)      (1.55)      (1.64)      (1.68)
PPE/SALES                      -0.010      -0.010     -0.010      -0.014      -0.015       -0.016     -0.016      -0.015      -0.015
                               (1.08)      (1.09)     (1.08)      (1.75)*     (1.82)*     (1.99)*     (2.05)*     (1.79)*     (1.84)*
R&D/SALES                      2.023       2.024       2.027       2.195       2.161       2.192       2.162       2.210       2.173
                             (2.79)**    (2.74)**    (2.75)**   (3.48)***   (3.23)***   (3.44)***   (3.20)***   (3.50)***   (3.24)***
FOREIGN SALES/SALES            0.082       0.082       0.094       0.070       0.066       0.080       0.077       0.064       0.059
                               (0.89)      (0.86)     (0.97)       (0.72)      (0.67)      (0.80)      (0.75)      (0.65)      (0.58)
CASH/ASSETS                    2.294       2.294       2.299       2.229       2.235       2.271       2.276       2.233       2.238
                            (6.89)***   (6.82)***   (6.75)***   (6.88)***   (6.85)***   (6.90)***   (6.86)***   (6.92)***   (6.90)***
CAPEX/ASSETS                   3.051       3.050       3.040       2.967       2.977       2.991       2.999       2.966       2.976
                            (3.90)***   (3.90)***   (3.82)***   (3.58)***   (3.60)***   (3.70)***   (3.71)***   (3.60)***   (3.62)***
EBIT/SALES                     0.026       0.026       0.027       0.027       0.027       0.028       0.028       0.027       0.027
                            (8.53)***   (8.36)***   (8.63)***   (7.66)***   (7.65)***   (7.59)***   (7.59)***   (7.79)***   (7.74)***
DEBT/ASSETS                    0.072       0.072       0.081       0.093       0.092       0.086       0.086       0.097       0.097
                               (0.27)      (0.27)     (0.31)       (0.36)      (0.36)      (0.33)      (0.33)      (0.38)      (0.38)
CLOSELY HELD                   0.217       0.217       0.181       0.202       0.201       0.137       0.136       0.205       0.205
                              (1.76)*     (1.75)*     (1.36)       (1.45)      (1.44)      (1.03)      (1.02)      (1.48)      (1.47)
ADR                            0.172       0.172       0.181       0.151       0.151       0.134       0.134       0.143       0.144
                             (2.58)**    (2.57)**   (2.87)***    (2.66)**    (2.67)**    (2.20)**    (2.22)**    (2.57)**    (2.61)**
GDPPC                                                             -0.439      -0.438      -0.413      -0.410      -0.402      -0.400
                                                                (3.72)***   (3.81)***   (3.17)***   (3.21)***   (3.37)***   (3.44)***
Market CAP/GDP                                                     0.000       0.000      -0.000      -0.000      -0.000       -0.000
                                                                   (0.08)      (0.06)      (1.02)      (1.03)      (0.04)      (0.02)
COMMON LAW                                                        -0.126      -0.127
                                                                   (1.38)      (1.40)
Rule of Law*Anti Director                                                                0.002       0.002
                                                                                         (0.38)      (0.33)
Anti-Self-Dealing                                                                                               -0.194    -0.206
                                                                                                                (1.28)    (1.40)
Constant                      1.840       1.840     2.339     6.691     6.673             6.274       6.253     6.410      6.392
                            (3.95)***   (3.96)*** (4.95)*** (4.72)*** (4.80)***         (4.30)***   (4.34)*** (4.50)*** (4.59)***
Adj. R-squared                 0.37        0.37      0.37      0.36      0.36              0.36        0.36      0.36      0.36
Number of Observations        1581        1581      1584      1581      1581              1581        1581       1581      1581




                                                               45
                                                           Table 7
                                Individual Attributes by Country and Differences from the U.S.

The table represents the percentage of firms in each country that meets or exceeds the minimum satisfactory threshold for each
governance attribute. The seven attributes are: Board Independence: board is controlled by more than 50% independent outside
directors; Board Size: board size is at greater than five but less than 16; Chairman/CEO Separation: chairman and CEO are
separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure: annually elected board (no staggered board); Audit Committee Independence:
audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders; Auditor Ratification: auditors ratified at most recent annual meeting;
and Stock Classes: only single class, common stock (no dual class). Italics are used if the mean difference in the attribute for a
country with the U.S. is negative and is statistically significant at the 5% level. If the difference is positive and significant, it is
shown in bold. Significance is not reported if zero percent or 100 percent of firms satisfy an attribute in a country.

                    Board      Board Size    Chairman/CEO         Board        Audit Comm.         Auditor           Stock
 Country
                  Independ.                    Separation        Structure      Independ.         Ratification      Classes
 Australia           39%           88%            97%                1%             24%              12%              98%
 Austria             0%            67%           100%               0%               0%             100%             100%
 Belgium             25%           85%            60%               0%              20%               5%              95%
 Canada              91%           94%            95%               98%             91%              98%              68%
 Denmark             71%           79%           100%              64%               7%             100%              57%
 Finland             64%           80%           100%              84%              40%             100%              68%
 France              28%           78%            49%                2%             22%              35%              38%
 Germany             40%           82%           100%               0%               3%             100%             100%
 Greece               3%           90%            90%                3%              7%              97%             100%
 Hong Kong            8%           89%            63%                4%             56%             100%             100%
 Ireland             30%           70%            90%               0%              20%              90%             100%
 Italy               0%            87%            77%               0%               3%              33%             100%
 Japan                1%           80%            0%               42%               2%               2%             100%
 Netherlands         83%           73%            98%                7%             54%              51%              68%
 New Zealand         17%           92%           100%               0%               8%              75%             100%
 Norway              69%           46%           100%              23%              15%               0%             100%
 Portugal            43%          100%            43%               0%               0%              14%              86%
 Singapore           34%          100%            84%               0%              40%             100%             100%
 Spain                6%           80%            60%                3%              6%              89%             100%
 Sweden              60%           97%           100%              100%             17%              14%              66%
 Switzerland         75%           81%            98%               19%             58%              98%              98%
 U.K.                32%           90%            96%                8%             68%              99%              99%
 U.S.A.              89%           81%            41%               52%             88%              68%              94%




                                                                  46
                                                      Table 8
           Individual Governance Attributes and Differences in Firm Value based on U.S. Matched-Firms

The table shows the relation between firm value (Tobin’s q, which is winsorized at 1% and 99%) and differences in
individual governance attributes between a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm based on industry and propensity scores
obtained from a probit analysis. The seven attributes are: Board Independence: board is controlled by more than 50%
independent outside directors; Board Size: board size is at greater than five but less than 16; Chairman/CEO Separation:
chairman and CEO are separated or there is a lead director; Board Structure: annually elected board (no staggered board);
Audit Committee Independence: audit committee comprised solely of independent outsiders; Auditor Ratification: auditors
ratified at most recent annual meeting; and Stock Classes: only one class of common stock. Panel A reports results from
seven different models that include one attribute at a time. Panel B reports results from one model that includes all seven
attributes at the same time. ATTRIBUTE_US is the governance attribute for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and
POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap of a firm from its matching U.S. counterpart if negative and if positive, respectively.
The following control variables are included but their coefficients are not reported here: SIZE (natural log of total assets);
SGROWTH (sales growth), R&D/SALES, FOREIGN SALES/SALES are two-year averages and are winsorized at 1% and
99%; CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES and DEBT/ASSETS are also included. CLOSELY HELD is
the percentage of shares closely held and ADR dummy equals one if the firm is cross-listed in the U.S. All regressions
include industry dummies, country FE, and standard errors are corrected for country-level clustering. *, **, *** reflects
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Number of observations is 1,584 for each model.




                                                                       Chairman/              Audit
                                              Board                      CEO       Board     Comm.       Audit            Stock
                                            Independ.    Board Size    Separation Structure Independ. Ratification       Classes

                                 Panel A: Regressions Using Individual Governance Attributes

ATTRIBUTE_US                                  0.086         0.239        -0.012       0.028      0.004        0.097       0.095
                                              (0.95)       (0.83)        (0.21)       (0.26)     (0.02)      (1.67)*      (0.52)
NEGATIVE GAP                                  0.225        -0.037        -0.039       -0.004     0.171        0.145       0.084
                                            (6.27)***      (0.61)        (0.66)       (0.04)   (3.00)***     (2.02)*      (1.22)
POSITIVE GAP                                  0.107         0.286        0.057        0.077      0.384        0.066       0.158
                                              (0.75)       (0.91)        (1.03)       (0.87)    (2.00)*       (0.75)      (0.86)

Pseudo R-squared                               0.37          0.37         0.37         0.37       0.38        0.37         0.37

                                        Panel B: Regression Using All Seven Attributes
ATTRIBUTE_US                                 0.069        0.191        0.014      -0.002         -0.053       0.133       0.102
                                             (0.74)       (0.68)      (0.16)      (0.04)         (0.31)     (2.23)**      (0.52)
NEGATIVE GAP                                 0.190       -0.038       -0.005      -0.032          0.111       0.171       0.076
                                           (4.22)***      (0.61)      (0.05)      (0.62)        (1.76)*     (2.08)**      (0.93)
POSITIVE GAP                                 0.040        0.246        0.058       0.046         0.340       0.098        0.146
                                             (0.34)       (0.80)      (0.72)      (0.96)        (1.79)*      (1.05)       (0.74)
Pseudo R-squared                              0.37




                                                             47
                                                                                    Table 9
                                                                             Robustness Estimations

The relationship between firm value and differences in governance between a foreign firm and a matched U.S. firm is estimated. GOV is the governance index for the foreign
firm and GOV_US is the index for the matched U.S. firm. NEGATIVE GAP and POSITIVE GAP are the governance gap from the U.S. matched firm if negative and if positive,
respectively. The regressions include firm-specific controls. Firm-level controls are (coefficients not reported): SIZE (natural log of total assets); SGROWTH (sales growth),
R&D/SALES, CASH/ASSETS, CAPEX/ASSETS, PPE/SALES, EBIT/SALES, DEBT/ASSETS for all regressions. In addition, for the foreign firms, we include FOREIGN
SALES/SALES, CLOSELY HELD, and the ADR dummy as controls. Median Industry q is median q for the firm’s industry. All regressions, include industry dummies (except
for regression (8)) and country FE (except for regression (2)). Standard errors are corrected for country-level clustering (t-statistics are in parentheses). *, **, *** reflects
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.


                               (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)               (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)
                                                                                      Size & Ind          Foreign            Foreign           Foreign             Median
                         Foreign Firms        U.S. Firms        Foreign firms
                                                                                       Matched           Ex. Japan           Ex. U.K.         Ex. Canada          Industry q
GOV                          1.269              1.094
                           (3.75)***          (3.35)***
GOV7 GAP                                                            0.515
                                                                  (2.64)***
GOV US                                                              0.383               1.248              1.170              0.595              0.904              0.874
                                                                    (1.13)             (1.98)*            (2.71)**            (1.18)            (1.91)*            (2.16)**
NEGATIVE GAP                                                                            1.162              1.578              1.184              1.090              1.284
                                                                                      (3.10)***          (4.53)***           (2.17)**          (3.38)***          (3.52)***
POSITIVE GAP                                                                            2.264              1.382              0.222              2.687              1.285
                                                                                      (3.48)***            (1.23)             (0.26)           (3.75)***            (1.15)
Median Industry Q                                                                                                                                                   0.606
                                                                                                                                                                  (5.38)***
Adj. R-squared                0.37               0.29                0.38                0.37               0.34               0.38               0.38               0.36
# of Observations             1584               2325                1584                1584               1104               1183               1473               1584




                                                                                       48
