NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MECHANISMS AND IMPACTS OF GENDER PEER EFFECTS AT SCHOOL
Victor Lavy
Analía Schlosser
Working Paper 13292
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13292

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

We thank the Ministry of Education for assisting with the data, Rachel Berner, Issi Romem and Yannay
Spitzer for outstanding research assistance, and comments from Kirk Doran, Alfronso Flores-Lagunes,
Alan Krueger, Cecilia Rouse, and seminar participants at LSE, the Institute of Education at the University
of London, Tel Aviv University, the Hebrew University, Princeton University, the 2007 SOLE meetings,
the Bergen-CEPR 2007 conference, the LEaF conference, and the IZA/SOLE transatlantic meeting.
Schlosser thanks the Industrial Relations Section and the Pinhas Sapir Center for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Victor Lavy and Analía Schlosser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at School
Victor Lavy and Analía Schlosser
NBER Working Paper No. 13292
August 2007
JEL No. I2,I21,J16
ABSTRACT
The consequences of gender social and learning interactions in the classroom are of interest to parents,
policy makers, and researchers. However, little is known about gender peer effects in schools and
their operational channels. In this paper, we estimate the effects of classroom gender composition
on scholastic achievements of boys and girls in Israeli primary, middle, and high schools and identify
the mechanisms through which these peer effects are enacted. In particular, we examine whether gender
peer effects work through changes in classroom learning and social environment, teaching methods
and pedagogy, and teacher burnout and work satisfaction. In assessing these mechanisms, we distinguish
between the effects generated by changes in the classroom gender composition and those generated
by changes in the behavior of students. To control for potentially confounding unobserved characteristics
of schools and students that might be correlated with peer gender composition, we rely on idiosyncratic
variations in gender composition across adjacent cohorts within the same schools. Our results suggest
that an increase in the proportion of girls leads to a significant improvement in students' cognitive
outcomes. The estimated effects are of similar magnitude for boys and girls. As important mechanisms,
we find that a higher proportion of female peers lowers the level of classroom disruption and violence,
improves inter-student and student-teacher relationships as well as students' overall satisfaction in
school, and lessens teachers' fatigue. We find, however, no effect on individual behavior of boys or
girls, which suggests that the positive peer effects of girls on classroom environment are due mostly
to compositional change, namely due to having more girls in the classroom and not due to improved
behavior of peers.
Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus
91905 Israel
and NBER
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
Analía Schlosser
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton, New Jersey 08544
aschloss@princeton.edu

I. Introduction
The question of whether classroom gender-composition matters for student learning has long
been of concern to social scientists, educators, and policymakers. The general view is that social
interactions between genders at school often play an important role in academic achievement and career
choices. However, little scientific evidence supports these beliefs and not much is known about the
mechanisms of these peer effects. Such evidence is even more relevant now given the revival of the
debate about the benefits of single-sex versus coeducational schooling and the concern about the
potential effects of single-sex schools on gender imbalances in coeducational public schools.1 This
debate received an impetus in October 2006 with the release of final Title IX single-sex regulations that
give communities more flexibility in offering single-sex classes and permit school districts to provide
single-sex schools.2
While much attention has been given to the comparison of students outcomes in single sex and
coeducational classes, a recent report of the American Association of University Women points that an
overlooked consequence in the creation of single-sex classes is the disruption of the sex ratio in
coeducational classes from which single-sex classes are drawn (Morse, 1998). In the United Kingdom,
for example, a higher demand for single sex-schools for girls relative to boys has resulted in highly
imbalanced sex ratios in some coeducational public schools.3 In Inner London, for example, a higher
ratio of girls in single-sex schools is reflected in coeducational schools, where 59 percent of the students
are boys.4 Understanding the effects of classroom gender composition is therefore important for
assessing the consequences of imbalanced sex ratios in coeducational public schools and for determining
an optimal grouping of students into classrooms and an efficient allocation of resources within and across
schools.
This paper examines the extent of gender peer effects in the educational production function. The
first part of the paper explores how classroom gender composition affects scholastic achievements of
1

See the National Association for Single Sex Public Education website: http://www.singlesexschools.org and
Campbell and Sanders (2002) for a discussion of the pros and cons of single-sex schooling.
2
The final regulations took effect on November 24th, 2006 and amend existing regulations that implement Title IX
of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibit sex discrimination in education programs or activities that
receive federal funds. While the previous regulations permitted school districts to provide single-sex public schools
to students of one sex if they provided comparable single-sex public schools to students of the other sex, the new
regulations only require providing equal coeducational schooling to students of the other sex. For more details, see
http://www.ed.gov/news/pressreleases/2006/10/10242006.html.
3
The Guardian, in a recent article (April 10, 2007), discusses the effect of single-sex schools on the gender
imbalance in public schools in the UK and explains that the higher proportion of girls in single-sex schools relative
to boys reflects the desire of parents to send their daughters to single-sex schools, but not their sons.
See: http://education.guardian.co.uk/egweekly/story/0,,2053138,00.html.
4
The gender gap in enrollment in single-sex classes is even more pronounced in certain boroughs in London. One
of the extreme cases of sex imbalance in the coeducational sector occurs in Islington, where boys make up 71
percent of the coed secondary school population (Whatford, 2005).

1

boys and girls in different stages of the schooling cycle. As outcomes in primary school and in middle
school, we use test scores in English, Hebrew, math, and science for 5th and 8th grades. For high school,
we use several measures of students’ performance in the matriculation exams. We also examine the
gender peer effects on students’ enrollment in advanced courses in math, computer science, and science
to assess the widely claimed statement that human capital investment of girls in math and science is
enhanced in an environment with more girls.
The second part of the paper identifies mechanisms by which the gender peer composition affects
academic outcomes. Our study appears to be the first to uncover the “black box” of peer effects,
particularly that deriving from classroom gender composition. We focus on the following mechanisms:
classroom disruption and violence, inter-student interactions, student-teacher relationships, school
discipline, students’ satisfaction with school, teaching methods, and teachers’ sense of “fatigue” or
“burnout” with their job. This form of externalities of girls in the classroom is a reflection of the
congestion effect in the education production model proposed by Lazear (2001). However, the peer
effects of girls can also be enacted by changing the probability that a student misbehaves, which in
Lazear’s model is assumed to be fixed. We are able to disentangle these two channels of the peer effect
by distinguishing between the effects generated by changes in classroom gender composition and those
caused by changes in the behavior of students. This analysis is based on contrasting students’ views about
their classroom environment with students’ self-reports on their own behavior.
To control for unobserved characteristics of schools and students that might be correlated with
peer gender composition and that can also affect students’ outcomes, we rely on idiosyncratic variations
in the proportion of female students across adjacent cohorts within the same school. By using multiple
cohorts and conditioning on school fixed effects and school-specific time trends, we are able to control
for unobserved factors that might confound the gender peer effect in schools. We show that within
schools, there is considerable cohort-to-cohort variation in gender composition that is unlikely to be
predicted by parents or manipulated by school authorities. We also demonstrate that this within-school
variation in the proportion of female students is not related to within-school variations in student
background characteristics and is sufficiently large to allow estimating the gender peer effects precisely.
The empirical evidence on gender peer effects in schools is based primarily on studies that
contrast outcomes for students, usually for girls, in single-sex and coeducational classes. The United
States Department of Education (2005) and Morse (1998) review such studies in elementary and high
schools, and Harwarth et al. (1997) includes a review of studies in colleges. The evidence is mixed; some
studies suggest no differences between single-sex and coeducational schooling while others find that
single-sex schooling may be beneficial. Evidence favoring coeducational schooling is much more
limited. Nevertheless, it is difficult to interpret the results since most of these studies do not account for

2

the non-random selection of students into single-sex and coeducational schools and the unobserved
potentially confounding differences between these two types of institutions.
Evidence on the effects of gender composition within a mixed-gender environment is very
limited. Ulku-Steiner et al. (2000) look at doctoral students’ experiences in gender-balanced and maledominated graduate programs and find lower academic self-concept and lower career commitment
among women involved in male-dominated programs. However, this study accounted neither for the
non-random sorting of students across graduate programs nor for unobserved aspects of these programs
that may generate correlated effects (Manski, 1993) and be confounded with peer effects. Some recent
studies resort to experimental or quasi-experimental research designs to separate the social effects in the
classroom from the correlated effects (see, e.g., Sacerdote, 2001; Zimmerman, 2003; Angrist and Lang,
2004; Arcidiacono and Nicholson, 2005; Hanushek et al., 2003; Gould, Lavy, and Paserman, 2005;
Hoxby and Weingarth, 2005; Ammermueller and Pischke, 2006; and Gibbons and Telhaj, 2006).
However, only a few studies focused on gender peer effects.
A notable exception is Hoxby (2000), who estimates gender and race peer effects in Texas
elementary schools and finds that boys and girls have higher test scores when classrooms have more
female students. Whitmore (2005), on the other hand, finds mixed results for the effects of the proportion
of female students (positive in Kindergarten and second grade, zero at first grade and negative at third
grade), using gender variation generated by the random assignment of students into classrooms in the
Tennessee’s Project STAR. A third study is Hansen et al. (2006), who use data from an introductory
undergraduate management course and find that male-dominated groups achieved lower scores, both in
group work and in individually taken exams, than female-dominated and equally mixed gender groups.
None of the referenced or other studies on peer effects, including those that focused on gender peer
effects, examined the mechanisms through which peers affect students’ scholastic achievement.5
The results we present in the paper show that the proportion of girls in a class has a positive and
significant effect on academic achievements of girls and of boys in high school. The effect is non-linear
and it is mainly evident when the proportion of girls in a class is over 55 to 60 percent. The sizes of the
estimated effects are similar for both genders. We also find that boys who have a higher proportion of
female peers have higher enrollment rates in advanced math and science classes during high school.
Surprisingly, we find a smaller and less significant effect for girls, though relative to the respective
means, the size effects are similar to those found for boys.
Both sets of results, the estimates on matriculation outcomes and those on enrollment in various
subjects, are significantly different from the results of falsification tests that use placebo treatments,

5

See Lazear (2001) for a model that illustrates one such possible mechanism.

3

which show no effect at all. These falsification tests are based on replacing the treatment variable with
the proportion of females in the previous or the subsequent cohort in the same school. The lack of any
discernable effects when the placebo treatments are used suggests that the estimated effects of the correct
measure of treatment are not biased due to omitted unobservable confounders of the effect of interest.
The evidence for primary school students’ achievement suggests that the proportion of girls
positively affects math, science, and technology test scores of boys and girls but not language test scores.
In middle school, the effects are mainly evident for girls in math, Hebrew, and English test scores; for
boys, the effects are positive but less precise. This is probably due to the lower precision in the
estimation as it is based on only two years of data and on fewer schools.
An examination of the underlying mechanisms of the gender peer effects shows that a higher
proportion of girls in the classroom lowers the level of classroom disruption and violence, and improves
inter-student and teacher-student relationships as well as students’ satisfaction with school. It also
significantly alters teaching methods and lessens teachers’ fatigue and feelings of burnout, although it
does not affect their overall work satisfaction. On the other hand, we find no evidence that having more
girls in a class leads to clearer and more enforceable disciplinary rules at school.
The estimates of the effect of the proportion of girls on student’s (self-reported) violent behavior,
disciplinary problems, and study effort show no systematic or significant relationship, suggesting that
much of the improvement in the classroom environment associated with a higher proportion of girls is
due to a change in classroom gender composition and not to changes in individual student behavior.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the identification strategy.
Section III discusses the data and the construction of the analysis samples, while section IV presents the
main OLS and school fixed effects estimates of gender peer effects on primary, middle, and high school
students’ achievement. Section V presents evidence on the possible mechanisms driving the positive
female peer effects on students’ achievement, and section VI shows results suggesting that a change in
classroom gender composition and not behavioral changes among students is the driving force behind the
estimated gender peer effects on classroom environment. Section VII concludes.

II. Empirical Strategy
Identification of Gender Peer Effects
The effect of classroom gender composition on students’ outcomes is usually confounded by the
effects of unobserved correlated factors. Such correlations could result if self-selection and sorting of
students across schools are affected by school gender composition or if there is a correlation between
school gender composition and other characteristics of the school that can affect students’ outcomes. One
possible way to account for both sources of confounding factors in the estimation of peer effects is by

4

relying on within school variations in the proportion of female students across adjacent cohorts.6 Based
on this approach, we examine whether cohort-to-cohort changes in male and female outcomes within the
same grade and school are systematically associated with cohort-to-cohort changes in the proportion of
female students. The basic idea is to compare the outcomes of students from adjacent cohorts who have
similar characteristics and face the same school environment, except for the fact that one cohort has more
female students than the other due to purely random factors.
While implementing this methodology, we use the proportion of female students measured at the
grade and not at the classroom level, because the latter might be endogenous as parents and school
authorities may have some discretion in placing students in different classes within a grade. This is not a
very restrictive compromise because within a given school the proportion of female students in a grade is
highly correlated with the proportion of female students in a class.7
Using repeated cross-sectional data, we estimate the following reduced-form equation separately
for boys and girls:
'
'
yigst = α g +β s + γ t + xigst
λ1 + S gst
λ2 + π Pgst + ε igst

(1)

where i denotes individuals, g denotes grades, s denotes schools, and t denotes time. yigst is an
achievement measure for a male/female student i in grade g, school s, and year t; α g is a grade effect,

β s is a school effect, γ t is a time effect, xigst is a vector of student’s covariates that includes mother’s
and father’s years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, and ethnic origin, and indicators
for missing values in these covariates, S gst is a vector of characteristics of a grade g in school s and time
t and includes a quadratic function of enrollment and a set of variables for the average characteristics of
the students in the grade; Pgst is the proportion of female students in grade g, school s, and year t, and

ε igst is the error term, which is composed of a school-specific random element that allows for any type of
correlation within observations of the same school across time and an individual random element.8 The

6

A similar identification strategy was recently applied by Hoxby (2000) to estimate gender and race peer effects in
elementary schools in Texas. Other studies that rely on within school variation in peer composition are Angrist and
Lang (2004); Gould, Lavy, and Paserman (2005); and Ammermuller and Pischke (2006).
7
The correlation between the proportion of female students in the grade and the proportion of female students in the
class is 0.67 for elementary schools. The correlation for middle schools and high schools is 0.56 and 0.55
respectively. Nevertheless, we think that at higher levels of education, the proportion of female students in the grade
(and not in the class) is a more relevant measure of treatment since students spend a lower proportion of the school
day in their homeroom class.
8
While the fixed effect coefficient in equation (1) captures much of the unobserved correlation within observations
of the same school, it is still important to account for within school correlations that are not fixed. For example, if

5

coefficient of interest is π, which captures the effects of having more female peers on student
achievement.
We estimate equation (1) separately for samples of primary, middle, and high school students in
order to explore how gender peer effects evolve through the different schooling stages. To address the
concern that there could be school trends in unobserved factors correlated with the proportion of female
students, we add to equation (1) school-specific linear time trends ( δ s ), resulting in the following
estimating equation:9
'
'
yigst = α g +β s + δ s yearst + γ t + xigst
λ1 + S gst
λ2 + π Pgst + ε igst

(2)

Identification of Mechanisms
The parameter π in equations (1) and (2) measures gender peer effects that could be enacted
through various channels. This could include effects through changes in the classroom climate, in the
quality of interactions among students and between students and teachers, in the level of motivation and
self-confidence of students; through modifications in students’ effort and study habits; and also through
responses of teachers in terms of their effort, attitudes towards the class, and teaching methods. To assess
the importance of each of these mechanisms, we estimate models identical to model (1) where the
dependent variables are constructed from students’ responses to a school questionnaire about classroom
environment, teaching methods, study efforts, and their own behavior, as well as from teachers’ reports
about their sense of fatigue and work satisfaction. The student and teacher questionnaires are described
in more detail in the data section.
It is important to note that the mechanisms through which gender peer effects may operate can
simply reflect a change in classroom gender composition but can also reflect changes in the individual
behavior of students. For example, a higher proportion of girls in the classroom can improve the
classroom climate by lowering the incidence of disruptions just because there are fewer boys, who tend
to be more disruptive than girls. In addition, having more girls in a class may affect students’ individual
behavior. A violent boy may be more tranquil and less disruptive due to a more relaxed atmosphere that
girls may create or because teachers may be more patient with more girls in the class. These behavioral
changes impact the average environment in school in addition to the compositional effect described
above.
corr(εigst,εigst-k)=ρ + (1- ρ)Фk the school fixed effect coefficient will absorb ρ while (1- ρ)Фk will be left in the error
term (see e.g., Petersen, 2006). Therefore, standard errors of fixed effects regressions that do not account for this
type of correlation will be misleading.
9
Equation (2) is estimated for high school outcomes because we have a longer panel and also because secular trends
in school gender composition are more likely to exist in high schools since there is school choice at this level of
education.

6

We propose to disentangle these two alternative explanations by using two different types of
questions in the student questionnaire. In one set of questions, students are asked about their views
regarding general aspects of their classroom (for example, the level of violence). The effect of the gender
mix on these measures captures the overall gender peer effect (due to compositional changes and changes
in students’ behavior). In another set of questions, students are asked about their own behavior (for
example, if they were involved in a violent interaction during the current year). We interpret the effect of
classroom gender composition on measures of students’ own, self-reported behavior as indications of
changes in individual behavior. More details about these questions are provided in the next section.
The structure of the panel data that we use and the nature of our treatment variable present us
with an unusual opportunity to test for the internal validity of the results obtained from the identification
strategy described above. We can replace the measure of treatment with the proportion of girls in an
older or younger cohort at the same school to check for possible biases originating from any short-term
changes at the school level correlated with the proportion of female students that are not captured by the
school-specific linear time trend. We will present estimates of the effect of the placebo treatments
alongside the estimates based on the true treatment measure.

III. Data
The empirical analysis is based on three samples that include elementary, middle, and high
school students, respectively. All three samples include only schools that have mixed-gender classes
because the identification strategy is based on within school variation in the proportion of female
students. This condition is met in all Jewish secular elementary, middle, and high public schools and in
about 50 percent of the Jewish religious elementary public schools. A small number of religious schools
have mixed-sex classes at the middle and high school level but since this sample is very selective, we
prefer not to include them in the analysis. Below we describe the three samples.

The High School Data
We use administrative records collected by the Israel Ministry of Education for eight consecutive
cohorts (from 1993 to 2000) of 10th grade students. The data are based on annual reports submitted by
school authorities to the Ministry of Education at the beginning of the school year. Each record contains
an individual identifier, a school and class identifier, and detailed demographic information on the
student: gender, parental education, number of siblings, year of immigration (where relevant), and
ethnicity. We use 10th grade to define the base population because it is the first year of high school and
the last year of compulsory schooling. The measure of treatment in high school in terms of the proportion
of female peers is also based on 10th-grade enrollment because any later change in this rate is

7

endogenous. The sample is restricted to students in non-special education classes in secular schools that
have a matriculation track.10 As a further restriction, we drop all schools that experienced a change in
enrollment of 80 percent or more between 2 consecutive years of the analyzed period to avoid changes in
school gender composition that might have originated from structural changes in the school. In addition,
we drop schools that have an annual enrollment lower than 10 students.
Israeli high school students are enrolled either in an academic track leading to a matriculation
certificate (Bagrut in Hebrew) or in an alternative track leading only to a high school diploma.11 The
Bagrut is completed by passing a series of national exams in core and elective subjects taken by the
students between 10th and 12th grade. Students choose to be tested at various levels of proficiency, with
each test awarding from one to five credit units per subject, depending on difficulty. Some subjects are
mandatory, and for many the most basic level is three credit units. Advanced level subjects are those
subjects taken at four or five credit units. A minimum of 20 credit units is required to qualify for a
matriculation certificate. We link the students’ datasets with administrative records that include the
results (test scores) of these matriculation exams.
We focus on the following matriculation outcomes that are available for all the years: the
average score in the matriculation exams, matriculation status (=1 if awarded with the matriculation
diploma and 0 otherwise), number of credit units, number of advanced level subjects in science, and
matriculation status that meets university entrance requirements (at least 4 credits in English and another
subject at a level of 4 or 5 credits).12 We also constructed indicator variables for student enrollment in
advanced courses in math, physics, computer science, biology, and chemistry.

The Middle and Elementary School Data
Data for elementary and middle schools are based on the GEMS (Growth and Effectiveness
Measures for Schools - Meizav in Hebrew) datasets for the years 2002-2005. The GEMS includes a
series of tests and questionnaires administered by the Division of Evaluation and Measurement of the

10

This step leads to only small reduction in the sample since there are few special education high schools.
The matriculation certificate is a prerequisite for university admission and receiving it is one of the most
economically important educational milestones. Similar high school matriculation exams are found in many
countries and in some states in the United States. Examples include the French Baccalaureate, the German
Certificate of Maturity (Reifezeugnis), the Italian Diploma di Maturità, the New York State Regents examinations,
and the South African Matriculation Certificate.
12
Roughly, 10 percent of the students in the sample did not take any of the matriculation exams. These students get
zero values in the average score. None of the other four matriculation outcomes that we use require such imputation
since the zero values that these students get for these outcomes, for example, number of credit units, is a real and not
an imputed measure of their achievements.
11

8

Ministry of Education.13 The GEMS is administered at the midterm of each school year to a
representative 1-in-2 sample of all elementary and middle schools in Israel, so that each school
participates in GEMS once every two years.
The GEMS student data include test scores of 5th and 8th graders in math, science, Hebrew, and
English, as well as the responses of 5th through 9th grade students to questionnaires. In principle, all
students except those in special education classes are tested and required to complete the questionnaire.
The proportion of students who are tested is above 90 percent, and the rate of questionnaire completion is
roughly 91 percent. The raw test scores used a 1-to-100 scale that we transformed into z-scores to
facilitate interpretation of the results.
The 71 questions in the GEMS student questionnaire address various aspects of the school and
learning environment. We focus on two sections of the questionnaire. The first section describes the
classroom climate and pedagogic. In this section, students are asked to rate the extent to which they agree
with a series of general statements that describe the classroom environment and teaching methods used
by their teachers. The students’ responses, on a 6-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6
(strongly agree), are used as outcome measures for the overall gender peer effects on classroom
environment (that are due to compositional changes and changes in students’ behavior).
In a second section, the student is asked a series of questions about his/her own behavior. These
questions allow us to assess whether gender peer effects on classroom environment come from changes
in students’ individual behavior rather than only through changes in the class gender composition. We
also look at a third set of questions that provide information on time allocated to homework in math,
Hebrew, English, and science and technology. We use this information to highlight the effect of the
classroom gender composition on another potential dimension of behavioral change — students’ study
effort in each of these subjects.
The student questionnaire data and test scores for the years 2002-2005 were linked to student
administrative records collected by the Israel Ministry of Education (identical in structure to the data
used for high school students). The administrative records include student demographics and were used
to construct peer gender composition and all measures of students’ background characteristics. Using the
linked datasets, we built a panel for elementary schools and a panel for middle schools. As we did for the
high school sample, we drop from the panel any schools with an annual enrollment lower than 10
students.

13

The GEMS are not administered for school accountability purposes and only aggregated results at the district
level are published. For more information on the GEMS see the Division of Evaluation and Measurement website
(in Hebrew): http://cms.education.gov.il/educationcms/units/rama/odotrama/odot.htm.

9

The elementary school panel includes data from 5th- and 6th-grade student questionnaires and 5thgrade student test scores for the years 2002-2005. The sample is restricted to Jewish public schools that
have mixed-gender classes. There are 997 elementary schools (808 secular and 189 religious) with test
score data and 1,010 elementary schools (808 secular and 202 religious) with student-questionnaire data.
Since every school is sampled once in two years, we have two observations of the same school and grade
for more than 90 percent of the schools.14
The middle school panel includes student questionnaires for 7th through 9th grades and 8th-grade
student test scores for the years 2002-2005. The sample is restricted to secular schools, since there are
only a few religious middle schools with mixed-gender classes. There are 395 secular schools in the
sample, of which 85 percent appear in two years.
Since we have multiple grades for each school in the student’s questionnaire data, we pool all
grades and years and exploit within school variation in the proportion of female students across grades
and years to gain more variability in this variable. We therefore have four observations of the same
school for elementary schools (5th and 6th grade for two years) and six observations of the same school
for middle schools (7th, 8th, and 9th grade for two years). The analysis on student test scores for
elementary and middle schools has a more limited power since only one grade was tested, leaving us
with only two observations per school.
The GEMS also includes interviews with all teachers and the school principal. The teacher
survey, which was conducted by phone and had a very high response rate, included mainly questions
about resources for instruction and training, but it also included three questions about teaching fatigue
(“burnout”), the amount of workload, and overall work satisfaction. We use teachers’ responses to these
items to explore another mechanism of the gender peer effect: namely, whether the proportion of girls in
the classroom affects teachers’ fatigue and work satisfaction, which are likely correlated with teachers
unobserved productivity.

Evidence on the Validity of the Identification Strategy
The identification strategy outlined in section II raises two main concerns. The first is related to
precision: since identification relies on within school variation in the proportion of female students,
sufficient variation in peer gender composition across cohorts within schools is needed to obtain precise
estimates. The evidence reported in Table 1 shows that this is indeed the case. The table reports the
variance decomposition of the proportion of female students in the elementary, middle, and high school
samples. At elementary schools, the within school variation is larger than the between school variation,

14

About 3.3 percent of the schools appear in three years.

10

since every elementary school that has mixed-gender classes is expected, on average, to have an equal
proportion of male and female students, so that between school variations should be relatively small. The
within school variation is smaller in middle schools and high schools since schools are larger at these
levels. On the other hand, the between school variation is larger at the high-school level since there is
some sorting of students across schools by gender.
Overall, the evidence presented in Table 1 shows that there is a considerable amount of within
school variation in the proportion of female students in all levels of education that can be exploited in the
empirical analysis. Figures 1 and 2 show that this variation is evident not only in small schools but also
in medium and large schools as well as in schools located in towns of different sizes. Figure 1 displays
the within school standard deviation in the proportion of female students by the average cohort size of
the schools. In all three panels it is evident that the within school variation is larger in small schools but
there is significant variation in larger schools as well. Figure 2 shows that there are schools with
significant within school variation both in large and small towns. The evidence in Figures 1-2 is
important because it suggests that the identification of gender peer effects will not rely solely on
variation in small schools and towns, which are mainly situated in the periphery of the country, but will
also derive from variation in medium and large schools and towns, including the large metropolitan areas
in the center of the country.
A second concern is whether the within school variation in the proportion of female students is
indeed random. It could be that changes in the proportion of female students in a school are correlated
with unobserved determinants of student outcomes. The lack of school choice at the primary and middle
school level and the very limited scope of private schooling in Israel, diminish significantly the
possibility that parents will respond to the gender composition of a cohort. In high schools, such
selection could potentially occur, but it is very unlikely since while parents may know the average gender
composition of a school, it will be difficult for them to predict in advance the gender composition of a
cohort that begins high school in a particular year.
Nevertheless, to address this issue, we checked whether the proportion of girls within a school is
correlated with student background characteristics such as parental education, family size, and proportion
of new immigrants. Table 2 provides evidence on these balancing tests by reporting the estimated
coefficients from within school regressions (by including school fixed effects) of various student
characteristics on the proportion of female students in primary, middle, and high school. OLS estimates
are also reported, as a benchmark for comparison.
In the elementary school sample, the proportion of female students in a grade is not related to
any of the observable student characteristics, both in the OLS and the within school fixed-effects
regressions. In the middle school sample, the OLS estimates suggest that grades with a higher proportion

11

of female students have a lower proportion of new immigrants. This negative correlation, however, is
largely reduced and becomes insignificant in the within school regression. The results suggest that
cohort-to-cohort changes in the proportion of female students within a school are not correlated with
other changes in student characteristics.15
At the high school level, the OLS estimates show some associations between school gender
composition and student background characteristics. However, these correlations are largely reduced and
became insignificant in the within school regressions. The addition of school-specific linear time trends
wipes away all associations. For example, the coefficient on father’s years of schooling is 0.825
(s.e.=0.633) in the OLS regression. It drops to 0.561 (s.e.=0.425) in the within school regression and it is
further reduced to 0.051 (s.e.=0.392) when adding school specific linear time trends. Overall, by
conditioning on school fixed effects and school specific linear time trends we effectively eliminate the
observed associations between the proportion of females and family background characteristics.16
As an additional check, we performed Monte Carlo simulations for the elementary, middle, and
high school samples to verify that the observed within school variation in the proportion of female
students was consistent with a random process. For each school, we randomly generated the gender of
the students in each cohort and computed the within school standard deviation of the proportion female.17
We repeated this process 1,000 times to obtain an empirical 90 percent confidence interval for the
standard deviation for each school.
To illustrate this procedure we plotted in Figure 3 the actual and the simulated within school
standard deviation in the proportion of female students for the elementary school sample. Panel A plots
the actual standard deviation, panel B plots the standard deviation obtained from one simulation and
panel C plots the 90 percent confidence interval computed for each school along with the actual standard
deviation. It is clear from the figure that the actual standard deviations resemble closely the variation in
the proportion of female students generated from a random process. The results for the middle and high
school sample show a similar pattern. Overall, 89 percent of the elementary schools, 88 percent of the
middle schools and 84 percent of the high schools, had a standard deviation that fell within the 90

15

There could of course be a systematic correlation between students’ unobservables and the proportion of female
students. We cannot entirely rule out this possibility, even though the lack of a correlation in the observables hints
that the presence of a strong correlation in the unobservables is very unlikely.
16
We also performed similar balancing tests by gender and did not find any association between within school
changes in the proportion of girls and changes in the background characteristics of boys or girls. To save space we
have not reported the results in the paper and they are available upon request.
17
The gender of each student was randomly generated by a binomial distribution function with p equal to the
average proportion of female students in the school across all years.

12

percent confidence interval, which is close to what expected.18 We further re-estimated all models by
restricting the samples to schools that had a standard deviation within the confidence interval and
obtained virtually identical results to those based on the full sample and reported below.

IV. Results
A. Effects on High School Students’ Achievement
Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for student outcomes in the matriculation exams by gender
and cohort, along with sample sizes and the mean proportion of female students. This sample includes
280 high schools and 425,138 students from eight cohorts. The proportion of female students is roughly
50 percent in all the cohorts and it has no apparent time trend.19
Female students consistently outperform males in almost all matriculation outcomes in every
cohort. For example, on average for the whole sample period 61 percent of the girls in the sample were
awarded a matriculation certificate, versus 51 percent of the boys. Girls accumulated, on average, 20.4
credit units while boys accumulated 18.9. On the other hand, boys’ matriculation curriculum includes a
larger number of advanced level subjects in science in most of the years; for example, in 1995 the
average was 0.647 among boys and 0.561 among girls. A turning point appears in the 1999 cohort, when
girls began to outperform boys in this area as well (0.589 versus 0.575). More years of data are needed to
explore whether this turning point will hold in the long run.
Table 4 reports the effects of the proportion of female peers on high school achievements. Each
cell in the table shows the estimated coefficient on the proportion of female students from a separate
regression. Columns 1 and 4 reproduce from Table 3 the sample means for the whole period for girls and
boys, respectively. Columns 2-3 report the results for girls and columns 5-6 the results for boys. The
estimates presented are based on two different specifications. Columns 2 and 5 report estimates when
year dummies, school fixed effects, school specific time trends, school enrollment and individual’s and
cohort mean characteristics are included as controls. In order to assess how sensitive are these estimates
to the control of individual and cohort characteristics we report in columns 3 and 6 estimates based on a
specification that exclude them from the regression.
Based on the estimates from the complete specification (columns 2 and 5) we see that both
females and males tend to perform better in each of the five outcomes when they are in classes with
18

Since the models at the high school level control also for school specific time trends, the within school standard
deviations in the proportion of female students for the high school sample were computed based on the residuals
from a regression of the proportion female on school fixed effects and school specific time trends..
19
In practice, only 2 out of the 280 high schools show a monotonic rising or declining trend in the proportion of
female students. Results for a sample that excludes these 2 schools are virtually identical to the results obtained for
the full sample. Nevertheless, we add, as shown in equations 3-4, differential linear time trends for every school to
rule out the possibility that these trends might confound the estimated effect of the proportion of girls.

13

higher proportions of females. Three of the five estimates for girls are significantly different from zero
and the two others are marginally so. The three significant estimates capture the effects on important
high school outcomes: the average score on the matriculation exams (which is used to screen students for
highly competitive college and university programs), the matriculation status (a necessary condition for
university admission), and the total credit units (a signal of the quality of the matriculation diploma). The
effect on boys is also positive for all five outcomes, being precisely measured for three of them while the
other two are marginally significant. Noteworthy is the similarity of the estimates for boys and girls. For
example, the effect on the average score is 5.3 for girls and 6.7 for boys, the respective effects for credit
units are 1.4 and 1.3, and on the probability of matriculation diploma that meets university entrance
requirements 0.07 and 0.08, respectively. 20, 21
Column 3 and 6 present the estimates when we omitted the student and cohort characteristics as
controls. The estimates are virtually unchanged in comparison to those reported in columns 2 and 5. The
robustness of the estimates with respect to these controls is a result of the good balancing of the
characteristics with respect to the proportion of girls in the cohort once we control for school fixed effect
and school specific linear time trends. 22
The above estimates imply effects of moderate size. For example, a 10 percentage point increase
in the proportion of female peers increases the probability of matriculation by almost one percentage
point among girls, and by half a percentage point among boys. To put this in perspective, assuming that
the gender peer effects are linear, the estimates suggest that an all-female class would increase the
matriculation rate of girls by about nine percentage points. Though in absolute terms it is a moderate
impact, it is not so in comparison to the gains obtained from recent educational interventions aimed at
raising the matriculation rate. For example, a 20 percentage point increase in the proportion of female
peers would lead to an increase in the probability of matriculation that is half of the size of that estimated
by Lavy and Schlosser (2005) for a remedial education program that provided additional instructional
20

We failed to reject the null hypothesis of equality of the boys and girls’ estimates for each of the five
matriculation outcomes. The hypothesis tests were based on the estimation of seemingly unrelated regressions to
account for the correlation between the estimates for boys and girls.
21
We also estimated models similar to those presented in columns 2-3 and 5-6 based on aggregate data at the
school/year/gender level weighted by cell size. The advantage of this method is that clustering standard errors to
correct for the correlation in the error term between students of the same grade is redundant, though we still adjust
the standard errors for clustering at the school level to account for serial correlation in the error term (reflecting
correlation across cohorts within the same school). The results using aggregate data are almost identical to the
results using micro data. These estimates are not shown here and are available from the authors.
22
We also estimated three alternative versions of the full model reported in columns 2 and 5 where we used
different controls for the average background characteristics of the cohort. In one model, we controlled separately
for the average characteristics of girls and boys. In two additional specifications, we alternated and controlled for
the average characteristics of boys or girls in the cohort. All estimates of these three alternative models (not reported
here to save space) were virtually identical to those obtained when controlling for the average characteristics of the
cohort..

14

hours to high school students and a quarter of the size of that estimated by Angrist and Lavy (2004) for a
program that provided large monetary bonuses to high school students to improve their matriculation
outcomes.
Another example that highlights the relative size of the effect uses the estimates of the average
score for females (5.297) and for males (6.740), which imply that a 20 percentage point increase in the
proportion of female peers, increases average scores of girls by 1.1 points and average scores of boys by
1.3 points. These absolute gains imply an approximate increase of 4-5 percent of a standard deviation in
the students test score distribution. An all-female class would raise the score of girls by 0.20-0.25 of a
standard deviation, similar in magnitude to the effect of reducing class size by 33 percent (Angrist and
Lavy, 1999).

B. Falsification Tests
Columns 7-10 of Table 4, present the falsification tests based on placebo measures of treatment,
namely when the proportion of female students in the younger cohort (t-1) or the older cohort (t+1)
replaces the true treatment measure. 23 The results based on the t-1 or t+1 measure of treatment show no
effect on any of the outcomes, for boys and for girls. All estimates are small, have inconsistent signs, and
are insignificant. For example, when using the proportion of girls of the t+1 cohort (columns 8 and 10)
the estimates of the matriculation rate are 0.027 (s.e.=0.046) for girls and -0.030 (s.e.=0.045) for boys.
Also notable is the large difference between the estimates from the falsification regressions and from
those obtained when the true treatment variable was used. For example, the estimated effect on boys’
average test score is 6.740 (column 5) when the true measure is used and 0.145 and -1.516, respectively,
when the t-1 and t+1 treatment measures are used. The lack of any discerned effects when the placebo
treatments are used suggests that the estimated effects of the correct measure of treatment are not biased
due to omitted unobservable confounders of the effect of interest.

C. Effect on Enrollment in Advanced Math and Science Classes
One of the main arguments for single-sex classes is that girls do much better in science and math
and are more likely to enroll in advanced or honors classes in these subjects if segregated from boys. In
this section, we report estimates from regressions where the dependent variable is an indicator of whether
a student enrolled in an advanced (five credits level) class in math, physics, computer science, biology,
23

Note that the number of observations is slightly different in columns 7-10 from the respective sample sizes in
columns 2-3 and 5-6. This is because for a small number of schools in our sample there were no classes in one of
these adjacent cohorts (t-1 and/or t+1). We re-estimated the models reported in columns 2 and 5 using the same
sample of columns 7-10. The results (not reported here to save space) are virtually identical and are available upon
request.

15

and chemistry. Table 5 (columns 1 and 4) shows that on average, over the period studied here, boys were
40 percent more likely than girls to enroll in math and much more likely to enroll in physics (a ratio of 3
to 1) and computer science (a ratio of 4 to 1). An opposite pattern, though not as sharp, is observed in
biology and chemistry. In advanced English, girls had a marginally higher enrollment rate, though the
gender gap in enrollment in this subject is very small.
Table 5 presents the estimated effect of the proportion of girls on enrollment rates in these
subjects using the same specifications reported in Table 4. Focusing on estimates from the full
specification at the micro level (columns 2 and 5), a surprising pattern emerges: the proportion of girls in
a class causes an increase in the enrollment of boys in all subjects except biology and computer science,
while there is a much smaller parallel effect on girls. The only significant effect among girls is on math
enrollment, though the effect is about half the size of the effect among boys.
The estimated effect on physics enrollment for boys is 0.074 (s.e.=0.031) and for girls only 0.024
(s.e.=0.018), the former highly significant while the latter is much less precise. These results, however,
do not necessarily imply that increasing the proportion of girls in a class would widen the gender gap in
math, physics, or computer science, because the effects on both genders are of a similar magnitude
relative to the respective group means. For example, the coefficient for physics among girls is 0.024
relative to a mean of 0.048 while the coefficient for boys is 0.074 relative to a mean of 0.148. However,
the standard errors for the coefficients are too large to allow rejecting the hypothesis that the effect
among girls is statistically different from zero. Since the outcome means for physics and computer
science are much lower for girls than for boys, it seems that we do not have enough power to determine
whether there is any effect among girls in these subjects.
Columns 7-10 present respective falsification regressions for the main results, using the same
placebo measures as used in the regressions reported in Table 4. The results when either of the placebo
measures (proportion of girls at t-1 or t+1) of treatment was used reveal an overall pattern of no effect on
the enrollment rate in the various subjects. This is in sharp contrast to the estimates when the true
treatment measure was used, especially for boys, which suggests that the results in reported in columns 2,
3, 5 and 6 are not spurious.

D. Heterogeneous Effects by School Size
Since the larger variability in the proportion of female students arises from small schools, we
examined whether all the effects obtained on students’ achievement come from small schools only. Table
A1 presents the results for samples stratified by school size: average cohort size below 200 (147 schools)
and average cohort size of 200 or above (133 schools). The table reports also the outcome means by
school size.

16

Interestingly, the effects of the proportion of female students are very similar in the samples of
small and large schools. As expected, the standard deviation of the proportion of female students is
higher for small schools than for large schools (0.061, on average, versus 0.039) and there is a loss in
precision in both sub-samples. Overall, the estimates obtained in both sub-samples are virtually identical
to those obtained in the full sample. This shows that there is enough variation in the proportion of female
students to allow a precise estimation even in the sample of large schools. Therefore, our results are
relevant for schools of all sizes.

E. Allowing for Non-Linearity in the Effect of Treatment
To allow for a non-linear effect of the proportion of girls on student outcomes, we computed
quintiles of this variable and replaced the single treatment in the regression with a set of quintile
indicators. Since each school is observed in multiple years, some schools could have switched quintiles
in different years. In a specification that includes school fixed effects, these dynamics are the source of
variation for identification of non-linear effects of the proportion of girls.
Panel A of Table A2 reports summary statistics on the quintiles. The first quintile includes
schools with a proportion of girls in the range [0-0.4390]. The second, third, fourth, and fifth quintiles
are defined for the following ranges respectively: [0.4391-0.4990], [0.4991-0.5389], [0.5390-0.5842],
and [0.5843-1]. The median of the first quintile is 0.346, and the median of the fifth is 0.628. Panel B of
Table A2 presents a matrix with information on the extent to which schools switch from quintile to
quintile. The diagonal of the matrix shows the number of schools that remained in the same quintile
throughout all years. Indeed, the number of schools that remain in the same quintile all years is very low
(37 out of 280). The elements of the off-diagonals report the number of schools that are observed in two
different quintiles throughout the eight years of data. If we focus on the first row of the matrix, for
example, we see that 73 schools changed from quintile 1 (q1) to quintile 2 (q2), 60 from q2 to q3, 36
from q3 to q4 and 22 from q4 to q5.
Two interesting patterns emerge in the matrix. First, there is a considerable amount of within
school mobility across quintiles, a condition needed for identification. Second, for a given quintile, the
probability of moving to other quintiles declines with the distance from the origin, suggesting that the
movement of schools across quintiles is relatively smooth. Another interesting feature of the panel data is
that schools switch quintiles in one out of every two opportunities: there were 1,753 such occasions and
915 switches actually occurred.24

24

A panel of eight years provides each school with seven opportunities for switching across quintiles, but since the
panel is not balanced, the number of potential switches is lower than seven times the number of schools.

17

Table 6 presents the estimates of the effects of switching to the second, third, fourth, or fifth
quintile in the proportion of female students (relative to the first quintile) on the set of high school
outcomes. Most of the effects appear to increase with the quintiles, for both boys and girls, while the
significant effects are mainly concentrated in the fourth and especially in the fifth quintile, where the
proportion of female students exceeds 58 percent. Focusing on the main matriculation outcomes we see
that in cohorts with a proportion of girls higher than 58.4 percent, boys have a 1.4 point higher average
score, a 1.5 percent higher matriculation rate, and 0.528 more credit units relative to cohorts with a
proportion of girls that is lower than 44 percent. The respective estimates for girls are a 0.83 point higher
average score, a 1.7 percent higher matriculation rate, and 0.45 more credit units.
Overall, it seems that the marginal effects of the proportion of female students increase when
moving from lower to higher quintiles, for both boys and girls. For example, focusing on the effects on
the matriculation rate among boys, the marginal effect in the second quintile relative to the first is 0.010
= 0.005/(0.473-0.309), while the marginal effect in the fifth quintile relative to the fourth is
0.147=(0.015-0.002)/(0.648-0.309). The marginal effects for girls in the first and fifth quintiles are 0.001
and 0.168, respectively.25 This result is consistent with Hoxby (2000), who finds a larger increment in
student test scores in Texas elementary schools when the proportion of female peers exceeds 66 percent.

F. Effect on Primary and Middle School Outcomes
The samples we have for primary and middle schools pool together only two cohorts of 5th and
8th grades, respectively. Therefore, the identification of within school variations is less powerful in these
samples. Nevertheless, albeit to a lesser extent, we do find positive effects of the proportion of girls on
test scores. Table 7 presents the results for 5th grade (columns 1-4) and 8th grade (columns 5-8) based on
the same two specifications we used for estimating the high school outcomes equations. Focusing on the
specifications that included all the controls, the estimates for math and science scores in 5th grade show
positive effects although standard errors are sometimes too large to obtain significant estimates.
Estimates for girls’ achievements in math and science are 0.366 (s.e.=0.155) and 0.301 (s.e.=0.169)
implying that a 10 percentage point increase in the proportion of female students increases girls’ test
scores in math and science by 3.7 and 3.0 percent of a standard deviation, respectively. Estimates for
boys are 0.218 (s.e.=0.159) and 0.432 (s.e.=0.167) for math and science, respectively. These effects are
slightly larger than Hoxby (2000) who found that a 10 percentage point increase in the proportion of
female students increases students math tests scores by 1-2 percent of a standard deviation in Texas

25

The same qualitative results are obtained when evaluating the marginal effects using the median points of the
quintiles (instead of the means).

18

elementary schools. Estimates for Hebrew and English are small for both genders and are not statistically
significant.
To reduce measurement error and improve precision, we also estimate the effects on
achievement using the average test scores in math and science and the average test scores in Hebrew and
English. The estimated coefficients for the average of students’ math and science scores are significant
for both genders. The size of the effect suggests that a 10 percentage point increase in the proportion of
female students increases average test scores of girls and boys in these particular subjects by 3.5 and 3.1
percent of a standard deviation, respectively. On the other hand, estimates of the effects on the average of
Hebrew and English scores are positive but not significant. It is noteworthy that while girls perform
remarkably better than boys in Hebrew and English, the effect of the proportion of girls on students’
performance is only visible in math and science, subjects where girls have a small or no advantage
compared to boys. This suggests that girls’ peer effects do not operate solely through spillovers of peers’
higher achievement—an issue we explore in detail in the next section.
Results for 8th grade (Table 7, columns 5-8) show a strong effect of the proportion of girls on
girls’ math and English test scores, with smaller positive effects for boys but with large standard errors.

V. Identifying the Mechanisms of Gender Peer Effects
The results reported above show that both boys and girls exhibit higher achievement when they
have more female peers in their class. In this section, we explore the mechanisms through which girls
may affect their peers. One obvious mechanism could be the spillover of girls’ achievement. However, it
seems unlikely that all gains in achievement are generated solely by this channel since we find positive
effects of the proportion of girls even in subjects where girls have lower achievement than boys (e.g., the
number of credit units in scientific subjects in high school or math and science test scores in elementary
schools).26 This is also consistent with Hoxby and Weingarth (2005) who find that even after controlling
for peers’ lagged achievement, race, ethnicity, and income, a higher proportion of girls in the class, leads
to higher test scores for both genders. In this section, we examine other possible channels using a rich set
of behavioral outcomes among middle and elementary school students and teachers.

A. Classroom Environment
We focus on 11 items in the student questionnaire that relate to the classroom and school
environment. To obtain a more general picture of the possible mechanisms and to gain statistical power,
we also group the 11 outcomes into the following categories: classroom disruption and violence; inter26

It could still be the case that gender peer effects are working solely through girls’ higher achievement if there are
spillovers across subjects.

19

student relationships; teacher-student relationships; school discipline; and students’ satisfaction with
school. Low scores achieved in the first category and high scores achieved in the latter four categories
point to improved outcomes.
Following Kling et al. (2007) we compute the average effect τc for each category c by averaging
across the standardized effects of the individual outcomes included in that category. That is, the average
effect of the proportion of female students for category c is defined as τ c =

1
kc

Kc

π kc

∑σ
k =1

where kc is the

kc

number of outcomes included in category c, πkc is the effect on outcome k included in category c, and σkc
is the standard deviation of the outcome. To calculate the variance of τc it is necessary to estimate the
covariance matrix of the individual effects within each category. We do so by estimating a system of
seemingly unrelated regressions for the outcomes in each category.27 By averaging across the effects on
different outcomes within a category, we implicitly attribute equal weight to all outcomes. Since there is
no prior information to justify a particular weighting, we assign equal weight to all outcomes as it
provides a more transparent interpretation.
As an alternative strategy, we also constructed aggregate outcomes by averaging across the
standardized outcomes included in each category and estimated the effects of the proportion of female
students on these aggregate outcomes. The results for these averaged outcomes (not reported here to save
space) are virtually identical to the average effects for each category reported below in Table 8.28 Table
8 reports within school estimates using pooled data of 5th and 6th graders, a second sample of 7th through
9th graders, and a pooled sample of 5th through 9th graders. We report results for individual outcomes as
well as the average effect for each category.

Classroom Disruption and Violence
The analysis on classroom disruption and violence is based on the following items:
(1) “Frequently the classroom is noisy and not conducive to learning”
(2) “There are many fights among students in my classroom”
(3) “Sometimes I’m scared to go to school because there are violent students”

27

This method treats the standard deviation of the outcomes (σkc) as known. It is possible to account for the
sampling variance of σkc by applying the delta method or bootstrapping. Kling and Liebman (2004) show that the
estimates that result from the delta method or bootstrapping are similar to those obtained under the assumption of
known σkc in a study that evaluates the effects of the Moving to Opportunity program on youth outcomes. Based on
their results and given the large sample size of our study, we treat σkc as known.
28
In practice, both methods provide identical estimates when there are no missing values in item responses and the
model has no additional covariates besides the treatment variable.

20

The mean responses of girls and boys to these questions are almost identical as seen from columns 1-2
(primary school) and columns 5-6 (middle school), implying that students’ subjective assessment of the
classroom environment is similar across both genders. 29
The estimates reported in columns 3-4 and 7-8 in the first panel of Table 8 suggest that a higher
proportion of girls in a class significantly lowers the level of disruption and violence. This effect is
evident in each of the three items, as reported by both boys and girls, and it is equally precise and
important in primary and in middle school. In columns 9-10 we report the estimates from a sample that
pools all grades together. The pooled sample provides some gain in precision, reducing the standard
errors by 20-40 percent. The estimate for the effect of the proportion of girls on students’ reports
regarding the level of noise in the classroom, for example, is -0.254 (s.e.=0.089) for girls and -0.218
(s.e.=0.080) for boys.
The average effect is much more precise than the estimates for the individual items: the estimate
for girls in the pooled sample is -0.302 (s.e.=0.058) and for boys it is -0.233 (s.e.=0.049). Overall, these
results suggest that having more girls in a class highly improves the learning and safety climate by
lowering the disruptions during lessons, lowering the incidence of fights, increasing the safety of
students, and lowering their anxiety about attending school. Beyond the direct effect, personal safety in
school can also indirectly affect students’ achievements by improving motivation, concentration, and
other non-cognitive factors that are important for learning. In addition, fewer disruptions during class are
likely to lead to a more efficient use of the instruction time.

Inter-Student Relationships
Two items in the questionnaire (“I feel well adjusted socially in my class” and “Students in my
class help each other”) provide an indication of the quality of inter-student relationships that can be
conducive or harmful to learning and achievement. Being well adjusted and acceptable socially among
classroom peers may improve a student’s self-confidence, self-image, motivation, and other noncognitive attributes that might be essential for effective learning. The cooperation between students may
comprise help with homework or with test preparation, both of these implying additional instruction
times and better learning.

29

There are some small differences between boys and girls’ reports within the same classroom. We have examined
these differences along with differences in mean responses by other student characteristics, like family size or
immigration status. These results, not shown in the paper, are available from the authors. Overall, the within
classroom differences by gender are relatively small compared to the differences by immigration status.
Nevertheless, in order to compare the results among boys and girls, we only need to assume that boys and girls
perceive changes in classroom environment in a similar way.

21

Boys and girls have similar feelings regarding their social adjustment in class. On the other hand,
girls have a more favorable view of the cooperation between students in a class, especially at the middle
school level, suggesting perhaps that girls are more cooperative than boys are. The within school
estimates show that a higher proportion of girls in a class improves both outcomes significantly. The
effect among girls in primary school is larger than among boys, but in middle school it is equal for both
genders. The estimated effects are larger in middle school, reflecting perhaps the increased importance of
social interaction among teenagers and a more pronounced effect of girls in a more ‘turbulent’
classroom. The average treatment effect of these two items over all grades is 0.302 (s.e.=0.057) for girls
and 0.155 (s.e.=0.049) for boys.

The Quality of Teacher-Student Relations
Three items are used to examine the effect of the proportion of girls in a class on the
relationships between students and teachers. The first item identifies how rude students are to their
teachers (“Students frequently talk back to teachers”). The effects of the proportion of girls in a class are
significant and negative, meaning that a higher proportion of girls lead to a lower frequency of offensive
treatments of students towards teachers, with the effects being similarly reported by boys and girls. In
contrast, we do find a different effect for boys and girls when we look at two other aspects that affect the
quality of the relationships between students and teachers. For these two items “There are good
relationships between teachers and students” and “There is mutual respect between teachers and
students”, the estimates are much higher for boys than for girls in both primary and middle schools.
Overall, we can conclude that the peer effect of girls in school is working through the quality of teacherstudent relationships as well, and that it is doing so largely among boys.

School Discipline
Two items allow us to examine whether a higher proportion of girls leads to greater emphasis
and/or enforcement of discipline in school. We find no effect on either item. The sign on whether the
school emphasizes discipline is indeed positive but it is not significantly different from zero as is the
effect on the incidence of students frequently being late or truant, an effect that is negative but not
significant. The average effect for these two outcomes has a lower standard error but is also insignificant.
Overall, it seems that the improvement in the level of discipline and quality of social relationships in the
classroom is not due to a stronger enforcement of rules in school.

22

Students’ Satisfaction with School
As a summary of their opinions about their classroom and school, students are asked whether
they feel good at school. Overall girls are happier at school than boys. In primary school the mean
response of girls is 5.27 and of boys it is 5.04 and in middle school it is 5.01 and 4.70, respectively.
Increasing the proportion of girls in primary school has a small and marginally significant positive effect
on this outcome, equal in size for boys and girls. In middle school, the effect increases for both boys and
girls, while it is larger among boys. Interestingly, the beneficial effect of girls on students’ satisfaction
with their school becomes increasingly more important at higher grades where this outcome seems to
deteriorate. Students’ satisfaction with school can affect achievement by improving motivation, selfconfidence, and perhaps even study effort. We explore this last issue in the next section.

Falsification tests
We also estimated falsification or placebo regressions for all items in the student questionnaire
similarly to the estimations of the respective models for the high school outcomes reported in Table 4.
The results of these falsification tests are reported in Table A3. All estimates of the placebo treatments
are small, have inconsistent signs, and are not significantly different from zero.

B. Pedagogic
A further aspect possibly affected by the classroom gender composition is the pedagogic
(teaching methods) in the classroom. If the classroom is noisy and suffers from frequent interruptions, it
will be difficult for the teacher to approach students individually and to focus on their specific needs.
Likewise, a higher fraction of instructional time spent on disciplinary problems would probably lead to a
lower fraction of time devoted to actual learning. Given the negative effects of the proportion of female
students on classroom violence and disruption, it is interesting to explore whether teaching methods are
affected as well.
To examine these issues, we focus on a section in the student questionnaire where the student
reports the teaching methods used by their teachers and the extent of feedback, help, support, and
individualized treatment they receive from their teachers. Since there are 29 items about teaching
methods in the student questionnaire, we grouped these items into 5 categories and report in Table 9 the
average effects for each category to get a more general picture of the effects.30 The first two categories,
“Emphasis on knowledge and enhancement of comprehension” and “Emphasis on application, analysis
and integration, evaluation, and critical thinking,” summarize the six levels of Bloom’s taxonomy of

30

A list of the individual items included in each of the five categories is reported in Appendix I.

23

educational objectives, which describes the hierarchies in the process of developing intellectual skills
(See Bloom, 1956). The third category, “Development of capacity for independent study,” describes the
development of an essential skill for successful achievement at higher levels of education. The last two
categories, “Gives fair and efficient feedback” and “Recognizes diversity, believes in students’ success,
and provides help and support,” are considered by the literature of educational psychology as critical
factors for successful learning (see, for example, the Theory of Mastery Learning in Bloom, 1968).
The estimated effects of the proportion of female students on teaching methods reported in Table
9 are less precise than the effects found on classroom environment, but overall they suggest a higher
level of learning as well as of teachers’ feedback, support, and individualized treatment when there are a
larger proportion of girls in the class. In contrast to what we find for measures of classroom disruption,
violence, and social relationships, there are marked differences by gender in the effects on the pedagogic.
For example, the effect of the proportion of female students on emphasis on knowledge and enhancement
of comprehension is significant for boys but not for girls. On the other hand, the effect on emphasis on
application, analysis and integration, evaluation, and critical thinking is significant only among girls.
Likewise, there is a positive effect on the development of capacity for independent study for girls but not
for boys. Lastly, boys seem to be the primary beneficiaries of an increase in teachers’ feedback, support,
and individualized treatment of students, while there is no effect among girls.

C. Teachers’ Fatigue and Work Satisfaction
Complementary to the analysis of pedagogical practices is that of the impact of the proportion of
female students on teachers’ fatigue, burned-out, and work satisfaction. These factors are likely to affect
teachers’ motivation and possibly their productivity. To analyze this aspect we look at the GEMS teacher
questionnaire that included the following three relevant items:
(1) “I feel burned-out as a teacher”
(2) “I feel that I have too much workload”
(3) “I am satisfied with my work at school”
We were able to match the home classroom teachers to their students for the primary and middle
school data. However, the contact time between the home classroom teacher and her students in middle
school is very limited, only a few hours a week, while in primary school most of the classes are taught by
the home classroom teacher, especially in the lower grades. We therefore focus in this analysis only on
the sample of 17,529 home classroom teachers in 1st to 6th grades in 1,038 schools. Table 10 presents
estimates of the effect of the proportion of girls on teachers’ responses to the above three items. We
present estimates from school fixed effects models that control for the mean characteristics of the grade
and include also grade and year dummies. These estimates are reported in panel A of the table.

24

The mean of teachers’ responses to the statement “I feel burned-out” is 2.6 on a scale of one
(completely disagree) to six (strongly agree). About a quarter of the teachers agreed to some extent with
this statement, reporting the three highest scores of the scale, suggesting that a non-negligible number of
teachers feel exhausted from their job. The estimates in column 3 show that this emotional-physical
status of teachers is strongly and negatively related to the proportion of girls in their classroom. The
estimate based on the full sample is -0.265, and it is only marginally significant (t-value=-1.4). However,
when the sample is limited to lower grades (1st through 4th), where the teachers are most likely to be
teaching only the grade for which treatment is measured, the estimate increases significantly (-0.637 with
a t-value=-2.6). A larger and more precise effect is also estimated for a sample that includes only math
and language home teachers, who are also more likely to be teaching most of their hours in the grade
where the treatment variable is measured.
In the lower panel of column 3, we report estimates from within school regressions where
various measures of the classroom environment (as reported by students) replace (one at a time) the
treatment variable of the proportion of girls in the grade. Not surprisingly, these estimates indicate that
the “fatigue” of teachers is highly negatively correlated with the quality of the classroom environment:
teachers feel much more exhausted when classrooms are noisy, when there are more fights among
students, when students are more abrasive towards their teachers, and when students and teachers do not
have good relationships and do not respect each other.
These estimates cannot be interpreted as causal because there might be a third factor affecting
both the classroom environment and teachers’ fatigue or there may be reverse causality. However, these
within school associations are consistent with the effects of gender composition on the classroom
environment and therefore can be viewed as channels through which gender composition may affect
teachers. If teachers who feel burned-out have lower productivity, it is reasonable to think that the
positive effects of the proportion of female students on student achievements is driven also by a lower
level of teachers’ fatigue and burnout.
Columns 4-5 report the effects of gender classroom composition (panel A) and correlations with
classroom environment (panel B) for the two remaining questionnaire items concerning teachers’
workload and work satisfaction. Overall, neither outcome is affected by the proportion of girls in the
grade, as the six estimates reported in panel A suggest. The vast majority of teachers (69 percent) report
having too much workload (choosing the three highest scores of the scale). The associations between
teachers’ reports on having too much workload and classroom environment shown in panel B have the
expected sign but are only marginally significant and much smaller (only about a quarter) in magnitude
compared to the associations reported for teachers’ burnout. This may suggest that girls do not have

25

much of an effect on teachers’ workload since the latter is only weakly related to the classroom
environment.
Despite teachers’ complaints about feeling burnout and having too much workload, only 3
percent of the teachers reported low scores (1-3) for work satisfaction. This outcome has a very high
average (5.456) and a much lower spread around the mean (s.d.=0.82), so that any effect will be harder to
detect. Nevertheless, we do find that teachers’ satisfaction with school is correlated with the classroom
environment indicators, although these estimates are much smaller (about half the size) than the
corresponding ones for teachers’ burnout and they are also less precise. On the other hand, the proportion
of female students has no effect on teachers’ work satisfaction. The fact that there is no correlation
between the teachers’ workload and satisfaction indicators and the proportion of girls, even though both
indicators are related to classroom environment, may be a result of other factors being more dominant
than the proportion of girls in the determination of these two indicators; for example, the level of
compensation and other duties at school.

VI. Change in the Classroom Gender Composition versus Change in Behavior
The results discussed above clearly show that a higher proportion of girls in a class leads to an
improved learning environment, as reflected by a lower level of violence and classroom disruption and
better inter-student and teacher-student relationships. But one central question remains: how much of the
peer effect on the learning environment is due to changes in gender classroom composition and how
much to changes in the behavior of students. Based on additional items in the student questionnaire we
are able to provide a limited answer to this question. By contrasting the information students provided
on how they view their classroom environment with their answers to questions about their own behavior,
we find very sharp and informative differences.
Table 11 presents estimates of the effect of the proportion of girls in the classroom on items that
measure (based on self-reporting) the student’s understanding of the learning and discipline requirements
in school, his/her involvement in fights with other students, and his/her reports on their own relationship
with the teachers. Similar to what we have done in the previous section, we summarize the effects on the
various outcomes related to student behavior by grouping them into broader categories and computing
the average effect for each category.
The striking overall pattern seen in this table is of no systematic or significant effect on any of
these measures of students’ behavior to changes in the proportion of girls in the classroom. The most
obvious example is the item on being involved in many fights at school during the current year. Boys are
much more likely to be involved in fights than girls, with a mean score of 2.372 versus 1.490 on a scale
of one (completely disagree) to 6 (strongly agree) in elementary school. However, the effect of the

26

proportion of girls in a class in elementary school is positive and significant both for boys and girls and
in middle school it is negative (though not significant) for boys and not significant for girls. Therefore, if
there is any effect on violent behavior of students, it goes in the opposite direction from the effect on the
classroom average. This suggests that the effect of the proportion of girls on disruption and violence is
mainly driven by a change in the composition of the class and not by changes in individual behavior of
students: as the number of girls in the class increases, so does the proportion of well-behaved students,
and therefore the mean level of violence is reduced. On the other hand, there are no behavioral changes
among girls or boys.
Another potential behavioral change is that of study efforts. The lower panel in Table 11 reports
the effect of the proportion of girls on weekly homework hours in math, Hebrew, English, and science
and technology. There is no systematic pattern in the 16 estimates (four subjects for each gender, in
primary and in middle school) in terms of sign or precision: some are negative and others positive and
most are not significantly different from zero. We do observe that girls spend more time doing
homework than boys in all subjects (0.73 hours more in primary school and 0.83 hours more in middle
school), but having more girls in a class has no effect on these outcomes, suggesting that the positive
gender effects on scholastic achievement reported in section IV operate through channels other than an
increase in learning effort. The fact that we do not find an effect on an out-of-school outcome (time at
home spent on homework) may be viewed as another indication that it is not a cohort effect that drives
the results reported in this and in the previous section.
We also estimated falsification or placebo regressions for all items in this part of the student
questionnaire and the results are reported in Table A4. All these estimates are small, have inconsistent
signs, and are not significantly different from zero.

VII. Conclusions
In this paper, we empirically measure the extent of peer effects of female students in primary,
middle, and high school on students’ academic achievements and behavior. We make four important
contributions in this study. We estimate the gender peer effects on scholastic achievement among high
school students and on students’ preferences over subjects of study, in particular on their enrollment in
advanced math, science, and technology classes. Using unique and rich data on behavioral outcomes, we
are able to look into the “black box” and explore the mechanisms through which gender peer effects may
affect academic achievement. The data allow us also to disentangle two different channels through which
these mechanisms may affect students, one that operates through a change in the gender composition of
the classroom and a second that reflects changes in the behavior of students.

27

The evidence provided in this paper suggests that a higher proportion of female peers improve
scholastic achievements among both boys and girls. The effects seem to be larger at higher proportions
of girls in the classroom, in particular, beyond 55 percent. These effects do not appear to be generated
entirely by spillover effects of girls’ achievements. Interestingly, a higher proportion of girls in a class
increase the likelihood of enrollment in advanced classes in math and science among boys while the
effects among girls are not precise enough to be identified.
An exploration of the mechanisms of the gender peer effects shows that a higher proportion of
females in a class lead to a better classroom and learning environment. Students who have more female
peers report a lower level of classroom violence and disruption, better relationships with other students
and teachers, and a higher level of satisfaction with their school. The effects on improved classroom
environment appear to come from a change in the classroom composition and not from changes in
students’ individual behavior or in their study effort. The benefit from a higher proportion of girls in the
classroom is also due to lower fatigue and burnout among teachers, which probably affects their
productivity. We also find that teaching methods are quite responsive to an increase in the proportion of
girls, which leads to better learning, more teacher feedback, and more support and individualized
instruction.
The findings that both boys and girls excel in an environment with more girls and that there are
large similarities across gender in the importance of the various mechanisms through which gender peer
effects operate, complicate the social choices regarding single sex classes and schools. The gain for
females from school or classroom gender segregation is offset by the loss for males. For example,
placing girls in single-sex classes in math and sciences would deny boys the positive externalities of
girls. Another implication of our results is that the gender mix of a class should be taken into account in
inter- and intra-school resource allocation, especially when the proportion of girls is particularly low.
Lastly, our results provide direct evidence of the possible consequences of imbalanced sex ratios in some
public schools that could emerge from a disproportionate increase in the number of single-sex classes for
girls.

28

Appendix I: Items used to estimate the average effects reported in Table 10.
1. Emphasis on knowledge and enhancement of comprehension
• The teachers give exercises and assignments that help to remember the material
• The teachers ask many questions in class to make sure we know the material
• The teachers commend students who know the material well
• The teachers give many examples that help students understand the material
• The teachers hold discussions in class that help clarify the material
• During lessons, the teachers ask many questions that check whether we understand the
material well
2. Emphasis on application, analysis and integration, evaluation, and critical thinking
• The teachers give exercises and assignments whose answers have not been studied in
class and are not in the textbooks
• The teachers require that we use what we have studied to explain various phenomena
• The teachers request that we find new examples to the material taught in class
• The teachers request we find several ways of solving a problem
• The teachers teach us to find a single common explanation for different phenomena
• The teachers give assignments which require analysis and integration with other subjects
we learned
• When there are different ways of solving a problem the teachers request we analyze all
of hem and find the best one
• The teachers expect us to ask ourselves whether what we have learned is correct
• The teachers teach us how to know whether information we have found is important,
relevant, and can be used
3. Development of capacity for independent study
• The teachers teach us how to learn new topics by ourselves
• The teachers require students to utilize many and varied sources of information
(newspapers, books, databases, etc.)
• The teachers teach us to observe our environment and to follow phenomena that occur in
it
4. Gives fair and efficient feedback
• The teachers explain to me exactly what I have to do to improve my studies
• The teachers explain how they determine the grades / assessments
• The teachers often tell me what my situation is regarding schoolwork
5. Recognizes diversity, believes in students’ success, and provides help and support
• The teachers know what the educational difficulties of each student are
• When a student has difficulty with a certain topic, the teachers give him/her more time to
study it
• The teachers give every student homework according to his/her stage of attainment
• The teachers help every student to learn topics that interest him/her
• The teachers give me a feeling that if I make an effort I will succeed more at my studies
• When a student fails, the teachers encourage him to try again and again
• The teachers always assist me when I need help with my studies

29

References
Ammermueller, Andreas and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, “Peer Effects in European Primary Schools: Evidence
from PIRLS,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2077, April 2006.
Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang, “Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence from
Boston’s Metco Program,” American Economic Review, 94(5), 2004, pp. 1613-1634.
Angrist Joshua and Victor Lavy, “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
Children’s Academic Achievement.”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999.
Angrist Joshua and Victor Lavy, “The Effects of High Stakes High School Achievement Awards:
Evidence from a School-Centered Randomized Trial”, IZA DP No. 1146, May 2004.
Arcidiacono, Peter and Nicholson Sean, “Peer Effects in Medical School,” Journal of Public Economics,
89, 2005, pp. 327-350.
Bloom, Benjamin S. (ed.), Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook 1: Cognitive Domain, David
McKay Co: New York, 1956.
Bloom, Benjamin S., “Learning for Mastery.” UCLA Evaluation Comment 1 (2):1–8, 1968.
Boozer, Michael and Cacciola Stephen, “Inside the ‘Black Box’ of Project Star: Estimation of Peer
Effects Using Experimental Data”, Economic Growth Center, Discussion Paper No. 832, 2001,
Yale University.
Campbell, Patricia and Jo Sanders, “Challenging the System: Assumptions and Data behind the Push for
Single-Sex Schooling” in A. Datnow and L. Hubbard (Eds.) Gender In Policy and Practice:
Perspectives on Single-Sex and Coeducational Schooling. New York: Routledge Falmer, 2002.
Gibbons, Stephen and Shqiponja Telhaj, “Peer Effects and Pupil Attainment: Evidence from Secondary
School Transition,” London School of Economics, mimeo, 2005.
Gould, Eric, Victor Lavy and Daniele Paserman, “Does Immigration Affect the Longterm Educational
Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental Evidence,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1883,
December 2005.
Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, Jacob Markman and Steven Rivkin, “Does Peer Ability Affect Student
Achievement?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(5), 2003, pp. 527-544.
Hansen, Zaynep, Hideo Owan, and Jie Pan, “The Impact of Group Diversity on Performance and
Knowledge Spillover – An Experiment in a College Classroom,” NBER Working Paper No.
12251, May 2006.
Harwath, Irene, Mindi Maline and Elizabeth Debra, “Women’s colleges in the United States: History,
Issues and Challenges,” Office of Educational Research and Improvement at the U.S.
Department of Education report, 1997.

30

Hoxby, Caroline “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation,” NBER
Working Paper No. 7867, 2000.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Gretchen Weingarth, “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School Reassignment
and the Structure of Peer Effects”, Mimeo, Harvard University, 2005.
Kling, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Liebman, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects on Youth”,
Working Paper No. 483, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton university, March 2004.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman and Lawrence Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects”,
Econometrica, 75(1), pp. 83-119, January 2007.
Lavy, Victor and Analía Schlosser, “Targeted Remedial Education for Underperforming Teenagers:
Costs and Benefits”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 839-874, 2005.
Lazear, Edward “Education Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), August 2001, pp.
777-803.
Manski, Charles, “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,” Review of
Economic Studies, 60(3), 1993, pp. 531-542.
Morse, Susan, Ed. Separated by Sex: A critical Look at Single-Sex Education for Girls. The American
Association of University Women Educational Foundation: Washington, DC, 1998.
Petersen Mitchell, “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing Approaches”,
Working Paper Kellog School of Management Northwestern University, October 2006.
Sacerdote, Bruce “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 2001, pp. 681-704.
Ulku-Steiner, Beril, Beth Kurtz-Costes, and C. Ryan Kinlaw, “Doctoral Students Experiences in GenderBalanced and Male-Dominated Graduate Programs,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(2),
2000, pp. 296-307.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development Policy and
Program Studies Service, Single-Sex Versus Secondary Schooling: A Systematic Review,
Washington, D.C., 2005.
Whatford, Christine, Secondary School Places Planning in London, Part I. The London Challenge for
World class Education, March 2005.
Whitmore, Diane, “Resource and Peer Impacts on Girls’ Academic Achievement: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 95(2), 2005,
pp. 199-203.
Zimmerman, David J., “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1), 2003, pp. 9-23.

31

Table 1. Decomposition of Variance in the Proportion of Female Students
Secular and religious
elementary schools
Sum of Share of
squares
total
DF
(1)
(2)
(3)

Secular middle schools
Sum of Share of
squares
total
DF
(4)
(5)
(6)

Secular high schools
Sum of Share of
squares
total
DF
(7)
(8)
(9)

Between

7.7

32%

1,009

3.2

38%

394

28.1

84%

279

Within

16.5

68%

2,890

5.2

62%

1,683

5.2

16%

1,747

Total

24.2

3,899

8.4

2,077

33.3

2,026

Notes: The elementary school sample includes all 5th and 6th grades in Jewish public schools that have mixed gender classes.
The middle school sample includes all 7th through 9th grades in Jewish secular public schools. The high school sample
includes all 10th grades in Jewish secular public schools that have a matriculation track.

Table 2. Balancing Tests for the Proportion of Female Students
Secular and religious
elementary schools

Secular middle schools

OLS
(5)

School
fixed effects
(6)

School
fixed effects +
school time trends
(7)

0.170
(0.375)

0.825
(0.633)

0.561
(0.425)

0.051
(0.392)

0.244
(0.994)

-0.672
(0.442)

0.757
(0.585)

0.431
(0.394)

0.018
(0.383)

0.023
(0.077)

-0.234
(0.341)

-0.371
(0.313)

0.290
(0.219)

0.287
(0.282)

0.046
(0.244)

0.006
(0.006)

-0.070
(0.030)

-0.004
(0.012)

-0.130
(0.036)

-0.015
(0.033)

0.050
(0.022)

OLS
(1)

School
fixed effects
(2)

OLS
(3)

School
fixed effects
(4)

Father's years of schooling

-0.057
(0.481)

-0.245
(0.228)

0.803
(1.056)

Mother's years of schooling

-0.206
(0.476)

-0.283
(0.236)

Number of siblings

-0.329
(0.155)

New immigrant

0.015
(0.008)

Dependent variable

Secular high schools

Notes: The table reports OLS and school fixed effects estimates from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the proportion of female
students. All regressions include year dummies. Regressions in columns 1-4 include also grade dummies. Regressions in even columns include also school
fixed effects. Regressions in column 7 include school fixed effects and school specific linear time trends. Robust standard errors clustered at the school
level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics: Matriculation Exams Outcomes in High Schools
Number of advanced
Proportion
Number of credit
level subjects
of female
Average score
Matriculation status
units
in science
students
Females Males
Females Males
Females Males
Females
Males
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Matriculation diploma
that meets university
requirements
Females
Males
(12)
(13)

10th grade
cohort
(1)

Number of
students
(2)

1993

51,040

0.509

64.4

58.1

0.572

0.489

19.0

17.6

0.561

0.647

0.502

0.432

1994

51,946

0.512

66.0

59.8

0.557

0.490

19.4

18.1

0.543

0.631

0.498

0.441

1995

51,041

0.507

66.5

60.4

0.565

0.477

19.9

18.3

0.542

0.615

0.515

0.435

1996

52,185

0.503

67.8

61.3

0.578

0.487

20.2

18.6

0.564

0.601

0.530

0.444

1997

53,207

0.507

69.6

64.3

0.634

0.522

20.8

19.4

0.561

0.596

0.574

0.475

1998

53,444

0.508

70.5

64.9

0.635

0.525

21.1

19.5

0.575

0.581

0.574

0.474

1999

55,293

0.505

71.2

64.4

0.657

0.542

21.2

19.6

0.589

0.575

0.590

0.485

2000

56,982

0.504

71.7

64.7

0.670

0.548

21.4

19.5

0.594

0.569

0.599

0.491

All

425,138

0.507

68.5

62.3

0.610

0.511

20.4

18.9

0.567

0.601

0.549

0.460

Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics for students' outcomes in the matriculation exams by sex and cohort. The sample includes all public secular Jewish high schools that
have a matriculation track. A matriculation certificate that meets university entrance requirements includes 4 credit units in English and one additional subject at a minimum level of
4 credit units. Enhanced subjects are subjects taken at a minimum of 4 credit units.

Table 4. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on Scholastic Outcomes in High School
Main Results
Females
Males
Females
Outcome
means
(1)

Proportion female in
the cohort
(2)
(3)

Outcome
means
(4)

Proportion female in
the cohort
(5)
(6)

Falsification Tests
Males

Prop. female
in t-1
(7)

Prop. female
in t+1
(8)

Prop. female
in t-1
(9)

Prop. female
in t+1
(10)

Average Score

68.5

5.297
(2.178)

3.857
(2.460)

62.3

6.740
(2.656)

5.555
(2.835)

2.926
(2.244)

-1.995
(2.655)

0.145
(2.591)

-1.516
(2.525)

Matriculation status

0.610

0.087
(0.040)

0.086
(0.042)

0.511

0.054
(0.043)

0.050
(0.045)

0.031
(0.042)

0.027
(0.046)

0.023
(0.042)

-0.030
(0.045)

Number of credit units

20.4

1.413
(0.849)

1.135
(0.926)

18.9

1.332
(1.025)

1.154
(1.070)

0.378
(0.857)

-0.035
(0.917)

-0.565
(1.021)

-0.242
(0.994)

Number of advanced level
subjects in science

0.567

0.120
(0.069)

0.125
(0.068)

0.601

0.209
(0.071)

0.209
(0.072)

0.040
(0.072)

0.025
(0.065)

-0.059
(0.072)

-0.039
(0.069)

Matriculation diploma that
meets university requirements

0.549

0.070
(0.045)

0.072
(0.046)

0.460

0.081
(0.044)

0.076
(0.045)

0.015
(0.039)

0.014
(0.043)

0.019
(0.041)

-0.009
(0.043)

Year effects

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

School Fixed Effects

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

School Time Trend

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Enrollment (2nd Poly.)

3

3

3

3

3

3

Individual Pupil Controls

3

3

3

3

3

3

3
215,442
280

3
209,696
280

3
210,925
270

3
214,884
278

3
205,349
270

3
208,864
278

Cohort Mean Controls
Number of students
Number of schools

215,442
280

215,442
280

209,696
280

209,696
280

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (columns 1 and 4), estimates for the effects of the proportion of female students in a grade on students achievement in high school (columns
2,3,5, and 6) and falsification tests using the proportion of female students of cohort in t-1 (columns 7 and 9) or in t+1 (columns 8 and 10). Proportion female is measured in 10th grade. Individual
controls include: both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, ethnic origin and indicators for missing values in these covariates. Cohort mean controls include students
individuals controls averaged by school and year. The regressions include school fixed effects and school specific linear time trends. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in
parenthesis.

Table 5. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on Enrollment in Advanced Math and Science Classes in High School
Main Results
Falsification Tests
Females
Males
Females
Outcome
means
(1)

Proportion female in the
cohort
(2)
(3)

Outcome
means
(4)

Proportion female in the
cohort
(5)
(6)

Males

Prop. female
in t-1
(7)

Prop. female
in t+1
(8)

Prop. female
in t-1
(9)

Prop. female
in t+1
(10)

Math

0.112

0.045
(0.023)

0.053
(0.022)

0.157

0.077
(0.029)

0.083
(0.029)

-0.002
(0.026)

-0.012
(0.026)

-0.063
(0.029)

-0.002
(0.030)

Physics

0.048

0.024
(0.018)

0.026
(0.018)

0.148

0.074
(0.031)

0.078
(0.032)

0.014
(0.016)

-0.013
(0.016)

0.004
(0.030)

-0.011
(0.027)

Computers

0.049

0.017
(0.021)

0.024
(0.021)

0.185

0.048
(0.045)

0.054
(0.045)

-0.020
(0.031)

-0.035
(0.035)

-0.016
(0.040)

-0.039
(0.050)

Biology

0.128

-0.010
(0.028)

-0.005
(0.028)

0.076

0.024
(0.021)

0.023
(0.021)

-0.013
(0.028)

0.033
(0.026)

0.007
(0.022)

-0.021
(0.023)

Chemistry

0.113

0.036
(0.027)

0.031
(0.027)

0.088

0.048
(0.024)

0.046
(0.024)

0.041
(0.030)

0.041
(0.024)

-0.017
(0.026)

0.001
(0.026)

Year effects

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

School Fixed Effects

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

School Time Trend

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Enrollment (2nd Poly.)

3

3

3

3

3

3

Individual Pupil Controls

3

3

3

3

3

3

3
215,442
280

3
209,696
280

3
210,925
270

3
214,884
278

3
205,349
270

3
208,864
278

Cohort Mean Controls
Number of students
Number of schools

215,442
280

215,442
280

209,696
280

209,696
280

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (columns 1 and 4), estimates for the effects of the proportion of female students in a grade on enrollment in advanced level subjects in math
and science in high school (columns 2,3,5, and 6) and falsification tests using the proportion of female students of cohort in t-1 (columns 7 and 9) or in t+1 (columns 8 and 10). Proportion female is
measured in 10th grade. Individual controls include: both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, ethnic origin and indicators for missing values in these covariates. Cohort
mean controls include students individuals controls averaged by school and year. The regressions include school fixed effects and school specific linear time trends. Robust standard errors clustered at
the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 6. Nonlinear Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on Matriculation Outcomes
and Enrollment in Advanced Math and Science Classes in High School
Quintile
Range
Mean
Median
Main matriculation outcomes
Average Score

Males
Females
II
III
IV
V
II
III
IV
V
0.439-0.499 0.499-0.539 0.539-0.584 0.584-1.000 0.439-0.499 0.499-0.539 0.539-0.584 0.584-1.000
0.473
0.519
0.559
0.648
0.473
0.519
0.559
0.648
0.477
0.519
0.558
0.628
0.477
0.519
0.558
0.628
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.065
(0.549)

-0.046
(0.593)

0.055
(0.598)

0.831
(0.651)

0.246
(0.467)

-0.214
(0.495)

0.545
(0.529)

1.379
(0.652)

Matriculation status

0.000
(0.009)

-0.004
(0.010)

0.002
(0.010)

0.017
(0.011)

0.005
(0.008)

-0.002
(0.008)

0.002
(0.009)

0.015
(0.011)

Number of credit units

0.128
(0.204)

0.191
(0.211)

0.165
(0.216)

0.452
(0.241)

0.091
(0.200)

-0.024
(0.198)

0.150
(0.211)

0.528
(0.264)

Number of advanced level
subjects in science

0.009
(0.015)

0.023
(0.017)

0.028
(0.017)

0.039
(0.019)

0.016
(0.014)

0.026
(0.015)

0.030
(0.015)

0.051
(0.020)

Matriculation diploma that
meets university requirements

-0.003
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.009)

0.000
(0.010)

0.014
(0.011)

0.001
(0.008)

-0.002
(0.009)

0.004
(0.009)

0.019
(0.011)

0.006
(0.007)

0.010
(0.007)

0.014
(0.007)

0.010
(0.007)

0.003
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

0.018
(0.007)

Physics

0.005
(0.005)

0.004
(0.005)

0.008
(0.005)

0.007
(0.006)

0.008
(0.005)

0.013
(0.005)

0.017
(0.006)

0.015
(0.008)

Computers

0.008
(0.005)

0.009
(0.007)

0.011
(0.006)

0.011
(0.006)

0.011
(0.008)

0.008
(0.009)

0.017
(0.009)

0.012
(0.011)

Biology

-0.006
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.000
(0.004)

0.003
(0.004)

0.007
(0.006)

Chemistry

0.005
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.008
(0.006)

0.016
(0.007)

0.005
(0.004)

0.008
(0.005)

0.005
(0.005)

0.016
(0.007)

Enrollment in advanced classes
Math

Notes: The table reports non-linear effects of the proportion of female students on main matriculation outcomes and students enrollment in advanced classes
in Math Science, and English. The model replaces the single treatment variable with a set of quintile indicators for the proportion of female students. The
omitted category is quintile I. The mean proportion female in quintile I is 0.309 and the median is 0.346. Descriptive statistics on the quintiles are reported
in table A2. The regressions control for students background characteristics and school time varying controls detailed in table 4. The regressions include
also school and year fixed effects and school specific linear time trends and control for a quadratic function of enrollment. Robust standard errors clustered
at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 7. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on Scholastic Outcomes in Elementary and Middle schools
5th grade

8th grade

Females

Females

Males

Males

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Math

0.366
(0.155)

0.366
(0.158)

0.218
(0.159)

0.126
(0.158)

0.773
(0.282)

0.778
(0.278)

0.360
(0.283)

0.483
(0.288)

Science and Technology

0.301
(0.169)

0.308
(0.170)

0.432
(0.167)

0.338
(0.166)

-0.088
(0.307)

0.071
(0.313)

-0.190
(0.329)

0.050
(0.350)

Hebrew

0.078
(0.148)

0.094
(0.150)

0.131
(0.157)

0.031
(0.158)

0.335
(0.249)

0.287
(0.261)

0.031
(0.326)

0.051
(0.333)

English

0.077
(0.172)

0.112
(0.173)

-0.088
(0.156)

-0.141
(0.156)

0.540
(0.229)

0.607
(0.234)

0.295
(0.260)

0.370
(0.273)

Average score in
Math and Science

0.350
(0.135)

0.343
(0.138)

0.310
(0.142)

0.212
(0.142)

0.327
(0.256)

0.428
(0.256)

0.123
(0.279)

0.307
(0.288)

Average score in
Hebrew and English

0.098
(0.132)

0.119
(0.134)

0.065
(0.132)

-0.024
(0.132)

0.390
(0.200)

0.401
(0.208)

0.174
(0.255)

0.213
(0.264)

Year effects

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

School Fixed Effects

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Enrollment (2nd Poly.)

3

3

Individual Pupil Controls

3

3

Number of students

3
56,288

56,288

3
57,527

57,527

52,551

52,551

53,042

53,042

Number of schools

999

999

999

999

389

389

389

389

Cohort Mean Controls

3
3

3
3

3

3

Notes: The table reports school fixed effects estimates for the effects of the proportion of female students in a grade on students standardized tests scores in
5th (columns 1-4) and 8th (columns 5-8) grade. Individual controls include: both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, ethnic
origin, and indicators for missing values in these covariates. Cohort mean controls include students individuals controls averaged by school and year.
Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 8. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on the Classroom Environment
Secular and religious elementary schools
th
th
(5 and 6 grades)
Outcome means
Females
Males
(1)
(2)

School fixed effects
Females
Males
(3)
(4)

Secular middle schools
th
th
(7 through 9 grades)
Outcome means
Females
Males
(5)
(6)

Full sample
th
th
(5 through 9 )

School fixed effects
Females
Males
(7)
(8)

School fixed effects
Females
Males
(9)
(10)

Classroom disruption and violence
1 Frequently the classroom is noisy and not
conducive to learning

4.772

4.807

-0.318
(0.112)

-0.202
(0.102)

4.957

4.883

-0.211
(0.146)

-0.297
(0.130)

-0.254
(0.089)

-0.218
(0.080)

2 There are many fights among students in

3.540

3.612

-0.707
(0.138)

-0.617
(0.136)

3.080

3.177

-0.594
(0.192)

-0.391
(0.191)

-0.669
(0.114)

-0.525
(0.111)

1.894

1.830

-0.328
(0.100)

-0.278
(0.092)

1.501

1.662

-0.175
(0.093)

-0.175
(0.124)

-0.247
(0.071)

-0.239
(0.075)

-0.332
(0.070)

-0.253
(0.060)

-0.266
(0.094)

-0.212
(0.081)

-0.302
(0.058)

-0.233
(0.049)

my classroom
3 Sometimes I'm scared to go to school

because there are violent students
Average effect

Inter-student relationships
4 I feel well adjusted socially in my class

5 Students in my class help each other

5.181

5.196

0.234
(0.079)

-0.020
(0.076)

5.149

5.072

0.368
(0.120)

0.312
(0.102)

0.293
(0.068)

0.097
(0.060)

4.560

4.421

0.391
(0.101)

0.146
(0.101)

4.152

3.854

0.506
(0.160)

0.588
(0.145)

0.440
(0.088)

0.316
(0.085)

0.260
(0.066)

0.048
(0.061)

0.360
(0.103)

0.336
(0.081)

0.302
(0.057)

0.155
(0.049)

Average effect

Teacher-student relationships
6 Students frequently talk back to teachers

3.969

4.026

-0.352
(0.143)

-0.370
(0.135)

4.490

4.364

-0.112
(0.166)

-0.173
(0.163)

-0.240
(0.109)

-0.282
(0.105)

4.523

4.392

0.098
(0.104)

0.262
(0.112)

3.792

3.640

0.235
(0.164)

0.410
(0.158)

0.153
(0.090)

0.326
(0.091)

4.530

4.345

0.178
(0.103)

0.190
(0.107)

3.765

3.601

and students

0.119
(0.163)

0.442
(0.152)

0.158
(0.088)

0.293
(0.088)

Average effect
(sign of item 6 is reversed)

0.161
(0.080)

0.199
(0.074)

0.128
(0.118)

0.251
(0.097)

0.146
(0.067)

0.220
(0.059)

7 There are good relationships between

teachers and students
8 There is mutual respect between teachers

Table 8. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on the Classroom Environment (cont.)
Secular middle schools
Secular and religious elementary schools
Outcome means
School fixed effects
Outcome means
School fixed effects
Females
Males
Females
Males
Females
Males
Females
Males
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Full sample
School fixed effects
Females
Males
(9)
(10)

School discipline
9 School emphasizes discipline

5.299

5.173

0.102
(0.078)

0.067
(0.080)

4.925

4.738

0.056
(0.129)

0.094
(0.157)

0.075
(0.068)

0.072
(0.077)

10 Students are frequently late or truant

3.870

4.034

-0.026
(0.113)

-0.049
(0.113)

4.395

4.420

-0.096
(0.155)

-0.097
(0.142)

-0.085
(0.091)

-0.073
(0.090)

0.063
(0.067)

0.047
(0.058)

0.065
(0.098)

0.073
(0.089)

0.070
(0.055)

0.057
(0.050)

Average effect
(sign of item 10 is reversed)
Students' satisfaction with school
11 Generally I feel good at school

5.272

5.037

0.153
(0.083)

0.109
(0.100)

5.014

4.695

0.259
(0.131)

0.492
(0.142)

0.196
(0.072)

0.242
(0.082)

Number of students

105,590

107,803

105,590

107,803

135,826

135,031

135,826

135,031

241,416

242,834

Number of schools

1,010

1,010

1,010

1,010

395

395

395

395

1,302

1,302

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (columns 1-2 and 5-6) and school fixed effects estimates for the proportion of female students on the classroom environment. The table also
reports the average effect for the outcomes included in each category. The regressions control for student background characteristics (both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration
status, ethnic origin and indicators for missing values in these covariates), cohort mean characteristics (students individuals controls averaged by school and year), a quadratic function of enrollment,
year and grade dummies, and school fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 9. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on the Pedagogical Environment (as Reported by Students)
Secular and religious
elementary schools
(5th and 6th grades)
Females
Males
(1)
(2)

Secular middle schools
(7th through 9th grades)
Females
Males
(3)
(4)

Full sample
(5th through 9th)
Females
Males
(5)
(6)

Teaching methods
0.066
(0.056)

0.072
(0.051)

0.022
(0.077)

0.165
(0.077)

0.042
(0.045)

0.102
(0.042)

0.114
(0.044)

0.033
(0.040)

0.038
(0.053)

0.084
(0.056)

0.072
(0.034)

0.050
(0.033)

0.148
(0.061)

0.059
(0.054)

0.043
(0.088)

0.050
(0.075)

0.099
(0.050)

0.048
(0.045)

4 Gives fair and efficient feedback

-0.043
(0.057)

0.022
(0.049)

-0.024
(0.079)

0.195
(0.070)

-0.043
(0.046)

0.087
(0.041)

5 Recognizes diversity, believes in students success,

0.018
(0.057)

0.015
(0.050)

-0.036
(0.082)

0.200
(0.069)

-0.008
(0.048)

0.082
(0.041)

Number of students

105,590

107,803

135,826

135,031

241,416

242,834

Number of schools

1,010

1,010

395

395

1,302

1,302

1 Emphasis on knowledge and enhancement of

comprehension
2 Emphasis on application, analysis and integration,

evaluation, and critical thinking
3 Development of capacity for independent study

Teachers behavior towards students

and provides help and support

Notes: The table reports the average effect for the outcomes included in each category. The list of the outcomes included in each category are reported in
Appendix 1. Regression estimates are from models that include the control variables specified in Table 8. Robust standard errors clustered at the school
level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 10. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on Teachers' Fatigue and Job Satisfaction

means
(s.d.)

Number of
teachers
(1)

Number of
schools
(2)

17,529

1,038

I feel burned-out
(3)

I feel that I have too
much workload
(4)

I am satisfied with my
work at school
(5)

2.564
(1.488)

4.180
(1.472)

5.456
(0.817)

A. Effects of the proportion of female students (grades 1st through 6th)
Full sample

17,529

1,038

-0.265
(0.188)

-0.017
(0.176)

0.006
(0.092)

Math & grammar teachers

16,837

1,037

-0.380
(0.193)

-0.039
(0.178)

0.032
(0.094)

1st through 4th grade teachers

10,611

1,030

-0.637
(0.244)

-0.180
(0.238)

-0.002
(0.117)

B. Within school associations with classroom environment (grades 5th and 6th)
Frequently the classroom is noisy
and not conducive to learning

6,844

1,001

0.238
(0.041)

0.054
(0.043)

-0.158
(0.022)

There are many fights among
students in my classroom

6,844

1,001

0.150
(0.030)

0.074
(0.031)

-0.091
(0.017)

Students frequently talk back to
teachers

6,844

1,001

0.190
(0.030)

0.056
(0.033)

-0.091
(0.017)

There are good relationships
between teachers and students

6,844

1,001

-0.332
(0.042)

-0.079
(0.041)

0.180
(0.023)

There is mutual respect between
teachers and students

6,844

1,001

-0.345
(0.043)

-0.087
(0.042)

0.179
(0.024)

Notes: Rows 1 and 2 report means and standard deviations of teachers responses on different aspects concerning their work at school. Panel A reports
the effects of the proportion of female students in a grade on teachers outcomes. Panel B reports within school associations between classroom
environment (as reported by the students) and teachers outcomes. Regression estimates are from models that include the control variables specified in
Table 8. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table 11. Estimates of the Effect of Proportion Female on Student's Behavior
Secular and religious elementary schools
(5th and 6th grades)
Outcome means
Females Males
(1)
(2)
Self-discipline
1 I understand well my teacher's scholastic requirements

School fixed effects
Females
Males
(3)
(4)

Full sample
(5th through 9th)

Secular middle schools
(7th through 9th grades)
Outcome means
Females Males
(5)
(6)

School fixed effects
Females
Males
(7)
(8)

School fixed effects
Females
Males
(9)
(10)

5.027

5.016

0.038
(0.067)

-0.081
(0.068)

4.810

4.749

0.024
(0.105)

0.109
(0.106)

0.048
(0.058)

-0.005
(0.058)

5.831

5.687

0.029
(0.033)

-0.047
(0.050)

5.638

5.426

0.024
(0.062)

0.070
(0.083)

0.035
(0.031)

-0.006
(0.044)

3 This year I was involved in many fights

1.490

2.372

0.169
(0.071)

0.296
(0.102)

1.316

2.082

-0.093
(0.079)

0.076
(0.136)

0.060
(0.053)

0.228
(0.082)

4 Sometimes the teachers treat me badly

2.680

2.946

0.150
(0.131)

0.143
(0.122)

2.989

3.189

0.251
(0.171)

-0.279
(0.169)

0.206
(0.104)

-0.019
(0.101)

5 When I have a problem at school there is always

5.031

4.790

-0.030
(0.107)

0.074
(0.111)

4.591

4.234

someone I can turn to (from the teaching staff)

-0.179
(0.171)

0.339
(0.179)

-0.080
(0.093)

0.173
(0.096)

Average effect
(signs of items 3,4 are reversed)

-0.037
(0.051)

-0.074
(0.049)

-0.022
(0.077)

0.098
(0.072)

-0.029
(0.043)

-0.009
(0.041)

2 I know what behavior is allowed or forbidden in

school

Study Efforts
6 Weekly hours spent on homework in Math

3.337

3.144

-0.004
(0.101)

0.004
(0.111)

3.201

2.886

0.144
(0.150)

0.106
(0.160)

0.086
(0.085)

0.056
(0.091)

7 Weekly hours spent on homework in Hebrew

2.546

2.371

-0.011
(0.110)

-0.010
(0.108)

1.970

1.812

0.140
(0.166)

0.099
(0.153)

0.049
(0.092)

0.006
(0.087)

8 Weekly hours spent on homework in English

3.213

2.947

-0.046
(0.110)

0.025
(0.117)

2.917

2.621

0.157
(0.153)

0.266
(0.166)

0.045
(0.089)

0.109
(0.095)

9 Weekly hours spent on homework in Science and

2.445

2.395

0.137
(0.110)

-0.030
(0.111)

1.927

1.893

0.015
(0.156)

-0.132
(0.164)

0.102
(0.092)

-0.078
(0.092)

0.014
(0.059)

-0.002
(0.058)

0.086
(0.083)

0.057
(0.081)

0.052
(0.049)

0.015
(0.047)

Technology
Average effect

Number of students

105,590

107,803

105,590

107,803

135,826

135,031

135,826

135,031

241,416

242,834

Number of schools

1,010

1,010

1,010

1,010

395

395

395

395

1,302

1,302

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (columns 1-2 and 5-6) and school fixed effects estimates for the proportion of female students on students self-reported behavior and study
efforts. Regression estimates are from models that include the control variables specified in Table 8. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Figure 1: Within School Standard Deviation in the Proportion of Female Students by School Size
0.35

A. Elementary Schools

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Average annual enrollment

0.25

A. Middle Schools

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

600

700

800

Average annual enrollment

0.20

C. High Schools

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
0

100

200

300

400

500

Average annual enrollment

Figure 2: Within School Standard Deviation in the Proportion of FemaleStudents by Town Size
0.35

A. Elementary Schools

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
-

50,000

100,000

150,000

200,000

250,000

200,000

250,000

Town Size

0.25

B. Middle Schools

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
-

50,000

100,000

150,000
Town Size

0.20

C. High Schools

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
-

50,000

100,000

150,000
Town Size

200,000

250,000

Figure 3. Monte Carlo Simulations for the within School Standard Deviation in the Proportion of Female Students
Elementary Schools
0.35

A. Actual within School Standard Deviation

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

160

180

200

Average annual enrollment

0.35

B. Simulated within School Standard Deviation

0.30
0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10
0.05

0.00

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Average annual enrollment
0.35

C. 90% Confidence Interval Placed over Actual Distribution

0.30
0.25
Actual

90% confidence interval

.

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Average annual enrollment

140

160

180

200

Table A1. Heterogeneous effects by School Size
Females

Outcome
Main matriculation outcomes
Average score

Full sample
School
fixed effects
(1)

Average enrollment
<200
Outcome
School
means
fixed effects
(2)
(3)

Average enrollment
≥200
Outcome
School
means fixed effects
(4)
(5)

Males

Full sample
School
fixed effects
(6)

Average enrollment
<200
Outcome
School
means fixed effects
(7)
(8)

Average enrollment
≥200
Outcome
School
means fixed effects
(9)
(10)

5.297
(2.178)

65.07

4.667
(3.265)

69.96

4.946
(2.919)

6.740
(2.656)

58.42

9.769
(3.935)

63.94

4.019
(3.448)

Matriculation status

0.087
(0.040)

0.540

0.071
(0.058)

0.638

0.081
(0.055)

0.054
(0.043)

0.435

0.032
(0.057)

0.543

0.082
(0.063)

Number of credit units

1.413
(0.849)

19.08

1.823
(1.184)

20.96

0.604
(1.193)

1.332
(1.025)

17.13

1.227
(1.348)

19.59

1.516
(1.457)

Number of advanced level
subjects in science

0.120
(0.069)

0.422

0.011
(0.080)

0.626

0.188
(0.108)

0.209
(0.071)

0.445

0.168
(0.076)

0.666

0.228
(0.113)

Matriculation diploma that
meets university requirements

0.070
(0.045)

0.468

0.055
(0.059)

0.582

0.061
(0.068)

0.081
(0.044)

0.377

0.054
(0.054)

0.495

0.112
(0.067)

0.045
(0.023)

0.080

0.042
(0.032)

0.125

0.047
(0.033)

0.077
(0.029)

0.110

0.067
(0.037)

0.177

0.089
(0.043)

Physics

0.024
(0.018)

0.031

-0.004
(0.020)

0.055

0.040
(0.028)

0.074
(0.031)

0.099

0.065
(0.032)

0.169

0.076
(0.050)

Computers

0.017
(0.021)

0.036

0.014
(0.026)

0.054

0.012
(0.034)

0.048
(0.045)

0.139

0.036
(0.043)

0.204

0.058
(0.075)

Biology

-0.010
(0.028)

0.106

-0.027
(0.033)

0.137

-0.002
(0.045)

0.024
(0.021)

0.068

0.028
(0.027)

0.079

0.015
(0.032)

Chemistry

0.036
(0.027)

0.078

-0.006
(0.034)

0.127

0.065
(0.042)

0.048
(0.024)

0.066

0.031
(0.028)

0.098

0.057
(0.038)

0.050
280
215,442

0.061
147
62,548

0.050
280
209,696

0.061
147
61,867

Enrollment in advanced classes
Math

Average SD(prop. female)
Number of schools
Number of students

0.039
133
152,894

0.039
133
147,829

Notes: The table reports heterogeneous by school size of effects of the proportion of female students on main matriculation outcomes and enrollment in advanced classes in math, science, and English.
The table also reproduces the estimates from the full sample reported in columns 2 and 5 of tables 4 and 5. The regressions control for students background characteristics and school time varying
controls detailed in table 4. The regressions include also school and year fixed effects and school specific linear time trends and control for a quadratic function of enrollment. Robust standard errors
clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table A2. Quintiles of the Proportion Female in High Schools
Quintile 1
Range
Mean
Median
Number of grades
Number of students

Quintile 2

Quintile 3

A. Summary Statistics
0.000-0.439 0.439-0.499 0.499-0.539
0.309
0.473
0.519
0.346
0.477
0.519
405
400
411
66,413
87,359
100,371

Quintile 4

Quintile 5

0.539-0.584
0.559
0.558
406
93,586

0.584-1.000
0.648
0.628
406
77,411

36
110
137
0

22
58
77
99
8

B. School Transitions Across Quintiles
Quintile 1
Quintile 2
Quintile 3
Quintile 4
Quintile 5

26

73
1

60
134
2

Note: Panel A reports the range, median, number of grades and number of students for each quintile. The
quintiles are defined based on the distribution of proportion female across schools in all years. The matrix
in panel B shows the transition of schools across quintiles. The elements of the diagonal report the number
of schools that appear in the same quintile during the whole period of interest. The elements of the offdiagonals report the number of schools that are observed both in quintile x and in quintile y. The sum of
observations across cells in panel B is larger than the total number of schools in the sample since schools
can be observed in multiple quintiles.

Table A3. Falsification Tests for the Proportion Female on the Classroom Environment
Secular and religious
elementary schools
Secular middle schools
Full sample
th
th
th
th
th
th
(5 and 6 grades)
(7 through 9 grades)
(5 through 9 )
Females
Males
Females
Males
Females
Males
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Classroom disruption and violence
1 Frequently the classroom is noisy and
0.061
0.094
0.000
0.064
0.038
0.098
(0.112)
(0.097)
(0.141)
(0.132)
(0.088)
(0.078)
not conducive to learning
0.430
(0.139)

0.217
(0.140)

-0.139
(0.193)

-0.026
(0.184)

0.194
(0.115)

0.136
(0.111)

0.118
(0.095)

-0.055
(0.089)

0.029
(0.102)

0.186
(0.115)

0.088
(0.071)

0.030
(0.069)

0.146
(0.069)

0.060
(0.059)

-0.025
(0.095)

0.059
(0.080)

0.082
(0.057)

0.064
(0.048)

-0.100
(0.084)

0.101
(0.076)

-0.101
(0.110)

-0.187
(0.105)

-0.080
(0.066)

-0.004
(0.061)

-0.271
(0.102)

-0.054
(0.101)

-0.065
(0.153)

-0.063
(0.149)

-0.172
(0.086)

-0.064
(0.084)

-0.155
(0.068)

0.020
(0.060)

-0.069
(0.098)

-0.098
(0.084)

-0.103
(0.056)

-0.025
(0.049)

0.118
(0.141)

0.058
(0.130)

-0.097
(0.167)

-0.057
(0.156)

0.040
(0.107)

0.039
(0.101)

-0.105
(0.107)

0.016
(0.108)

0.304
(0.153)

0.092
(0.159)

0.046
(0.087)

0.041
(0.091)

teachers and students

-0.121
(0.101)

0.014
(0.108)

0.215
(0.155)

0.072
(0.160)

0.013
(0.086)

0.037
(0.091)

Average effect
(sign of item 6 is reversed)

-0.092
(0.081)

-0.005
(0.073)

0.168
(0.112)

0.054
(0.098)

0.007
(0.066)

0.010
(0.059)

-0.205
(0.071)

0.016
(0.076)

0.135
(0.136)

-0.051
(0.138)

-0.075
(0.066)

-0.014
(0.068)

-0.076
(0.112)

-0.160
(0.110)

0.183
(0.158)

-0.003
(0.150)

-0.009
(0.090)

-0.103
(0.089)

-0.078
(0.063)

0.064
(0.057)

-0.012
(0.101)

-0.019
(0.084)

-0.033
(0.053)

0.032
(0.047)

0.025
(0.078)

0.107
(0.095)

0.114
(0.125)

-0.166
(0.134)

0.068
(0.067)

0.000
(0.078)

Number of students

105,376

107,573

131,389

130,539

236,765

238,112

Number of schools

1,008

1,008

384

384

1,301

1,301

2 There are many fights among students

in my classroom
3 Sometimes I'm scared to go to school

because there are violent students
Average effect
Inter-student relationships
4 I feel well adjusted socially in my class
5 Students in my class help each other

Average effect
Teacher-student relationships
6 Students frequently talk back to
teachers
7 There are good relationships between

teachers and students
8 There is mutual respect between

School discipline
9 School emphasizes discipline
10 Students are frequently late or truant

Average effect
(sign of item 10 is reversed)
Students' satisfaction with school
11 Generally I feel good at school

th
Notes: The table reports falsification tests for the outcomes reported in table 8. With the exception of 7 grade, the proportion of female students in
th
grade g was replaced with the proportion of female students in grade g-1. The proportion of female students in 7 grade was replaced with the
th
proportion of female students in 9 grade. Regression estimates are from models that include the control variables specified in Table 8. Robust
standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

Table A4. Falsification Tests for the Proportion Female on Student's Behavior
Secular and religious
elementary schools
(5th and 6th grades)

Secular middle schools
(7th through 9th grades)

Full sample
(5th through 9th)

Females
(1)

Males
(2)

Females
(3)

Males
(4)

Females
(5)

Males
(6)

-0.053
(0.066)

0.035
(0.065)

0.057
(0.107)

-0.026
(0.111)

0.003
(0.058)

0.025
(0.058)

-0.006
(0.032)

0.114
(0.047)

0.057
(0.069)

0.024
(0.089)

0.027
(0.032)

0.079
(0.043)

-0.037
(0.070)

-0.189
(0.105)

-0.061
(0.080)

0.156
(0.133)

-0.049
(0.052)

-0.052
(0.083)

-0.141
(0.121)

-0.182
(0.128)

-0.469
(0.164)

0.128
(0.164)

-0.249
(0.097)

-0.067
(0.102)

0.057
(0.094)

-0.052
(0.104)

0.331
(0.172)

-0.209
(0.176)

0.171
(0.086)

-0.097
(0.092)

0.020
(0.047)

0.077
(0.047)

0.147
(0.075)

-0.063
(0.069)

0.076
(0.040)

0.026
(0.039)

-0.143
(0.105)

-0.096
(0.103)

0.065
(0.157)

0.131
(0.161)

-0.019
(0.088)

0.003
(0.087)

-0.002
(0.111)

-0.194
(0.101)

-0.055
(0.156)

0.174
(0.163)

-0.024
(0.089)

-0.084
(0.087)

-0.077
(0.107)

-0.165
(0.109)

-0.059
(0.162)

-0.189
(0.157)

-0.035
(0.090)

-0.169
(0.088)

-0.084
(0.114)

-0.058
(0.111)

0.288
(0.162)

0.210
(0.166)

0.054
(0.093)

0.029
(0.093)

Average effect

-0.054
(0.061)

-0.086
(0.053)

0.045
(0.085)

0.061
(0.086)

-0.004
(0.050)

-0.037
(0.046)

Number of students

105,376

107,573

131,389

130,539

236,765

238,112

Number of schools

1,008

1,008

384

384

1,301

1,301

Self-discipline
1 I understand well my teacher's
scholastic requirements
2 I know what behavior is allowed or

forbidden in school
3 This year I was involved in many

fights
4 Sometimes the teachers treat me

badly
5 When I have a problem at school

there is always someone I can turn
to (from the teaching staff)
Average effect
(signs of items 3,4 are reversed)
Study Efforts
6 Weekly hours spent on homework
in Math
7 Weekly hours spent on homework

in Hebrew
8 Weekly hours spent on homework

in English
9 Weekly hours spent on homework

in Science and Technology

Notes: The table reports falsification tests for the outcomes reported in table 11. With the exception of 7th grade, the proportion of female students in
grade g was replaced with the proportion of female students in grade g-1. The proportion of female students in 7th grade was replaced with the
proportion of female students in 9th grade. Regression estimates are from models that include the control variables specified in table 8. Robust
standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parenthesis.

