                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EMPLOYMENT, INNOVATION, AND PRODUCTIVITY:
                       EVIDENCE FROM ITALIAN MICRODATA

                                           Bronwyn H. Hall
                                            Francesca Lotti
                                           Jacques Mairesse

                                         Working Paper 13296
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13296


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




We would like to thank the Mediocredito-Capitalia research department for having kindly supplied
firm level data for this project. We thank also an anonymous referee who provided insightful comments,
Bettina Peters, Massimo Sbracia, Roberto Torrini, Marco Vivarelli, and participants at the Schumpeter
Society Meetings (Nice, June 2006), the Bank of Italy (Rome, November 2006), Sant'anna School
of Advanced Studies (Pisa, February 2007), and at the Vth International Industrial Organization Conference
(Savannah, April 2007) for useful comments. B. H. Hall gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Ente Luigi Einaudi. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or those of the Bank of Italy.

© 2007 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Francesca Lotti, and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employment, Innovation, and Productivity: Evidence from Italian Microdata
Bronwyn H. Hall, Francesca Lotti, and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 13296
August 2007
JEL No. D24,J0,J20,L20,O30

                                                  ABSTRACT

Italian manufacturing firms have been losing ground with respect to many of their European competitors.
This paper presents some empirical evidence on the effects of innovation on employment growth and
therefore on firms' productivity with the goal of understanding the roots of such poor performance.
We use firm level data from the last three surveys on Italian manufacturing firms conducted by Mediocredito-Capitalia,
which cover the period 1995-2003. Using a slightly modified version of the model proposed by Harrison,
Jaumandreu, Mairesse and Peters (HJMP 2005), which separates employment growth rates into those
associated with old and new products, we find no evidence of significant employment displacement
effects stemming from process innovation. The sources of employment growth during the period are
split equally between the net contribution of product innovation and the net contribution from sales
growth of old products. However, the contribution of product innovation to employment growth is
somewhat lower than in the four European countries considered in HJMP 2005, and the contribution
of innovation in general to productivity growth is almost nil in Italy during this period.

Bronwyn H. Hall                                           Jacques Mairesse
Department of Economics                                   INSEE, CREST
549 Evans Hall                                            15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
UC Berkeley                                               92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                   FRANCE
and NBER                                                  and NBER
bhhall@nber.org                                           mairesse@ensae.fr

Francesca Lotti
Economic Research Department
Bank of Italy
via Nazionale 91
00184 Rome
ITALY
francesca.lotti@bancaditalia.it
1. Introduction
       Italian manufacturing firms have been losing ground with respect to many of
their European competitors. This weak performance is not entirely attributable to the
preponderance of traditional sectors in Italy, which are more exposed to competition
from emerging countries than the advanced sectors: not only do the traditional sectors
account for larger shares of employment than in other countries, but they also display
a significant positive productivity growth differential (see Lotti and Schivardi, 2005
and IMF, 2006). Also, many indicators of innovation activity, both in terms of input
and output, signal that the Italian economy is lagging behind. Can this lower
innovative activity account for slower productivity growth in Italian manufacturing?
       This paper presents some empirical evidence on the effects of innovation on
employment growth, and therefore on firms’ productivity, with the goal of
contributing to our understanding the roots of such poor performance. We use a
simple framework pioneered by Harrison, Jaumandreu, Mairesse and Peters (2005,
henceforth HJMP 2005) to disentangle the effects of innovation on employment and
productivity growth applied to a panel of nearly 9,500 Italian firms observed over a
nine year period (1995-2003). These data come from the last three surveys of Italian
manufacturing firms conducted by Mediocredito-Capitalia (hereafter MCC), covering
the period 1995-2003. These surveys contain balance sheets items and, more
importantly, qualitative information on firm characteristics, with a focus on
innovation activities.
       Using instrumental variable regressions to correct for the endogeneity of our
innovation measures, we provide evidence that there is no significant employment
displacement effects stemming from process innovation, and therefore no productivity
growth associated with such innovation for our firms during the study period. We also
show that product innovation contributes about half the employment growth, while
sales expansion of old products accounts for the other half, in spite of some efficiency
gain in their production. Correspondingly, we find almost no contribution to
productivity growth from product innovation per se, leaving all productivity growth to
be accounted for by the industry specific trends in productivity.
       In the next section of the paper we discuss prior empirical evidence on
innovation and employment growth. We then present the model we use for estimation,


                                               2
and discuss measurement issues raised by the data that are available to us. This is
followed by a presentation of the data and the results of estimating the model on our
samples of firms. In the final sections of the paper we compare our results to those of
HJMP 2005 for France, Germany, Spain, and the U.K. and draw some conclusions.


2. Theoretical and empirical underpinnings
        The debate about the impact of technological change on employment is an old
one (Jean-Baptiste Say, 1803; 1964 edition); since that time, scholars have been trying
to disentangle the displacement and compensation effects of innovation both from a
theoretical and an empirical point of view, often pointing out the different
implications of process and product innovation. In theory, other things equal, the
introduction of new or significantly improved products increases demand for
innovating firms, and therefore also their employment levels. However, innovating
firms, enjoying temporary market power, may set profit-maximizing prices and
reduce output enough so that the net effect on employment after substitution to the
new good can be negative. On the other hand, even though process innovation is
typically labor-saving, its effect on employment is not straightforward. If the same
output can be made with fewer workers, the firm can share this efficiency gain with
the consumers via lower prices, thereby increasing demand. Depending on market
structure, the demand elasticity, and the elasticity of substitution between capital and
labor, compensation mechanisms can counterbalance the labor saving effect of
process innovation (for a detailed survey on these compensation mechanisms, see
Spiezia and Vivarelli, 2002).
         Empirically, the identification of displacement and compensation effects is
particularly difficult, because firms are often involved in product and process
innovation together. Nevertheless, the empirical literature on the effects of innovation
on employment has made significant progress since the 1990s, when micro-economic
data on individual firms began to be widely available and econometric techniques
applicable to such data have been developed to take care of selectivity and
endogeneity problems.1
        While there is a widespread consensus in this literature on the positive impact

1
 See for surveys Van Reenen (1997), Hall and Kramarz (1998), Vivarelli and Pianta (2000), Chennels
and Van Reenen (2002), Lachenmaier and Rottmann (2006).

                                                    3
of product innovation on employment at the firm-level, the evidence about process
innovation is less clear-cut. Using cross-sectional data for Germany, Zimmermann
(1991) finds that technological progress was responsible for the fall of employment
during the 1980s, while Entorf and Pohlmeier (1990) find no significant effects.
Based on a series of surveys, Brouwer et al. (1993) find a positive effect for product
innovation on employment growth for the Netherlands in the 1980s, but a negative
one for overall innovation (as measured by total R&D expenditures). Using the
Community Innovation Survey (CIS) data for Germany, Peters (2004) finds a
significantly positive impact of product innovation on employment, and a negative
one for process innovation. In contrast, Blechinger et al. (1998) support the evidence
of a positive relationship between both product and process innovation and
employment growth in the Netherlands and in Germany. Blanchflower and Burgess
(1998) and Doms et al. (1995) find positive impacts of process innovation on
employment growth, respectively in Australia and the U.K., and in the U.S., whereas
the study by Klette and Forre (1998) does not show any clear relation between
innovation and employment in Norway. Greenan and Guellec (2000), combining
firm-level panel data with innovation surveys, observe that innovating firms (and
industries) have created more jobs than non-innovating ones. Piva and Vivarelli
(2005), build a balanced panel of 575 Italian Manufacturing firms based on different
surveys by Mediocredito-Capitalia for the period 1992-1997, and estimate a small but
significantly positive relation between innovative investment and employment. They
do not rely, however, on the usual classification of innovation in product and process,
but instead consider a measure of investment in new innovative equipment, proxying
for embodied technological change and thus close to an indicator of process
innovation. Finally, the paper by HJMP 2005, which we follow here, uses CIS3 data
(1998-2000) for France, Germany, U.K., and Spain. The authors find that although
process innovation displaces employment, compensation effects from product
innovation dominate in the four countries, albeit with some differences between
them.2
           Summarizing the results of this large set of firm-level studies, most of them
have found positive effects of product innovation on employment, but mixed evidence


2
    A comparison of our results with those in HJMP 2005 is presented in Section 5.



                                                         4
for process innovation. The net impacts of process innovation seem positive in the
U.S. and Australia, but small and negative in European countries. Summing up, the
overall effects of innovation on employment appear to be generally positive at the
firm level in developed economies.


3. A model of innovation and employment

3.1 Theoretical framework

        The framework presented here is a variation of the one described in the paper
by HJMP 2005, which is specifically tailored for the type of innovation data available
to us. In this framework, a firm produces two kinds of products in period t : old or
only marginally modified products (“old products”, denoted Y1t ) and new or

significantly improved products (“new products”, Y2t ). Firms are observed for two
periods, t = 1 and t = 2 and innovation occurs between the two periods (if it occurs at
all). Therefore by definition, in the first period, only old products ( Y11 ) are available,

so that Y21 = 0 .
        We assume that the production functions for old and new products are
separable with both having constant returns to scale in capital, labor and intermediate
inputs. We also assume that they are identical except for a Hicks neutral efficiency
parameter, which can depend on firms’ investments in process innovation. New
products can be made with higher or lower efficiency with respect to old products.
        We can thus write the firm’s production function for a product of type i in
period t as:
                             Yit = θit F ( K it , Lit , M it ) ,   i = 1, 2; t = 1, 2.            (1)


where θ represents efficiency, K , L and M stand for capital, labor and materials,
respectively.3 Or, assuming cost minimization, we can write the firm’s cost function
as the following:


3
 Actually, we do not have capital and materials in our data, and have to omit these two factors in our
implementation of the model. This amounts to using labor productivity instead of total factor
productivity (TFP), and assuming that within industry firm annual growth in capital and materials use
is equal to that in labor (i.e., equal once we control for industry and year).



                                                              5
                                                                                 Y1t                 Y2t
                      C ( w1t , w2 t , Y1t , Y2 t ,θ1t ,θ 2 t ) = c ( w1t )            + c ( w2t )          +F             (2)
                                                                                 θ1t                 θ 2t


where the marginal cost c ( w ) is a function of the factors price vector w , and F

represents fixed costs. According to Shephard’s Lemma, we also have:


                                                                           Yit
                                                    Lit = cL ( wit )                                                       (3)
                                                                           θit

where cL ( wit ) represents the derivative of the marginal cost with respect to the wage.

        The employment growth from period t = 1 to period t = 2 can be decomposed
                   L12 − L11
in two terms:                , the contribution to growth from the old products and
                      L11

L22 − L21 L22                                           4
         =     , the contribution from the new products. We can therefore write it as
   L11     L11
follows:


                                                  ∆L L12 − L11 L22
                                                     =        +                                                            (4)
                                                   L    L11     L11


or, using equation (3),

                 ∆L  c ( w ) Y / θ − c ( w ) Y / θ  c ( w ) Y / θ
                   =          L      12     12
                                                    +
                                                    12       L        11         11     11           L      22   22   22


                  L          c ( w )Y /θ     L      c ( w )Y / θ
                                                     11     11     11                                 L     11   11   11




        Assuming that the derivative of the marginal cost with respect to wage does
not change over time, and is equal for old and new products, that is
cL ( w11 ) = cL ( w12 ) = cL ( w21 ) = cL ( w22 ) , we can show that the following holds

approximately:



4
 When both old and new products exist in both periods the overall growth rate of employment can be
expressed as the share-weighted sum of growth rates in the two products. The present decomposition
(4) is an extension of this formula, when the new products only exist in the second period and old
products are produced (more or less efficiently) in the two periods.


                                                                  6
                ∆L       θ −θ   Y −Y  θ Y
                     ≅ −   12
                               +
                                      11
                                        +
                                                 12        11   11   22
                                                                          (5)
                 L        θ   Y  θ Y
                                 11                   11        22   11




       According to equation (5), employment growth is determined by three terms.
The first is the rate of change in efficiency in the production of old products: it is
expected to be larger for those firms that introduce process innovations related to old
product production. The second term is the growth of old product production, and the
third is the labor increase from expansion in production due to the introduction of new
products or the effect of product innovation on employment growth. This effect
depends on the relative efficiency θ11/θ22 of the production processes of old and new
products. If new products are made more efficiently than old ones, this ratio is less
than unity, and employment does not grow at the same pace as the output growth
accounted for by new products.

3.2 Estimation strategy

       Equation (5) implies the following estimation equation:


                                           l = α 0 + y1 + β y2 + u              (6)


where l is the growth rate of employment between t = 1 and t = 2 , y1 is the

contribution of old products to output growth  12Y 11  , y2 is the contribution of new
                                                Y −Y
                                                11 

products to output growth  Y22  , and u is a random disturbance expected to have
                             Y
                            11 
zero mean conditional to a suitable set of instruments. In this specification, the
parameter α0 represents the negative of the average efficiency growth in the
production of the old product (i.e., labor productivity growth), while the parameter β
measures the marginal cost in efficiency units of producing new products relative to
that for old products. If β is equal to unity, efficiency in the production of old and new
products is the same; if β<1, new products are produced more efficiently.
       Process innovation can change the efficiency of producing both old and new
products and equation (6) can be easily modified to take this into account as follows:




                                                           7
                          l = (α 0 + α1d1 ) + y1 + ( β 0 + β1d 2 ) y2 + u   (7)


where d1 and d 2 are dummy variables which take value one if the firm introduced
process innovation related to the production of old and new products respectively.
Because it is impossible to know from the survey what share of its process innovation
the firm devotes to new versus old products, in the empirical exercise we experiment
with different alternatives of equation (7) (see Table 4), and we end up choosing as
our preferred equation the following alternative:


                               l = α 0 + α1 d3 + y1 + β y2 + u                    (8)


where d3 is a dummy variable for process innovation only (i.e., d 3 = ( d1 ) (1 − d 2 ) .

        Despite its simplicity, equation (8) captures two effects of innovation. First,
the variable y2 allows us to identify the gross effect of product innovation on
employment. Second, the dummy for process innovation only allows us to identify
directly the productivity (or displacement) effect of process innovation on
employment. It is worth noting also that the variable y1 is affected by three different
forces: (1) “autonomous” variation in the demand of old products, due to exogenous
market conditions; (2) a “compensation” effect induced by a price changes in old
products following process innovation; and (3) a “substitution” effect stemming from
the introduction of new products. The latter two effects are expected to be
respectively positive and negative respectively for growth in old product sales.
Unfortunately, without additional data on the demand side, it is impossible to
disentangle these three effects.
        By simply by rearranging terms, we can rewrite equation (8) as a labor
productivity equation:


                            y − l = y1 + y2 − l = −α 0 − α1 d1 − (1 − β ) y2 − u            (9)


which is helpful in interpreting the magnitude and the sign of the estimated
coefficients (the dependent variable is the growth of real output per worker). We will
use equation (8) later in the paper to provide a decomposition of the sources of
employment growth, and equation (9) to show the corresponding decomposition in

                                                      8
terms of productivity growth.

3.3 Measurement issues

        In order to estimate equation (6) (and equations 7 to 9 as well), we must
approximate real production ( Y1 and Y2 ) with nominal sales, and this creates a
measurement problem, since we do not observe production price changes at the firm
level, and since both firm output and prices are affected by movements in demand. It
is also the case that old and new products’ prices do not necessarily have the same
patterns of change and that they will probably remain unknown to us, even if firm
price changes for total output were available. Furthermore, it is likely that price
changes for new goods will not be adjusted for quality changes as they should be in
principle for an appropriate measure of firm real output growth. In this sub-section of
the paper we show that using nominal sales growth instead of real output growth in
our equation implies that the coefficient of growth due to new products combines two
effects: the relative efficiency of producing the new and old products and their
relative price, which reflects in part their relative quality differences.
        By definition, the nominal and real growth rates of sales of old products g1

and y1 and the corresponding growth rate of prices π 1 are related as follows:


                 P12Y12 − P11Y11           P12 − P11                                 (1 + g1 )
          g1 =                      π1 =                   implying    (1 + y1 ) =                (10)
                     P11Y11                   P11                                    (1 + π 1 )


For π 1 and/or y1 not too large we can approximate y1 as ( g1 − π 1 ) .

        In accordance with the definition of the “growth rates” of sales in new
products (see footnote 4 above), we define the “growth rate” in their prices π 2 as the
difference in the prices of the new products with respect to the old products, that is:


                     P22Y22               P22 − P11                             g
             g2 =                  π2 =                     implying   y2 = (1+π2 )           (11)
                     P11Y11                  P11                                 2



        Substituting g1 and g 2 for y1 and y2 , which are not observable, equation (6)
thus becomes the following:


                                                       9
                                                            g2
                              l − ( g1 − π 1 ) = α 0 + β         +u              (12)
                                                           1+ π2


       Unfortunately equation (12) is still not suitable for estimation, because neither
π 1 nor π 2 are available. What is known are industry-level price indices P1 and P2 in
the two periods, where in the second period the price index P2 is in fact some

unknown weighted average of old and new product price indices P12 and P22 .

Expressing the latter in terms of the former, so that                        P21 = (1 + ϕ1 ) P2 and

P22 = (1 + ϕ 2 ) P2 , we obtain that the growth rates of old and new prices π 1 and π 2 are

respectively related to the industry price growth rate π as follows:


                      π 1 = π + ϕ1 (1 + π ) and π 2 = π + ϕ 2 (1 + π ) (13)


where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the percent differences, varying across firms, between the
unobserved “true” prices of the old and new products and the observed industry
price.. We have used as proxies for π the two digit industry price growth rates
available from the statistical agency, which probably do not fully adjust for all the
quality changes between the periods.
       Replacing π 1 and π 2 by π , our estimating equation (12) thus becomes
approximately:


                                             β      g2
                 l − ( g1 − π ) ≅ α 0 +                  + u − ϕ1 (1 + π )       (14)
                                          1 + ϕ2 (1 + π ) 

where (1 + ϕ2 ) is an average ratio of the quality-adjusted price of the new products to

the share-weighted price of old and new products.
       This equation expresses the growth in employment relative to the real output
growth in old products as a function of the growth in real new products, where real
output in old and new products are measured by deflating the corresponding nominal
sales by overall industry level price indices. It shows two important differences with
equation (12). First, the coefficient of the new product term is not β , the relative



                                                     10
efficiency of producing new versus old products, but β divided by (1 + ϕ2 ) . If there

is substantial (measured) quality improvement in the new product whose cost is
passed on to consumers, leading to higher “effective” prices, ϕ2 will be greater than
zero and the pass-through from its sales growth to labor growth will be moderated
relative to the case of little quality change. On the other hand, if quality improvement
leads to lower “effective” prices, ϕ2 will be less than zero, and new product sales will
have an enhancing effect on labor growth.
        This interpretation is similar to that given by Griliches and Mairesse (1984)
for their “semi-reduced form” estimates of an extended production function with both
physical and R&D capital stocks: R&D can either improve efficiency (declines in β )
or quality (increases in ϕ2 ). Without good information on quality-adjusted prices we
cannot separate the two effects.
        The second difference in equation (14) is in the component ϕ1 (1 + π ) in the

disturbance, which is another likely source of endogeneity into the equation, beyond
that due to the simultaneous choice by the firm of its output and labor input. This
should, however, remain a minor problem, since old products make up a large share
of sales on average, implying that ϕ1 is small.


4. The data

        The data we use come from the 7th , 8th , and 9th waves of the “Survey on
Manufacturing Firms” conducted by Mediocredito Capitalia (MCC). These three
surveys were carried out in 1998, 2001, and 2004 using questionnaires administered
to a representative sample of Italian manufacturing firms. Each survey covered the
three years immediately prior (1995-1997, 1998-2000, 2001-2003) and although the
survey questionnaires were not identical in all three of the surveys, they were very
similar. All firms with more than 500 employees were included, whereas smaller
firms were selected using a sampling design stratified by geographical area, industry,
and firm size. We merged the data from these three surveys, excluding firms with
incomplete information or with extreme observations for the variables of interest.5


5
 We required sales per employee between 2000 and 10 million euros, growth rates of employment and
sales of old and new products between -150 per cent and 150 per cent, and R&D employment share

                                                   11
Our final sample is an unbalanced panel of 12,948 observations on 9,462 firms, of
which only 608 are present in all three waves.6 Details on the variable construction
are given in the Appendix.
           Equations (12) and (14) require measures of g1 and g2, the sales growth
attributed to old and new products respectively. In fact, we have in the three surveys
g, the growth of nominal sales during the three year periods of the surveys (i.e., 1995-
1997, 1998-2000, 2001-2003), and s, the share of sales in the last year of the surveys
(i.e., 1997, 2000, 2003) that are due to new products introduced during their three
year periods or substantially improved during these periods. Given the definitions of
g1 and g2 [see (9) and (10)], we directly derive their expression in terms of g and s. 7
We thus obtain:


                            g1 = (1 − s ) g − s        and         g 2 = s (1 + g )     (15)


Note that these two “growth rates” sum to g directly, without share weighting, so that
they can be interpreted as the contribution to growth from the two sources. Note that
g2 is either null (if s = 0) or positive (if s > 0), but cannot be negative, and is not a rate
of growth stricto sensu (see footnote 4).
           Table 1 shows simple statistics for the unbalanced sample, both separately for
the three periods and pooled together, as well as for the pooled balanced panel. In the
appendix, Table A1 gives also these statistics for various other subsets of the
unbalanced sample: R&D-doing firms only, innovating firms only, and firms in high
and low technology sectors.8


less than 100 per cent. We also replaced R&D employment share with the R&D to sales ratio for the
few observations where it was missing.
6
  In an earlier version of this paper we have used a balanced panel of 466 firms. The results found for
this sample and those presented here for the much larger unbalanced panel are very similar.
7
 More precisely g, the rate of change of firm sales between period t=1 and t=2, and s, the share of new
products in total firm sales of period t=2, being respectively
                         Y22 P22 + Y12 P12 − Y11 P11                          Y22 P22
                    g=                                   and        s=                     ,
                                   Y11 P11                               Y22 P22 + Y12 P12
we see easily that the sales growth due to new products and the sales growth due to old products are the
following:
                        Y22 P22
                 g2 =           = s(1 + g )        and        g1 = g − g 2 = (1 − s ) g − s .
                        Y11 P11
8
    “Innovating” firms are those that do some process and/or product innovation, as defined in the survey

                                                         12
                                     [Table 1 about here]


        From Table 1, one can see that overall the three surveys the median firm has
33 employees and sales of 154,000 euros per employee; and that about 40 per cent of
firms perform R&D while 60 per cent innovate, either in processes or products. Firms
in the balanced panel are slightly larger, with median employment of 38, and the
proportion of those doing R&D is higher (60%), while the proportion of innovating
firms is about the same, with more of them reporting product innovation and fewer
reporting process innovation only. Sales growth slowed considerably in the last three
year survey period (2001-2003), as compared to the first and middle periods (1998-
2000 and 1995-1997): from 8.7% and 7.6% down to 0.5%. Since the growth in
employment fell between the first and middle survey periods but not between the
middle and last periods, there is an acceleration of labor productivity between the first
two periods and an even more striking deceleration between the last two: respectively
from 2.5% up to 6.2%, and from 6.2% down to -1.6%. Note that the share s of new
products in total sales (or share on innovative sales) is relatively small: about 5.5% in
the first survey period and nearly10% in the two other ones.
        Table A1 in the appendix shows that R&D-doing firms are in average slightly
larger than innovating firms, themselves larger than the other firms. About 50 per cent
of the innovating firms do R&D, while about 80 percent of the R&D-doing firms
innovate.. R&D intensity of the R&D-doing firms among the innovating firms is
higher than that of the R&D-doing firms overall (2.35% versus 1.8%). Although
substantially fewer firms do R&D in low-tech industries than in the high-tech
industries (34% versus 59%), only slightly fewer innovate (56% versus 67%).


5. Results

5.1 Main estimates and variants

        Our main estimates of equations (12) and (14) using instrumental variables to
correct for possible simultaneity and measurement biases, and by ordinary least


questionnaire.


                                               13
squares (OLS) for comparison, are given in Tables 3 and 4. However, before
discussing these estimates, it is instructive to begin by presenting the OLS estimates
of simple descriptive regressions of the three-year employment growth l on the three-
year real sales growth g and on three dummies for innovation in these periods: process
innovation only, product innovation only, and both process and product innovation.
These estimates are shown in Table 2, first for the three survey periods separately, and
then pooled over these three periods, but with separate intercepts for each of them.
Tests of slope and dummy coefficient equality over time are generally accepted. We
have included industry dummies at the two digit level (i.e. at the same level as the
industry price deflators π ) in all the regressions. As we are interested in preserving
the value of the intercept, we apply a linear constraint to the dummies so that the
estimated sum of their coefficients is equal to zero (Suits 1957) and include an
intercept, which therefore corresponds to the overall mean effect.


                                     [Table 2 about here]


       The coefficient of real sales growth in this simple regression is always
significant and well below unity, implying that for non-innovating firms, employment
growth is substantially dampened relative to the growth of real sales. However, the
growth rate of employment for innovating firms is much higher. With the exception of
process innovation in the first survey period, the coefficients of all three innovation
dummies are positive and increasing over the three periods, although only the
process-product dummy is always significantly different from zero.
       For the pooled estimates, if sales growth increases by one per cent, non-
innovators’ employment increases by about 0.25 per cent. However, firms that
introduce new processes but not new products have an average growth of employment
that is 0.60 per cent higher than non-innovating firms whereas firms that introduce
new products without new processes have an average growth of employment that is
about one per cent higher. Those that innovate in both ways have a growth of
employment about two per cent higher, which is about one third higher than the sum
of the two separate effects, suggesting some form of complementarity. Clearly
innovation is associated with increases in employment. However, all these OLS
estimates are likely to be downward biased because of simultaneity between the
output and labor growth rates variables and because of measurement errors, due in

                                              14
particular to the lack of output price indices at the firm level (see previous sub-section
3.3).
        Table 3 presents both OLS and Instrumental Variable (IV) estimates of
equation (14), in the same format as in Table 2, but where now the employment
growth rate minus the growth rate of the deflated sales due to old products (l-g1+π) is
the left hand side variable and the growth rate of deflated sales due to new products
(g2/(1+π)) is a right hand side variable.. The instruments for sales growth due to new
products are a dummy variable for positive R&D expenditures in the last year of the
three year survey period, the same dummy lagged one year (in the middle year of the
survey period), the R&D employment intensity in the last year of the survey period,
and a dummy variable for whether the firm assigned high or medium importance to
developing a new product as the goal of its investment. The coefficient of the sales
growth due to new products estimated by IV are not significantly different from one,
implying that no significant differences exist between the efficiency levels of
production of old and new products. Note that they are close to those estimated by
OLS but much less precise as expected. The negative of the constant term gives an
estimate of the average productivity growth for the old products: 4.0% from 1995 to
1997, 5.8% from 1998 to 2000, and -1.7% from 2001 to 2003. These values are close
to what we see in Table 1 for the average productivity growth for all products, which
is not surprising since the average share of old products in sales is more than 90 per
cent.


                                     [Table 3 about here]


        In Table 4 we consider three specifications of equation (14) trying to take into
account process innovation, (as proposed in equation (7) in sub-section 3.2). It should
be kept in mind that we have only a binary indicator for process innovation in the
survey, and thus we cannot quantify how important such innovation is nor can we
know how much applies to the production of old products, new products, or both. In
the upper panel of Table 4, we give the estimates for the simplest (and our preferred)
specification, in which we include a dummy for process innovation only (i.e., only for
firms with no product innovation), thus not trying to disentangle the effects of process
and product innovations in the case of new products. In this specification, a negative
coefficient for “process innovation only” indicates an increase in the productivity of

                                               15
manufacturing the old products and a displacement of employment. The estimates are
indeed negative (except for the middle survey period), but rather small and not
statistically significant (except for the all years sample at a 10% confidence level),
implying no impact, or a small one, on productivity, and little or no displacement
effects.


                                         [Table 4 about here]


           In the middle panel of Table 4 we include in the specification an additional
dummy for product and process innovation together, while in the lower panel we
include another variable which interacts the sales growth variable due to new products
with the process innovation dummy. In a sense we are trying to separate two extreme
cases, assuming in the middle panel specification that process innovation of product
innovators can be fully attributed to old products, and in the lower panel specification
that it is fully attributed to new products. Of course, the truth probably lies somewhere
in between these two extreme cases. The results are disappointing and do not add
much compared to the first panel: the only variable that is significantly related to
employment growth throughout the three survey periods is the growth of sales of new
products, with a coefficient of unity.
           Thus the main conclusion from Table 4 is that there is no difference in the
efficiency with which old and new products are produced, although firms that
introduce process innovations do experience a slight increase in labor productivity
during the whole period that is not related to sales growth (either of old or new
products). In these specifications, the constant term (the estimate of the average
productivity growth of the old products) displays the same pattern as in Table 3,
showing that non-innovators did lose employment on average between 1995 and
2003.
           Tables A2a and A2b in the appendix show the OLS and IV estimates of our
preferred specification with the dummy for process innovation only (the first panel)
for high-tech and low-tech industries separately. We see that the productivity
slowdown in the last survey period (2001-2003) as compared to the first period (1995-
1997) occurred about equally in the high tech and low tech industries, but the
productivity gain during the middle (1998-2000) period was much higher in the low-
tech sector than in the high-tech sector. We also note that unlike what we observe for

                                                 16
manufacturing as a whole, the high tech sector exhibits evidence either of greater
efficiency in producing new products ( β < 1 ) or quality increases that are passed on
to consumers in the form of higher prices for new products ( ϕ2 > 0 ), or both.


5.2     A simple (but effective) employment growth decomposition

        Another way to summarize our results is to consider the following
decomposition of employment growth into several components:


  
  
         ∑j αˆ0 + αˆ 0 j  Dind j +       due to specific productivity trend in old products;
  
                   αˆ1 d +                         due to process innovation in old products;
   1 − 1( g > 0 )  ( g − πˆ ) +                  due to output growth of old products;
l=              2         1
                                   g 
  1( g 2 > 0 )  g1 − πˆ + βˆ 2  +           due to product innovation (net of substitution);
                                 1 + πˆ 
                      uˆ                                zero sum residual component.
  

where the α̂ s and β̂ s are the estimated coefficients of our preferred specification (in
the first panel of Table 4), Dindj are the industry dummies, and d the dummy variable
for process innovation only.
        For each firm, the first component accounts for the industry-specific
productivity trend in the production of old products, and the second for the change in
employment due to the net effect of process innovation in the production of old
products. The third component is the change due to output growth of old products for
the non product innovating firms. The fourth is the net contribution to employment
growth of product innovation (for the product innovating firms), after adjustment for
any substitution effect of old and new products. The last component is a zero-mean
residual.
        The results of this decomposition for all industries are reported in the upper
panel of Table 5, for each survey period separately and then pooled. In the last two
columns of this table, we also show the standard deviation of the estimated
components across the pooled sample as well as the average standard error of the
estimates, averaged across firms.9


        9
            For example, the standard error of a component such as f (γˆ, x) is computed for each firm


                                                      17
                                            [Table 5 about here]


         Focusing the discussion on the pooled analysis, we see that the average
employment growth during the nine years 1993 to 2001 was of 3.2 per cent, of which
about half (1.7%) is accounted for by new product innovations, net of the induced
substitution away from old products, and the remainder (1.5%) by growth in the
production of old products, net of any productivity gain. Process improvements in the
firms producing old products reduce employment by a very small amount (-0.2%)
whereas changes attributable to the industry-specific productivity trends in these firms
are larger (-2.3%). These productivity enhancing effects are completely cancelled by
the even larger increase (4.0%) in employment associated with the output growth of
these firms.
         Looking at the standard errors, we see that the employment growth
contributions of sales growth, either for old or new products, are significantly
positive, whereas the average industry specific trend contribution is significantly
negative. However perhaps the most noteworthy result is the substantial heterogeneity
in observed employment growth (standard deviation of 15.6%) and the fact that
heterogeneity in unexplained employment growth (the residual) is increased (23.2%)
rather than reduced.

5.3 Productivity growth decomposition

         In order to examine the impact of innovation on productivity growth more
closely, an alternative decomposition of our estimating equation is useful, one which
put (measured) real labor productivity on the left hand side, rather than employment:




by the so-called delta method and then averaged across firms, and its standard deviation is simply the
standard deviation of f (γˆ, x) computed across the observations.


                                                       18
               −∑ (αˆ 0 + αˆ 0 j ) Dind j   ind-specific productivity trend in old products
                j
               −αˆ d                        due to process innovation in old products
                1
  g − πˆ − l =          ˆ
               +(1 − β ) g                  due to product innovation (net of substitution)
                     1 + πˆ
                                2

               −uˆ
                                            zero sum residual component


The first two terms in this decomposition are simply the negative of the contributions
to employment growth. That is, for old products, increases in labor productivity
translate one for one into decreases in employment. The third term is the contribution
of product innovation (including any accompanying process innovation) to labor
productivity growth.
        The results of this decomposition are shown in the bottom panel of Table 5.
For the three survey periods as a whole, average productivity growth was 2.5 per cent,
and most of this growth was accounted for by improvements in the production of old
products that were not related to innovation. Process innovation in producing old
products and product innovation both have a very small positive impact, so the net
impact of innovation on productivity growth in Italian firms during the 1994-2003
decade is effectively zero. The individual three year periods show variable patterns,
with some effect of process innovation on productivity growth in the first period and
of product innovation in the second. However, this positive impact of product
innovation is almost entirely cancelled by a negative one in the third period.
        The conclusion is that the slowdown in productivity of Italian manufacturing
firms during the 2000-2003 period relative to the 1997-2000 period (a difference of
about -7.8 per cent) is due mainly to overall trends in productivity that are not
associated with innovation. The decrease in productivity growth that can be imputed
to product innovation account for about 1.2 per cent only of this slowdown. Note,
however, that if the new products had true quality-adjusted prices that were lower
than the prices of old products, true productivity for firms that innovate in products
would be correspondingly higher. There is no way to assess such an effect without
detailed price data information that is not available (and actually does not exist), but it
is likely to be fairly small, given the relatively modest share of innovative sales.




                                                     19
5.4 A rough comparison with France, Germany, Spain and the U.K.

       As mentioned earlier, an analysis similar to ours has been carried out by
HJMP 2005 for manufacturing and service industries in France, Germany, Spain and
the United Kingdom (U.K.) using data from the third Community Innovation Survey,
which covers the period 1998-2000. Even though the sample design and the
questionnaire are slightly different from ours, it is still worthwhile comparing their
estimates with the results obtained for Italy. In the appendix, Table A3 presents the
results of estimating a specification of the model that is exactly the same as the one
they used:


                             l − ( g1 − π ) = α 0 + α1d + β g 2 + v    (15)


       The estimates are very similar to our preferred ones in the top panel of Table
4, although the intercept (the negative of the average productivity gain adjusted for
industrial composition change) is slightly lower, which implies that the average
productivity gain net of process innovation and growth in new product sales is higher
when the new product sales are not adjusted for inflation.
       In Table 6 we compare the estimates of HJMP 2005 for manufacturing
industries in France, Germany, Spain and the U.K. for the period 1998-2000 with our
corresponding estimates for Italy. The sample sizes are roughly comparable for
France, Spain and Italy, and smaller for the U.K. and Germany. The instruments used
are different, HJMP 2005 relying mainly on a dummy variable for the impact of
innovation on increasing the range of products offered, as reported by the firm. The
estimated coefficient of the sales growth due to new products is very similar and
around one for all five countries. The estimated coefficient of the process innovation
only dummy is negative and significant for Germany and the U.K., indicating an
increase in productivity for the old products; for France and Italy it is not significantly
different from zero, while for Spain it is positive, but barely significant. According to
HJMP 2005, a large pass-through of productivity improvements to prices might
possibly explain this positive effect for Spain.
       The estimated intercept is significantly negative for all countries, with the
highest values for Germany, Italy, and Spain. Not too surprisingly, manufacturing
firms in the five countries which were producing old products only and that did not

                                                  20
innovate in process (nor in products as well) experienced declines in employment
during the 1998-2000 period, and conversely increases in labor productivity. For Italy
only, product innovation appears to have been negative for employment, but note
from Table 4 that this is true only for the 1998-2001 period; for the other periods
product innovation is neutral or positive for growth even in Italy.


                                     [Table 6 about here]


       In Table 7 we compare the employment growth decomposition (based on the
estimates of Table 6) across the five countries. In the 1998-2000 period, firm-level
employment growth in Italy has been much slower than in the four other countries
(2.5% in Italy versus percentage values ranging from 5.9% in Germany to 14.2% in
Spain), and roughly in parallel with the estimated average contribution of new product
innovation to employment growth (2.4% in Italy versus percentage values ranging
from 3.9% in the U.K. to 8.0% in Germany). The other components of the
decomposition are also quite different. The sum of the average contributions of old
products to employment growth is very high in Spain (6.8%), also quite positive in
France and the U.K. (about 2.8%), approximately zero in Italy, and negative in
Germany (-2.1%). These effects all result from a substantial decline in employment
growth due to productivity growth in the firms producing old products only,
combined with a substantial increase due to output growth of old products in these
same firms. We can nonetheless conclude from this comparison that firm employment
growth in Italy during the three years 1998 to 2000 was much slower than in its four
European counterparts largely because of the smaller contribution of product
innovation.


                                     [Table 7 about here]




6. Conclusions
       In this paper we consider a simple model for employment growth, in which it
is possible to disentangle the roles of displacement and compensation effects of
innovation on employment growth at the firm level. Analyzing such mechanisms is of


                                               21
importance, because, as HJMP 2005 point out, the firm-level effects of innovation on
employment are likely to determine the extent to which different agents within the
firm behave with respect to innovation. Managers and workers have different
incentives, and their behavior can foster or hamper innovation and technology
adoption within the firm. Understanding better how these mechanisms work at the
firm-level is central for the design of innovation policy and for predicting how labor
market regulation can affect the rate of innovation.
       Using data from the last three surveys on Italian manufacturing firms
conducted by Mediocredito-Capitalia, covering the period 1995-2003, we estimate
alternative specifications of our model of employment growth and we provide
evidence that process innovation does not have significant displacement effects in
Italian firms. We also find that the average productivity growth for existing products
has been increasing until 2000 and declining thereinafter, signaling a widespread
inability of Italian manufacturing firms to reallocate employment in order to fully
exploit productivity gains stemming from process innovation. Comparing these results
with the ones of HJMP 2005 for France, Germany, Spain and the U.K. indicates that
the displacement effect for process innovation in all countries is quite small, and
significant only for Germany and the U.K. Although partial, this evidence suggests
that Italian firms may not be able to obtain productivity benefits from process
innovation, possibly because of labor market rigidities.
       We also find that about half of employment growth in Italy during the 1995-
2003 period is contributed by product innovation and the other half by the sales
growth of old products net of their productivity gains. Finally, although there are
substantial productivity gains in the production of old products overall in Italy, these
are more than cancelled by output growth in firms that did not introduce new
products. As other researchers have found, the overall conclusion is that process
innovation has little displacement effect in Italy and product innovation increases
employment. However, the productivity decline during the period seems to come
largely from non-innovating firms.
       According to some recent evidence (Barba Navaretti et al, 2007), in the period
subsequent to our analysis, these non-innovating firms have experienced a process of
“creative destruction” due to increased competition from Asian countries. This
selection mechanism has wiped away less efficient firms from the market, and
reallocated their production both to new and incumbent firms. In this light, the

                                              22
productivity slowdown that we observe in the last period of our sample (2001-2003),
may be attributed to the (slow) response of non-innovating firms to the exogenous
increase in competition: these firms might have delayed exit in the hope to recover
their competitiveness, causing a decrease in the aggregate productivity growth.




                                           23
References

           Barba Navaretti, Giorgio, Matteo Bugamelli, Riccardo Faini, Fabiano
Schivardi, and Alessandra Tucci (2007), “Le imprese e la specializzazione produttiva
dell’Italia: dal macrodeclino alla microcrescita?”, forthcoming in I vantaggi
dell’Italia, Il Mulino, Richard Baldwin, Giorgio Barba Navaretti, and Tito Boeri
Editors.

           Blanchflower, David, and Simon Burgess (1998), “New Technology and
Jobs: Comparative Evidence from a Two-Country Study.” Economic Innovations and
New Technology, n. 5, pp. 109–138.

           Blechinger, Doris, Alfred Kleinknecht, Georg Licht, and Friedhelm Pfeiffer
(1998) “The Impact of Innovation on Employment in Europe. An Analysis using the
CIS Data.” ZEW Documentation, 98-02.

           Brouwer, Erik, Alfred Kleinknecht, and Jeroen-ON Reijnen (1993)
“Employment Growth and Innovation at the Firm Level. An Empirical Study.”
Journal of Evolutionary Economics n.3, pp. 153–159.

           Chennells, Lucy, and John V. Reenen (2002) “Technical Change and The
Structure of Employment and Wages: a Survey on the Microeconometric Evidence.”
Productivity, Inequality and the Digital Economy, pp. 175–224. Greenan, N. and Y.
L'Horty and J. Mairesse Editors; MIT Press.

           Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Mark J. Roberts (1995) “The Role of
Technology Use in the Survival and Growth of Manufacturing Plants.” International
Journal of Industrial Organization, n. 13, pp. 523–542.

           Entorf, Horst, and Winfried Pohlmeier (1990) “Employment, Innovation and
Export Activity: Evidence form Firm-Level Data.” Microeconometrics: Surveys and
Applications, pp. 349–415. Florens, J.P. and M. Ivaldi and J.J. Laffont and F. Laisney
Editors.

           Greenan, Nathalie, and Dominique Guellec (2000) “Technological
Innovation and Employment Reallocation.” Labour n. 14, pp. 547–590.

           Griliches, Zvi, and Jacques Mairesse (1984) “Productivity and R&D at the


                                              24
Firm Level.” In R&D, Patents and Productivity pp. 339–374. Griliches Z. Editor.
Chicago University Press.

            Hall, Bronwyn H., and Francis Kramarz (1998) “Effects of Technology and
Innovation on Firm Performance, Employment, and Wages: Introduction.” Economic
Innovations and New Technology, n. 6, pp. 99–107.

            Harrison, Rupert, Jordi Jaumandreu, Jacques Mairesse, and Bettina Peters
(2005) “Does Innovation Stimulate Employment? A Firm-Level analysis Using
Comparable Micro Data from four European Countries.” Mimeo, Department of
Economics, University Carlos III, Madrid.

            International Monetary Fund (2006) “Country Study: Italy.” IMF Research
Bulletin.

            Klette, Tor Jacob, and Svein Erik Forre (1998) “Innovation and Job Creation
in a Small Economy: Evidence from Norwegian Manufacturing Plants 1982-92.”
Economic Innovations and New Technology n. 5, pp. 247–272.

            Lachenmaier, Stefan, and Horst Rottmann (2006) “Employment Effects of
Innovation at the Firm Level.” IFO Working Papers.

            Lotti, Francesca, and Fabiano Schivardi (2005) “Cross Country Differences
in Patent Propensity: a Firm-Level Investigation.” Giornale degli Economisti e Annali
di Economia n. 64 pp. 469–502.

            Peters, Bettina (2004) “Employment Effects of Different Innovation
Activities: Macroeconometric Evidence.” ZEW Discussion Papers, 04-73.

            Piva,   Mariacristina, and Marco Vivarelli (2005) “Innovation and
Employment: Evidence from Italian Microdata.” Journal of Economics n. 86, pp. 65–
83.

            Say, Jean-Baptiste (1964), “A Treatise on Political Economy or the
Production, Distribution and Consumption of Wealth”, New York: Kelley. First
edition, 1803.

            Spiezia, Vincenzo, and Marco Vivarelli (2002) “Technical Change and
Employment: a Critical Survey.” In Productivity, Inequality and the Digital Economy
pp. 101–131. Greenan N. and Y. L’Horty and J. Mairesse Editors. MIT Press.



                                               25
        Suits, Daniel B. (1957) “Use of Dummy Variables in Regression Equations.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association n. 52, pp. 548–551.

        Van Reenen, John (1997) “Employment and Technological Innovation:
Evidence from U.K. Manufacturing Firms.” Journal of Labor Economics n. 2, pp.
255–284.

        Vivarelli, Marco, and Mario Pianta eds (2000) “Employment Impact of
Innovation: Evidence and Policy.” Routledge, London.

       Zimmermann, Klaus F. (1991) “The Employment Consequences of
Technological Advance: Demand and Labour Costs in 16 German Industries.”
Empirical Economics n. 16, pp. 253-266.




                                             26
Table 1 - Descriptive statistics, sample firms, all industries
                                                                                                         Balanced
                                             1995-1997         1998-2000     2001-2003      All years     Panel
                                                                                             12948         1824
Number of observations (firms)                  4290             4618           4040
                                                                                             (9462)       (608)

% firms doing R&D                               35.57            41.40         48.44         41.67         49.51

% firms doing innovation                        73.10            46.51         59.80         59.47         60.53

R&D exp. over sales
                                                1.70              1.94          1.73          1.79          2.10
 (in per cent)
R&D exp. per employee
                                                2.70              3.22          3.16          3.05          3.54
 (in thousands of euros)
Share of innovative sales (s )
                                                5.39              9.99          9.62          8.33         11.72
 (in percent)
Sales/employee: mean/median
                                            185.7/139.3        189.6/143.8   247.1/188.0   206.3/154.1   193.8/153.5
 (in thousands of euros)

Number of employees: mean/median             116.30/34          88.24/25      142.43/49     114.45/33     136.4/38

Employment growth (l )
                                                5.05              2.54          2.13          3.24          0.94
 (in per cent)
Real sales growth (g-π )
                                                7.59              8.74          0.49          5.78          -2.44
 (in per cent)

% of firms with process innovation              66.27            37.31         42.65         48.57         41.12

% of firms with product innovation              30.44            27.33         45.77         34.11         49.67

% of firms with process innovation
                                                42.66            19.19         14.03         25.36         10.86
only
% of firms with process & product
                                                23.19            15.61         24.48         20.89         25.82
innovation
Sales growth attributed to old
                                                5.90             -1.10          -4.57         0.14          -3.69
products (g1), in per cent
Sales growth attributed to new
                                                5.80             10.98          8.86          8.60         10.96
products (g2), in per cent
Growth rate of prices (π), in per cent          4.10              1.14          3.81          2.95          3.09
*Means are shown for the 4419 nonzero R&D observations only.




                                                         27
Table 2 - Employment growth regressed on real sales growth and innovation dummies
Dependent variable: employment growth rate l (in %)

                                  1995-1997              1998-2000               2001-2003                All years
                               Coeff. S.E.            Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.
Real sales growth (g-π)        0.25    (0.01) *** 0.17 (0.01) *** 0.26                 (0.02) *** 0.23 (0.01) ***
Process inno only              -1.26   (0.91)     1.48 (0.63) ** 1.22                  (0.68) * 0.60 (0.42)
Product inno only              0.53    (0.59)     1.04 (0.42) ** 0.85                  (0.77)     0.96 (0.33) ***
Process & product inno         1.48    (0.76) ** 1.92 (0.48) *** 2.57                  (0.62) *** 2.04 (0.36) ***
Intercept                      2.02    (0.55) *** 0.32 (0.26)     1.53                 (0.42) *** 2.37 (0.35) ***
Number of observations                 4290                   4618                    4040                   12948
OLS estimates. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; in the last column they are also clustered by firm.
Significance levels: *** 1% ** 5% * 10%
Two-digit industry dummies (and also period dummies in the last column) are included in all regressions. The intercept
shown is the average of the industry dummy estimates.




                                                       28
Table 3 - Employment and growth in innovative sales
Dependent variable: employment growth rate less real sales growth l - g 1 + π (in %)
                                  1995-1997              1998-2000               2001-2003               All years
                               Coeff. S.E.            Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.            Coeff. S.E.
                                                                    OLS estimates
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)    0.97 (0.02) *** 0.96 (0.01) *** 0.96 (0.03) *** 0.96 (0.01) ***
Intercept                -3.73 (0.57) *** -5.88 (0.42) *** 3.00 (0.55) *** -2.27 (0.30) ***
F-test for g2/(1+π)=1               1.60                    9.23        ***        2.77          *        12.36        ***
                                                        Instrumental variables estimates
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)    1.02 (0.09) *** 0.95 (0.04) *** 1.11 (0.07) *** 1.01 (0.10) ***
Intercept                -4.01 (0.77) *** -5.81 (0.59) *** 1.71 (0.80) ** -2.66 (0.91) ***

F-test for g2/(1+π)=1               0.06                    1.76                   1.97                    0.00
Test of overidentifying
  restrictions                      1.05                    0.84                   8.41         **        12.46         *

Number of observations              4290                    4618                   4040                  12948
Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; in the last column they are also clustered by firm.
Significance levels: *** 1% ** 5% * 10%
Two-digit industry dummies (and also period dummies in the last column) are included in all regressions. The intercept shown
is the average of the industry dummy estimates.
Instruments: R&D intensity (R&D employees/employees), a dummy for doing R&D (current and lagged), and a dummy for
whether investments are relevant to new product creation




                                                       29
Table 4 - Employment and growth in innovative sales, including process innovation
Dependent variable: employment growth rate less real sales growth l - g 1 + π (in %)
                                  1995-1997              1998-2000               2001-2003               All years
                               Coeff. S.E.            Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.            Coeff. S.E.
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)    1.01 (0.11) *** 0.95 (0.04) *** 1.10 (0.08) *** 0.97 (0.04) ***
Process innovation only -1.65 (1.31)      0.16 (0.87)      -1.14 (1.32)     -1.27 (0.66) *
Intercept                -3.21 (1.25) *** -5.81 (0.71) *** 1.95 (0.91) ** -1.93 (0.65) ***
Test of overidentifying
  restrictions               1.25             0.92             13.81    ***     12.77    *
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)    1.04 (0.19) ***               0.91 (0.07) *** 1.18 (0.11) *** 0.95 (0.05) ***
Process innovation only -1.82 (1.17)                   0.14 (0.90)     -0.96 (1.32)    -1.23 (0.60) **
Process and product
  innovation             -1.21 (3.04)                  2.56 (2.09)      -1.79 (1.41)   0.80 (1.06)
Intercept                -3.04 (1.11) ***              -5.78 (0.76) *** 1.74 (0.92) ** -2.44 (0.69) ***
Test of overidentifying
  restrictions               1.33                           1.29                  12.26        ***        1.79
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)    1.01 (0.11) ***               0.95 (0.04) *** 1.10 (0.08) *** 0.97 (0.04) ***
Process innovation only -1.69 (1.30)                   0.11 (0.85)     -1.29 (1.29)    -1.31 (0.64) **
Sales growth due to new
  prod * proc innovation -0.06 (0.11)                  -0.05 (0.07)     -0.09 (0.08)    -0.03 (0.05)
Intercept                -3.17 (1.24) ***              -5.76 (0.69) *** 2.10 (0.87) *** -1.91 (0.65) ***
Test of overidentifying
  restrictions               1.28                           0.91                  14.31        ***        1.91

Number of observations              4290                    4618                   4040                  12948
Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; in the last column they are also clustered by firm.
Significance levels: *** 1% ** 5% * 10%
Two-digit industry dummies (and also period dummies in the last column) are included in all regressions. The intercept
shown is the average of the industry dummy estimates.
All estimates are instrumental variable estimates with same instruments as in the lower panel of Table 3: R&D intensity
(R&D employees/employees), a dummy for doing R&D (current and lagged), and a dummy for whether investments are




                                                       30
Table 5 - Growth decompositions: All industries, unbalanced panel.
                                                                     Means                          Std. dev.* Std. err.**
                                           1995-1997 1998-2000 2001-2003               All years     All years     All years

                                                  Employment growth
Employment growth, in %                        5.05      2.54       2.13                  3.24         15.58          0.00
Average industry specific trend               -1.70     -5.51       1.32                 -2.27         4.62           1.04
Growth due to non-innovators                   6.04      5.67       0.05                  4.04         20.40          0.00
Growth due to process innovation
in old products                               -0.70           0.03         -0.17         -0.20          0.34          0.17
Growth due to product innovation               1.41           2.35          0.94          1.67         13.55          0.34
Residual component                             0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00         23.22          1.12

                                                   Productivity growth
Productivity growth, in %                      2.54       6.20        -1.65              2.54          23.60          0.00
Average industry specific trend                1.70       5.51        -1.32              2.27           4.62          1.04
Growth due to process innovation
in old products                                0.70           -0.03         0.17         0.20           0.34          0.17
Growth due to product innovation               0.14            0.72        -0.50         0.07          1.07           0.34
Residual component                             0.00            0.00         0.00         0.00          23.22          1.12

Based on estimates from the first panel of Table 4. Units are percents.
* The standard deviation of each component of the growth across the firm observations.
** The standard error computed for each observation based on the pooled coefficient estimates, and then averaged over the
observations




                                                         31
Table 6 -Employment growth and innovative sales: a comparison (1998-2000)
       Dependent variable: employment growth rate less real sales growth l - g 1 + π (in %)

                                           MCC data                          CIS data
                                            Italy           France       Germany   Spain                UK

Sales growth due to new prod g 2               0.94           0.98          1.01          1.02          0.98
                                              (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.04)        (0.05)
Process innovation only                        0.18           -1.31         -6.19         2.46          -3.85
                                              (0.87)         (1.57)        (2.92)        (1.78)        (1.87)
Intercept                                      -5.84          -3.52         -6.95         -6.11         -4.69
                                              (0.71)         (0.78)        (1.86)        (0.90)        (0.88)

Number of observations                         4618           4631          1319          4548          2493

The first column is taken from estimates in Table A3, while the others are from HJMP 2005, Table 6, column 1.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                  32
Table 7 - The employment growth decomposition: a comparison (1998-2000)

                                           MCC data                         CIS data
                                            Italy           France      Germany Spain                  UK

Employment growth, in %                         2.5           8.3           5.9          14.2          6.7
Average industry specific trend                 -5.6          -1.9          -7.5         -5.7          -5.0
Growth due to non-innovators                    0.1           -0.1          -0.6          0.3          -0.4
Growth due to process innovation
in old products                                 5.7            4.8          6.0          12.2           8.3
Growth due to product innovation                2.4            5.5          8.0           7.4           3.9

Number of observations                         4618           4631         1319         4548          2493

The first column is taken from the estimates in Table 5 for 1998-2000, while the others are from HJMP 2005.
Units are per cents.




                                                 33
Appendix A

Variable Definition and Additional Tables

Share of sales due to new products (s): share of turnover in the last year of the survey due
to new or significantly improved products introduced in the last three years.

Process innovation: a dummy variable which takes value 1 if the firm reports to have
introduced new or significantly improved production process in the three years of the
survey.

Product innovation: a dummy variable which takes value 1 if the firm reports to have
introduced new or significantly improved products in the three years of the survey.

R&D expenditure: expenditure in R&D as reported by the firm in each year of the survey
(th. of euro).

R&D personnel: employment devoted to R&D activities, as reported by the firm in each
year of the survey (heads).

Industry dummies: a set of dummy variables reflecting the 2-digits “Ateco91” industry
classification.

High-tech industries: encompasses high and medium-high technology industries
(chemicals; office accounting & computer machinery; radio, tv & telecommunication
instruments; medical, precision & optical instruments; electrical machinery and apparatus,
n.e.c.; machinery & equipment; railroad & transport equipment, n.e.c.).

Low-tech industries: encompasses low and medium-low technology industries (rubber &
plastic products; coke, refined petroleum products; other non-metallic mineral products;
basic metals and fabricated metal products; manufacturing n.e.c.; wood, pulp & paper;
food, beverages & tobacco products; textile, textile products, leather & footwear).




                                            34
Table A1 - Descriptive statistics, for different subsamples of firms, all years,
unbalanced panel
                                                          Innovating    High-tech     Low-tech
                                     R&D firms
                                                            firms       industries    industries

Number of observations                   5395                7700          4039          8909

% firms doing R&D                       100.00              48.72         58.50         34.03

% firms doing innovation                79.22               100.00        66.77         56.16

R&D exp. over sales
                                         1.79                2.35          2.40          1.29
  (in per cent)
R&D exp. per employee
                                         3.05                3.99          4.01          2.25
  (in thousands of euros)
Share of innovative sales (s )
                                        13.43               13.03         10.94          7.17
  (in percent)
Sales/employee: mean/median
                                     211.5/164.8          195.2/154.9   192.5/153.7   212.5/154.5
  (in thousands of euros)
Number of employees:
                                      164.41/50           135.24/40     172.05/40      88.33/31
mean/median
Employment growth (l )
                                         3.96                4.27          3.98          2.91
  (in per cent)
Real sales growth (g-π )
                                         6.29                6.78          6.04          5.67
  (in per cent)
% of firms with process
                                        62.39               81.68         52.51         46.78
innovation
% of firms with product
                                        55.24               57.36         42.86         30.15
innovation
% of firms with process
                                        16.83               42.64         23.92         26.01
innovation only
% of firms with process &
                                        38.41               39.04         28.60         20.78
product innovation
Sales growth attributed to old
                                         -4.35               -3.26         -1.24         0.76
products (g1), in per cent
Sales growth attributed to new
                                        13.80               13.22         11.19          7.42
products (g2), in per cent
Growth rate of prices (π), in
                                         3.16                3.18          3.91          2.52
per cent
*Means are shown for the nonzero R&D observations only.




                                                     35
Table A2a - Employment and growth in innovative sales, high tech industries
Dependent variable: employment growth rate less real sales growth l - g 1 + π (in %)
                                   1995-1997               1998-2000               2001-2003                 All years
                                Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.              Coeff. S.E.

                                                                      OLS estimates
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)            0.95 (0.04) *** 0.95 (0.02) *** 0.84 (0.05) *** 0.92 (0.02) ***
Process innovation only         -1.26 (1.56)     -0.57 (1.55)     -2.75 (2.54)    -1.52 (1.03)
Intercept                       -4.41 (1.48) *** -4.52 (0.88) *** 4.50 (1.26) *** -5.09 (0.79) ***
F-test for g2/(1+π)=1                1.60                     6.07         **        11.87         ***        18.98
                                                           Instrumental variables estimates
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)            0.88 (0.14) *** 0.86 (0.07) *** 1.09                     (0.16) *** 0.94 (0.07) ***
Process innovation only         -2.18 (2.32)     -2.18 (1.96)    0.27                     (3.22)     -1.27 (1.39)
Intercept                       -3.51 (2.25)     -2.89 (1.51)    1.32                     (2.26)     -2.44 (1.23) **
F-test for g2/(1+π)=1                0.75                     4.30         **         0.33                    0.88
Test of overidentifying
  restrictions                       0.10                     0.26                    8.22         **         2.77
Number of observations               1401                    1394                     1244                    4039
Robust standard errors are shown; in the last column they are also clustered by firm.
Significance levels: *** 1% ** 5% * 10%
Two-digit industry dummies (and also period dummies in the last column) are included in all regressions. The intercept shown is
the average of the industry dummy estimates.
Instruments: R&D intensity (R&D employees/employees), a dummy for doing R&D (current and lagged), and a dummy for
whether investments are relevant to new product creation




                                                              36
Table A2b - Employment and growth in innovative sales, low tech industries
Dependent variable: employment growth rate less real sales growth l - g 1 + π (in %)
                                  1995-1997                1998-2000               2001-2003                All years
                               Coeff. S.E.              Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.

                                                                      OLS estimates
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)           0.91 (0.03) *** 0.94 (0.02) *** 0.95 (0.03) *** 0.94 (0.01) ***
Process innovation only         -2.53 (0.96) *** 0.68 (0.74)      -2.53 (1.26) ** -1.37 (0.58) **
Intercept                       -3.43 (0.97) *** -6.77 (0.70) *** -0.07 (0.77)    -3.37 (0.64) ***
F-test for g2/(1+π)=1               11.12        ***         7.67         ***        3.69          **        17.16        ***
                                                          Instrumental variables estimates
Real sales growth due to
  new prod g 2 /(1+π)           1.02 (0.13) *** 0.99 (0.05) *** 1.06 (0.07) *** 1.02 (0.05) ***
Process innovation only         -1.59 (1.49)     1.17 (0.93)      -1.57 (1.38)  -0.57 (0.71)
Intercept                       -4.37 (1.50) *** -7.33 (0.94) *** -1.00 (0.98)  -0.60 (0.73)
F-test for g2/(1+π)=1                0.02                    0.05                    0.57                     0.28
Test of overidentifying
  restrictions                       3.15                    1.97                    6.60          *          8.38         **
Number of observations               2889                    3224                    2796                    8909
Robust standard errors are shown; in the last column they are also clustered by firm.
Significance levels: *** 1% ** 5% * 10%
Two-digit industry dummies (and also period dummies in the last column) are included in all regressions. The intercept shown is
the average of the industry dummy estimates.
Instruments: R&D intensity (R&D employees/employees), a dummy for doing R&D (current and lagged), and a dummy for
whether investments are relevant to new product creation




                                                             37
Table A3 - Employment and growth in innovative sales,
HJMP 2005 specification
Dependent variable: employment growth rate less real sales growth l - g 1 + π (in %)

                                  1995-1997              1998-2000               2001-2003                All years
                               Coeff. S.E.            Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.             Coeff. S.E.
Sales growth due to
  new products g 2             0.96 (0.10) *** 0.94 (0.04) *** 1.07 (0.07) *** 0.95 (0.04) ***
Process innovation only        -1.84 (1.29)      0.18 (0.87)     -1.15 (1.31)   -1.22 (0.66) *
Intercept                      -2.98 (1.23) *** -5.84 (0.71) *** 1.91 (0.91) ** -2.80 (1.14) ***
t-test g 2 = 1                     0.19             2.59             0.80           1.70
Test of overidentifying
   restrictions                     1.45                    0.91                   13.53        ***        1.74

Number of observations              4290                    4618                   4040                   12948
Robust standard errors are shown; in the last column they are also clustered by firm.
Significance levels: *** 1% ** 5% * 10%
Two-digit industry dummies (and also period dummies in the last column) are included in all regressions. The intercept shown
is the average of the industry dummy estimates.
Instruments: R&D intensity (R&D employees/employees), a dummy for doing R&D (current and lagged), and a dummy for
whether investments are relevant to new product creation




                                                            38
