NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIG BAD BANKS? THE IMPACT OF U.S. BRANCH DEREGULATION ON INCOME
DISTRIBUTION
Thorsten Beck
Ross Levine
Alexey Levkov
Working Paper 13299
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13299

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

Martin Goetz and Carlos Espina provided exceptional research assistance. We especially thank Phil
Strahan for providing insightful comments and sharing his data and Yona Rubinstein, whose suggestions
substantively improved the quality of the research. We received many helpful comments at the World
Bank conference, “Access to Finance,” and seminars at the Bank of Israel, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, Brown University, Boston University, International Monetary Fund, European
Central Bank, Georgia State University, New York University, Tilburg University, University of Frankfurt,
University of Lausanne, University of Mannheim, and the University of Virginia. This paper's findings,
interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, the countries they represent, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Thorsten Beck, Ross Levine, and Alexey Levkov. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Big Bad Banks? The Impact of U.S. Branch Deregulation on Income Distribution
Thorsten Beck, Ross Levine, and Alexey Levkov
NBER Working Paper No. 13299
August 2007, Revised June 2009
JEL No. D31,G28,O16
ABSTRACT
By studying intrastate branch banking reform in the United States, this paper provides evidence that
financial markets substantively influence the distribution of income. From the 1970s through the 1990s,
most states removed restrictions on intrastate branching, which intensified bank competition and improved
efficiency. Exploiting the cross-state, cross-time variation in the timing of bank deregulation, we evaluate
the impact of liberalizing intrastate branching restrictions on the distribution of income. We find that
branch deregulation significantly reduced income inequality by boosting the incomes of lower income
workers. The reduction in income inequality is fully accounted for by a reduction in earnings inequality
among salaried workers.

Thorsten Beck
The World Bank
1818 H Street N.W.
Mail Stop MC 3-307
Washington, D.C. 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

Alexey Levkov
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Alexey_Levkov@brown.edu

1. Introduction
This paper assesses how financial markets affect the distribution of income by studying
intrastate branch banking reform in the United States. From the 1970s through the 1990s, most
states removed restrictions on intrastate branching, which intensified bank competition and
improved bank efficiency and performance (Flannery, 1984; Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998). While
researchers have examined the impact of these reforms on aggregate economic activity (e.g.,
Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; Black and Strahan, 2002; Huang, 2008; and Kerr and Nanda, 2009),
we provide the first evaluation of how branch deregulation altered the distribution of income. We
test whether removing these restrictions intensified, ameliorated, or had no effect on income
inequality and also study particular channels linking bank deregulation and income distribution.
Policy and theoretical debates motivate our analysis (Allen and Gale, 2000). Since Thomas
Jefferson first opposed the creation of the Bank of the United States, U.S. policymakers have
expressed concerns that big banks would primarily help the wealthy and widen the distribution of
income (Hammond, 1957). If banking is a natural monopoly, then unregulated, monopolistic banks
may earn rents through high fixed fees that disproportionately curtail the economic opportunities of
the poor (Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990; Banerjee and Newman, 1993; and Galor and Zeira,
1993). Based on this argument, politicians in many U.S. states implemented and maintained
restrictions on bank branching for much of the 20th century (Southworth, 1928; White, 1982).
Furthermore, most countries regulate bank mergers and acquisitions, with the advertised goals of
constraining the expansion of powerful banks and expanding access to credit (Barth et al, 2006).
Countervailing arguments, however, challenge the view that regulations on bank expansion
help the poor. These regulations could curtail competition and raise fees that disproportionately hurt
the poor. Indeed, Flannery (1984) and Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) show that U.S. branching

1

restrictions created and protected local banking monopolies, which allowed banks to maintain
higher fees and interest rate margins. From this perspective, intrastate branch deregulation will
operate on the extensive margin, disproportionately expanding economic opportunities for the poor.
The deregulation of intrastate branching provides a natural setting for identifying and
assessing the impact of bank regulatory reform on the distribution of income. As shown by
Kroszner and Strahan (1999), national technological innovations triggered branch deregulation at
the state level. Specifically, (1) the invention of automatic teller machines (ATMs), in conjunction
with court rulings that ATMs are not bank branches, weakened the geographical bond between
customers and banks; (2) checkable money market mutual funds facilitated banking by mail and
telephone, which weakened local bank monopolies; and, (3) improvements in communications
technology lowered the costs of using distant banks. These innovations reduced the monopoly
power of local banks, weakening their ability and desire to fight against deregulation. Kroszner and
Strahan (1999) further show that cross-state variation in the timing of deregulation reflects the
interactions of these national technological innovations with preexisting state-specific conditions.
For example, deregulation occurred later in states where politically powerful groups viewed large,
multiple-branch banks as potentially serious competitors. Moreover, as we demonstrate below,
neither the level nor rate of change in the distribution of income before deregulation helps predict
when a state removed restrictions on bank branching, suggesting that the timing of branch
deregulation at the state level is exogenous to the state’s distribution of income. Consequently, we
employ a difference-in-differences estimation methodology that exploits the exogenous cross-state,
cross-year variation in the timing of branch deregulation to assess the causal impact of bank
deregulation on the distribution of income.

2

The paper’s major finding is that deregulation of branching restrictions substantively
tightened the distribution of income by disproportionately helping lower income workers. While
income inequality widened in the overall U.S. economy during the sample period, branch
deregulation lowered inequality relative to this national trend. This finding is robust to using
different measures of income inequality, controlling for time-varying state characteristics, and
conditioning on both state and year fixed effects. We find no evidence that reverse causality or prior
trends in the distribution of income account for these findings. Furthermore, the economic
magnitude is consequential. Seven years after deregulation, the Gini coefficient of income
inequality is about four percent lower than before deregulation after conditioning on state and year
fixed effects. Put differently, deregulation explains about 60% of the de-trended variation of
inequality relative to state and year averages.
Removing restrictions on intrastate bank branching reduced inequality by boosting the
incomes of the relatively poor, not by hurting higher income workers. Deregulation increased the
average incomes of those in the bottom quarter of the income distribution by more than five percent,
but deregulation did not significantly affect the incomes of those in the upper half of the distribution
of income. These results are consistent with the view that the removal of intrastate branching
restrictions triggered changes in banking behavior that had disproportionately positive repercussions
on lower income individuals.
To provide additional evidence that bank deregulation tightened the distribution of income
by affecting bank performance and not through some other mechanism, we show that the impact of
deregulation on the distribution of income varied across states in a theoretically predictable manner.
In particular, if branch deregulation tightened the distribution of income by improving the operation
of banks, then deregulation should have had a more pronounced effect on the distribution of income

3

in those states where branching restrictions were particularly harmful to bank operations before
deregulation. Based on Kroszner and Strahan (1999), we use four indicators of the degree to which
intrastate branching restrictions hurt bank performance prior to deregulation. For example, in states
with a more geographically diffuse population, branching restrictions were particularly effective at
creating local banking monopolies that hindered bank performance. After deregulating, therefore,
we should observe a bigger effect on bank performance in states with more diffuse populations.
This is what we find. Across the four indicators of the cross-state severity of branching restrictions,
we find that deregulation reduced income inequality more in those states where these branching
restrictions had been particularly harmful to bank operations. These findings increase confidence in
the interpretation that deregulation reduced income inequality by enhancing bank performance.
We finish by conducting a preliminary exploration of three possible explanations of the
labor market channels underlying these findings. We view this component of the analysis as a
preliminary exploration because each of these explanations warrants independent investigation with
individual-level, longitudinal datasets. Nevertheless, we provide this extension to further motivate
and guide future research on the channels linking bank performance and the distribution of income.
The first two explanations stress the ability of the poor to access banking services directly.
In Galor and Zeira (1993), for example, credit market imperfections prevent the poor from
borrowing to invest more in education, which hinders their access to higher paying jobs.
Deregulation that eases these credit constraints, therefore, allows lower income individuals to invest
more in education, reducing inequality. A second explanation focuses on the ability of the poor to
become entrepreneurs. In Banerjee and Newman (1993), financial imperfections are particularly
binding on the poor because they lack collateral and because their incomes are relatively low
compared to the fixed costs of obtaining bank loans. Thus, deregulation that improves bank

4

performance by lowering collateral requirements and borrowing costs will disproportionately
benefit the poor by expanding their access to bank credit.
A third explanation highlights the response of firms to the lower interest rates triggered by
deregulation, rather than stressing increased access to credit by lower income individuals. While the
drop in the cost of capital encourages firms to substitute capital for labor, the cost reduction also
increases production, boosting the demand for capital and labor. On net, if the drop in the cost of
capital increases the demand for labor and this increase falls disproportionately on lower income
workers, then deregulation could reduce inequality by affecting firms’ demand for labor.
Although branch deregulation stimulated entrepreneurship and increased education, our
results suggest that deregulation reduced income inequality primarily by boosting the relative
demand for low-income workers. More specifically, deregulation dramatically increased the rate of
new incorporations (Black and Strahan, 2002) and the rates of entry and exit of non-incorporated
firms (Kerr and Nanda, 2009). However, we find that the reduction in total income inequality is
fully accounted for by a reduction in earnings inequality among salaried employees, not by a
movement of lower income workers into higher paying self-employed activities or by a change in
income differentials among the self-employed. Furthermore, the self-employed account for only
about 10% of the working age population, and this percentage did not change significantly after
deregulation. On education, Levine and Rubinstein (2009) find that the fall in interest rates caused
by bank deregulation reduced high school dropout rates in lower income households. Yet, changes
in educational attainment do not account for the reduction in income inequality triggered by branch
deregulation during our sample period. Rather, consistent with the view that bank deregulation
increased the relative demand for low-income workers, we find that deregulation increased the
earnings of low-education workers relative to workers with more education.

5

This paper relates to several strands of research and to current policy debates. First, the
international policy community increasingly emphasizes the benefits of providing the poor with
greater access to financial services as a vehicle for fighting poverty and reducing inequality.
Burgess and Pande (2007) find that when India reformed its banking laws to provide the poor with
greater access to financial services, this policy change reduced poverty by boosting wages in rural
areas. Our findings also suggest that financial development might help the poor primarily by
intensifying competition and boosting wage earnings, not by increasing the business income of the
poor. Second, following the onset of the current financial crisis, many stress the potential dangers of
financial deregulation. Though our work does not address the causes of the crisis, the results do
indicate that regulations that impeded competition among banks during the 20th century were
disproportionately harmful to lower income individuals. Thus, reforms to bank regulations could
substantively affect the distribution of income. Finally, our work complements recent cross-country
analyses of finance and the distribution of income. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2007) find
that an overall index of banking sector development is associated with lower income inequality
across countries. We improve on this work by analyzing the impact of a specific, exogenous policy
change rather than a broad index of financial development and by using a differences-in-differences
methodology rather than simple cross-country comparison that combine to yield sharper inferences
about a policy change and reduce concerns about endogeneity bias.
This paper also relates to a substantive body of work on the effects of branch deregulation.
Besides the investigations discussed above, researchers have examined the impact of branch
deregulation on output volatility (Demyanyk, Ostergaard, and Sorensen, 2007; Acharya, Imbs and
Sturgess, 2008), the wage rate gap between men and women bank executives (Black and Strahan,
2001), and the income growth of proprietors differentiated by race and gender (Demyanyk, 2007).

6

In this paper, we examine the impact of branch deregulation on the distribution of income in the
overall economy and help resolve a debate about bank regulation that extends over two centuries.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and
econometric methodology. Section 3 provides the core results, while Section 4 provides further
evidence on how deregulation influences labor market conditions. Section 5 concludes.

2. Data and methodology
To assess the effect of branch deregulation on income distribution, we gather data on the
timing of deregulation, income distribution, and other banking sector and state-level characteristics.
This section presents the data and describes the econometric methods.
2.1. Branch deregulation
Historically, most U.S. states had restrictions on branching within and across state borders.
With regards to intrastate branching restrictions, most states allowed bank hold companies to own
separately capitalized and licensed banks throughout a state. Other states were “unit banking states,”
in which each bank was typically permitted to operate only one office.
Beginning in the early 1970s, states started relaxing these restrictions, allowing bank
holding companies to consolidate subsidiaries into branches and permitting de novo branching
throughout the state. This deregulation led to significant entry into local banking markets (Amel and
Liang, 1992), consolidation of smaller banks into large bank holding companies (Savage, 1993;
Calem, 1994), and conversion of existing bank subsidiaries into branches (McLaughin, 1995). This
relaxation, however, came gradually, with the last states lifting restrictions following the 1994
passage of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act.

7

Consistent with Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), and others, we choose the date of
deregulation as the date on which a state permitted branching via mergers and acquisitions (M&As)
through the holding company structure, which was the first step in the deregulation process,
followed by de novo branching. Appendix Table 1 presents the deregulation dates. Twelve states
deregulated before the start of our sample period in 1976. Arkansas, Iowa and Minnesota were the
last states to deregulate, only after the passage of the Riegle-Neal Act in 1994. We have data for 50
states and the District of Columbia. Consistent with the literature on branch deregulation, we drop
Delaware and South Dakota because the structure of their banking systems were heavily affected by
laws that made them centers for the credit card industry.
Over this period, states also deregulated restrictions on interstate banking by allowing bank
holding companies to expand across state borders. We confirm this paper’s results using the date of
interstate deregulation instead of the date of intrastate deregulation. However, when we
simultaneously control for inter- and intrastate branch deregulation, we find that only intrastate
deregulation enters significantly. Thus, we focus on intrastate rather than interstate deregulation
throughout the remainder of this paper.
2.2. Income distribution data
Information on the distribution of income is from the March Supplement of the Current
Population Survey (CPS), which is an annual survey of about 60,000 households across the United
States. The CPS is a repeated, representative sampling of the population, but it does not trace
individuals through time. The CPS provides information on total personal income, wage and salary
income (earnings), proprietor income, income from other sources, and a wide-array of demographic
characteristics in the year prior to the survey. Most importantly for our study, we start with the 1977
survey because the exact state of residence is unavailable prior to this survey. Each individual in the

8

CPS is assigned a probability sampling weight corresponding to his or her representativeness in the
population. We use sampling weights in all our analyses.
We measure the distribution of income for each state and year over the period 1976-2006 in
four ways. First, the Gini coefficient of income distribution is derived from the Lorenz curve.
Larger values of the Gini coefficient imply greater income inequality. The Gini coefficient equals
zero if everyone receives the same income, and equals one if a single individual receives all of the
economy’s income. We frequently use the logarithm of the Gini coefficient in the regression
analyses. Our second measure of income distribution is the Theil index, which is also increasing in
the degree of income inequality. If all individuals receive the same income, the Theil index equals
zero, while the Theil index equals Ln(n) if one individual receives all of the economy’s income,
where n equals the number of individuals. An advantage of the Theil index is that it is
computationally easy to decompose it into inequality accounted for by differences in income
between groups in the sample and inequality accounted for by differences among those within each
group of the sample. Third, we examine the difference between the natural logarithm of incomes of
those at the 90th percentile and those at the 10th percentile (Log (90/10)). Finally, we use the
difference between the natural logarithm of incomes of those at the 75th percentile and those at the
25th percentile ((Log (75/25)). Appendix Table 2 provides more detailed information on the
construction of these income distribution indicators.
Consistent with studies of the U.S. labor market, our main sample (a) includes prime-age
(25-54) civilians that have non-negative personal income, (b) excludes individuals with missing
observations on key variables (education, demographics, etc), (c) excludes the richest 1% of
individuals, (d) excludes people living in group quarters, (e) excludes individuals who receive zero
income and live in households with zero or negative income from all sources of income, and (f)

9

excludes a few individuals for which the CPS assigns a zero (or missing) sampling weight.
Appendix Table 3 provides details on the construction of the sample.
There are 1,859,411 individuals in our sample. Table 1A provides summary statistics on the
sample of individuals, while Table 1B gives summary statistics on the income inequality measures.
The average age in the sample is 38 years, 49% are female, and 75% are white, non-Hispanic
individuals. In the sample, 49% have a high school degree or less, while 27% graduated from
college. Only 9% of the individuals report being self-employed (entrepreneurs).
In Table 1B, we present basic descriptive statistics on the four measures of income
inequality, which are measured at the state-year level. In particular, we have data for the 31 years
between 1976 and 2006 and for 48 states plus the District of Columbia. Thus, there are 1,519 stateyear observations. Besides providing information on the means of the inequality indicators and their
minimum and maximum values, we also present three types of standard deviations of the natural
logarithms of the inequality indexes: cross-state, within-state, and within state-year. These standard
deviations help in assessing the economic magnitude of the impact of bank branch deregulation on
the distribution of the income that we report below.
2.3. Control variables
To control for time-varying changes in a state’s economy, we use the U.S. Department of
Commerce data to calculate the growth rate of per capita Gross State Product (GSP). We also
control for the unemployment rate, obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and a number of
state-specific, time-varying socio-demographic characteristics, including the percentage of highschool dropouts, the proportion of blacks, and the proportion of female-headed households.
We also test whether the impact of deregulation on income inequality varies in a predictable
way with different state characteristics at the time of deregulation. As we discuss below, we control

10

for the interaction of branch deregulation with a unit banking indicator, the small bank share, the
small firm share and population dispersion, each of which we measure in the year before
deregulation. The unit banking indicator equals one if the state had unit banking restrictions prior to
deregulation and zero otherwise. The following states had unit banking before deregulation:
Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North
Dakota, Oklahoma, Texas, Wisconsin, West Virginia, and Wyoming. The small bank share equals
the fraction of banking assets in the state that are held by banks with assets below the median size
bank of each state, while the small firm share equals the proportion of all establishments operating
in a state with fewer than twenty employees. Data on the small firm share and small bank share are
from Kroszner and Strahan (1999). Population dispersion equals one divided by population per
square mile, which is obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau.
2.4. Methodology
We use a difference-in-differences specification to assess the relation between branch
deregulation and income distribution, based on the following regression set-up:
Ys,t = Αs + Βt + βDs,t + δXs,t + εs,t,

s = 1, …, 49;

t = 1976, …, 2006.

(1)

In equation (1), Ys,t is a measure of income distribution in state s in year t, Αs and Βt are vectors of
state and year dummy variables that account for state and year fixed-effects, Xs,t is a set of timevarying, state-level variables and εs,t is the error term. The variable of interest is Ds,t, a dummy
variable that equals one in the years after state s deregulates and equals zero otherwise. The
coefficient, β, therefore indicates the impact of branch deregulation on income distribution. A
positive and significant β suggests that deregulation exerts a positive effect on the degree of income
inequality, while a negative and significant β indicates that deregulation pushed income inequality

11

lower. In total, we have data for 48 states plus the District of Columbia, over 31 years, so the 1,519
state-year observations serve as the basis for much of our analysis.
The difference-in differences estimation technique allows us to control for omitted variables.
We include year-specific dummy variables to control for nation-wide shocks and trends that shape
income distribution over time, such as business cycles, national changes in regulations and laws,
long-term trends in income distribution, and changes in female labor force participation. We include
state-specific dummy variables to control for time-invariant, unobserved state characteristics that
shape income distribution across states. We estimate equation (1) allowing for state-level clustering,
i.e. allowing for correlation in the error terms over time within states.

3. Branch deregulation and income distribution
3.1. Preliminary results
Our empirical analysis rests on the assumption that the cross-state timing of bank branch
deregulation was unaffected by the distribution of income. Figure 1 shows that neither the level of
the Gini coefficient before deregulation nor its rate of change prior to deregulation explains the
timing of branch deregulation. In a regression of the year of deregulation on the average Gini
coefficient before deregulation or the rate of change of the Gini coefficient in the years before
deregulation, the t-statistic on the inequality indicators are 0.20 and -1.16 respectively. Furthermore,
in unreported robustness tests, we find that changes in the state-specific labor protection laws
examined by Autor, Donohue, and Schwab (2006) do not predict the timing of branch deregulation.
Additional evidence that income inequality did not affect the timing of branch deregulation
emerges from a hazard model study of deregulation. Following Kroszner and Strahan (1999), Table
2 reports tests of whether the Gini coefficient of income inequality influences the likelihood that a

12

state deregulates in a specific year given that it has not deregulated yet. While the Kroszner and
Strahan (1999) sample period starts in 1970, we do not have Gini data available before 1976. Also,
since we use the original Kroszner and Strahan (1999) dataset, our sample period ends in 1994,
when there were three states that had not deregulated yet – Arkansas, Iowa and Minnesota.
Table 2 indicates that the timing of bank branch deregulation does not vary with the degree
of income inequality. Column 1 reports the results of a regression with only the Gini coefficient of
income inequality, while columns 2 – 5 provide regression results controlling for numerous statelevel control variables, including those state characteristics employed by Kroszner and Strahan
(1999). As in Kroszner and Strahan (1999), we find that states with a larger share of small banks
and better capitalized small banks deregulate later, while states with a higher share of small firms
deregulate earlier. As shown, the Gini coefficient does not enter significantly in any of the Table 2
regressions.
3.2. Deregulation and the distribution of income
In Table 3, we assess the impact of branch deregulation on income inequality using four
indicators of income inequality and two regression specifications. In Panel A, the regressions
simply condition on state and year fixed effects, which are not reported. Panel B also includes
numerous time-varying, state-specific characteristics: the growth rate of per capita gross state
product, the proportion of blacks in the population, the proportion of high-school dropouts in the
population, the proportion of female-headed households in the population, and the unemployment
rate.
The Table 3 results indicate that bank branch deregulation substantially reduced income
inequality. The branch deregulation dummy enters negatively and significantly at the 5% level in all
eight regressions. For example, consider the Gini coefficient. The column 1 results suggest that

13

deregulation induced a 2.2% reduction in the Gini coefficient, which is economically large. To
gauge the economic effect of this result, we compare the coefficient estimate to the standard
deviation of the logarithm of the Gini coefficient after accounting for state and year fixed effects.
This standard deviation is 0.037 as shown in Table 1, suggesting that branching deregulation
explains about 60% of the variation of income inequality relative to state and year averages.
The Table 3 results indicate that deregulation tightened the distribution of income even
when conditioning on time-varying state-level factors. Higher unemployment is associated with
higher income inequality, though the other state characteristics do not enter independently
significantly. This does not imply that these other characteristics, such as per capita economic
growth, an economy’s socio-demographic traits, or educational attainment, are unrelated to income
inequality. Rather, it suggests that after conditioning on state and year fixed effects, unemployment,
and branch deregulation, there is not a significant, independent link between each of these traits and
the various measures of income inequality. Most importantly for the purposes of this paper, the
results on deregulation are robust to conditioning on these factors.
Additional robustness tests confirm these findings. Controlling for the size of each state’s
aggregate economy, the level of real per capita income in each state, or lagged values of each state’s
Gini coefficient yields similar results. We were also concerned that the migration of labor across
state lines could affect the results. If deregulation induces interstate labor reallocations that tighten
the distribution of income, we want to identify and understand these dynamics. In unreported
regressions, we regress the share of immigrants per state-year on the branch deregulation dummy,
while controlling for year and state-fixed effects. We did not find any significant effects of branch
deregulation on migration flows. We also controlled for migration flows directly in the Table 3
regressions and obtain the same conclusions. Thus, interstate labor migration does not seem to be

14

driving this paper’s results. Finally, the results hold when examining household income, rather than
individual income.
3.3. Dynamics of deregulation and the distribution of income
We next examine the dynamics of the relation between deregulation and inequality. We do
this by including a series of dummy variables in the standard regression to trace out the year-byyear effects of intrastate deregulation one the logarithm of the Gini coefficient:
Log (Gini)st = α + β1D-10st + β2D-9st + … + β25D+15st + As +Bt + εst,

(2)

where the deregulation dummy variables, the “D’s,” equal zero, except as follows: D-j equals one
for states in the jth year before deregulation, while D+j equals one for states in the jth year after
deregulation. We exclude the year of deregulation, thus estimating the dynamic effect of
deregulation on income distribution relative to the year of deregulation. As and Bt are vectors of
state and year dummy variables, respectively. At the end points, D-10st equals one for all year that
are ten or more years before deregulation, while D+15st equals one for all years that are fifteen or
more years after deregulation. Thus, there is much greater variance for these end points and the
estimates may be measured with less precision. Figure 2 plots the results and the 95% confidence
intervals, centering the estimates around year 0, the year of deregulation.
Figure 2 illustrates two key points: innovations in the distribution of income did not precede
deregulation and the impact of deregulation on inequality materializes very quickly. As shown, the
coefficients on the deregulation dummy variables are insignificantly different from zero for all years
before deregulation, with no trends in inequality prior to branch deregulation. Next, note that
inequality falls immediately after deregulation, such that D+1 is negative and significant at the 5%
level. Thus, the particular mechanisms and channels connecting bank deregulation with the
distribution of income must be fast acting. The impact of deregulation on inequality grows for about

15

seven years after deregulation and then the effect levels off, indicating a steady-state drop in the
Gini coefficient of inequality of about 3.5%. In sum, changes in inequality do not precede
deregulation and deregulation has a level effect on inequality, but does not have a trend effect.
3.4. Deregulation and income for different income groups
Although the results demonstrate that income inequality fell after intrastate branch
deregulation, the analyses do not yet provide information on whether the distribution of income
tightened because the rich got poorer, or because deregulation disproportionately helped the poor.
We now address this issue by examining the impact of branch deregulation on the incomes of
individuals across the full distribution of incomes. More specifically, we compute the logarithm of
income for the ith percentile of the distribution of income in each state s and year t, Y(i)s,t. We do
this for i equal to 5, 10, 15, …, 90, 95. We then run 19 regressions of the form:
Y(i)st = α + γDst + As +Bt + εst,

(3)

where the regressions are run for each ith percentile of the income distribution. Figure 3 depicts the
estimated coefficient, γ, from each of these 19 regressions and also indicates whether the estimates
are significant at the 5% level.
Figure 3 shows that intrastate branch deregulation tightened the distribution of income by
disproportionately helping relatively low income individuals. Deregulation boosted the incomes of
those with incomes below the 40th percentile. Deregulation did not have a significant impact on
others. Rather than reducing the incomes of relatively high income individuals, deregulation
reduced income inequality by increasing the incomes of the comparatively poor.

16

3.5. Mechanism: impact of deregulation as a function of initial conditions
We next assess whether the impact of deregulation on the distribution of income varies in
predictable ways across states with different initial conditions. If the impact of deregulation on
income inequality varies in a theoretically predictable manner, this provides greater confidence in
the conclusions, sheds empirical light on the mechanisms through which deregulation influences the
distribution of income, and also reduces concerns about reverse causality.
If bank deregulation reduced income inequality by boosting bank performance, then the
impact of bank deregulation should be stronger in states where branch regulation had a more
harmful effect on bank performance prior to deregulation. Following Kroszner and Strahan (1999),
we consider four initial conditions that reflect the harmful effects of branch regulation before
deregulation. First, unit banking -- where states typically restricted banks to having one office -was the most extreme form of branching restriction and exerted the biggest effect on bank
performance before deregulation. Thus, we expect that deregulation exerted a particularly large
impact on income inequality in states that had unit banks before they deregulated. Second, states
with a high share of small banks will tend to benefit disproportionately from branching restrictions
that protect small banks from competition. Thus, we expect that deregulation had an especially large
impact on inequality in states with a comparatively high ratio of small banks at the time of
deregulation. Third, small firms tend to face greater barriers to obtaining credit from distant banks
than larger firms, suggesting that local branching restrictions that protect local banking monopolies
were particularly harmful in states dominated by small firms. Thus, we expect that deregulation had
a bigger impact in states with a large proportion of small firms prior to deregulation. Finally, we
examine population dispersion. Local banking monopolies will be particularly well-protected if the
population is diffuse, so that other banks tend to be far away. This suggests that deregulation would

17

have a bigger effect on inequality in states with high initial population dispersion. These four initial
conditions are not independent. States that had adopted unit banking before deregulation tended to
have a higher share of small banks and firms and more dispersed populations. The correlations
between the four characteristics are far from perfect, however. The highest pair-wise correlation
coefficient is 0.53. Since we do not have strong reasons to favor one indicator over another, we
provide the results on each in our assessment of whether intrastate branch deregulation has a
particularly large effect on the distribution of income in those economies where theory suggests the
impact will be largest.
The results in Table 4 indicate that the impact of branch deregulation on income inequality
was stronger in states where branching restrictions had been especially harmful to bank activities
before deregulation. As shown in Table 4, branch deregulation reduced income inequality more in
states that had (a) unit banking (column 1), (b) a more dispersed population (column 2), (c) a higher
share of small banks (column 3), and (d) a larger share of small firms (column 4). More specifically,
deregulation exerted a strong, negative effect on inequality in unit banking states, while this effect
was weaker, both economically and statistically, in non-unit banking states. In terms of population
dispersion, the share of small banks, and the share of small firms, the results indicate that branch
deregulation exerted an economically large and statistically significant impact on income inequality
in those states with above the median values of these pre-deregulation characteristics. Branch
deregulation reduced inequality more in states where branching restrictions had been particularly
harmful to the operation of the banking system before liberalization, suggesting that branch
deregulation tightened the distribution of income by enhancing bank performance.

18

4. Labor market channels
4.1. Theories of how financial markets affect labor markets and the distribution of income
Having found that branch deregulation decreased income inequality by affecting bank
performance, we now explore three potential channels underlying these findings. The first two
explanations rely on (i) branch deregulation improving the ability of the poor to access banking
services directly and (ii) the poor using this improved access to either purchase more education or
become entrepreneurs. The third explanation focuses on firms’ demand for labor, not on the poor
directly using financial services. These explanations are not mutually exclusive.
In terms of entrepreneurship, financial imperfections represent particularly severe
impediments to poor individuals opening their own businesses for two key reasons: (1) the poor
have comparatively little collateral and (2) the fixed costs of borrowing are relatively high for the
poor. From this perspective, branch deregulation that improves credit markets will lower the
barriers to entrepreneurship disproportionately for poor individuals (Banerjee and Newman, 1993).
In terms of human capital accumulation, financial imperfections in conjunction with the high
cost of schooling represent particularly pronounced barriers to the poor purchasing education,
perpetuating income inequality (Galor and Zeira, 1993). In this context, financial reforms that ease
financial market imperfections will reduce income inequality by allowing talented, but poor,
individuals to borrow and purchase education.
Textbook price theory provides a third channel through which bank deregulation affects
income inequality that does not involve the poor directly increasing their use of financial services.
Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) show that branch deregulation reduced the cost of capital. Reductions
in the cost of capital induce firms to (1) substitute capital for labor and (2) expand output, which
increases demand for capital and labor. On net, if the output effect dominates, the reduction in the

19

cost of capital will increase the demand for labor. Even under these conditions, however, the impact
of deregulation on inequality is ambiguous because we do not know if the increased demand for
labor falls primarily on higher- or lower-income workers. If deregulation disproportionately
increases the demand for lower-income workers, then branch deregulation could tighten the
distribution of income by affecting firms’ demand for labor, not by directly increasing the use of
financial services by relatively low-income individuals.
4.2. Evidence on banks, inequality, and labor markets
To provide an initial assessment of the entrepreneurship channel, we decompose the impact
of bank branch deregulation on income inequality into that part accounted for by a reduction in the
income gap between the self-employed and wage earners and that part accounted for by a reduction
in income inequality within the self-employed and within wage earners. We conduct this
decomposition in two-steps. First, using the Theil index, we decompose income inequality into the
“between” component, which measures income inequality between the self-employed and wage
earners, and the “within” component, which is composed of inequality among the self-employed
and inequality among wage earners. This decomposition is done for each state and year. We then
estimate the impact of deregulation on each of these components controlling for state and year fixed
effects. This yields that part of the estimated change in income inequality from deregulation that is
accounted by a reduction in inequality between the self-employed and wage earners and that part
accounted for by a reduction in inequality within the two groups.
Enhanced entrepreneurship does not directly account for the impact of deregulation on the
distribution of income. As shown in Panel A of Table 5, none of the change in income inequality is
accounted for by a reduction in between group inequality. All of the reduction in income inequality
from deregulation is accounted for by a reduction in income inequality among salaried workers. The

20

change in between group inequality is actually positive, but insignificant. These results are
unsurprising in light of the following observations: (1) the self-employed account for only 9% of the
sample, (2) the proportion self-employed individuals did not increase following branch
deregulation, and (3) the self-employed do not, on average, have higher incomes than salaried
employees after accounting for educational differences (Hamilton, 2000). These results do not
suggest that the relation between branch deregulation and entrepreneurship is unimportant. Bank
deregulation boosted the rate of entry and exit of firms (Black and Strahan, 2002; Kerr and Nanda,
2009). Nonetheless, the decomposition findings indicate that direct changes in entrepreneurial
income and the movement of lower-income salaried workers into higher-income entrepreneurial
activities do not account for the tightening of the distribution of income following deregulation.
In Panel B of Table 5, we conduct a similar decomposition but focus on education groups.
We divide the sample into those with some education beyond a high school degree (about 51% of
the sample) and those with educational attainment of a high school degree or less (about 49% of the
sample). Since Panel A showed that all of the reduction in income inequality is accounted for by a
reduction in inequality among wage earners, we focus only on wage earners in conducting the
decomposition by educational attainment.
The reduction in income inequality triggered by branch deregulation is accounted for by
both a closing of the gap between low- and high-educated workers and by a fall in inequality among
low-educated workers. From Panel B of Table 5, 73% (0.0074/0.0102) overall income inequality is
accounted for by a reduction in inequality within the two education categories, and the bulk of this
reduction arises because of a tightening of the distribution of income among the less-educated
group. Furthermore, 27% (0.0028/0.0102) of the reduction in income inequality explained by bank
deregulation is accounted for by a reduction in the income gap between education groups. The

21

between group results are consistent with at least two possible explanations: (1) bank deregulation
eased credit constraints and induced lower-income individuals to increase their investment in
education, thereby reducing income inequality and (2) bank deregulation increased the demand for
workers in the lower-education group, reducing between group inequality.
To help distinguish among possible explanations for these findings, Table 6 presents two
additional analyses. First, we test whether bank deregulation lowers earnings inequality among
workers of different ages. Besides examining workers between the ages of 25 and 54 as above, we
also assess the 30-54 and 53-54 age groups. Since Figure 3 shows that the impact of deregulation on
income inequality is almost immediate and Levine and Rubinstein (2009) find that the main impact
of deregulation on education involves a reduction in high school dropout rates, then if deregulation
is reducing earnings inequality by increasing education we should obverse this primarily among the
relatively young workers, not those who are older than 30 or 35. If we find the relation between
deregulation and earnings inequality across the different age groups, this suggests that increased
educational attainment is not the primary channel during our estimation period.
Second, we more directly control for education by eliminating the educational attainment
component of wage earnings. Specifically, in the analyses thus far, we have computed measures of
earnings inequality based on the unconditional wage earnings of individuals. We now condition
each individual’s earnings on educational attainment. That is, we compute that part of an
individual’s earnings that are unexplained by years of education. Then, we assess the impact of
branch deregulation on measures of earnings inequality that are computed based on conditional
earnings. If branch deregulation also reduces these conditional earnings inequality measure, this
suggests that deregulation is not reducing earnings inequality only by its affect on educational
attainment. In particular, we first regress log earnings on six dummy variables corresponding to the

22

number of years of educational attainment (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, 16, and more than 15 and year
fixed effects. We then collect the residuals to calculate the conditional earnings inequality measures.
In unreported robustness tests, we also condition on gender and ethnicity, and obtain the same
results.
As shown in Table 6, education does not account for the impact of bank deregulation on
earnings inequality, suggesting that branch deregulation reduced earnings inequality primarily by
boosting firms’ relative demand for low-income workers. First, across the four earnings inequality
indicators, we obtain very similar results when using different age samples of workers as reported in
Panels A-C. The easing of credit constraints in response to bank deregulation is most likely to affect
the educational choices of individuals in school, or just out of school. It seems unlikely that branch
deregulation will cause a sufficiently large and rapid increase in the educational attainment of
workers above the age of 35, such that the resulting increase in earnings would tighten economywide measures of earnings inequality in the year after deregulation. Second, bank deregulation
reduces conditional earnings inequality, where the conditioning is done based on educational
attainment. As shown in Panel D, the estimated impact of deregulation on earnings inequality holds
for unconditional and conditional earnings. These findings imply that deregulation is not reducing
earnings inequality only through its affect on educational attainment. Rather, though needing
additional research, the findings are more consistent with the view that bank branch deregulation
reduced earnings inequality by boosting the relative demand for low-income workers.

23

5. Conclusions
Policymakers and economists disagree sharply about the impact of bank regulations on the
distribution of income. While some argue that the unregulated expansion of large banks will
increase banking fees and reduce the economic opportunities of the poor, others hold that
regulations restrict competition, protect monopolistic banks, and widen the distribution of income.
More generally, an influential political economy literature stresses that income distributional
considerations, rather than efficiency considerations, frequently exert the dominant influence on
bank regulations as discussed in Claessens and Perotti (2007) and Haber and Perotti (2008).
We find that liberalizing restrictions on intrastate branching across the states of the U.S.
tightened the distribution of income. This finding is robust to an array of sensitivity analyses. We
find no evidence that reverse causality drives the results. Moreover, the impact of deregulation on
income distribution varies in a theoretically predictable manner across states with distinct economic,
financial, and demographic characteristics at the time of deregulation. Critically, deregulation
tightened the distribution of income by disproportionately helping the poor, not by hurting the rich.
These findings support the view that branch regulation in the United States restricted competition,
protected local banking monopolies, and impeded the economic opportunities of the relatively poor.

24

References
Acharya, V., Imbs, J., Sturgess, J., 2008. Finance and efficiency: do bank branching regulations
matter?, London Business School mimeo.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 2000. Comparing Financial Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Amel, D., Liang, N., 1992. The relationship between entry into banking markets and changes in
legal restrictions on entry. The Antitrust Bulletin 37, 631-49.
Autor, D.H., Donohue, J.J. III., Schwab, S.J., 2006. The costs of wrongful-discharge laws. The
Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 211-231.
Banerjee, A., Newman, A.F., 1993. Occupational choice and the process of development, Journal of
Political Economy 101, 274-98.
Barth, J.R., Caprio, G., Levine, R., 2006. Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till Angels Govern.
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2007. Finance, inequality and the poor: cross-country
evidence. Journal of Economic Growth 12, 27-49.
Black, S.E., Strahan, P., 2001. The division of spoils: rent-sharing and discrimination in a regulated
industry. American Economic Review 91, 814-831.
Black, S.E., Strahan, P., 2002. Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability. Journal of Finance 57,
2807-2833.
Burgess, R., Pande, R., 2007. Can rural banks reduce poverty? evidence from the Indian social
banking experiment. American Economic Review 95, 780-95.
Calem, P., 1994. The impact of geographic deregulation on small banks. Business Review, Federal
Research Bank of Philadelphia, 17-31.
Claessens, S., Perotti, E., 2007. Finance and inequality: channels and evidence. Journal of
Comparative Economics 35, 748-773.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2009. Finance and opportunity. Annual Review of Financial
Economics 1, Palo Alto, CA, forthcoming.
Demyanyk, Y., 2007. U.S. banking deregulation and self-employment: a differential impact on
those in need, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper.
Demyanyk, Y., Ostergaard, C., Sorensen, B., 2007. U.S. banking deregulation, small businesses,
and interstate insurance of personal income. Journal of Finance 62, 2763-2801.
Flannery, M., 1984. The social costs of unit banking restrictions. Journal of Monetary Economics

25

13, 237-49.
Galor, O., Zeira, J., 1993. Income distribution and macroeconomics. Review of Economic Studies
60, 35-52.
Greenwood, J., Jovanovic, B., 1990. Financial development, growth, and the distribution of income.
Journal of Political Economy 98, 1076-1107.
Haber, S., Perotti, E., 2008. The political economy of finance. Stanford University mimeo.
Hamilton, B.H., 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? an empirical analysis of the returns to selfemployment. The Journal of Political Economy 108, 604-631.
Hammond, B., 1957. Bank and Politics in America: From the Revolution to the Civil War.
Princeton University Press.
Huang, R., 2008. Evaluating the real effect of bank branching deregulation: comparing contiguous
counties across U.S. state borders. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 678-705.
Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P., 1996. The finance-growth nexus: evidence from bank branch
deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639-670.
Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P., 1998. Entry restrictions, industry evolution and dynamic efficiency:
evidence from commercial banking. Journal of Law and Economics 41, 239-74.
Jerzmanowski, M., Nabar, M., 2007. Financial development and wage inequality: Theory and
Evidence. Mimeo.
Kerr, W., Nanda, R., 2009. Democratizing entry: banking deregulations, financing constraints, and
entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Kroszner, R., Strahan, P., 1999. What drives deregulation? economics and politics of the relaxation
of bank branching deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1437-67.
Levine, R., Rubinstein, Y., 2009. Credit constraints, teen pregnancy, and high school diplomas.
Brown University mimeo.
McLaughin, S., 1995. The impact of interstate banking and branching reform: evidence from the
states. Current Issues in Economics and Finance 1, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Savage, D.T., 1993. Interstate banking: a status report. Federal Reserve Bulletin 79, 1075-89.
Southworth, S.D., 1928. Branch Banking in the United States. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
White, E.N., 1982. The political economy of banking regulation, 1864-1933. Journal of Economic
History 42, 33-40.

26

Table 1A
SUMMARY STATISTICS ON INDIVIDUALS
Mean

Min

Max

Age

38.4

25

54

Female

0.49

0

1

White, non-Hispanic

0.75

0

1

Black, non-Hispanic

0.11

0

1

Hispanic

0.09

0

1

High-school dropout

0.13

0

1

High-school grad

0.36

0

1

Some college education

0.24

0

1

College grad or advanced degree

0.27

0

1

Wage or salary earner

0.80

0

1

Entrepreneur

0.09

0

1

32,369

0

385,961

Total personal income ($2000)

NOTE – The table provides summary statistics for the sample of respondents
to March Current Population Surveys in the years 1977-2007. The sample is
subject to restrictions described in Appendix Table 3. The number of
observations in the sample is 1,859,411. The mean values in the first column
are weighted by CPS sampling weights. Total personal income is adjusted to
constant 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.

Table 1B
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON INCOME INEQUALITY
Standard deviation of logs
N

Mean

Min

Max

Crossstates

Withinstates

Within
state-years

Gini coefficient

1,519

0.431

0.334

0.532

0.045

0.047

0.037

Theil index

1,519

0.326

0.187

0.506

0.105

0.098

0.080

Log(90/10) ratio

1,519

2.772

1.653

10.797

0.636

0.380

0.329

Log(75/25) ratio

1,519

1.218

0.747

2.637

0.146

0.127

0.094

NOTE – The table provides descriptive statistics for the following measures of income inequality: [1] Gini coefficient, [2] Theil index,
[3] log ratio of the 90th and 10th percentiles of the income distribution, and [4] log ration of the 75th and 25th percentiles of the income
distribution. Each measure of inequality is based on total personal income of respondents to March Current Population Surveys
described in Table 1A. We use sampling weights in all calculations of inequality measures. Inequality measures are discussed in
more details in Appendix Table 2. The number of observations in the table corresponds to 49 states (we exclude Delaware and
South Dakota) times 31 years between 1976 and 2006. For each measure of inequality we report the mean, the minimum and the
maximum values, as well as the standard deviation of log of each measure (except log(90/10) and log(75/25) which are already in
logs). We report three types of standard deviations: cross-state, within-state, and within state-year. These standard deviations are
useful in calculating the economic magnitude of the impact of bank deregulation on income inequality.

Table 2
TIMING OF BANK DEREGULATION AND PRE-EXISTING INCOME INEQUALITY: THE DURATION MODEL
(1)
Gini coefficient

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

.02

.02

.03

.03

.01

(.03)

(.05)
-1.50
(1.41)
-1.28**
(.64)
-.73
(1.27)
-.64
(2.41)
.02
(.04)

(.02)

(.03)
.41
(1.15)
-1.08
(1.01)
-3.14**
(1.44)
2.40
(1.84)
.04
(.04)
7.53***
(2.06)
9.00**
(3.69)
1.99
(2.44)
-1.06
(1.02)
-1.17**
(.54)
-12.50***
(3.31)
.41**
(.20)
.06
(.10)
-5.35
(6.33)
.24*
(.13)
-.03
(.15)

(.03)
.41
(1.05)
-.82
(.95)
-3.16***
(1.09)
2.62
(1.87)
.03
(.03)
8.17***
(1.70)
10.00**
(4.20)
.90
(2.08)
-.50
(.87)
-.52
(.54)
-16.28***
(4.23)
.12
(.17)
.18
(.16)
-6.23
(4.57)
.23
(.14)
-.13
(.19)

Growth rate of per capita GDP ($2000)
Proportion blacks
Proportion high-school dropouts
Proportion female-headed households
Unemployment rate

6.62***
(2.36)
12.00**
(5.14)
3.76
(2.38)
-2.12**
(.99)
-1.95***
(.62)
-11.27***
(3.20)
.25
(.20)
.04
(.12)
-2.44
(6.65)
.29**
(.13)
.00
(.20)

Small bank asset share of all banking
assets in the state
Capital ratio of small banks relative
to large in the state
Relative size of insurance in states
where banks may sell insurance, 0 otherwise
Indicator is 1 if banks may sell insurance
in the state
Relative size of insurance in states where
banks may not sell insurance, 0 otherwise
Small firm share of the number of firms
in the state
Share of state government controlled by
Democrats
Indicator is 1 if state controlled by
one party
Average yield on bank loans in the state
minus Fed funds rate
Indicator is 1 if state has unit
banking law
Indicator is 1 if state changes bank
insurance powers
Regional indicators

No

No

No

No

Yes

Observations

408

408

408

408

408

NOTE - The model is a Weibul hazard model where the dependent variable is the log expected time to bank branch
deregulation. All the right-hand side variables are included in levels. Sample period is 1976 to 1994 and the sample
comprises 37 states that deregulated after 1977. States drop from the sample once they deregulate. Data on per capita Gross
State Product are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Proportion blacks, high-school dropouts, and female-headed
households are calculated from the March Supplements to the Current Population Surveys. Data on unemployment rate are
obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. All other control variables are taken from Kroszner and Strahan (1999).
Standard errors are adjusted for state-level clustering and appear in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance levels at
10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Table 3
THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON INCOME INEQUALITY
Gini
Coefficient
(1)

Theil
Index
(2)

(90/10)
Ratio
(3)

(75/25)
Ratio
(4)

-0.022***
(0.008)
0.35
1,519

-0.041**
(0.016)
0.43
1,519

-0.135**
(0.058)
0.74
1,519

-0.077***
(0.020)
0.60
1,519

-0.018***
(0.006)
-0.028
(0.041)
-0.218
(0.154)
0.140*
(0.071)
0.017
(0.058)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.39

-0.032**
(0.014)
-0.050
(0.081)
-0.462
(0.320)
0.219
(0.147)
0.028
(0.125)
0.013***
(0.003)
0.46

-0.101**
(0.050)
-0.140
(0.229)
-0.826
(1.451)
0.432
(0.635)
0.226
(0.501)
0.069***
(0.014)
0.75

-0.066***
(0.017)
-0.114
(0.119)
-0.231
(0.473)
-0.072
(0.155)
0.102
(0.153)
0.023***
(0.003)
0.63

1,519

1,519

1,519

1,519

PANEL A: NO CONTROLS
Bank deregulation
R2
Observations
PANEL B: WITH CONTROLS
Bank deregulation
Growth rate of per capita GDP ($2000)
Proportion blacks
Proportion high-school dropouts
Proportion female-headed households
Unemployment rate
R2
Observations

NOTE - The table shows the impact of bank deregulation on the natural logarithm of the different
measures of income inequality. The number of observations in each regression corresponds to 49 states
(we exclude Delaware and South Dakota) times 31 years between 1976 and 2006. All models control for
state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state-level and appear in parentheses. *,
**, and *** indicate significance levels at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Table 4
THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON LOG GINI COEFFICIENT OF INCOME INEQUALITY
AS A FUNCTION OF INITIAL STATE CHARACTERISTICS
Bank deregulation
Deregulation x (unit banking)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.012
(.008)
-.020*
(.010)

-.014*
(.008)

.019
(.013)

.577**
(.253)

Deregulation x (initial population dispersion)

-.180**
(.079)

Deregulation x (initial share of small banks)

-.326***
(.111)

Deregulation x (initial share of small firms)
Linear combination

-.674**
(.287)
-.032***
(.010)

Evaluated at the 25th percentile
Evaluated at the 50th percentile
Evaluated at the 75th percentile

Observations

1,519

-.016**
(.007)
-.017**
(.007)
-.021***
(.007)

-.003
(.008)
-.014*
(.007)
-.027***
(.008)

-.009
(.008)
-.016**
(.007)
-.026***
(.008)

1,519

1,209

1,209

NOTE – The table presents estimates of the impact of bank deregulation on income inequality as a
function of initial state characteristics. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the Gini
coefficient. All models control for state and year fixed effects. Since we control for state fixed effects
the initial state characteristics are dropped from the regressions. Unit banking states are: CO, AR, FL,
IL, IA, KS, MN, MO, MT, NE, ND, OK, TX, WI, WV, and WY. Data on population dispersion are from
the Census Bureau. Data on the share of small banks and small firms is obtained from Kroszner and
Strahan (1999). These data exclude 10 states that deregulated in 1960 and therefore have 310 fewer
state-year observations. Standard errors are adjusted for state-level clustering and appear in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance levels at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Table 5
DECOMPOSING THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON INCOME INEQUALITY TO BETWEEN- AND
WITHIN-GROUPS
Employment Groups:
PANEL A:
ALL WORKERS
Bank deregulation

Total

Between
Groups

Within
Groups

Self
Employed

Salaried

-.0103**
(.0043)

.0002
(.0003)

-.0105**
(.0042)

-.0077
(.0074)

-.0102**
(.0042)

Education Groups:
High School
Some College
or Less
or More

PANEL B:
SALARIED WORKERS

Total

Between
Groups

Within
Groups

Bank deregulation

-.0102**

-.0028**

-.0074**

-.0086*

-.0039

(.0042)

(.0011)

(.0035)

(.0043)

(.0038)

NOTE - The table reports the impact of intrastate deregulation on the Theil index of income
inequality. The number of observations in each decomposition is 1,519, corresponding to 49 states
(we exclude Delaware and South Dakota) times 31 years between 1976 and 2006. All
decompositions control for state and year fixed. In panel A we divide the sample into two mutually
exclusive groups: (a) those who are self-employed, and (b) those who work for wages. In panel B
we divide the sample of wage workers into two mutually exclusive groups: (a) those with twelve or
less years of completed education, and (b) those with thirteen or more years of completed
education. In the first column in both panels we estimate the overall impact of intrastate
deregulation on the Theil index of inequality using all groups. In the next column we estimate the
impact of deregulation on inequality between the different groups, whereas in the third column we
estimate the impact of deregulation on inequality within the different groups combined. The second
and the third columns add up to the first column. In the next columns we estimate the impact of
deregulation on income inequality separately within each of the groups. Standard errors are
adjusted for state level clustering and appear in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance
levels at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Table 6
THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON EARNINGS INEQUALITY
Gini
Coefficient
(1)

Theil
Index
(2)

(90/10)
Ratio
(3)

(75/25)
Ratio
(4)

-0.042**
(0.017)
0.26
1,519

-0.094***
(0.030)
0.47
1,519

-0.051***
(0.017)
0.33
1,519

PANEL B: AGES 30-54, UNCONDITIONAL EARNINGS
Bank deregulation
-0.023***
-0.045**
(0.009)
(0.018)
R2
0.11
0.24
Observations
1,519
1,519

-0.111***
(0.033)
0.46
1,519

-0.058***
(0.017)
0.35
1,519

PANEL C: AGES 35-54, UNCONDITIONAL EARNINGS
Bank deregulation
-0.019**
-0.036**
(0.008)
(0.018)
2
R
0.11
0.22
Observations
1,519
1,519

-0.072**
(0.031)
0.42
1,519

-0.055***
(0.016)
0.33
1,519

PANEL D: AGES 25-54, EARNINGS CONDITIONAL ON EDUCATION
Bank deregulation
-0.037***
-0.073***
-0.091***
(0.012)
(0.027)
(0.029)
2
R
0.58
0.51
0.59

-0.038***
(0.013)
0.50

PANEL A: AGES 25-54, UNCONDITIONAL EARNINGS
Bank deregulation
R2
Observations

Observations

-0.022**
(0.008)
0.13
1,519

1,519

1,519

1,519

1,519

NOTE – The table shows the impact of bank deregulation on the natural logarithm of
different measures of earnings inequality. Standard errors are adjusted for state level
clustering and appear in parentheses. All specifications control for state and year
fixed effects and do not include other control variables. In panels A-C, the inequality
measures are based on real annual earnings as reported by CPS respondents. Panels
A-C differ only in the ages of the respondents. In panel D, in contrast, we first regress
log real annual earnings on six educational categories corresponding to years of
completed education (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, 16, and 16+) and then calculate measures of
inequality based on the residuals.

Appendix Table 1
TIMING OF INTRASTATE BANK DEREGULATION
State

Postal
code

Year of
deregulation

State

Postal
code

Year of
deregulation

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi

AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS

1981
1960
1960
1994
1960
1991
1980
1960
1960
1988
1983
1986
1960
1988
1989
1999
1987
1990
1988
1975
1960
1984
1987
1993
1986

Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

1990
1985
1960
1987
1977
1991
1976
1960
1987
1979
1988
1985
1982
1960
1960
1960
1985
1988
1981
1970
1978
1985
1987
1990
1988

Missouri

MO

1990

NOTE – The table shows the year of branch deregulation for each state. Source: Kroszner and Strahan (1999).

Measure
Gini
coefficient

Appendix Table 2
DIFFERENT MEASURES OF INCOME INEQUALITY
Mathematical Expression
Interpretation
Advantages
1 - 2∫L(x)dx,
The Gini coefficient
[1] Very intuitive
where L() is the Lorenz
is equal to 0 in the
and widely used.
curve showing the relation
case of perfect
[2] Makes use of
between the percentage of
equality when
all information
income recipients and the
exactly s percent of
about the
percentage of income they
total income is held
distribution.
earn.
by bottom s
individuals
(s=1,...,100). The
Gini coefficient is
equal to 1 if all the
income is held by
one individual.

Disadvantages
[1] Sensitive to
changes in the
middle of the
distribution.
[2] Not easily
decomposable
to between- and
within-group
inequality.

Theil index

n-1∑i{(yi/μ)ln(yi/μ)},
where i indexes individuals
(i=1,…,n), y is personal
income, and μ is the mean
value of y. The first term
inside the sum is
individual’s share of total
income and the second term
is that individual’s income
relative to the mean.

If all individuals
have the same (i.e.,
mean) income, then
the Theil index is 0.
If one individual
has all the income,
then the index is
ln(n).

Easily
decomposable to
between- and
within-group
inequality.

Hard to
interpret.

Log(75/25)

ln(y75) – ln(y25),
where y75 and y25 are the
75th and the 25th percentiles
of personal income
distribution (y),
respectively.

The ratio is equal to
0 if the 75th and the
25th percentiles of
the distribution are
equal. There is no
upper bound to the
ratio.

[1] Intuitive
measure of the
percentage
difference
between the third
and the first
quartiles of a
distribution.
[2] Robust to
extreme values.

Does not
measure the
entire
distribution.

Log(90/10)

ln(y90) – ln(y10),
where y75 and y25 are the
90th and the 10th percentiles
of personal income
distribution (y),
respectively.

The ratio is equal to
0 if the 90th and the
10th percentiles of
the distribution are
equal. There is no
upper bound to the
ratio.

[1] Intuitive
measure of the
percentage
difference
between the top
and the bottom
deciles of a
distribution.
[2] Robust to
extreme values.

Does not
measure the
entire
distribution.

Appendix Table 3
SAMPLE CONSTRUCTION
Total number of observations in the March Current Population Surveys in the years 1977-2007:

5,085,135

Sample restrictions (observations deleted):
1. Persons between the ages of 25 and 54 with non-negative personal income below the 99th
percentile
2. Non-missing years of completed education and demographic characteristics

3. Not residing in group quarters

4. Not residing in Delaware or South Dakota

5. With positive total household income

6. Positive and non-missing sampling weights

Total number of observations that satisfy sample restrictions above:

(3,154,652)

(21,786)

(2,142)

(45,780)

(1,276)

(88)

1,859,411

NOTE – March Current Population Surveys (CPS) are available at <http://cps.ipums.org/cps/>. We start with the 1977 survey
because exact state of residence is not available prior to 1977. We follow the literature and exclude Delaware and South Dakota
because of large concentration of credit card banks in these states. From 1977 to 1982, group quarters included housing units
containing five or more people unrelated to the person in charge. As of 1983, group quarters were defined in the CPS as noninstitutional living arrangements for groups not living in conventional housing units or groups living in housing units
containing ten or more unrelated people or nine or more people unrelated to the person in charge. Because we use sampling
weights to construct measures of income inequality, we exclude persons with missing or zero sampling weights.

Figure 1
TIMING OF BANK DEREGULATION AND PRE-EXISTING INCOME INEQUALITY: GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS
(A)
2000
IA

1995
Year of bank deregulation

AR
MN
1990

CO
MO

WI
IN

IL
KS

NH

NM
KY

MT

FL OKWY
TX
LA
MI WV ND
MS
WA
NE
OR
TN

HI
1985
MA

GA
PA
UT
1980

AL

CT
OH
VA
NJ

1975
-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

Average Gini coefficient prior to bank deregulation

(B)
2000
IA

1995
Year of bank deregulation

AR
MN
CONM
KY WI
MT
MO
IN
FL WY
TX
IL LA
OK
ND NHKS
MI
MS
TN ORWANE
MA

1990

1985

WV
HI
GA
PA

AL
1980

UT

CT
OH
VA

1975
-.02

0

.02

.04

Average change in the Gini coefficient prior to bank deregulation

NOTE – Figure (A) shows a scatter plot of the average Gini coefficient of income
inequality prior to bank deregulation and the year of bank deregulation. Figure (B)
shows a scatter plot of the average change in the Gini coefficient of income inequality
prior to bank deregulation and the year of bank deregulation. The t-statistics for the
correlations in figures (A) and (B) are 0.20 and -1.16, respectively.

Figure 2
THE DYNAMIC IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON LOG GINI COEFFICIENT
.04

Percentage point change

.02

0

-.02

-.04

-.06

-10

-5

0
5
Years before/after intrastate deregulation

10

15

NOTE – The figure plots the impact of intrastate bank deregulation on the natural logarithm
of the Gini coefficient of income inequality. We consider a 25 year window, spanning from
10 years before deregulation until 15 years after deregulation. The dashed lines represent
95% confidence intervals, adjusted for state-level clustering. Specifically, we report estimated
coefficients from the following regression:
log(Gini)st = α + β1D-10st + β2D-9st + … + β25D+15st + As +Bt + εst
The D’s equal zero, except as follows: D-j equals one for states in the jth year before
deregulation, while D+j equals one for states in the jth year after deregulation. We exclude the
year of deregulation, thus estimating the dynamic effect of deregulation on the different
percentiles of income distribution relative to the year of deregulation. As and Bt are vectors
of state and year dummy variables that account for state and year fixed effects, respectively.

Figure 3
THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON DIFFERENT PERCENTILES OF INCOME DISTRIBUTION
.15

Percentage point change

.1

.05

0

-.05
5

10

15

20

25

30

35 40 45 50 55 60 65
Percentile of income distribution
Significant at 5%

70

75

80

85

90

95

Not significant

NOTE – Each bar in the figure represents the estimated impact of bank deregulation on a natural
logarithm of a specific percentile of income distribution. Dark bars represent estimates significant
at 5% after adjusting the standard errors for clustering. Light bars represent statistically
insignificant estimates. Specifically, we report the estimates of γ from 19 separate regressions of
the following form:
Y(i)st = α + γDst + As +Bt + εst
where Y(i)st is the natural logarithm of ith percentile of income distribution in state s and year t.
Dst is a dummy variable which equals to zero prior to bank deregulation and equals to one
afterwards. As and Bt are vectors of state and year dummy variables that account for state and
year fixed effects, respectively. Each of the 19 regressions has 1,519 observations corresponding to
49 states (we exclude Delaware and South Dakota) times 31 years between 1976 and 2006.

