NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHILD PROTECTION AND ADULT CRIME:
USING INVESTIGATOR ASSIGNMENT TO ESTIMATE CAUSAL EFFECTS OF FOSTER CARE
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
Working Paper 13291
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13291

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

Special thanks to Robert Moffitt, Mark Duggan, Steve Levitt, Michael Greenstone, Jon Gruber, Jim
Poterba, Josh Angrist, Phil Oreopolous, Tom Stoker, Roberto Rigobon, Tavneet Suri, Robert Goerge
and Lucy Mackey-Bilaver for comments and advice on this research program. I would like to acknowledge
the Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of Chicago for the creation of the Integrated
Database on Child and Family Programs in Illinois that was used in this study. All findings, interpretations
and conclusions based on the use of the IDB are solely my responsibility and do not necessarily represent
the views of the Chapin Hall Center for Children. I would also like to acknowledge the generous support
of the National Science Foundation under grant SES-0518757. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects
of Foster Care
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 13291
August 2007
JEL No. H75,I38
ABSTRACT
Nearly 20% of young prison inmates spent part of their youth in foster care - the placement of abused
or neglected children with substitute families. Little is known whether foster care placement reduces
or increases the likelihood of criminal behavior. This paper uses the placement frequency of child
protection investigators as an instrument to identify causal effects of foster care placement on adult
arrest, conviction, and imprisonment rates. A unique dataset that links child abuse investigation data
to criminal justice data in Illinois allows a comparison of adult crime outcomes across individuals
who were investigated for abuse or neglect as children. Families are effectively randomized to child
protection investigators through a rotational assignment process, and child characteristics are similar
across investigators. Nevertheless, investigator placement frequencies are predictive of subsequent
foster care placement, and the results suggest that school-aged children who are on the margin of placement
have lower adult arrest rates when they remain at home.
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
E52-447
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu

1. Introduction
When parents are suspected of child abuse or neglect, their children may be
placed in foster care until reunification is deemed safe or adoptive homes are sought.
Each year, states spend $20 billion dollars on child protection services, including the
investigation of over 2 million children and the temporary housing of 800,000 (Bes et al.,
2002; US DHHS, 2004; US DHHS, 2006). Aside from the immediate goal of safety,
foster care is a powerful intervention in the lives of children who appear to be at great
risk of poor life outcomes. An estimated 28% of the homeless population spent time in
foster care as a youth (Burt et al., 1999). Former foster children have also been found to
be far more likely to drop out of school, join welfare, and experience substance abuse
problems (Clausen et al., 1998; Courtney and Piliavin, 1998; Dworsky and Courtney,
2000; US DHHS, 1999; Vinnerljung et al., 2006).
One area where the association between child maltreatment, foster care, and poor
life outcomes is particularly strong is criminality.1 Nearly 20% of the prison population
under the age of 30, and 25% of prisoners with prior convictions, report that they spent
part of their childhood in foster care.2 This is not surprising given the strong correlation
found between poor family backgrounds and later criminal behavior (Loeber and
Stouthamer-Loeber, 1986; Widom, 1989; Case and Katz, 1991; Sampson and Laub,
1993; Donohue and Levitt, 2001, Currie and Tekin, 2006; Pezzin, 2004). Meanwhile,
interventions for youth at risk for criminal behavior are thought to have some impact and

1

Criminal activity has received considerable attention from economists following Becker (1968). Recent
papers and reviews include Levitt, 1997; Freeman, 1999; Glaeser and Sacerdote, 1999; Jacob and Lefgren,
2003; Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2004; Lee and McCrary, 2005; Lochner and Moretti, 2004, among
others.
2
Data from the nationally-representative Survey of Inmates in Adult State and Federal Correctional
Facilities (1997).

1

provide motivation for child welfare policy. For example, high quality day care and
improved neighborhood settings have been associated with lower criminality (Belfield et
al., 2006; Oreopolous, 2003; Kling, Ludwig and Katz, 2005).
Foster care and juvenile delinquency have also been linked. Courtney, Terao, and
Bost (2004) surveyed children who will turn 18 in foster care in the Midwest and found
that two-thirds of the boys and half of the girls had a history of delinquency. JonsonReid and Barth (2000a, 2000b) considered children in California and found a modest
reduction in delinquency with in-home services compared to foster care placement.
Meanwhile, Doyle (2007) finds that children on the margin of foster care placement in
Cook County, Illinois (which includes the City of Chicago) were more likely to enter the
juvenile delinquency system if they were placed in foster care.
Little is known whether foster care placement is likely to reduce or exacerbate the
propensity for adult criminal behavior (Courtney, 2000; Gelles, 2000; Goerge, Wulzcyn,
and Fanshel, 1994; Jonson-Reid and Barth, 2000; National Research Council, 1998;
McDonald et al. 1996). While child abuse may lead to criminality later in life, the
removal of children from parents is thought to be traumatic as well. For example,
placement instability has been highlighted as a problem for children in foster care, with
the average foster child experiencing at least one placement disruption and a quarter
experiencing three or more moves.3 This leads to a difficult tradeoff between two
competing goals: child protection and family preservation (Barth, 1999; Maluccio, Pine,
and Warsh, 1994). The uncertainty over the effectiveness of placement is evident in the
number of children in foster care at the end of each year increasing from 200,000 to
3

There is a large empirical literature on placement instability, as it is one observable characteristic in
administrative data. See Zinn, et al. (2006), James et al. (2004), Newton et al. (2000), and Smith et al.
(2001).

2

500,000 in the 1960s, dropping back to 200,000 in the 1970s, and rising to more than
500,000 in the 1980s and 1990s. The current emphasis is increasingly placed on family
preservation (McDonald et al., 1996; Annie E. Case Foundation, 2002).
One of the limitations on previous research is the lack of long-term outcome data.
In addition, there are endogeneity concerns: worse outcomes for foster children could be
due to worse family backgrounds, as opposed to any effect of foster care placement
(Kerman, Wildfire, and Barth, 2002). In addition, children placed in foster care are likely
those who benefit most from placement, which can lead to a selection bias where average
outcomes may overstate the benefit of placement for marginal cases.
This paper uses a unique dataset that links child abuse investigation data with
criminal justice data in Illinois to compare adult crime outcomes across children who
were placed in foster care with children who were also investigated for abuse or neglect
but not subsequently placed in care. The foster care placement frequency of child
protection investigators is used as an instrumental variable to identify causal effects of
foster care placement on adult arrest, conviction, and imprisonment rates. Families are
assigned to investigators on a rotational basis within geographic field teams to smooth the
caseload. This has the empirical advantage of essentially randomizing families to
investigators: one family may receive an investigator who is more likely to recommend
foster care placement, while another family may draw an investigator who is more likely
to stress family preservation. The assignment process results in family characteristics
that are similar across investigators, and their placement tendencies provide a plausible
instrument to estimate the effects of foster care on later criminal activity. One advantage
of the approach is that the instrumental variable estimates apply to particularly policy-

3

relevant cases: children on the margin of placement where investigators may disagree
about the recommendation of removal.
The results suggest that school-aged children on the margin of placement have
lower arrest, conviction, and imprisonment rates when they remain at home, especially
for children outside of the Chicago area where the linkage across the databases appears
more accurate. The large size of the estimated effects and their relative lack of precision
suggest caution in the interpretation, though large preventative effects of foster care
placement on later criminal justice problems appear unlikely for these children.
The paper is organized as follows. Section two presents the empirical framework
that incorporates heterogeneous treatment effects. Section three provides background
information on child abuse investigations and the investigator assignment process.
Section four describes the data sources and reports summary statistics. Section five
presents the results, and section six concludes.

2. Empirical Framework
The decision to remove a child from home is notoriously difficult. Placement in
foster care may promote child protection, but may be traumatic as well. The empirical
framework follows Doyle (2007) and considers this treatment effect heterogeneity using
a random coefficient model (Bjorklund and Moffitt (1987); Heckman and Vytlacil
(2005)). Consider an outcome Y, such as an indicator for an adult arrest, observable case
characteristics X, and an indicator for removal from home R, for child i:
(1) Yi = X i β + α i Ri + ε i
(2) Ri = 1( Z i γ + X i δ + θ i > 0)

4

where Z is a random variable that influences selection into foster care placement but is
excluded from the outcome equation.4 α i will be negative for children where the
placement is associated with a lower propensity for an arrest, but may be positive for
children where the disruption of placement is associated with a higher arrest propensity.
One problem that arises when estimating treatment effects is that the placement
indicator, R, may be correlated with ε : those from the most abusive families may be
more likely to be placed in foster care and more likely to be arrested. Second, the
heterogeneous treatment effects create the possibility that R may be correlated with α —
the correlated random coefficient model—if child protection agents place children who
are most likely to benefit from the placement. This leads to a selection bias that tends to
overstate the benefits of foster care placement. Although the placement decision may not
be based on α i itself, if the effect of placement on arrest propensities were indicative of
child well being in general, then such a correlation may exist. Last, α may be correlated
with ε , for example if those who benefit most from placement have the highest
underlying propensity for later arrests.
In this paper, Z is a measure of how likely the investigator assigned to child i
tends to have children placed in foster care. Consider if there were two types of
investigators: strict and lenient. Strict investigators would be defined as having a high
placement rate, Z=zH, while lenient ones would be defined as having a low placement
rate, Z= zL . The difference in outcomes across these investigators could then be used to
measure a local average treatment effect (LATE) (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). The
parameter can be written using a potential outcomes framework and the above latent
4

Heckmand and Vytlacil (2005) note that the restrictions inherent in the latent index model may be relaxed.
The model is used here for ease of exposition.

5

index model, letting a superscript on Y equal 1 if the child is placed in foster care and
zero otherwise (and conditioning on X kept implicit) as:

(3) α LATE = E (Y 1 − Y 0 | R( Z = z H ) = 1, R( Z = z L ) = 0)
= E (Y 1 − Y 0 | z H γ + θ > 0, z L γ + θ ≤ 0)
= E (Y 1 − Y 0 | − z H γ < θ ≤ − z L γ )
The local average treatment effect is the average effect for children induced into foster
care on the basis of the investigator assignment. Letting P(z)=P(R=1|Z=z), the parameter
can be calculated using sample means according to:
( 4) α LATE ( P ( z H ), P ( z L )) =

E[Y | P ( Z ) = P ( z H )] − E[Y | P ( Z ) = P ( z L )]
P( z H ) − P( z L )

The identifying assumptions that justify interpreting (4) as a local average
treatment effect are:

(5) E ( Zε ) = 0; E ( Zα ) = 0; E ( Zθ ) = 0; γ ≠ 0
The first three conditions represent the exclusion restriction that Z is not in the
outcome equation, is unrelated to unobserved heterogeneity in the gains from treatment,
and is unrelated to unobservable characteristics associated with selection into foster care.
In a standard correlated random coefficient model, the heterogeneous returns would be
associated with the unobserved propensity to be placed in care. Relaxing the assumption
that Z is not related to unobservables included in the selection process would result in an
estimate that incorporates the selection bias associated with foster care placement
decisions, which may be policy relevant. If investigators were randomized to families,
the exclusion restriction would appear to be an accurate description of the role of the
investigators.

6

The fourth condition is that the instrument is associated with foster care
placement. Implicit in the common coefficient γ is also a monotonicity condition: any
child removed by a lenient investigator would also be removed by a strict one, and a child
not removed by a strict investigator would not be removed by a lenient one. This
condition rules out the case where assignment to an investigator described as “lenient”
would result in an increased likelihood of placement.
The monotonicity condition is less straightforward in the setting considered here
compared to a treatment and control environment, where, for example, the treatment may
be denied to a control group (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). Instead, the model here relies
more heavily on the varying ethos between family preservation and child protection
across child welfare investigators, as discussed below.
Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996) describe the tradeoff involved when the
monotonicity assumption is only approximated. First, the bias will decrease with the
strength of the relationship between the instrument and foster care placement. Second, in
their language, if the effect of foster care placement for “defiers” (for example, those
individuals induced to receive the treatment when assigned to the lenient investigator) is
the same for the “compliers” (those induced to receive the treatment because they are
assigned to the strict investigator), then the bias disappears. This may be unlikely when
the investigator types are quite different from one another, where defiers may represent
exceptional cases. In the case of a continuous instrument, however, this would appear to
be less of a problem when considering small differences in investigators: that is,
measuring marginal treatment effects (MTE).

7

A marginal treatment effect is the average effect for children on the margin of
foster care placement, and that margin varies with the instrument. It is the limit of the
local average treatment effect as the thresholds for different types of investigators goes to
zero:
(6) α MTE = lim z L → z H E (Y 1 − Y 0 | − z H γ < θ ≤ − z L γ )
= E (Y 1 − Y 0 | θ = − zγ )

In terms of the calculation in (4), the MTE calculation can be written as a derivative:
(7) α MTE ( P( z )) =

∂E (Y | P( z ))
∂P ( z )

The marginal treatment effect may vary with the probability of placement.
Consider children assigned to relatively strict investigators. These investigators should
observe a similar distribution of child abuse severity levels, yet they remove more
children. Children on the margin in this group likely have unobservable characteristics
that make them the least likely to be placed. For cases of serious abuse or no abuse at
all, all investigators would agree on the placement referral. This would result in no
variation in placement and the likely benefit of placement cannot be identified.
In this setting, the MTE estimates are of interest in themselves, as they describe
whether outcomes for children on the margin of foster care improve or become worse as
we move from more lenient to more strict investigators. For comparisons of marginal
treatment effects across investigators with large differences in recommendation
thresholds, however, violations of the monotonicity condition become more salient.

3. Background

8

Reports of abuse or neglect are typically made by physicians, school principals,
police, and family members. In Illinois, all reports of abuse or neglect are made to the
Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS). The case is referred to a field team
that is closest to the child’s residence. A typical team covers one county in Illinois and
consists of eight investigators at any given time. These investigators are called case
managers, though they differ from the case managers who supervise children once they
are placed in foster care.
There are three main reasons why the investigator assignment may predict foster
care placement. First, the investigator may remove the child from home on an emergency
basis. Second, the investigator may decide that the case does not have merit. Third, in
most cases that result in foster care placement, the decision is ultimately made by a judge
in each county’s Child Protection Division of the Juvenile Court. The investigator is
responsible for collecting the evidence for the case, and presents this evidence along with
a recommendation. Some investigators may be more likely to convince a judge that a
placement is warranted, either by the way the investigation is conducted or the evidence
is presented.5
The main analysis relies on the variation in placement across investigators.
Previous research suggests that there is variation in investigator recommendations for
similar cases. In particular, case managers are thought to rely more heavily on “practice
wisdom” rather than administrative rules to make placement referrals (Cash, 2001).
Nasuti and Pecora (1993) and Rossi, Schuermand, and Budde (1996) found that case

5

This approach is similar to that of Kling (2006), who studied the effect of prison sentences on
employment and earnings. In that study, the tendencies of randomly assigned judges to impose different
prison sentences is used as an instrumental variable. In an analogy to criminal proceedings, investigators
studied here are similar to detectives who are the key witnesses in each case.

9

managers had inter-rater reliability ranging from 60-80% when assessing fictional cases.
In addition, the standard for foster care placement does vary over time and with the
amount of resources available to child protective services, such as federal funding and
monthly subsidies paid to foster parents (Simon, 1975; Campbell and Downs, 1987;
Chamberlain et al., 1992; Doyle and Peters, 2004; Hegar and Scannapieco, 1995). It
appears that the threshold for placement is not constant, and may differ across
investigators.
Investigator Assignment
Most families are assigned to case managers on a rotational basis in an effort to
smooth the caseload. The assignment process is referred to as “the rotation”, and it
appears to be self-enforced: case managers note that they abide by it to avoid managing
too many cases.6
One limitation in using the case manager assignment as a randomization device is
that exceptions are made, and the main analysis will focus on cases that are most likely to
enter the rotational assignment process. First, some field teams assign case managers to
particular neighborhoods. For example, one team divides the county into east and west,
with half of the case managers assigned to each sub-team. If particular types of case
managers were assigned to neighborhoods that were more likely to have child abuse or
neglect, then a comparison across case managers would capture differences in these
neighborhoods as well. The analysis here will focus on sub-teams defined as the
interaction between the child’s ZIP code of residence and the field team assigned.
Second, if a family were investigated more than once, an effort is made to reassign the same case manager to investigate the most recent allegation. The exogenous
6

Conversations with case managers.

10

variation in case manager assignment stems from the initial investigation, and the case
manager assigned to the family’s first investigation will be considered in the analysis.
Third, if the family speaks only Spanish, an effort is made to assign a Spanishspeaking case manager. Like the neighborhood consideration, if some case managers
specialize in Spanish-speaking cases, then differences across case managers would
incorporate differences in Spanish-speaking versus English-speaking cases as well. For
this reason, Hispanic cases will be considered separately.
Fourth, cases involving sexual abuse and substance-exposed infants are assigned
to specially-trained case managers. These allegations are dropped from the analysis as
they are less likely to enter the rotational assignment. Taking these exceptions into
account, the analysis below will consider the relative frequency of foster care placement
within sub-teams defined by field team x ZIP code x Hispanic x report-year cells.
In essence, the results will consider the effect of assignment to different types of
case managers, categorized by their rate of foster care placement, on crime outcomes as
adults. One question that arises is whether these investigators affect families in ways
other than through foster care placement. Recall that these investigators do not supervise
the case once a child enters foster care. Foster care stays are overseen by a separate
division within IL DCFS that works with private child welfare agencies to recruit and
supervise foster families. One potential area where they may have an impact is the
recruitment of relatives to care for foster children, as the investigators often interview
family members. An IL DCFS rule requires a relative to be sought first, however,
regardless of the case manager assigned to investigate the case. An examination of any
relationship between the investigator type and observable case characteristics, including

11

placement type, will be explored in detail below. It appears that the role of the
investigator is concentrated on determining whether a child has been abused or neglected:
evidence that will be used to make the foster care placement decision. As a result, the
differences in outcomes across investigators should largely stem from differences in the
likelihood of foster care placement.7

4. Data Description

A unique data set that matches individuals across a wide array of administrative
agencies in Illinois is used to carry out the analysis. These data are collected by the
Chapin Hall Center for Children, a research institute located at the University of Chicago,
and linked using name, address, social security number, date of birth, and other
identifiers to create the Illinois Integrated Database (Goerge, Van Voorhis, and Lee,
1994).
First, longitudinal, administrative data used by the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services for their abuse investigations and foster care placements are
considered. In particular, the Child Abuse and Neglect Tracking System (CANTS)
provides details of the investigation, including the initial reporter of the abuse, the
allegations, the alleged perpetrator, the field team assigned to the case, and the case
manager assigned to investigate. CANTS data also include the child’s name, date of
birth, sex, race, and address. Meanwhile, the Child and Youth Centered Information
System (CYCIS) tracks children in foster care, and the two systems have been linked to
determine whether the child was ever placed in care. The two information systems
7

Family preservation services, such as counseling and vouchers for maid services, are increasingly
common in the late 1990s. These programs are generally administered by separate case workers, and those
considered here are focused on the investigation.

12

reflect the fact that children under investigation are served by a different set of case
managers than children who are placed in foster care.
The Illinois Integrated Database also includes the Computerized Criminal History
System of the Illinois State Police, which records all arrests in the state. The system
relates these arrests to the associated charges, offenses, court dispositions, and sentences.
The main identifiers to link children to adults are the social security number, name, and
date of birth. One issue with the state police data is that the reports, especially linkages
between the arrest and court systems, is known to be of higher quality outside of Cook
County.8 The results below will be presented for children separately for children residing
in and outside of Cook County.
The fourth data set is the Illinois Longitudinal Public Assistance Database.
Children investigated for abuse are linked to this Public Assistance database using the
rich set of personal identifiers. The main reason for this linkage is to obtain the child’s
social security number for the linkage to the state police database.
Sample Construction
The investigation data are considered more reliable beginning in 1990, so all first
investigations of parental abuse or neglect between July 1, 1990 and June 30, 2003 are
considered. The arrest data include the social security number beginning in 2000, so all
arrests in Illinois from 2000 to 2005 are considered for the outcome measures.
There are two main restrictions of the data. First, every foster child is statutorily
eligible for Medicaid. Once in Medicaid, the personal identifiers known for the match
improve, including the availability of the social security number. It may be possible,
then, to find foster children more likely to be matched to the criminal justice data simply
8

Conversations with researchers at the Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority.

13

due to the greater availability of the identifiers. To compare children with the same
known identifiers, the analysis here will focus on all children who received Medicaid
prior to the abuse/neglect report. This represents 43% of all first-time abuse reports.
Although this restriction will affect the interpretation of the results, it considers an
important group, especially for foster care. Of the children placed in foster care in
Illinois, 82% had received Medicaid prior to the first abuse report.
The second major restriction is on the age of children to ensure that they are old
enough at the end of the sample period to be at risk for adult arrests. While individuals
who are 17 years old can be arrested as an adult in Illinois, very few below the age 18
were found to be arrested on adult charges. As a result, all children who are at least 18 in
2005 will be considered, resulting in a sample consisting of children ranging from 4-16
years old at the time of the abuse report. This also results in a foster care placement
measure that is uncensored. The estimates below should be regarded as the effects of
foster care placement for school-aged children.
Further, to consider the effect of removal from home, the analysis focuses on the
81% of cases where the alleged perpetrator is a natural parent, step parent, or cohabitating adult. Also, as noted in section two, sexual abuse cases, which represent 8%
of all investigations, are excluded as well, as they are unlikely to enter the rotational
assignment.9 Last, less than 1% of the observations had missing child characteristics or
had too few case manager investigations to calculate the instrument defined below.

9

Drug exposure cases that do not enter the rotation largely relate to infants and are excluded due to the age
restriction. The few cases where the initial reporter was listed as the Department of Children and Family
Services were also dropped from the analysis as they likely reflect previous DCFS involvement with the
family.

14

In terms of the linkage, 3% of the school-aged children considered here had
missing social security number information. More importantly, social security numbers
were available for roughly 80% of those arrested outside of Cook County in each of the
years, and 65% for those within Cook County. Comparisons of the results for children
from Cook County and those from outside of Cook are complicated by this match quality
and should be considered in the interpretation. Results that use name and date of birth to
link the data sets will be considered as well.
Summary Statistics
The analysis sample includes nearly 45,000 children, roughly half in Cook
County (which includes the City of Chicago) and half outside of Cook at the time of the
child abuse investigation. To better understand the types of allegations, reporters, and
child characteristics, Table 1 reports summary statistics for children who lived in Cook
County and children who resided outside of Cook County at the time of the abuse
investigation. 16% of the children investigated outside of Cook were eventually placed
in foster care, while 26% of those in Cook County were placed. Approximately 10% of
investigated children are placed in foster care in the U.S. as a whole, and the higher
figures here largely reflect the restriction of the sample to children who received
Medicaid benefits prior to the abuse report.
Race is one variable that differs greatly between Cook County and non-Cook
investigated children. 71% of the investigated children outside of Cook County are
white, compared to 87% of the population aged 5-14 in 2000. In Cook County, only 12%
of the investigated children are white compared to 60% of the 5-14 year old population.
76% of the investigated children in Cook are African American and 11% are Hispanic

15

compared to 26% and 20% of children in Chicago Public Schools in 1998 (CPS, 1998),
respectively. Roughly half of the investigated children are boys in both groups.
The most common reporters outside of Cook County were the police (21%), the
family itself (18%), and schools (17%). The police and schools are mandated reporters—
they are required by law to report suspected abuse or neglect. Family reports can stem
from domestic violence reports or from a concerned grandparent, possibly a grandparent
who already houses the child. These family reports are the most common report in Cook
County (27%). The children considered here tend to be older at the time of the report,
with an average age of 11 years old. The average age for all first investigations in Illinois
is 6 years old, and this sample is older due to the restriction that these children are at least
18 years old in 2005.
Another characteristic observed is the allegation. Roughly half of the allegations
are for abuse, and the other half for neglect. The most common report of neglect is a lack
of supervision, which usually implies that the parent has abandoned a child, though it can
reflect problem behavior for the child as well. 13% of the allegations are due to
environmental neglect, when the child’s living conditions are hazardous. The primary
allegation of abuse is “substantial risk of harm” (29%), which describes situations where
physical harm is thought to be imminent. Physical abuse is cited as the main allegation
18% of the time and is usually described as bruises, cuts, burns, or broken bones.
Together, the characteristics in Table 1 describe the types of cases seen by child
protective services and will be used as controls in the analysis below, including
individual indicators for each age.

16

Apart from the age difference, the observable characteristics for all investigated
children in Illinois are similar. There were fewer physician reports among the sample
compared to the population of first-investigated children (7-13% vs.17%), reflecting
physician interventions for younger children. Meanwhile, more school reports are found
for this school-aged sample (13-17% vs. 9%). The statewide population is also less likely
to be African American (41% vs. 49%). In terms of allegations, physical abuse reports
were less common among the full population (12% vs. 18%), with much of the difference
coming from the 8% sexual abuse and 5% drug-exposed children who were excluded
because they are less likely to enter the rotational assignment or are too young to be at
risk for an adult arrest by the end of the sample period. Rates of the other major
allegation categories were similar in the full population. Last, the full population
included 43% from Cook County compared to the 48% in the analysis sample.
The sample of investigated children comes from Illinois, and another comparison
is with all children currently in foster care in the U.S. as a whole. One advantage of
considering Illinois is that it includes a large city as well as smaller cities to compare
results. The average length of stay is 2 years in the U.S. compared to an average length
of stay of 4 years in Illinois during the mid-1990s.10 The average age of foster children
currently in care is 10 years old, with 30% under the age of 5 (US DHHS, 2004).
Illinois also relies more heavily on kinship foster care, with half of all initial placements
going to a relative, compared to 23% for all children currently in family foster care in the
U.S. Last, the sample studied here is disproportionately African American compared to
the US foster care population (49% vs. 35%), with a similar proportion of whites, and

10

Under court order to reduce lengths of stay, efforts were made to reduce this time in foster care beginning
in 1997.

17

fewer Hispanics (7% vs. 17%). The focus on older, poorer children should be kept in
mind when interpreting the results.

5.

Estimation

A. Investigator Assignment

Given the rotational assignment process within geographic teams, the instrument
will be calculated for each case manager-team cell, where the team is defined by the case
team x ZIP code x Hispanic x report year. It measures the fraction of children assigned to
the child’s case manager who are placed in foster care, relative to the placement rate for
children that the investigator was eligible to receive as part of the rotation. The main
analysis is done at the child level, so the instrument is defined for each child i assigned to
case manager c in investigation sub-team j as:
(8) Z icj = d icj ⋅

1
nc − ncj

∑n

k =− j

ck

( R ck − R k )

where d icj is an indicator that the case manager c and sub-team j correspond to the ones
assigned to child i. nc is the total number of children investigated by case manager c, ncj
is the number of children investigated by case manager c in investigation team j, R ck is
the fraction of children investigated by case manager c in sub-team k that are eventually
k

removed from home, and R if that fraction of removals for sub-team k. Results are
similar when the instrument is the mean removal rate the a child’s investigator (outside of
the child’s investigation team) and the analysis uses investigation team fixed effects,
though this global measure is useful in demonstrating the results as shown in the figures
below.

18

The case manager placement differential is analogous to a case manager fixed
effect in a model predicting removal with sub-team fixed effects. It is calculated for all
sub-teams not including the family’s sub-team, so that each family’s removal decisions
do not enter into their calculation. It is not conditional on child characteristics to allow a
direct examination of whether case manager placement tendencies are related to the
characteristics of a given child’s case. In contrast, a model with controls may mask the
possibility that case managers are assigned to particular types of cases.
Heckman (1981) and Greene (2001) discuss the ability of small sample sizes per
group to allow for meaningful estimates of fixed effects with a rule of thumb of eight
observations per group. The calculation is restricted to case managers with at least 10
investigations. 733 case managers are considered outside of Cook County and 581 case
managers considered in Cook County, with a weighted average of 74 investigations per
case manager outside of Cook and 80 investigations in Cook County.11 All analyses are
done at the child level, which serves to weight the measures by the number of children to
extract the signal from cells with the least noise.
The measure is constructed on sub-team cells with more than 1 case manager and
at least 8 cases. Children investigated in sub-team cells that do not meet these
requirements will have a non-missing instrument, however, as it is calculated for all other
sub-team cells. Coincidentally, there are 670 sub-teams used in the calculation in each of
the groups with an average of 24 and 20 observations per cell outside of Cook and within
Cook, respectively. Further, the results were similar when the year interactions were not
used in the cell construction to increase the number of children per cell.
11

The total number of observations used in the calculation differs slightly from the analysis sample, as subteams with only one case manager are excluded from the calculation. These cases are still assigned a case
manager placement differential, however, as this measure is for all cells other than for a given family.

19

The instrument is calculated for the case manager originally assigned to the case.
The foster care placement indicator is equal to 1 if the child is ever removed from home,
and this may occur during a subsequent investigation with a different case manager.
Case managing is well known to be a difficult occupation, with 37% of case managers
who began in 1991 no longer working 5 years later: a cohort with a median tenure of 8
years. As a result, the relationship between the assigned case manager and ultimate foster
care placement is unlikely to be one-to-one, and the strength of this relationship will
instead be an empirical one described by the first stage.
The resulting instrument reveals some variation in placement rates across case
managers. The instrument has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 9-11% in the
non-Cook and Cook County samples.
The rules and regulations described in section three imply that families are
effectively randomized to investigators within the rotational assignment pool. If this
were the case, then child characteristics should be similar across investigators and
therefore not predict the case manager’s placement differential. To test this hypothesis,
the instrument was regressed on the child characteristics, including year of investigation
indicators. The standard errors were clustered at the case manager level to reflect
dependence across children assigned to the same investigator.
Table 2 reports the results and shows that the observable characteristics are
unrelated to the investigator placement differential. In particular, physician, police, and
other government reporters, as well as an indicator for African Americans, are highly
positively correlated with foster care placement, yet little relationship is found with the
investigator differential in both the magnitude and sign of the coefficients.

20

Another test to see whether case managers with high removal frequencies are
assigned more problematic cases is to examine the length of stay once in foster care.
More abusive families can be expected to result in longer stays away from home. If strict
case managers are assigned to these families, then length of stay should be correlated
with the placement differential. In these samples, children typically stay in care for 4
years outside of Cook and for 5 years within Cook. A higher case manager placement
differential is not related to the length of stay, however.12
To further explore the type of care received, the type of placement can be
compared as well. Although case managers do not supervise foster children once placed
in care, case managers do investigate the family and may be aware of a relative willing to
provide foster care, as described in section three. Nevertheless, an initial placement with
relatives is not related to the case manager placement differential. Of the children placed
in foster care in the samples considered here, 31% of children outside of Cook and 59%
of children in Cook were initially placed with relatives. A ten percentage-point increase
in the case manager placement differential is associated with only a 0.006 percentagepoint increase in the likelihood of relative placement for children outside of Cook
County, and a 0.0004 percentage-point decrease in the likelihood of relative placement in
Cook County. This is not surprising given the administrative rule that relatives are
sought first for any child placed in foster care. Still, the lack of a relationship between
the investigator and the placement type is suggestive that the investigator has little impact
on the type of care received once in foster care.
12

A ten percentage-point increase in the case manager placement differential is associated with a 0.2%
reduction in the length of stay in foster care outside of Cook County, and a 0.3% reduction in the length of
stay for children in Cook County, with neither estimate statistically significant. This also suggests that the
foster care system does not correct for investigator tendencies by varying the length of stay of children once
they are placed.

21

Finally, if case managers with higher removal frequencies place particular types
of children who just so happen to be more frequently observed, this would be a violation
of the monotonicity condition. If this were the case, then observable characteristics, such
as allegations or reporters, may be more prevalent for case managers with higher
placement differentials, conditional on foster care placement. When the case manager
placement differential is regressed on child characteristics for children placed in foster
care, however, child characteristics are again unrelated to the case manager placement
differential in each of the samples.
B. Foster Care Placement and Crime Outcomes

A first look at the results is shown in Figure 1. Consider Figure 1A, which
considers children outside of Cook County. The x-axis is the investigator placement
differential, which is mean zero and ranges from -0.25 to 0.25. The two lines report local
linear regressions of the removal indicator and the arrest indicator against the case
manager placement differential, evaluated at each percentile of the differential.13
The placement differential is positively related to the foster care placement rate in
both geographic groups. Outside of Cook, an increase in the differential from the 10th
percentile to the 90th percentile, representing an increase from -0.10 to 0.11, is associated
with an increase in foster care placement from 0.14 to 0.21, for an implied first-stage
estimate of 0.33. That would imply that an increase in the placement rate by 10% is
associated with an increase in the placement rate by 3.3%, or 21% of the mean placement

13

The results are shown using pilot bandwidths that were chosen by minimizing the sum of squared errors
between the local linear estimator and a fourth-degree polynomial model. For the foster care placement
regression, the bandwidth is 0.034. For the arrest regression the bandwidth is 0.056. Results are robust to
bandwidths down to 0.01, with larger fluctuations with bandwidths below 0.02, although the similarity in
shapes remains at the smaller bandwidths.

22

rate. Figure 1B shows a similar increase in Cook County: from 0.22 to 0.31, for a firststage estimate of 0.43.
Given the implied 1st stage coefficients of close to one-third, the arrest rate graphs
use the second vertical axis and the scale is one-third of the placement rate axis. One
feature is that the arrest rates are fairly high despite the potential for measurement error
due to the linkage between the systems. 26% of the investigated children outside of Cook
County, and 22% of those from Cook, were found arrested between 2000 and 2005.
When restricted to children aged 25 in 2005, the arrest rates are 40% and 35% for boys
for the two geographic categories and 27% for girls in both samples.
Figure 1A shows that the arrest rate relationship is remarkably similar in shape to
the foster care placement relationship for children outside of Cook County. For the
change from the 10th percentile to the 90th percentile considered above, the arrest rate for
children outside of Cook County increases from 0.25 to 0.28. For children from Cook
County, the arrest rate does not vary as systematically with the placement differential.14
As a means of comparison, a predicted probability of placement was calculated
from a probit model that included the control variables listed in Table 1. This
combination of the child characteristics is unrelated to the case manager placement
differential, as expected given the rotational assignment process (see Appendix Figures
A1A and A1B).15 While children assigned to investigators with high placement rates are
more likely to be placed in foster care themselves, and have higher arrest rates later in life
among those from outside of Cook County, their observable characteristics do not predict

14

Bandwidths were chosen as with Figure 1A, with the placement bandwidth of 0.080 and the arrest
bandwidth of 0.043.
15
Bandwidths in Figures A1A and A1B mirror those for the placement relationship in Figures 1A and 1B.

23

that they would be more likely to placed in foster care compared to children assigned to
low removal rate investigators.
Foster Care Placement

To test the first-stage relationship that children assigned to case managers with
high removal differentials are more likely to be placed in foster care with and without
controls for child characteristics, the estimating equation for child i assigned to an
investigator c in sub-team j in year t is:
(9) Ricj = φ 0 + φ1 Z icj + φ 2 X i + ∑ δ k 1(t i = k ) + ω icj
k

where δ represents a vector of year effects for the date of child i’s investigation. This
equation will be estimated using a linear probability model, though results are similar
with a probit model.
Table 3 reports the results. Columns (1) and (5) report the coefficients for models
without any controls. The coefficient for the sample outside of Cook is 0.23 and within
Cook it is 0.27. When controls are introduced, the coefficients are similar: 0.23 and
0.26, reflecting that the instrument is unrelated to the observable child characteristics.
In contrast, these variables are associated with foster care placement. For example,
physician, police, and other government reports are strongly associated with increases in
the likelihood of foster care placement compared to school reports, and African American
children are also more likely to be placed.
The probability of removal does not increase one-for-one with the case manager
removal rate. This is likely due to measurement error that attenuates the effect toward
zero. First, the case manager of the initial investigation is used to characterize the case
manager type, though this may not represent the case manager in subsequent

24

investigations given the investigator turnover described above. Second, the case manager
is the lead investigator in the case, whereas a judge has the final say on foster care stays.
Nevertheless, the removal rate is associated with placements, with F-statistics of close to
40, well above the rule of thumb of 10 for weak instruments (Stock, Wright, and Yogo,
2002).
Some information is known about the case manager as well, including sex, race,
experience, educational attainment (master’s degree), and Spanish-speaking ability. The
most stable relationship in these data is that male case managers are slightly less likely to
be associated with foster care placement. These case manager characteristics are much
less predictive compared to the case manager’s placement differential, however. It
appears that differences in removal rates are more idiosyncratic than systematic when it
comes to case manager characteristics.
Child Outcomes

To consider a model of child outcomes, with and without controls, the empirical
models will consider outcomes, Y, for child i investigated by case manager c in sub-team
j during in year t of the form:
(10) Yicj = α 0 + α 1 Ricj + α 2 X i + ∑ δ k 1(t i = k ) + ν icj
k

where the case manager placement differential, Z icj , will be used as an instrument for the
indicator for removal, Ricj .
Adult Arrests

Table 4 reports the results for arrests. The first two columns report the mean
comparisons across children who were placed in foster care with investigated children
who were not placed. These results are of some interest in themselves, as long-term
25

outcome data are generally unavailable for this group of children. The results show that
children who were placed in foster care have higher arrest rates: 6-7.5 percentage points
higher (compared to a mean arrest rate of 26%) for children outside of Cook County. A 3
percentage-point difference is found in Cook County (compared to a mean of 22%)
shown in columns (7) and (8).
Columns (3), (4), (9), and (10) mirror the reduced-form results from Figure 1A
and 1B. An increase in the investigator placement differential from -0.1 to 0.1 is
associated with an 18 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of an arrest outside of
Cook County, while a similar change in the differential within Cook County is associated
with only a 4-5 percentage-point increase. The Cook County result is not significantly
different from zero as well.
Last, Columns (5) and (6) report the 2SLS results for children who were residing
outside of Cook, and foster care placement is associated with very large (39 percentage
points) differences in arrest rates, with a relatively large standard error (19 percentage
points) as well. The larger IV results suggest that the estimated causal effects of foster
care on arrest rates are worse than the conditional means comparison in Columns (1) and
(2) would imply, although differences between the IV and non-IV results are not
statistically significant. A key difference between the two sets of results is that the IV
calculation estimates the effects for marginal cases—those induced into foster care due to
the case manager assignment. The usual omitted variables bias in the means
comparison—that foster children come from worse families and would have worse
outcomes regardless of placement—may be outweighed by a selection bias: children
with higher expected benefits from foster care placement, such as severely abused

26

children, are more likely to be placed. As a result, the means comparison may understate
any negative effect from placement among marginal cases.
The results suggest that if 10% of “marginal” cases are placed in foster care, then
the arrest rate would be 3 times higher for foster children outside of Cook County, which
is possible with juvenile arrest rates of 50-67% for children who age out of foster care.16
The large coefficients and standard errors suggest that caution in the interpretation is
warranted.
Columns (11) and (12) report the 2SLS results for children from Cook County.
The estimates have coefficients of 0.10 and 0.08, with standard errors of 0.10. The point
estimate suggests that the arrest rate is 1.5 times higher for children who were placed in
foster care compared to investigated children who were not placed in care, though the
large standard errors place less confidence in these estimates.
Doyle (2007) used the IV strategy employed here to consider juvenile
delinquency in Cook County and found point estimates that suggested a delinquency rate
that was 3 times higher for children placed in foster care. This suggests that some of
these children may have already been in prison during 2000-2005, though the point
estimates are nearly identical when the subset of children who were less than 18 in 2000
were considered to avoid left censoring in the arrest indicator.
One issue with the Cook vs. non-Cook comparison is that the data quality appears
to be better outside of Cook as described in the data description and evidenced by an
imprisonment match rate that is more consistent with the population (described below).

16

To have a 26% arrest rate, a 10% placement rate, and a 39 percentage-point difference would require
arrest rates of 61% for those placed and 22% for those not placed [0.1(X+0.39) + 0.9(X) = 0.26 Æ
X=0.22]. Similarly for those in Cook County the implied arrest rates woujld be 30% vs. 20% [0.1(X+0.1)
+ 0.9(X) = 0.21 Æ X=0.20].

27

When matches were done by the name and date of birth (where names were first
transformed using SOUNDEX software so that similar names have the same linkage
variable) 34% of children outside Cook County, and 40% of children within Cook
County, are matched to the arrest database. The imprisonment rate remains low for the
Cook County sample, however. The IV estimate for arrests increases for children from
Cook County to 0.20 (s.e.=0.11), as shown in Appendix Table A1. Meanwhile, the
estimates are slightly smaller for children from outside of Cook: 0.23 with a standard
error of 0.21. These results suggest that the comparison of Cook vs. non-Cook children
should be treated with caution as differences may stem from the ability to match children
to adults.
Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects

The remainder of the paper explores these results further by considering related
outcomes such as convictions and prison sentences following the arrest; marginal
treatment effects discussed in section two; and results for subgroups such as boys versus
girls and older children versus younger ones at the time of the investigation. Given the
fairly large standard errors in the instrumental variables estimates, these results should be
considered more exploratory than definitive. Further, the discussion will focus on the
differences found for children from outside of Cook County, with Cook County results
reported in the appendix.
Convictions and Prison Sentences

First, it is possible to consider whether these arrests lead to worse outcomes such
as convictions and prison sentences. Panel A of Table 5 reports regressions of the form
of equation (10), where the outcome is whether the individual was found guilty or had a

28

judgment withheld during 2000-2005. Results are similar when the outcome is simply a
guilty verdict17, though a withheld judgment is often used as a probationary measure.
These results are not independent of the arrest results, as those with a conviction were
arrested first.
The results outside of Cook County mirror the arrest results, with higher mean
differences among former foster children compared to those who were not placed in care
(4 percentage points higher compared to a mean of 15%). The reduced-form estimate
shows that children assigned to high removal investigators have higher conviction rates,
with a coefficient of 0.09 (s.e.=0.035), and a 2SLS coefficient of 0.40 (s.e.=0.15).
Prison Sentences

The prison sentence rate for this sample is 6.6%, including 9.8% for boys.18 By
comparison, 0.73% of white males between the ages of 20 and 24 residing in Illinois
outside of Cook County entered prison in 2000, while 5.4% of African American males
in that group entered prison in 2000.19 When the age is restricted to children who were
18 in 2000, to avoid any left censoring, the prison sentence rate for boys outside of Cook
County increases to 15%.20
Panel B of Table 5 shows the results for a prison sentence between 2000 and
2005. The prison sentence results again mirror the earlier results, with higher OLS
17

The mean of the guilty-only outcome is 11%, and the reduced form coefficient is 0.075 (s.e.=0.031) with
a 2SLS estimate of 0.33 (s.e.=0.14)
18
Despite high arrest rates, the prison sentence rate in Cook County is 1.9%, much lower than Cook
County imprisonment rates for this population would imply. This suggests that the linkage to the
sentencing data may be worse in Cook County. Another consideration is that these individuals may already
be in prison by 2000. When children who were 18 in 2000 were considered, 4% of boys in Cook County
were found to be sentenced to prison during the 2000-2005 time period in these data.
19
Author’s calculations using the US Census population data by county and prison data from the Bureau of
Justice Statistics’ National Corrections Reporting Program for 2000. The rate is similar to the published
numbers described in US DOJ (2007).
20
When children who were less than 18 in 2000 are considered, the results are qualitatively similar. The
reduced-form coefficient for the arrest outcome is 0.08 (s.e.=0.047), and the coefficient for the prison
sentence outcome is 0.053 (s.e.=0.023).

29

differences in imprisonment (3 percentage points compared to a mean of 6.6%), as well
as higher imprisonment rates for those assigned to investigators with higher removal
rates: a reduced form coefficient of 0.05 (s.e.=0.023) and a 2SLS coefficient of 0.22
(s.e.=0.10).
Within Cook County, the results for convictions and prison sentences show little
effect of foster care placement for marginal cases. When the databases were matched by
name and date of birth instead of the social security number, however, the estimated
effect for convictions increases to 0.097 (s.e.=0.10), and an imprecisely estimated (but
positive) point estimate for the prison sentence outcome is found as well. For children
from outside of Cook, the estimates are somewhat smaller for convictions, though a
similar estimate is found for the prison outcome (see Appendix Table A1).
Marginal Treatment Effects

To further explore the source of the linear IV results, it is possible to estimate
marginal treatment effects as described in section two. Four sets of results are presented:
the arrest indicator for children from outside of Cook and within Cook, as well as the
conviction and prison indicators for children from outside of Cook. Given that the linear
IV results were similar with and without controls, the MTE estimates will be calculated
without controls for child characteristics.
To estimate the marginal treatment effects, the predicted probability of placement
was estimated using a probit model. The case manager placement differential was the
only explanatory variable in the model to capture the variation in placement solely due to
the instrument. These predicted probabilities range from 0.11 to 0.23 for children from
outside of Cook and 0.20 to 0.34 for children from Cook. With the lack of full support

30

for the probability of placement on the unit interval, especially at the extremes, it is not
possible to estimate parameters such as the average treatment effect. Instead, marginal
treatment effects can be estimated. These parameters are necessarily dependent on the
instrument considered, though an advantage of the instrument considered here is that it
exploits variation that is naturally within the bounds of likely policy changes.
Next, the relationship between the outcome indicators and this predicted
probability was estimated using a local quadratic estimator.21 As suggested by Figure 1,
the arrest rate increases with the placement propensity. For arrests among children from
outside of Cook County, for example, an increase from the 10th percentile of predicted
placement to the 90th percentile (an increase from 0.13 to 0.19) is associated with an
increase in the arrest rate from 0.25 to 0.27, for an estimated local average treatment
effect of 0.33 (see Appendix Figure A2A).
The derivative of these relationships provides the marginal treatment effect
estimates.22 Figure 2 reports the results, along with 5 to 95% percent confidence intervals
calculated using a bootstrap procedure clustered at the case manager level. The
propensity score was re-estimated in each of the 250 re-samplings to capture the variation
in the point estimates caused by estimating this variable.
Figure 2A shows that the MTE function for arrests among children from outside
of Cook County is above zero and the mass is centered around the linear IV estimate of
21

The local quadratic estimator was chosen because the first derivative of the relationship is sought and
local quadratic estimators are thought to have better properties (Fan and Gijbels, 2000). In practical terms,
the results are nearly identical when a local linear regression was estimated instead. The pilot bandwidths
were again chosen by minimizing the sum of squared errors between the local quadratic estimator and a
fourth-degree polynomial model, and are 0.031, 0.060, 0.085, and 0.048 to arrive at the MTE estimates in
Figures 2A-2D, respectively. Results are robust to bandwidths from 0.01 to 0.1. For example, at a
bandwidth of 0.01, the arrest rate for children from outside of Cook County is increasing for the first thirty
percentiles of predicted placement, is flat for the next thirty percentiles at 0.26, and increases for the
remaining percentiles up to a maximum of 0.29 at the 97th percentile.
22
The derivative comes directly from the local quadratic coefficients.

31

0.4. The function is also upward sloping, with noisy estimates at the extremes, although
it is not possible to reject a zero slope. Nevertheless, the implied upward slope in the
point estimates is suggestive that the children on the margin of placement among the high
removal investigators have the largest increases in arrest rates. These are likely children
with unobservable characteristics that make them the least likely to be placed in foster
care, reflecting the selection of children into foster care who are more likely to benefit
(or, in this case, appear less likely to be harmed in terms of adult arrests).
Figure 2B shows that the IV estimate of zero for children from Cook County is at
the center of the MTE estimates. The estimates are above zero with higher arrest rate
effects found for children with both low and high propensities of placement associated
with the investigator assignment. Figure 2C shows the conviction results for children
from outside Cook, and again the estimates are above zero and the function has an
upward slope. Last, Figure 2D reports the results for the prison outcome and here the
MTE estimates are close to 0.25 for the bulk of the data, with lower estimates for the first
10 percentiles of predicted placement.
Among children who are not on the margin, either because it is clear there was no
abuse or it is clear the child must be protected, the effects of foster care placement are not
identified. For less clear cases, the upward slopes, especially for arrests and convictions,
suggest that children who are on the margin among high removal rate investigators—
children likely to have unobservables associated with a lower likelihood of placement—
have worse crime outcomes when placed in foster care compared to children on the
margin among low removal rate investigators.
Child Characteristics

32

Given that the instrumental variable results are imprecisely estimated, differences
across groups of children are not found to be statistically significantly from one another.
These results are again more exploratory than definitive, but may highlight the types of
children whose placement in foster care may lead to criminal activity.
Table 6 reports the results for the three outcomes of arrests, convictions, and
prison sentences for children outside of Cook County. The largest difference in both the
level of the outcomes and the size of the estimated effects is found for the comparison of
boys versus girls. Boys are more likely to be found arrested (31% vs. 22%), more likely
to be found guilty or have a verdict withheld (19% vs. 11%), and more likely to be found
sentenced to prison (10% vs. 3.3%). The OLS results show that those who are placed in
foster care have higher arrest, conviction, and imprisonment rates for both boys and girls.
The IV results show larger coefficients for girls in terms of arrests and convictions. In
terms of prison sentences, boys have the large IV coefficient and the girl’s coefficient is
much smaller and statistically insignificant. Once subgroups are considered, some of the
estimates lose their statistical significance, although the similarity in the point estimates
tends to confirm the earlier results. The one exception is the point estimate for the prison
outcome among girls, which loses economic and statistical significance.
In terms of allegations, the results are similar whether the allegation is abuse or
neglect, though the prison sentence outcome is found to be stronger for abuse cases.23
The results are similar when broken out separately for white cases and African American
cases, with larger IV point estimates for each outcome category compared to the pooled
results.
23

Another difference between Cook and non Cook cases is the frequency of family reports. When these
are excluded, the IV point estimates remain large, but are somewhat smaller. For example, in terms of
arrests, the 2SLS estimate is 0.275 with a s.e. of 0.19.

33

One important caveat when interpreting the main results is that these children are
between 4 and 16 years old when they are investigated to allow for an examination of
longer-term outcomes. One way to begin to investigate the role of age is to consider
children who were investigated when they were under the age of 10 with those who were
10 years old or older. The removal rates are somewhat higher for the younger children
(17% vs. 15%), as they were at risk of removal for longer periods of time. The point
estimates suggest that the effects are similar for both age groups.
Last, the probability of foster care placement was estimated with a probit
including only the child controls. Then the sample was broken into two groups based on
their predicted foster care placement. Note that this analysis differs from the MTE results
which considered children with similar observable characteristics among those at the
margin of placement, while this exercise compares the effects of placement across
children who have different observable characteristics. The last two columns of Table 6
report the results for these two groups. The placement rate is 11% in the low predicted
placement group and 25% in the high-predicted placement group. The results are fairly
similar across the groups with a somewhat larger IV point estimate in terms of arrests for
the high probability of removal group, and somewhat larger point estimates for the low
removal rate group for the conviction and prison outcomes.
The results for Cook County are in the appendix and, as expected, these results
are somewhat less stable. Smaller point estimates are found for children suspected of
being neglected, within race categories (where the relationship is often negative), and for
boys.
Violent vs. Property Crime

34

The arrest data also record whether the nature of the offense is drug related,
property, violent, or other. Results are compared across the different types of arrest
categories. These categories are not mutually exclusive, as each individual may be
arrested within one or more categories over the 2000-2005 time period.
The results are reported in Table 7 for children investigated outside of Cook
County. When arrests for each type of offense were estimated separately, the results
revealed no effect on drug arrests, either in OLS or in the reduced form, despite a 7.5%
drug arrest rate. Property crime arrests were found for 10.5% of the investigated
children, and the OLS results show that those placed in foster care had a 3.5 percentagepoint higher property-crime arrest rate (s.e.=0.6). The reduced-form coefficient was
0.058 with a 2SLS estimate of 0.21 (s.e.=0.10). Results were similar for violent crime,
which had an 8.7% arrest rate, with an OLS estimate of 0.027 (s.e.=0.006), a reduced
form coefficient of 0.050 (s.e.=0.023), and a 2SLS estimate of 0.16 (s.e.=0.11).
It might be expected that abuse cases lead to more violent crime compared to
neglect cases though a “cycle of violence” (Widom, 1989). The violent crime arrest rate
measured here is 8.4% for children investigated for abuse, and a similar rate of 7.9% is
found for those investigated for neglect. In terms of the estimated effects of foster care,
the IV point estimates were somewhat larger for abuse cases compared to neglect cases,
similar to Table 6, although this was found for both the violent crime and property crime
arrest categories.
Recidivism, Felony convictions, and Prison Sentence Length

The results largely mirror those above for children outside of Cook County when
other severity measures are considered. For example, repeat arrests during 2000-2005

35

show similar increases with foster care placement, with a mean of 14% and an IV point
estimate of 0.34 (s.e.=0.15). An indicator for being found guilty or having a judgment
withheld when the arrest offense was a felony has a mean of 5.3% and an IV point
estimate of 0.19 (s.e.=0.088). Another measure of the severity of the arrests is whether
the individual ever received a prison sentence of one or more years. 2.3% of the
investigated children were found to have at least one such sentence between 2000 and
2005, and the IV point estimate is 0.13 with a standard error of 0.067.
Robustness Checks

Appendix Table A1 reports some robustness checks. First, the results outside of
Cook County were similar when a probit and IV probit models were used, with somewhat
larger point estimates and somewhat smaller standard errors in terms of arrests and
convictions. The indicator for a prison sentence, the outcome that was least likely and,
therefore, more likely to be affected by the functional form chosen, exhibits a larger IV
point estimate and a larger standard error when the probit model was used. Within Cook
County, the arrest estimates are again similar with the probit model.
Second, models with ZIP code fixed effects to control for neighborhood
characteristics that may influence criminal activity showed similar results, as expected as
the instrument was calculated within ZIP code categories. Last, the estimates when the
databases were matched by name and date of birth are reported, as described above.
Limitations

In addition to the potential for violations of the identifying assumptions described
in section two, one limitation of the estimation is that the outcomes are for adults in
Illinois. To the extent that children in foster care are more likely to remain in Illinois as

36

adults, we may find a higher match rate.24 In fact, it may be that assignment to strict case
manager may encourage families to leave the state, although this should lead to smaller
estimated effects of foster care. One piece of evidence against this possibility of
differential migration among those assigned to strict investigators is that Doyle (2007)
found lower employment rates (matches to the Illinois unemployment insurance
database) among those who entered foster care. In the end, foster care may have an effect
on both the propensity to be imprisoned (and employed), as well as on migration.
Another limitation is that the empirical strategy does not lend itself to an analysis
of the effect of the length of stay in foster care on outcomes. When models are
considered for children who were either not removed or were in foster care for more than
1 year, the results are nearly identical. This is partly due to the fact that most children are
in care for more than 1 year in these samples.

7. Conclusion

Foster care placement is a major intervention into the lives of children who appear
to be at high risk of poor life outcomes, including adult criminality and subsequent arrests
and incarceration. Previous work has found strong correlations with foster care
placement and incarceration, yet whether placement results in greater or lower arrest rates
has not been considered. The analysis here uses the effective randomization of abuse
investigators to families to estimate causal effects of placement on crime outcomes.
Children assigned to investigators with higher removal rates are more likely to be placed
in foster care and are found to have higher arrest and imprisonment rates, as well. The

24

In fact, it may be that assignment to strict case manager may encourage families to leave the state. This
should lead to lower Illinois arrest rates, however.

37

point estimates are large and relatively imprecisely estimated, however, which suggests
some caution in the interpretation. Nevertheless, the estimates suggest that large benefits
from foster care placement are unlikely for this group of children at the margin of
placement, at least for the outcomes considered here.
The results are strongest for children outside of Cook County, where the match to
the state police data appears more accurate. When children and arrested adults were
matched by names and dates of birth, the results are less precise, but the point estimates
show similar increases in arrest rates across the geographic areas.
When interpreting the results three main caveats should be kept in mind. First,
the sample consists of school-age welfare recipients investigated in Illinois, a large urban
state where placement of children with family members is more popular than the nation
as a whole. Future work will consider younger children as they become at risk for adult
arrests.
Second, the results consider a group on the margin of placement. While this
speaks directly to the policy question of whether we should place greater emphasis on
family preservation or child protection, it does not attempt to measure the benefit of
placement for children in such danger that all investigators would agree the child should
be placed in care.
Last, the outcomes studied here may relate to child wellbeing, though they may
not reflect the potential prevention of serious child abuse in extreme cases. To the extent
that the children on the margin of placement are less likely to suffer from the most
serious abuse, this may be less of a concern. Still, child welfare agencies may be willing
to trade off higher adult crime rates for slightly lower levels of serious abuse.

38

References

Angrist, Joshua D., Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association. 91(434). June 1996: 444-455.
Annie E. Casey Foundation. Family to Family: Tools for Rebuilding Foster Care.
March 2002.
Barth, Richard P. “After Safety, What is the Goal of Child Welfare Services:
Permanency, Family Continuity or Social Benefit?” International Journal of
Social Welfare. 8. 1999: 244-252.
Belfield, Clive R., Milagros Nores, Steve Barnett, and Lawrence Schweinhart. “The
High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the
Age-40 Followup.” Journal of Human Resources. 41(1). 2006: 162–190
Bes, R., Andrews, C., Jantz, A, Russell, V. and R. Geen. The Cost of Protecting
Vulnerable Children III: What Factors Affect States’ Fiscal Decisions.
Assessing the New Federalism Occasional Paper No. 61. Urban Institute:
Washington D.C. 2002.
Bjorklund, Anders and Robert Moffitt. “The Estimation of Wage Gains and Welfare
Gins in Self-Selection Models.” The Review of Economics and Statistics. 69(1).
February 1987: 42-49.
Burt, Martha, Aron, Laudan Y., Douglas, Toby, Valente, Jesse, Lee, Edgar, and Britta
Iwen. “Homelessness: Programs and the People They Serve: Findings of the
National Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients.” Urban Institute:
Washington D.C., December 1999.
Campbell, C. and S. W. Downs. "The Impact of Economic Incentives on Foster Parents."
Social Service Review. 61(4). December 1987:509-609.
Case, A., and L. Katz."The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths" NBER Working Paper. No. 3705.
1991.
Cash, Scottye J. “Risk Assessment in Child Welfare: The Art and Science.” Children
and Youth Services Review. 23(11). 2001: 811-830.
Chamberlain, P., Moreland, S., and K. Reid. “Enhanced Services and Stipends for Foster
Parents: Effects on Retention Rates and Outcomes for Children.” Child Welfare.
LXXI(5). September/October. 1992:387-404.
Chicago Public Schools, Office of Accountability, Department of Compliance, Student
Racial/Ethnic Survey. September 30, 1998.
Clausen, J.M., Landsverk, J., Ganger, W., Chadwick, D., and A. Litrownik. “Mental
Health Problems of Children in Foster Care.” Journal of child and Family
Studies. Vol. 7. 1998: 283-296.
Courtney, Mark E. “Research Needed to Improve the Prospects for Children in Out-ofhome Placement.” Children and Youth Services Review. Vol. 22. 2000: 743761.
Courtney, M.E. and I. Piliavin. Foster youths transitions to adulthood: Outcomes 12 to

39

18 months after leaving out-of-home care. Madison, WI: School of Social Work,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. 1998.
Courtney, Mark E., Terao, Sherri, and Noel Bost. Midwest Evaluation of the Adult
Functioning of Former Foster Youth: Conditions of Youth Preparing to Leave
State Care. Chicago: Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of
Chicago. 2004
Currie, Janet and Erdal Tekin. “Does Child Abuse Cause Crime?” NBER Working
Paper. No. 12171. April 2006.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. "Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using
the Allocation of Police Forces after a Terrorist Attack." American Economic
Review 94(1). March 2004: 115-33.
Donohue, John J. and Steven D. Levitt. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. CXVI(2). May 2001: 379-420.
Doyle, Joseph and H. Elizabeth Peters. “The Market for Foster Care: An Empirical
Study of the Impact of Foster Care Subsidies.” Working Paper. August 2004.
Doyle, Joseph. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
Care.” Working Paper. 2007.
Dworsky, A. & Courtney, M.E. Self-sufficiency of former foster youth in Wisconsin:
Analysis of unemployment insurance wage data and public assistance data.
USDHHS: Washington, D.C. 2000.
Fan, J. and Gijbels, I. “Local Polynomial Modeling and Its Applications.” Monographs
on Statistics and Applied Probability. 66. 1996.
Freeman, Richard. “The Economics of Crime,” in The Handbook of Labor Economics,
David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.). 3C. Chapter 52. New York: North
Holland. 1999.
Gelles, R.J. “How Evaluation Research Can Help Reform and Improve the Child
Welfare System.” Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment, and Trauma. Vol. 4.
2000: 7-28.
Glaeser, E. L. and B. Sacerdote. “Why is There More Crime in Cities?” Journal of
Political Economy. 107. 1999: S225–S258.
Goerge, R. M., Wulczyn, F., and D. Fanshel. “A Foster Care Research Agenda for the
90s.” Child Welfare. 73(5). 1994: 525-549.
Goerge, R. M., Van Voorhis, J. and B.J. Lee. “Illinois’s longitudinal and relational child
and family research database.” Social Science Computer Review 12(3). 1994:
351-65.
Greene, W. H. “Estimating Econometric Models with Fixed Effects.” Working Paper.
April 2001.
Heckman, J., "The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Conditions
in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process," in Manski, C.
and D. McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric
Applications, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1981, pp. 114-178.
Heckman James J. and Edward Vytlacil. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and
Econometric Policy Evaluation.” Econometrica. 73(3). May 2005: 669-738.

40

Hegar, R. and M. Scannapieco. “From Family Duty to Family Policy: The Evolution of
Kinship Care.” Child Welfare. LXXIV(1). January/February. 1995:201-215.
Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D.Angrist. “Identification and Estimation of Local
Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica. 62(2). March 1994: 467-475.
Jacob Brian ,and Lars Lefgren. “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
Concentration and Juvenile Crime," American Economic Review. 93(5). 2003:
1560-1577.
James, Sigrid, Landsverk, John, and Donald J. Slymen. “Placement Movement in Outof-Home Care: Patterns and Predictors.” Children and Youth Services Review.
26. 2004: 185-206.
Jonson-Reid, Melissa and Richard P. Barth. “From Maltreatment Report to Juvenile
Incarceration: The Role of Child Welfare Services. Child Abuse & Neglect,
24(4). 2000a: 505–520.
Jonson-Reid, M. and R. Barth. “From Placement to Prison: The path to Adolescent
Incarceration from Child Welfare Supervised Foster or Group Care.” Children
and Youth Services Review. 22(7). 2000b:493-516.
Kerman, Benjamin, Wildfire, Judith, and Richard P. Barth. “Outcomes for Young Adults
Who Experienced Foster Care.’ Children and Youth Services Review, 24(5).
2002: 319–344.
Kling, Jeffrey R. “Incarceration Length, Employment and Earnings.” American
Economic Review, 96(3). June 2006: 863-876
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. "Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher
Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(1) 2005: 87–130.
Lee David S. and Justin McCrary. “Crime, Punishment, and Myopia.” NBER Working
Paper. No. 11491. July 2005.
Levitt, Steven D. "Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of
Police on Crime." American Economic Review. 87(3). 1997:. 270-90.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self Reports,” American Economic Review. 94(1).
2004: 155-189.
Loeber, Rolf and Magda Stouthamer-Loeber, "Family Factors as Correlates and
Predictors of Juvenile Conduct Problems and Delinquency," Crime and Justice,
VII, Miehael Tonry and Norval Morris, eds. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. 1986.
Maluccio, A. N., Fein, E., and I. P. Davis. “Family Reunification: Research Findings,
Issues, and Directions.” Child Welfare. LXXIII(5). September/October. 1994:
489-504.
McDonald, Thomas P., Allen, Reva I., Westerfelt, Alex, and Irving Piliavin. Assessing
the Long-Term Effects of Foster Care: A Research Synthesis. Washington,
D.C.: CWLA Press. 1996.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. Violence in Families. Chalk,
Rosemary and Patricia A. King (editors). Washington: National Academy Press.
1998.

41

Natusi, J.P, and P.J. Pecora. “Risk Assessment Scales in Child Protection: A Test of the
Internal Consistency and Interrater Reliability of One Statewide System.” Social
Work Research and Abstracts. 29(2). 1993: 28-33.
Newton, Rae, Litronwnik, Alan J., and John A. Landsverk. “Childrne and Youth in
Foster Care: Disentangling the Relationship Between Problem Behaviors and
Number of Placements. Child Abuse & Neglect. 24(10). 2000: 1363-1374.
Oreopoulos, Philip. “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor
Neighborhood”, Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(4). 2003: 1533-75.
Pezzin, Liliana E. “Effects of Family Background on Crime Participation and
Criminal Earnings: An Empirical Analysis of Siblings.” Estudos Economicos,
34. July-September 2004: 487-514.
Rossi, P., Schuerman, J., and Budde, S. Understanding Child Maltreatment
Decisions and Those Who Make Them. Chicago, IL: Chapin Hall Center for
Children at the University of Chicago. 1996.
Sampson, R. L., and Laub, J. H. Crime in the Making. Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press. 1993.
Simon, J. "The Effect of Foster-Care Payment Levels on the Number of Foster Children
Given Homes." Social Service Review. 49(3). September 1975:405-411.
Smith, Dana K., Stormshak, Elizabeth, Chamberlain, Patricia, and Rachel Bridges
Whaley. “Placement Disruption in Treatment Foster Care.” Journal of
Emotional and Behavioral Disorders. 9(3), 2001: 200-205.
Stock, James, James Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. (2002). “A Survey of Weak
Instruments and Weak Identication in GMM.” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 20:4, 518–29.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Children, Youth and
Families. Title IV-E Independent Living Programs: a Decade in Review.
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 1999.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on
Children, Youth and Families, Child Maltreatment 2002 (Washington, DC: US
Government Printing Office, 2004).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and
Families. The AFCARS Report Washington, DC: US Government Printing
Office. 2006.
U.S. Department of Justice. Prisoners in 2005. NCJ 215092. (revised) January 18, 2007.
Vinnerljung, Bo, Sundell, Knut, Andree Lofholm, Cecilia, and Eva Humlesjo. “Former
Stockholm Child Protection Cases as Young Adults: Do Outcomes Differ
Between Those that Received Services and Those that Did Not?” Children and
Youth Services Review. 28. 2006: 59-77.
Widom, C.S. The Cycle of Violence, Science, 244. 1989:160-166..
Zinn, Andrew, DeCoursey, Jan, Goerge, Robert, and Mark Courtney. “A Study of
Placement Stability in Illinois.” Chapin Hall Working Paper. Chicago: Chapin
Hall Center for Children. 2006.

42

Figure 1A: FC Placement & Arrest Rate vs. CM Placement Differential:
Outside Cook County
Arrested

0.3

0.3

0.25

0.28

0.2

0.26

0.15
0.24

0.1

0.22

0.05
0
-0.25

Arrested

FC Placement

FC Placement

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.2
0.25

CM Placement Differential

Figure 1B: FC Placement Rate & Arrest Rate vs. CM Placement Differential:
Cook County
Arrested

0.4

0.3

0.35

0.28

0.3

0.26

0.25
0.24

0.2

0.22

0.15
0.1
-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

CM Placement Differential
Local linear regressions evaluated at each percentile of the placment differential.

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.2
0.25

Arrested

FC Placement

FC Placement

Figure 2B: Arrested Marginal Treatement Effects:
Cook County

1.5

1.5

1.25

1.25

1

1

0.75

0.75
Arrested MTE

Arrested MTE

Figure 2A: Arrested Marginal Treatment Effects:
Outside Cook County

0.5
0.25
0

0.5
0.25
0

-0.25

-0.25

-0.5

-0.5

-0.75

-0.75

-1
0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

0.2

-1
0.20

0.22

0.23

0.26

P(Placement|Z)

Figure 2C: Guilty/Withheld Marginal Treatment Effects
Outside Cook County

0.32

0.35

Figure 2D: Sentenced to Prison Marginal Treatment Effects: Outside
Cook County

1.5

1.5

1.25

1.25

1

1
Sentenced to Prison MTE

Found Guilty/Withheld MTE

0.29

P(Placement|Z)

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25

-0.5

-0.5

-0.75

-0.75

-1

-1
0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16
P(Placement|Z)

0.18

0.2

0.22

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

0.2

0.22

P(Placement|Z)

Estimates for each percentile of P(Placement|Z): the predicted placement from a probit modle that includes only the CM placement differential. Dashed lines report 5-95% bootstrapped
confidence intervals.

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Outside Cook County
Mean
Std Dev

Variable

Cook County
Mean
Std Dev

Foster Care Placement

0.16

0.36

0.26

0.44

white
African American
Hispanic

0.71
0.25
0.03

0.46
0.43
0.18

0.12
0.76
0.11

0.32
0.43
0.31

Initial Reporter physician
school
police
family
neighbor
other government
anonymous
other reporter

0.07
0.17
0.21
0.18
0.07
0.14
0.12
0.03

0.25
0.38
0.41
0.38
0.25
0.35
0.33
0.17

0.13
0.13
0.14
0.27
0.06
0.09
0.15
0.03

0.34
0.33
0.35
0.45
0.23
0.29
0.36
0.17

Age at Report

age

11.0

3.1

11.0

3.0

Sex

boy

0.50

0.50

0.49

0.50

Allegation

lack of supervision
environmental neglect
other neglect
substantial risk of harm
physical abuse
other abuse

0.26
0.11
0.06
0.35
0.20
0.02

0.44
0.31
0.24
0.48
0.40
0.16

0.35
0.15
0.06
0.24
0.17
0.03

0.48
0.36
0.23
0.43
0.38
0.16

Race

Observations
23254
21653
Children investigated between July 1, 1990 and June 30, 2003 and were at least 18 in 2005.
Cook County includes the City of Chicago.

Table 2: Child Characteristics and Case Manager Assignment
Dependent Variable: Case Manager Placement Differential
Outside Cook County
Coeff.
p-value

Variable

Cook County
Coeff.
p-value

Race
Other race
Excluded

white
African American
Hispanic

0.000
-0.002
0.007

(1.000)
(0.782)
(0.528)

-0.032
-0.023
-0.026

(0.012)*
(0.091)
(0.060)

Initial Reporter
Other Reporter
Excluded

physician
school
police
family
neighbor
other government
anonymous

-0.001
0.000
0.002
0.001
0.004
-0.000
-0.003

(0.846)
(0.988)
(0.739)
(0.759)
(0.513)
(0.965)
(0.482)

0.002
-0.003
-0.007
0.001
-0.008
-0.002
-0.010

(0.757)
(0.560)
(0.252)
(0.908)
(0.270)
(0.810)
(0.102)

Age at Report
Youngest ages
Excluded

age 6
age 7
age 8
age 9
age 10

0.003
0.010
0.001
0.000
0.002

(0.565)
(0.011)*
(0.870)
(0.969)
(0.542)

-0.003
-0.013
-0.006
-0.002
-0.006

(0.653)
(0.018)*
(0.330)
(0.782)
(0.261)

age 11
age 12
age 13
age 14
age 15
age 16

-0.000
0.001
0.001
0.004
0.005
0.002

(0.960)
(0.806)
(0.720)
(0.433)
(0.285)
(0.596)

-0.007
-0.004
-0.006
-0.000
-0.006
-0.009

(0.204)
(0.481)
(0.322)
(0.996)
(0.310)
(0.124)

Sex

boy

-0.001

(0.518)

0.000

(0.838)

Allegation
Other neglect
Excluded

lack of supervision
environmental neglect
substantial risk
physical abuse
other abuse

-0.006
-0.004
-0.000
-0.000
-0.001

(0.084)
(0.226)
(0.915)
(0.905)
(0.867)

0.006
0.007
-0.002
0.005
0.001

(0.102)
(0.088)
(0.639)
(0.162)
(0.895)

Mean of Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. of Dep. Var.

-0.004
0.091

-0.001
0.111

Number of Investigators
733
581
Observations
23254
21653
All models include year indicators. Estimated variance is clustered by investigator.
*=5% significance **=1% significance

Table 3: Case Manager Assignment and Foster care Placement
Dependent Variable: Foster Care Placement
Model:

Case Manager
Placement Differential

Outside Cook County
1
2
3
4
Coeff. S.E.
Coeff.
S.E.
0.229 0.036** 0.233
0.035**

Cook County
5
6
7
Coeff. S.E.
Coeff.
0.269 0.046** 0.255

8
S.E.
0.040**

white
African American
Hispanic

-0.002
0.093
-0.030

0.029
0.029**
0.031

-0.029
0.091
-0.033

0.031
0.031**
0.031

physician
school
police
family
neighbor
other government
anonymous

0.043
0.025
0.073
0.016
-0.013
0.084
0.002

0.018*
0.015
0.016**
0.015
0.016
0.016**
0.016

0.060
-0.017
0.102
0.045
-0.001
0.060
-0.051

0.024*
0.023
0.023**
0.023
0.025
0.026*
0.023*

age 6
age 7
age 8
age 9
age 10

-0.027
0.001
0.008
0.014
0.016

0.018
0.016
0.017
0.017
0.017

-0.000
0.017
-0.009
-0.019
-0.009

0.024
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021

age 11
age 12
age 13
age 14
age 15
age 16

0.016
0.020
0.020
0.016
-0.007
-0.017

0.017
0.017
0.018
0.017
0.018
0.018

-0.004
-0.021
-0.036
-0.059
-0.072
-0.085

0.022
0.022
0.022
0.022**
0.022**
0.022**

boy

-0.016

0.005**

0.001

0.006

physical abuse
substantial risk
other abuse
lack of supervision
env. neglect

-0.172
-0.180
-0.162
-0.152
-0.188

0.015**
0.015**
0.019**
0.015**
0.016**

-0.118
-0.046
-0.123
-0.029
-0.086

0.015**
0.016**
0.023**
0.015
0.017**

F-stat. for instrument 39.4
44.2
34.0
39.5
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.16
0.26
Observations
23254
21653
Standard errors are clustered at the case manager level. *=5% significance **=1% significance
Models include year indicators.

Table 4: Foster Care Placement and Arrest Outcomes: 2000-2005
Dependent Variable: Arrested, 2000-2005

Model
FC Placement
CM Placement
Differential

Outside Cook County
Cook County
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
0.075
0.060
0.388
0.391
0.030
0.030
(0.008)**(0.008)**
(0.189)* (0.182)* (0.007)**(0.007)**
0.089
0.091
0.026
0.021
(0.043)* (0.042)*
(0.027) (0.026)

Mean of Dep. Var. 0.260
0.218
Full Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
23254
21653
Standard errors are clustered at the case manager level. *=5% significance **=1% significance
Models include year indicators.

No

Yes

2SLS
(11)
0.097
(0.104)

2SLS
(12)
0.083
(0.105)

No

Yes

Table 5: Convictions and Prison Outcomes for Children from Outside Cook County
A. Dependent Variable: Sentence of Guilty/Withheld, 2000-2005
Model
FC Placement

OLS
(1)
0.045
(0.007)**

OLS
(2)
0.039
(0.007)**

CM Placement
Differential
Mean of Dep. Var.
Full Controls
Observations

0.151
No
23254

Yes

OLS
(3)

OLS
(4)

2SLS
(5)
0.403
(0.160)*

2SLS
(6)
0.405
(0.154)**

0.092
(0.035)**

0.095
(0.034)**

No

Yes

No

Yes

OLS
(3)

OLS
(4)

2SLS
(5)
0.219
(0.104)*

2SLS
(6)
0.225
(0.102)*

0.050
(0.023)*

0.053
(0.023)*

B. Dependent Variable: Sentenced to Prison 2000-2005
Model
FC Placement
CM Placement
Differential

OLS
(1)
0.035
(0.005)**

OLS
(2)
0.031
(0.005)**

Mean of Dep. Var.
0.066
Full Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
23254
Standard errors are clustered at the case manager level. *=5% significance **=1% significance
Models include year indicators.

Table 6: Results by Child Characteristics for Children from Outside Cook County
A. Dependent Variable: Arrested, 2000-2005
Sex
Boy
Girl
(1)
(2)
OLS: FC Placement
0.062
0.060
(0.012)** (0.011)**
2SLS: FC Placement
0.221
0.509
(0.298)
(0.187)**
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.305
0.215
F-statistic on instrument
18.401
36.594
Observations
11673
11581

Allegation/Reporter
abuse
neglect
(3)
(4)
0.051
0.070
(0.012)** (0.013)**
0.385
0.389
(0.203)
(0.297)
0.261
0.259
35.323
16.507
13149
10105

Race
white
Afr. Amer.
(5)
(6)
0.059
0.057
(0.011)** (0.010)**
0.541
0.591
(0.263)*
(0.249)*
0.249
0.248
23.939
26.647
16402
17459

Age Group
age < 10
age 10+
(7)
(8)
0.069
0.056
(0.013)** (0.011)**
0.400
0.379
(0.243)
(0.222)
0.208
0.286
18.136
34.487
7648
15606

Predicted P(R|X)
<Median
>Median
(9)
(10)
0.055
0.068
(0.012)** (0.013)**
0.346
0.435
(0.235)
(0.243)
0.253
0.274
27.757
21.211
15559
7695

B. Dependent Variable: Guilty/Withheld, 2000-2005
Sex
Allegation/Reporter
Boy
Girl
abuse
neglect
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS: FC Placement
0.048
0.033
0.037
0.042
(0.011)** (0.009)** (0.010)** (0.010)**
2SLS: FC Placement
0.326
0.467
0.366
0.449
(0.266)
(0.134)**
(0.165)*
(0.249)
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.190
0.112
0.151
0.152
F-statistic on instrument
18.401
36.594
35.323
16.507
Observations
11673
11581
13149
10105

Race
white
Afr. Amer.
(5)
(6)
0.047
0.045
(0.009)** (0.009)**
0.487
0.509
(0.231)*
(0.221)*
0.150
0.149
23.939
26.647
16402
17459

Age Group
age < 10
age 10+
(7)
(8)
0.039
0.040
(0.011)** (0.009)**
0.338
0.436
(0.202)
(0.187)*
0.120
0.166
18.136
34.487
7648
15606

Predicted P(R|X)
<Median
>Median
(9)
(10)
0.042
0.037
(0.010)** (0.010)**
0.433
0.375
(0.198)*
(0.203)
0.147
0.159
27.757
21.211
15559
7695

C. Dependent Variable: Sentenced to Prison, 2000-2005
Sex
Allegation/Reporter
Race
Age Group
Predicted P(R|X)
Boy
Girl
abuse
neglect
white
Afr. Amer. age < 10
age 10+
<Median
>Median
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
OLS: FC Placement
0.049
0.015
0.030
0.031
0.034
0.035
0.032
0.031
0.031
0.032
(0.009)** (0.005)** (0.007)** (0.008)** (0.007)** (0.007)** (0.008)** (0.007)** (0.008)** (0.007)**
2SLS: FC Placement
0.487
0.051
0.277
0.118
0.369
0.372
0.216
0.226
0.252
0.193
(0.229)*
(0.072)
(0.109)*
(0.161)
(0.152)*
(0.144)*
(0.125)
(0.124)
(0.127)*
(0.133)
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.098
0.033
0.064
0.067
0.063
0.063
0.047
0.075
0.063
0.072
F-statistic on instrument
18.401
36.594
35.323
16.507
23.939
26.647
18.136
34.487
27.757
21.211
Observations
11673
11581
13149
10105
16402
17459
7648
15606
15559
7695
Each row and column represents a separate regression estimate. Standard errors clustered at the case manager level are reported. F-statistics test the first-stage
relationship between the instrument and foster care placement. Columns (9) and (10) used a predicted probability of removal from a probit model with full controls.
The mean placement rates are 11% in the column(9) and 25% in column (10). * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Table 7: Arrests by Type of Offense for Children from Outside Cook County
Dependent Variable: Arrested for Offense Listed, 2000-2005
Offense:

Drug
Property
Violent
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS: FC Placement
0.004
0.035
0.027
(0.005)
(0.006)**
(0.006)**
2SLS: FC Placement
0.026
0.212
0.163
(0.087)
(0.096)*
(0.106)
CM Placement Differential
0.025
0.058
0.050
(0.022)
(0.024)*
(0.023)*
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.075
0.105
0.087
Observations
23254
Each row and column represents a separate regression estimate.
Standard errors clustered at the case manager level are reported.
Models include the full set of controls. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Other
(4)
0.042
(0.007)**
0.300
(0.169)
0.067
(0.038)
0.141

Table A1: Robustness
A. Dependent Variable: Arrested, 2000-2005

FC Placement: Marginal Effect
FC Placement: IV Estimate
Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations

Probit
(1)
0.061

Outside Cook County
ZIP Code
Match using
Fixed Effects
Name and DOB
(2)
(3)
0.054
0.079

Probit
(4)
0.031

Cook County
ZIP Code
Fixed Effects
(5)
0.033

Match using
Name and DOB
(6)
0.061
(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.431

0.317

0.235

0.091

0.113

0.201

(0.168)

(0.127)

(0.210)

(0.115)

(0.107)

(0.111)

0.260
23254

0.260
22711

0.344
23899

0.218
21653

0.218
21554

0.403
22357

Probit
(4)
0.013

Cook County
ZIP Code
Fixed Effects
(5)
0.014

Match using
Name and DOB
(6)
0.041
(0.007)

B. Dependent Variable: Sentence of Guilty/Withheld, 2000-2005

FC Placement: Marginal Effect
FC Placement: IV Estimate
Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations

Probit
(1)
0.039

Outside Cook County
ZIP Code
Match using
Fixed Effects
Name and DOB
(2)
(3)
0.036
0.050

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.532

0.346

0.304

-0.0290

-0.0007

0.097

(0.158)

(0.112)

(0.177)

(0.049)

(0.061)

(0.100)

0.151
23254

0.152
22711

0.211
23899

0.087
21653

0.087
21554

0.206
22357

Probit
(4)
0.002

Cook County
ZIP Code
Fixed Effects
(5)
0.002

Match using
Name and DOB
(6)
0.018
(0.004)

C. Dependent Variable: Sentenced to Prison, 2000-2005

FC Placement: Marginal Effect
FC Placement: IV Estimate

Probit
(1)
0.028

Outside Cook County
ZIP Code
Match using
Fixed Effects
Name and DOB
(2)
(3)
0.030
0.042

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.007)

(0.002)

(0.003)

0.416

0.201

0.249

-0.0017

0.0020

0.018

(0.230)

(0.076)

(0.138)

(0.025)

(0.031)

(0.053)

Mean of Dep. Var.
0.066
0.066
0.102
0.019
0.019
0.056
Observations
23254
22711
23899
21653
21554
22357
The models with zip code fixed effects eliminated observations in ZIP Codes with only one observation, resulting in a slightly smaller sample size. Match using
name and date of birth (DOB) allows the use of individuals with missing social security numbers, resulting in larger sample sizes. Columns (1) and (4) are estimates
from probit models with marginal effects reported, while the remaining columns are estimates from linear models. All models include the full set of controls.

Table A2: Convictions and Prison Outcomes for Children from Cook County
A. Dependent Variable: Sentence of Guilty/Withheld, 2000-2005
Model
FC Placement

OLS
(7)
0.013
(0.005)**

OLS
(8)
0.013
(0.005)**

CM Placement
Differential
Mean of Dep. Var.
Full Controls
Observations

0.087
No
21653

Yes

OLS
(9)

OLS
(10)

2SLS
(11)
-0.024
(0.057)

2SLS
(12)
-0.029
(0.058)

-0.006
(0.015)

-0.007
(0.015)

No

Yes

No

Yes

OLS
(9)

OLS
(10)

2SLS
(11)
0.001
(0.030)

2SLS
(12)
0.002
(0.032)

0.000
(0.008)

0.001
(0.008)

B. Dependent Variable: Sentenced to Prison 2000-2005

FC Placement
CM Placement
Differential

OLS
(7)
0.002
(0.002)

OLS
(8)
0.002
(0.002)

Mean of Dep. Var.
0.019
Full Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
21653
Standard errors are clustered at the case manager level. *=5% significance **=1% significance
Models include year indicators.

Table A3: Results by Child Characteristics: Cook County
A. Dependent Variable: Arrested, 2000-2005
Sex
Boy
Girl
(1)
(2)
OLS: FC Placement
0.025
0.036
(0.010)*
(0.009)**
2SLS: FC Placement
-0.008
0.168
(0.153)
(0.133)
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.230
0.206
F statistic on instrument
29.673
23.949
Observations
10661
10992

Allegation/Reporter
abuse
neglect
(3)
(4)
0.024
0.032
(0.011)*
(0.009)**
0.167
0.040
(0.209)
(0.106)
0.226
0.211
11.107
41.739
9534
12119

white
(5)
-0.011
(0.021)
-0.142
(0.642)
0.204
3.192
2569

Race
Afr. Amer.
(6)
0.029
(0.014)*
-0.758
(0.999)
0.184
1.109
5223

Age Group
age < 10
age 10+
(7)
(8)
0.034
0.028
(0.010)**
(0.009)**
0.080
0.082
(0.132)
(0.156)
0.156
0.248
20.433
32.279
7199
14454

Predicted P(R|X)
<Median
>Median
(9)
(10)
0.024
0.032
(0.015)
(0.007)**
0.463
0.065
(0.843)
(0.090)
0.199
0.226
1.992
49.511
6906
14747

B. Dependent Variable: Found Guilty/Withheld, 2000-2005
Allegation/Reporter
Sex
Boy
Girl
abuse
neglect
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS: FC Placement
0.013
0.014
0.002
0.019
(0.007)
(0.006)*
(0.008)
(0.006)**
2SLS: FC Placement
-0.035
-0.026
-0.014
-0.035
(0.098)
(0.072)
(0.130)
(0.062)
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.101
0.074
0.095
0.082
F statistic on instrument
29.673
23.949
11.107
41.739
Observations
10661
10992
9534
12119

white
(5)
0.003
(0.017)
-0.175
(0.436)
0.089
3.192
2569

Race
Afr. Amer.
(6)
0.022
(0.011)
0.149
(0.609)
0.073
1.109
5223

Age Group
age < 10
age 10+
(7)
(8)
0.012
0.014
(0.006)*
(0.007)*
-0.041
-0.028
(0.077)
(0.085)
0.058
0.102
20.433
32.279
7199
14454

Predicted P(R|X)
<Median
>Median
(9)
(10)
0.003
0.016
(0.010)
(0.005)**
0.017
-0.031
(0.432)
(0.056)
0.079
0.091
1.992
49.511
6906
14747

B. Dependent Variable: Sentenced to Prison, 2000-2005
Sex
Allegation/Reporter
Race
Age Group
Predicted P(R|X)
Boy
Girl
abuse
neglect
white
Afr. Amer.
age < 10
age 10+
<Median
>Median
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
OLS: FC Placement
0.004
-0.000
0.002
0.002
-0.001
0.003
0.000
0.003
-0.000
0.002
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.003)
2SLS: FC Placement
0.025
-0.022
0.023
-0.009
0.353
0.508
-0.024
0.014
0.191
-0.013
(0.058)
(0.033)
(0.083)
(0.029)
(0.379)
(0.635)
(0.046)
(0.044)
(0.248)
(0.029)
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.027
0.012
0.022
0.017
0.022
0.017
0.010
0.023
0.018
0.020
F statistic on instrument
29.673
23.949
11.107
41.739
3.192
1.109
20.433
32.279
1.992
49.511
Observations
10661
10992
9534
12119
2569
5223
7199
14454
6906
14747
Each row and column represents a separate regression estimate. Standard errors clustered at the case manager level are reported. F-statistics test the first-stage
relationship between the instrument and foster care placement. Columns (9) and (10) used a predicted probability of removal from a probit model with full controls.
The mean placement rates are 11% in the column(9) and 33% in column (10). * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Table A4: Arrests by Type of Offense for Children from Cook County
Dependent Variable: Arrested for Offense Listed, 2000-2005
Offense:

Drug
Property
Violent
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS: FC Placement
0.006
0.022
0.017
(0.004)
(0.005)**
(0.004)**
2SLS: FC Placement
0.029
-0.004
0.026
(0.052)
(0.065)
(0.061)
CM Placement Differential
0.007
-0.001
0.007
(0.013)
(0.017)
(0.015)
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.065
0.085
0.079
Observations
21838
Each row and column represents a separate regression estimate.
Standard errors clustered at the case manager level are reported.
Models include the full set of controls. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Other
(4)
0.013
(0.005)**
-0.037
(0.073)
-0.010
(0.019)
0.100

Figure A1A: FC Placement & Predicted FC Placement vs. CM Removal Differential:
Outside Cook County
FC Placement

P(Placement|X)

0.3
0.25
Placed

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.25

-0.20

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.20

0.25

CM Placement Differential

Figure A1B: FC Placement & Predicted FC Placement vs. CM Removal Differential:
Cook County
FC Placement

P(Placement|X)

0.4
0.35

Placed

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
-0.25

-0.20

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

CM Placement Differential

Local linear regressions evaluated at each percentile of the placment differential.
P(R|X) is the predicted probability of placment from a probit using the observable child characteristics.

0.15

Arrested

Figure A2A: Arrested vs. P(Placement|Z):
Outside Cook County
0.3
0.29
0.28
0.27
0.26
0.25
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.21
0.2
0.1

0.11

0.12

0.13

0.14

0.15

0.16

0.17

0.18

0.19

0.2

0.21

0.22

P(Placement|Z)

Arrested MTE

Figure A2B: Arrested Marginal Treatment Effects:
Outside Cook County
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1
0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

0.2

0.22

P(Placement|Z)
Estimates for each percentile of P(Placement|Z): the predicted placement from a probit modle that includes only the CM placement
differential. Figure A2B is the estimated first derivative of Figure A2A. Dashed lines report 5-95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.

