NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL WAGE INDEXATION,
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE INTERVENTION AND
MONETARY POLICY

Joshua Aizenman

Jacob A. Frenkel

Working Paper No. 1329

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1981L

A previous version of this paper was presented under the title
"Wage Indexation and the Optimal Exchange Rate Regime," at the 1983
NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA. We wish to acknowledge helpful coniments by G. Calvo, P. de Grouwe, S. Fischer, E. Helpman, C.
Kahn, K. Kimbrough, P. Kouri, L. Leiderman, M. Mussa, M. Obstfeld,
A. Razin, L. Weiss, Y. Weiss, and participants in seminars held at
the Hebrew University, Tel—Aviv
the NBER Summer
University, Columbia University, the University of Chicago, and the
University of Pennsylvania. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research programs in International Studies and Economic
Fluctuations and project in Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Institute,

NBER Working Paper #1329
April 1984
Optimal Wage Indexation, Foreign—Exchange
Intervention and Monetary Policy
ABSTRACT
This paper deals with the design of optimal monetary policy and with the
interaction between the optimal degrees of wage indexation and foreign exchange

intervention. The model is governed by the characteristics of the stochastic
shocks which affect the economy and by the information set that individuals possess.
Because of cost of negotiations, nominal wages are assumed to be precontracted and
wage adjustments follow a simple indexation rule that links wage changes to observed

changes in price. The use of the price level as the only indicator for wage adjustments may not permit an efficient use of available information and, may result in

welfare loss. The analysis specifies the optimal st of feedback rules that should
govern policy aiming at the minimization of the welfare loss. These feedback rules
determine the optimal response of monetary policy to changes in exchange rates,

interest rates and foreign prices. The adoption of the optimal set of feedback
rules results in the complete elimination of the welfare cost arising from the

simple indexation rule and from the existence of nominal contracts. Since optimal
policies succeed in the elimination of the distortions, issues concerning the
nature of contracts and the implications of specific assumptions about disequilib—

rium positions become inconsequential. The analysis then proceeds to examine the
interdependence between the optimal feedback rules and the optimal degree of wage

indexation. It is shown that a rise in the degree of exchange rate flexibility
raises the optimal degree of wage indexation. One of the key conclusipns is the
proposition that the number of independent feedback rules that govern a policy must
equal the number of independent sources of information that influence the deter-

mination of the undistorted equilibrium. Thus, it is shown that with a sufficient
number of feedback rules for monetary policy there may be no need to introduce

wage indexation. It is also shown that an economy that is not able to choose freely
an exchange rate regime can still eliminate the welfare loss by supplementing the

(constrained) monetary policy with an optimal rule for wage indexation. The paper
concludes with an examination of the consequences of departures from optimal policy
by comparing the welfare loss resulting from the imposition of alternative constraints on the degree of wage indexation, on foreign exchange intervention and on
the magnitudes of other policy feedback coefficients.

Professor Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104

Professor Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

I. Introduction
This paper deals with the design of optimal monetary policy and with the
interaction between the optimal degrees of wage Indexation and foreign exchange

intervention. Recent studies of wage indexation in the closed economy have
established that the optimal degree of wage indexation depends on the character-

istics of the stochastic distrubances that affect the economy. In many of these
studies, specifically in those that have adopted the analytical framework originated

hJ

•-•••7

that

result in some stickiness of nominal wages. In these studies indexation is

\(1Q7i\
—. /

— —. ... —-fr-c

41,
JIL4SSL.
CLL

tL.J LI1 &&fl .4.

tt L 4. fl.. I.. 0

intended to reduce the undesirable consequences of the stickiness of wages. Subsequent analyses of the optimal degree of wage indexation examined the implications
of alternative assumptions about the determinants of employment in disequilibrium
situations, as well as the rationale for the existence of nominal contracts that
yield sticky wages [e.g., Barro (1977), Fischer (1977a, l977b), Gray (1978),
Cukierman (1980) and Karni (1983)].
The analysis of the optimal foreign exchange intervention, on the other hand,
focused initially on the choice between a completely fixed and a completely

flexible exchange rate systems. Subsequent examinations of the same question
have shifted the focus from the problem of choice between the two extreme exchange
rate regimes to the problem of the optimal degree of exchange rate flexibility.

Thus, the focus has shifted towards finding the optimal mix of the fixed and the
flexible exchange rate regimes. Consequently, that analysis has attempted to
determine the optimal degree of exchange rate management [e.g., Frenkel and Aizenman
(1982) and the references thereupon].

More recently it has been recognized that the optimal degree of wage indexa—

tion depends on the prevailing exchange rate regime. Thus, Flood and Marion (1982)
showed that a small open economy with fixed exchange rates should adopt a policy of

—2--

complete wage indexation whereas an economy with flexible exchange rates should

adopt a policy of partial wage indexation. This analysis was extended by Aizenman
(l983a) who showed that, under flexible exchange rates, the optimal degree of wage
indexation rises with the degree of openness of the economy as measured by the

relative size of the traded goods sector. On the other hand some authors have
recognized that the choice between fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes depends

on labor market conventions [Bhandari (1982)]. Specifically, it has been argued
that the degree of wage indexation determines the relative efficiency of macroeconomic policies under alternative exchange rate regimes and, therefore, the
choice between the two regimes should depend on whether wages are indexed or not
[e.g., Sachs (1980) and Marston (1982a)].

Common to these studies is the characteristic that the economy is either
searching for the optimal degree of wage indexation under the assumption that the
exchange rate regime (being fixed or flexible) is exogenously given, or that it
is choosing between fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes under the assumption

that the degree of wage indexation is exogenously given. The point of departure
of our paper is the notion that the optimal degrees of wage indexation and exchange

rate intervention are interrelated and are mutually and simultaneously determined.
Therefore, in our analytical framework the choice of the optimal degrees of wage
indexation and exchange rate intervention emerges as the outcome of a joint optimization problem. This joint optimization outcoiqe is shown to be a component of the
solution to the broader problem of the design of optimal monetary policy.
The interdependence among monetary policy, foreign exchange intervention and
labor market conditions, as characterized by the degree of wage indexation, has been
clearly recognized by policy makers and has been viewed as an important constraint

on the conduct of policy particularly in highly inflationary countries. And yet,
except for few exceptions like Turnovsky (l983a), the question of the formal inter—

—3.-

action between the optimal degrees of indexation and foreign exchange intervention
especially within the context of the design of optimal monetary policy has not

received attention in the theoretical literature. This question is addressed in
the subsequent sections.

Section II describes the building blocks of the model, including the
determination of output and employment, the specification of wage contracts and

the determination of prices and exchange rates. One of the key characteristics
of the model is the menu of the stochastic shocks. It is assumed that the economy
is subject to stochastic shocks to productivity, to foreign prices, to purchasing

power parities, to the rate of interest and to the money supply. Much of the
analysis depends, therefore, on the relative magnitudes of these shocks, as well as

on the information set that individuals are assumed to possess.
Our analysis assumes that, due to cost of negotiations, nominal wages are
pre—coritracted and real wages adjust according to a simple indexation formula which

links the change in wages to the observed change in the price level. The level of
employment, in turn is assumed to be determined by firms according to their demand

for labor. This specification of labor market conventions may result in discrepancies between the realized levels of real wages and employment and the equilibrium

levels obtained when labor markets clear continuously without friction, The goal
of policies is to minimize the welfare loss associated with such discrepancies.
Section III contains an analysis of the objective function which is given

a formal justification in the Appendix. In Section IV we specify the optimal money
supply process and we derive the optimal set of feedback rules that should govern

the conduct of monetary policy. These feedback rules determine the optimal response
of monetary policy to changes in exchange rates, interest rates and foreign prices.
One of the key results is that the adoption of the optimal set of feedback rules

results in the complete elimination of the welfare cost. Thus, optimal policies

—4—

nullify the distortions arising from the simple indexatiori rule and from the existence

of nominal contracts. Since optimal policies succeed in the elimination of the
distortions, critical issues concerning the nature of contracts and the implications

of specific assumptions about disequilibrium positions become inconsequential. We
then proceed to examine in detail the interdependence between the optimal feedback

rules and the optimal degree of wage indexation. The section concludes with the
proposition that the number of independent feedback rules that govern a policy
aiming at the elimination of a distortion, must equal the number of independent
sources of information that influence the determination of the undistorted equili-

brium. Thus, it is shown that with a sufficient number of feedback rules for
monetary policy there may be no need to introduce wage indexation. By the same
token it is also shown that an economy that is not able to choose freely an exchange rate regime can still eliminate the welfare loss by supplementing the
(constrained) monetary policy with an optimal rule for wage indexation.

Section V. examines the implications of the optimal policies on the means

and the variances of money and output. In Section VI we apply our analytical
framework to situations in which some of the policy instruments can not be used

optimally. In this context we determine the optimal indexation coefficient for
an economy that is constrained to follow a given exchange rate regime, and we
determine the optimal degree of exchange rate intervention for an economy that

is constrained to follow a given wage indexation rule. For both of these cases
we show the dependence of t.he (constrained) optimal policies on the details of

the stochastic disturbances that affect the economy, and we compute the values

of the loss function that result from the adoption of various policies. Section
VII contains concluding remarks.

-.5—

II. The Model
The model that we use has several building blocks. These include the
specification of output and employment, the specification of the wage rule and

the determination of prices and exchange rates, In this section we outline the
structure of the model.

11,1 Output and Employment
Let the production function be

log Y. =

(1)

where

Lt

,

and

log B + Blog L +

denote respectively the level of output, the input of

labor and a productivity shock, at time t. The productivity shock,

to be distributed normally with a zero mean and a known variance o .

,

is

assumed

Within

each period the realized value of the productivity shock is not known and the
expectations concerning the realized value of

are formed on the basis of

the information that is available during the period. Throughout the analysis
we assume that at each point in time all prices and rates of interest are known,
The conditional expectation of

period t ,

is

p, as based on the information available at

denoted by E(u)

Producers are assumed to maximize the expected value of profits subject

to the available information, Thus, in their demand for labor, producers are
assumed to equate the real wage to the expected marginal product of labor.
Expressed logarithmically, this equality implies that

(2)

log() log B. -

(l-)1og

Lt + E(i)

where W and P denote the nominal wage and the price level, respectively.
From equation (2), the demand for labor is

—6—

log L =

(3)

Where

-- [_log() + log

B+

E()J

L designates the demand for labor.1 In order to simplify notations

we suppress from here on the subscript t .

Thus, unless stated otherwise,

the conditional expectation of the productivity shock E(P) will be denoted

by E(P) , which will also be refered to as the perceived productivity shock.
Assuming that employment is determined by the demand for labor, we substitute
equation (3) into (1) and obtain the level of output that corresponds to the
employment of labor:

(4)

log Y =

log

log W + log B + E(p)] + p

B + I3c [log P

where Y

Equation (4) specifies the stochastic supply of output that is obtained when

the value of the productivity shock is p

In the absence of any stochastic

shocks the corresponding deterministic level of output is

(4')

where P

log Y = log

B +

o

(log P

log W + log B)

and W denote the market clearing price level and nominal wage

that are obtained in the absence of stochastic shocks.

1Formally, the firm facing a given real wage is assumed to demand labor so
as to maximize the expected value of profits conditional on the available information. Thus,
u
pax E {BL e t_(W/p) L }

L

tt

t

The resulting demand for labor (expressed logarithmically) is
P
d
1
log Lt = -r--- [log6B_log(-.) + log E(e t)],

and using the approximation log Et(e't)

E(P) we obtain equation (3). The same

approximation, which is valid for small values of the variance of the stochastic
shock, is also used in the derivation of the expected value of the marginal product
of labor in equation (2).

7—

For the subsequent analysis it is useful to denote by lower case letters
the percentage discrepancy of a variable from the value that it obtains in the

absence of shocks. Thus, x

log X —

log

X

.

Accordingly,

from equations (4)

and (4') we obtain

y a[p —

(5)

w + E(ld)] +

Equation (5) shows that the percentage deviation of output from its deterministic
level depends on the percentage deviations of the real wage from its deterministic
value, on the perceived productivity shock, E(i.i), as well as on the realized
productivity shock,

11.2 The Wage Rule
It is assumed that due to costs of negotiations nominal wages are set
according to the following simple, time—invariant, indexation rule:

log W = log W + b(log P — log P0)

(6)

Equation (6) specifies the wage at period t

as a function of W , the wage

that would have prevailed if shocks were zero, and the percentage deviation of

the price from its non—stochastic value.2 In equation (6), b designates an
indexation parameter. When b=l, wages are fully indexed to the rate of infla-

tion and the real wage is rigid. When b=O, nominal wages are rigid. From
equation (6) it follows that w = bp

.

Substituting bp for w in equation

(5) yields

2 is assumed that the initial nominal wage is set at the level W
This assumption is being justified in the Appendix. The main virtue of the
assumed specification of the indexation rule is its simplicity. Much of our
subsequent analysis aims to demonstrate that with proper monetary policy, which
is governed by time—invariant feedback rules, this simplicity need not yield
sub—optina1 outcomes.

—8—

y =

(7)

Equation

a[(l—b)p

(7),which may

be

+ E(i)] + ji

viewed as an aggregate supply function, expresses the

supply of output as a function of the price, p , as well as the perceived and
realized productivity shocks. The dependence of the supply on the price depends
in turn on the coefficient of indexation b ; a higher indexation coefficient
results in a weaker dependence of output on the price.

11.3 The Price Level and the Exchange Rate
The domestic price level is assumed to be linked to the foreign price

through purchasing power parity which is assumed to hold subject to random

deviations. Let the foreign price be

(8)

log P = log P' +

where a prime (') denotes a foreign variable and where a bar over a variable

denotes the value of its fixed component. In equation (8), x1 denotes the
stochastic component of the foreign price which is assumed to be distributed

normally with zero mean and a fixed known variance. The domestic price is
linked (stochastically) to the foreign price according to:

(9)

where

log

=

log

St +

log

F' +

S denotes the exchange rate and

the random deviation frrnn purchasing

power parity which is distributed normally with zero mean and a fixed known

variance. Thus,

—9--

(10)

log P =

log

St + log P' +

where xx1+x2
When all shocks are zero, the purchasing power parity relation can be written as

(10')

log P =

log

S + log P'

and subtracting (10') from (10) yields

(11)

p=s+x

where, as before, we suppress the time subscript.
The formulation in equation (11) links tie domestic price to the exchange

In

rate and to the stochastic shock X .

order to determine the level of prices

we need to incorporate monetary considerations. The equilibrium pice level and
exchange rates can be derived from the conditions of money market equilibrium.

Let the demand for money be

(12)

log

=

log

K +

log

+ log

-

where M denotes nominal balances and i denotes the nominal rate of interest.
The nominal rate of interest in turn is linked to the foreign rate of interest,
i' .

Arbitrage

by investors, who are assumed to be risk neutral, assures that

uncovered interest parity holds:3

3More precisely, when prices are stochastic, uncovered interest parity
holds only as an approximation due to Jensen's inequality. This approximation is
valid for small values of the variance of the stochastic shock to prices; see Frerike].
and Razin (1980).

—10—

(13)

it i + E(log S1 — log S)

where E1ogS÷1 denotes the expected exchange rate for period t+1 based on
the information available at period t .

The foreign rate of interest is also

subject to a random shock, p which is distributed normally with zero mean
and a fixed known variance. Thus,

(14

t

= -

+ n- t

-

In specifying the money supply process we assume that the monetary
authority takes account of the relevant information conveyed by a specific set

of independent indicators. Thus, the supply of nominal balances adjusts in
response to the three independent indicators

(15)

where

log

=

log

M +

and x according to

—

(which is assumed to be distributed normally with zero mean and a

fixed known variance) denotes a random shock to the money supply process. In

equation (15) y denotes the elasticity of the money supply with respect to
s—-- the deviation of the exchange rate from its deterministic value, r denotes
the elasticity of the money supply with respect to p—— the stochastic shock to
the rate of interest, and

denotes the elasticity of the money supply with

respect to x—— the sum of the stochastic shocks to foreign prices and to
purchasing power parity. In the subsequent analysis of the money supply rule
we justify the choice of this set of indicators and determine the optimal values

of the time—invariant feedback coefficients y,r and

—11—

Equilibrium in the money market requires that

log K + log

(16)

+ log

—

= log

M +

—

TPt

—

and, when all shocks are zero, money market equilibrium yields4
log K + log P + log Y — cd' = log M

(16')

substracting (16') for (16) and omitting the time subscript yields

(17)

Substituting equations (7) and (11) for y and p and using the fact
that the domestic rate of interest (from equations (13)—(14)) is i' + p

s

we obtain

(18)

A(s +

x) +oE()

+ p — n(p—s) = 6 — ys

where
A

[l+o(1—b)J

In equation (18), A denotes the elasticity of nominal income (and thereby of
the reduced form demand for money) with respect to prices. As may be seen the

magnitude of A depends on the size of the indexation coefficient b

.

When

4it is relevant to note that from equations (13)—(14) i—i'
p +
E1ogS1_ logS , and the specification of the stochastic shocks implies that

E1ogS1 = log S

.

The implicit assumption underlying this formulation is

that E log S1 is not influenced by the observed price. Our assumption about
the absence of trend enables us to focus on the properties of the stationary equilibrium for which the current values of the stochastic shocks do not affect the expectations about future values of the variables. The specification of equation (16')
also embodies the assumption that the equilibrium is unique. The choice of the
unique equilibrium is consistent with the criterion suggested by McCallum (1983).
On the issue of uniqueness see Calvo (1979) and Turnovsky (1983b).

—12—

wage indexation is complete (i.e., when b=l), price changes do not alter output

and X=1 .

When

b is less than unity, a rise in the price alters real wages

by (1—b) and, therefore, it also affects money demand through changing real outFrom equation (18) it follows that the equilibrium percentage

put by c(1—b) .

change in the exchange rate is

= (ci—T) p

(19)

—

(.i—6) —

aE(i.i)

(X+)

—

X+c+y

As is evident from equation (19), when y=0 the exchange rate is fully flexible,

and when y= , s=0 and the exchange rate is fixed. Between these two extremes
there is a wide range of intermediate exchange rate regimes.

Recalling that p=s+< ,
p =

(20)

As may

be

and using equation (19) we can express the price as

P - () — E(u)

-

(X+) +

X+ct+y

seen, the price depends on the stochastic structure of the shocks,

on the perceived value of the real shock, E(p) , on the coefficient of wage
indexation, b , on the coefficient of foreign exchange intervention, '

, and

on

the other feedback rules which govern monetary policy
In order to determine the value of E(j) that is consistent with the
information structure and with the requirement of rational expectations we need

to specify the information set that is available to decision makers We assume
that at each point in time individuals observe the current values of the price,
p ,

the exchange rate, s , and the rates of interest, i and 1'

,

but

they cannot

observe directly the stochastic shocks. Since our analysis does not deal with
issues arising from asymmetric information, we also assume that individuals

know the policy feedback rules. The available information set can be used by
individuals in order to infer the values of some of the shocks. For example,

the observed values of p and s imply the value of x (from equation (11)),

—13—

and the observed value of i' implies the value of p (from equation (14)).
While individuals do not possess knowledge about the values of the real pro-

ductivity shock, p , and the money supply shock,

6 ,

their

knowledge of the

values of p,> and p along with their knowledge of the coefficient of wage
indexation, b , and of the monetary policy feedback rules 6,y,T and ,

implies

from equation (20), a value of (p—6). The value of (i.i—6) may be viewed as the

informational content of the price p

The assumption of rational expectations

implies that the optimal forecast of p

reflects

an efficient use of this

information. Thus, the value of E(p) may be computed form a regression of u

on (p—6) .

The ordinary least squares estimate of the real shock that is

obtained through this procedure is

E(p) =

where

cov(p,.i—6)

a
denotes the variance of (p—S)

and where a2

When

the

shocks are indepen—

dent of each other the regression coefficient becomes

a2
p
i-i

6

where the variance of a variable, x ,

is

denoted by a2

This procedure for determining E(P) may be viewed as a short cut to
the more lengthy computation following the undetermined coefficients method.
An analogous short cut is adopted in Canzoneri, Henderson and Rogoff (1983)
in the context of an analysis of the informational content of interest rates.

Finally, substituting the estimates of the real shock E(1.1)

into

equation (20) we obtain

(21)

(a—t)
p =

+ (a+y—)x —

X+ct+y

(1+o) (p—a)

This solution for p can be substituted into equation (7) to yield an expression for the aggregate supply as a function of the stochastic structure of the
shocks, the coefficient of wage indexation, b (that is embodied in the value

of X), and the various feedback coefficients which govern policy. In order to
determine the optimal values of these coefficients we turn next to an analysis
of the objective function.

III

The Loss Function

The foregoing analysis determined the level of output, y (or more precisely the percentage deviation of output from the level that would have prevailed
in the absence of shocks) under the assumption that the level of employment is
determined exclusively by the demand for labor (equation (3)). The resultant dis-

equilibrium in the labor market induces welfare cost. We will assume that the
policy goal is to minimize this welfare cost by choosing the optimal values of
the coefficient of indexation and the other feedback rules.
In order to compute the welfare cost, we compute the level of employment

L that would have prevailed under conditions of full clearance of labor markets.

We then compare L with the actual level of employment L , and compute the
welfare cost that is associated with the discrepancy between L and L

—15—

Diagrammatically, in Figure 1, L and L denote respectively the equilibrium and
the actual levels of employment. The shaded area ABC measures the welfare cost.6
We turn now to the computation of the welfare cost
Let the supply of labor be

(22)

where

log L = log A ÷ c log

denotes the elasticity of labor supply, and workers are assumed to be

risk neutral. Equating the supply of labor, equation (22), with the demand for

labor, equation (3), yields the equilibrium level of employment, log L , where

(23)

log L

log A +

[a(E(u) + log B) log A1

and subtracting from (23) the equilibrium level of employment that would have
prevailed in the absence of shocks, we obtain

(24)

9. =

Actual

employment, however, may not adjust to clear labor markets; rather,

it is governed by the assumptions that labor is demand determined and wages are

determined by the indexation rule. Subtracting from the actual supply of output
(equation (1)) the supply that would have obtained in the absence of shocks, yields

(25)

y=

6A formal derviation of the loss function is presented in the Appendix
in terms of utility maximization. In what follows we provide a somewhat less
formal expOsition in terms of consumer and producer surplus.

log

w

log

Wd
1og(-)

S

L

w

log(-)
Ws
log(-)

C

d
log L

log L

Figure 1:

logL

LogL

The labor market and the welfare
cost of sub—optimal employment.

—16—

and thus, employment (or more precisely the percentage deviation of employment
from the level that would have prevailed in the absence of shocks) is

(26)

By using equation (5) for the value of y, Z can be written as

(26')

and, therefore, the discrepancy (in percentage terms) between equilibrium and
actual employment is

(27)

In order to compute the welfare loss associated with this discrepancy we
need to multiply it by one half of the difference

between the demand and the

supply prices at the actual employment leveL From the demand for and the supply
of labor these demand and supply prices (or more precisely the percentage changes
thereof) are, respectively,

d

—

___
____

(28)

(w—p)

(29)

(w—p)S = ____

and the percentage welfare cost of suboptimal employment is therefore

(30)

— (. +

.) {—(w—p)+

a(ii) 2

—17—

To obtain the welfare loss in units of output we need to multiply equation (30)

by the equilibrium real wage bill (W/P) L

.

The resulting quantity corresponds

to the area of the triangle ABC in Figure 1.
As is clear from equation (30), once we omit the irrelevant constants,
minimizing the expected welfare loss on the basis of the information available
at period t—1, amounts to minimizing the loss function H:

(31)

H = E [{— (w—p)

+_E(i)}2

where 1tl denotes the information set available at period t—1.7

IV. Optimal Policies
In order to find the optimal values of the coefficient of indexation and
the other feedback coefficients which govern policy we substitute into equation

(31) the indexation rule, w=bp, the forecasting rule, E(i)=(.i—ô) , and the

solution for p from equation (21) and obtain the loss function (32):

71t is relevant to note that the formulation of the objective function
in terms of a minimization of the welfare cost of the distortions in the labor
market is equivalent to the more conventional (but somewhat less informative)
formulation of minimizing the expected squared discrepancy of output, y , from
, obtained with full market clearing [see Aizenman,
the equilibrium level,
(1983b)]. This equivalence becomes evident by noting that since (y—y)=(2—),
Our focus on the labor market in the computation of the
E(y—y)2 = 2E(2—)2 .
welfare cost presumes that other markets are undistorted. An explicit incorporation of this assumption would require that monetary policies at home and abroad
generate the optimal rate of inflation. With this interpretation, our formulation
of the stochastic shock to the money supply would be viewed as a random deviation
from the deterministic trend reflecting the optimal rate of inflation. Equation
(31) presumes that the authorities aim to minimize the expectations of the welfare
loss on the basis of the information set available at period t—l. The alternative
specification which minimizes the expected welfare loss on the basis of the currently
available information would yield a feedback rule that is not time—invariant. Since,
as will be seen below the time—invariant feedback rules eliminate the welfare loss,
the choice between the two procedures might reflect the excess costs associated
with state—dependent rule.

—18--

E[{e + _p(_)}2

H =

(32)

'

where
1—b

I

and

A+o+-y
0

(a-r)p + (a+y-) - (1 +

[

In

equation (32), 8 denotes the change in the real wage (1—b)p
In interpreting the ioss function (32), it is useful to note that the

term (i—S) denotes the private sectors' optimal forecast of the real shock,
p , and its product with a/(c+c) measures therefore the equilibrium change in

real wages that would occur under an optimal use of information. On the other
hand the actual change in real wages that results from the adoption of specific

feedback rules is —

The squared discrepancy between the two magnitudes,

that is, the variance of the error in the determination of actual real wages,
entails welfare loss which is measured by the loss function H .

By inspecting

the value of B in equation (33) it is clear that in order to minimize the loss
function (32), we need the set
*

(34)

a

t

and
*

(35)
where

*
T

and

*
designate the optimal values of

the values of 1 and

and

.

Assuming that

are set according to equations (34) and (35), the loss

funtion (32) becomes
(32')

-r

E[{[-(l+Bcy) +

2-

t-l

—19—

which equates (32') to zero is:

and it is evident that the value of

(36)

*_— ________
(a-4-€)(l-I-a)

Finally, by equating the value of

with its definition in equation (33), we

solve for the optimal value of y

()

(1 - b)

(a)

(1 +

--

and substituting 1 + a(l — b) for the value of A we obtain

(37)

y*

(1 -

b)

+

a

E(l+BaP) -

(1 +

)

Equations (34),(35) and (37') provide three restrictions on the values of
the four policy coefficients t,,y and b .

As is evident, this set of restrictions

contains one degree of freedom. Since, however, the structure of the model implies
that these restrictions are recursive, it follows that of the four policy coeffi-

cients, r is indispensable. The degree of freedom permits setting an arbitrary

value to one of the coefficients in the triplet (b,,y) while setting the other
two at their optimal values. For example, if the indexation coefficient, b, is
given exogeneously, the restrictions in equations (34),(35) and (37') imply the

optimal values of

.

This provides the rationale for the specification of

the money supply process in equation (15). Adopting this optimal set of feedback
rules for the money supply process results in the elimination of the welfare loss.
Equation (37') also suggests that the optimal value of y depends on
the structural parameters of the economy (including the semi—elasticity of the
demand for money (a), the elasticity of output with respect to labor input (s),

and the elasticity of the supply of labor (C)); on the stochastic structure

—20—

of the real and the monetary shocks (that govern the value of ij) and on the

indexation coefficient (b). Thus, for example, the higher the elasticity of
the supply of labor, the larger becomes the optimal value of y, that is, the
larger becomes the desirability of greater fixity of exchange rates.

As is evident by inspection of equation (37'), around the optimum,there
is a negative correlation between the degree of wage indexation and the value

*
of y

.

Thus, an economy with a higher degree of wage indexation will find it

optimal to increase the flexibility of exchange rates (reduce y*)• As the coefficient of wage indexation approaches unity, the degree of real wage rigidity
*

increases, and the optimal value of y
*

from equation (35), the value of

8

approaches —(1+c).
*
depends linearly on y

Furthermore, since
it also follows that

a higher degree of wage indexation lowers the optimal degree to which monetary

policy responds to x (the shocks to foreign prices and to purchasing power parities).
The foregoing analysis also demonstrates that as long as the money supply

responds optimally to s,p, and x

which in the present case are the relevant

sources of independent information that can be used to yield the market clearing

real wage, there is no need to introduce wage indexation. Thus, it was shown
that when the degree of freedom provided by equations (34),(35) and (37) is used
up by setting the irtdexation coefficient at an exogenously given level, the

welfare loss may be eliminated by a proper choice of ,T, and

.

If,

on the

other hand, the value of y was given exogenously, then the welfare loss could
still be eliminated by supplementing the optimal values of T and

in the money

supply process with an optimal rule of wage indexation. From equation (37') the

optimal value of b for an exogenously given value of y is:

8At the extreme, with full indexation, the optimal value of y is indeter—
mined. This may be verified by references to the loss function in equations (32)—
(33), where it is seen that when b=l the value of is zero and, as a result the
value of the loss function is independent of y. Intuitively, full indexation introduces real wage rigidity. Consequently, changes in the price level which can be
brought about through changes in the exchange rate and which are influenced by the
exchange rate regime, will be inconsequential since, due to the rigidity of real
wages, they will induce equiproportionate changes in nominal wages.

—21—

1-1-a-I-y

b = —

(38)

—(14 --)

+ 1-ft

a2
U

The dependence of the value of b* on the magnitudes of the key parameters is qualitatively similar to the dependence of -' on these parameters.
Thus

*

*

Accordingly,

>0

'

1)

a rise in the relative variance of the real shock, a rise in the

elasticity of output with respect to labor input, and a rise in the degree of
fixity of exchange rates result in a lower optimal value of the indexation
coefficient, whereas a rise in the elasticity of labor supply raises the

optimal degree of wage indexation. It is noteworthy that the optimal rela-

tion between b and y is linear. This might reflect the fact that the various
instruments are used optimally and the welfare loss is eliminated. It is also
relevant to note that by setting 'y=O ,

the

optimal indexation coefficient

becomes

*

(38')

where b

b =
c

1—

l+ci

— (1+ ) + l+E

denotes the closed—economy value. This is indeed the optimal indexa—

—22—

tion coefficient that is derived in Aizenman's (1983b) closed—economy model.9
The economic intuition underlying the redundancy of one of the coeffi-

cients in the triplet (y,,b) is implicit in the structure of the model. Since
the rate of interest appears only in the demand for money, the only way of
eliminating the impact of an interest rate shock on the loss function is by
*
setting T =a as in equation (34). No other feedback rule can eliminate the

impact of an interest rate shock. In contrast, the rest of the shocks manifest
themselves through the price level and, together with the given nominal wage,

they impact on the real wage which is the source of the welfare loss. Since

from equation (21) y and

influence the price level whereas the wage in—

dexation coefficient influences both the price level and the nominal wage,

they all alter the real wage directly. Given the nature of the shocks we need
oniy three independent feedback rules)0Therefore, it is sufficient to use in

addition to T , which is in this model an indispensable feedback rule, any
other pair from the triplet (y,,b)
The examples analyzed above illustrated the substitutability between

exchange rate flexibility and wage indexation under the assumption that T and
——

the instruments that respond to interest rate shocks, p , and

price shocks,

to foreign

x —— are set optimally. Suppose now that the authorities do not
*

adopt a feedback rule for x .

Under these circumstances, again T = a

and,

9The intuition underlying this result is that the optimal coefficients of
the feedback rule for the open—economy ensure that the price level effects arising
from the shocks p, and x (that originate from the openness of the economy) are offset
by setting a and a+y . Thus, at the optimum, policy succeeds in creating an
outcome that is equivalent to the one generated by =x=0 • Since in the closed
economy =xrO, we only need to substitute y=O in equation (38) to obtain the
closed—economy result. Alternatively, b can be obtained directly from the loss

function (32)—(33) by noting that when te economy is closed, p===o, e= —(l+)(—),
and the value of b which eliminates the welfare loss is b* as in (38').
10An analogous redundancy proposition is developed in Canzoneri, Henderson
and Rogoff (1983) in connection with the usage of the information contained in
nominal interest rates. It is noteworthy that our objective function presumes
that the only policy objective is the elimination of distortions. If, in addition,
the policy maker wishes to reduce the variance of prices then the redundant
coefficient could be employed in the attainment of that target.

—23—

since O ,

it

follows from equation (35) that the optimal value of y is —c#.

Thus, when =O the solution for the optimal exchange rate regime is unique
and, in contrast with the case described by equation (37'), the value of
is independent of the deterministic and the stochastic structure of the economy.
The optimal value of the indexation coefficient corresponding to that

case can be found from equation (38). Substituting y= —ct

(33'')

b** =

yields:

1

—

*

U
1.1

A comparison of equation (38'') with (38') reveals that

*

*

(39)

b *

>b.

*
y =-cL

That is, when in the open economy r,y, and b are set at their optimal values,
the resultant wage indexation coefficient is larger than the corresponding

closed economy optimal indexation coefficient.
The incorporation of the various shocks as components of the feedback
rules governing the money supply process may serve to supplement Tinbergen's
theorem concerning the relation between targets and instruments of economic
policy.

tn our case the single "target" for economic policy is the elimination

of a distortion to the real.wage. This single target can be attained by means
of a single policy instrument. Our analysis shows that the single policy instrument is capable of attaining the target only if it is triggered by a sufficient

number of independent indicators. This number of independent indicators for the

This result reflects our specification of the nature of the shocks by
which the openness of the economy does not increase the exposure to foreign real
shocks. In prinicple the relative importance of real shocks may be higher for
the open economy if, for example, it faces shocks to the price of imported raw *
materials. In that case the optimal indexation coefficient may be lower than b

—24—

feedback rules must equal the number of independent sources of information that
influence the determination of the undistorted real wage.

This perspective on

the concept of policy instruments was illustrated in our model in terms of the

characteristics of the money supply process. It does, however, have relevance
for a wider range of policies including the characteristics of fiscal spending.
Finally, we have argued that the optimal policy could follow a sophisticated money supply rule which is triggered by a sufficient number of independent

indicators. Alternatively, the optimal policy could follow a sophisticated wage
indexation formula that is not limited to respond only to changes in the price
level. Following the general principle, such an indexation formula will be
optimal only if it contains a sufficient number of feedback rules and, as was

argued before, the number of such independent feedback rules must equal the
number of the independent sources of information that matter in determining
the market clearing real wage.12 The choice among the alternatives of a
sophisticated money supply rule, a sophisticated wage indexation formula or
any other sophisticated set of policies is likely to be governed by the relative

costs and complexities associated with each alternative. Such costs may reflect
the difficulties of prompt implementations of alternative feedback rules. The
choice among alternative policies is also likely to be influenced by external
constraints (like the rules of the IMF on foreign exchange intervention) and
domestic institutional constraints (like the relative strength of the monetary

authority and labor unions). Therefore, the actual choice of policy is likely
to differ across different countries.

12For illustrations of the optimal design of sophisticated indexation
formula in the context of a closed economy, see Fischer (1977a) and Karni (1983).

—25—

V The Optimal Levels and Variability of Money and Output
In the previous section we derived the optimal values of the feedback
coefficients in the money supply rule along with the optimal coefficient of wage

indexation. We showed that when the various coefficients are set at their optimal
values the welfare loss is eliminated and the real equilibrium replicates the
undistorted situation in which labor markets clear without friction. In this
section we assume that the optimal policies have been adopted and we examine
the implications of these optimal policies on the means and the variances of
the money supply and Output.

V.1. The Optimal Money Supply
The money supply function was specified in equation (15) that is
repeated here for convenience:

m = S—ys—rp—

(15)

Substituting the optimal values of r and

recalling that p=s+ ,

E

from equations (34)—(35), and

yields

m = 6—yp—a(p+)

(40)

Substituting (37) for the optimal value of y , collecting terms and recalling

that p+x—p =

(40')

supply,

i—i'

yields the optimal money supply:

m = 6-[(1--b)

O+C(

- 1]p-a(i-i')

Equation (40') which may be interpreted as a reduced form optimal money
*
expresses the dependence of m
on the price and on the rate of interest.

As may be seen a rise in the rate of interest triggers a reduction in the money

supply. The optimal reduction in the money supply aims to restore money market

—26—

equilibrium and thereby to neutralize the effect of the change in the rate of
interest on the price and. through it, on the real wage. Therefore, the (semi)

elasticity

*

of m with respect to i is

—ci, and changes in in

*

exactly

match and offset changes in the demand for money.13 The response of the

optimal money supply to changes in p is more involved since it depends on
the stochastic structure and on the coefficient of indexation. A change in p
affects the real wage. For the case in which the change in price results from
a monetary shock the equilibrium real wage should not be changed. Therefore,

to

*

restore the initial equilibrium,

in

and p should change equiproportionally,

as indicated by the second term in the bracketed coefficient of p in equation

(40'). On the other hand, the change in p may reflect the outcome of a real
shock which necessitates a change in the equilibrium real wage. This factor,

which is represented by the first term in the bracketed coefficient of p in
equation (40 ),

factors

requires

*14 As

a negative response of in .

a result, when both

*
are taken into account, the optimal dependence of

in

on

p may be
*

negative or positive. When the coefficient of wage indexation is low, m /p
is likely to be negative; on the other hand, when the coefficient of indexation

is high, changes in p have very little impact on the real wage and, therefore,
in order to facilitate the attainment of an equilibrium change in the real wage
*
ni /Bp may have to be positive.

13This property of the optimal money supply reflects the assumption that the
rate of interest does not affect the real equilibrium of the economy. In a more
elaborate framework the rate of interest may affect the real equilibrium through
altering the supply of labor or through its impact on relative conunodity prices.

1This negative response is needed in order to mitigate the change in
the real wage that results from the change in price. The extent of the needed
mitigation of the change in the real wage depends negatively on 4 and b

27

In order to obtain further understanding of the characteristics of the opti-

mal money supply, it is convenient to express m as a function of the stochastic
shocks. For this purpose we note from equation (21) that with optimal policies
the optimal price is

*

p =

(21')

(1—b)(a+c)

(7'\
'.JI ,-.4 (91 '\ f,sr -h -timl

c.-.--.
.JttLJOL.LLLL.St&5

/

rf
—

v

nr

SULU

equation (40) and collecting terms yields

m = - gtn +

(40'')

(1+gP)u—a(p+x)

where
g —
—

c

— 1-I-a
1—b

The economic interpretation of (40'') is facilitated by substituting the

perceived value of the real shock, E(i), for p(p—6) and by rewriting (40'')
as

*
—'S

= (i—'S) + gE(p) —

a(p+)

*

— denotes the optimal money supply net of the random component 'S

where

in

Thus,

m —

*

is

the part of the money supply that is attributed to the optimal

feedback rules. As may be seen, the parameter g is the elasticity of the optimal

money supply with respect to the perceived value of the real shock. The sign
of this elasticity depends on the coefficient of indexation and on the values

of the structural parameters. Further insight is obtained by noting that from

—28—

*

equations (24) and (21') gE(p)=(y—p)+(1+c)p

*

(40''')

m

=

and, therefore,

*
*
y + p — c(P+x*p )

Equation (40''') shows that the optimal money supply ensures that money market
equilibrium prevails, that the level of output corresponds to the non—distorted

level, , and that the resulting price and the rate of interest correspond to

their

*

and p+p

optimal values, p

*

Using equation (40''), the variance of the optimal money supply can be
written as

=

(41)

[l+g(2+g)ip]c2 +

From equation (41) it is evident that a rise in the variance of
p,x and p
raises the variance of the optimal money supply while a rise in the variance

of 6 excerts an ambiguous effect. Specifically, for —2<g<0 ,

a rise in the

*

variance of 6 increases the variance of m

On the other hand if g>O, as

would be the case when the coefficient of indexation is low and the product 8c
is high, or if g<—2, as would be the case when the coefficient of indexation

approaches unity, a rise in the variance of 6 reduces the varaince of m*
The explanation for this last result follows similar reasoning to the explana—

tiori

given above for the case of a positive dependence of the level of

*
m

on the price in equation (40').

V.2 Optimal Outp
The level of output corresponding

which equals the level of output obtained
can be found from equation (24) and (25)

to the optimal policies is

y

with full market clearing. This level

or, alternatively, it can be found by

—29—

substituting the optimal price from equation (21')

into

the aggregate supply in

equation (7). Thus,

+ p

=

(42)

From equation (42) it follows that the variance of the optimal level of output
can be written as

a- =

(43)

[1+

iL(2 +

As is evident, the variance of the optimal level of output depends positively on

the variance of the real shock, a2 , and negatively on the variance of the

monetary shock a .
the value of

11.'

,

its

Since a rise in the variance of the real shock raises
effect on the variance of optimal output is being magni-

fied and the elasticity of a2 with respect to a2 exceeds unity.
p
V

VI. Constrained Optimization and Welfare
The analysis up to this point determined the optimal degrees of wage
indexation and the optimal values of the feedback coefficients thich govern

monetary policy. The optimal values of the feedback coefficients were determined
by minimizing the loss function. In this section we compute the values of the
loss function that result from the adoption of various feedback rules. This
procedure enables us to compare the welfare loss that results from the imposition
of alternative constraints on the degree of wage indexation, exchange rate inter—

venion and other policy instruments. The analysis also yields some more general

—30—

conclusions concerning the link between the information set and the number of
independent feedback coefficients necessary for welfare maximization.
Using equations (32)—(33), the loss function can be written as

-

H =

(44)

(l

a))a_+
+,

()2 a

where

= (ct—T)2a2 + (ct+y—)2a2 +

We first consider the situation in which the only instrument of policy

that can be set at its optimal level is the coefficient of wage indexation, In
order to find the optimal value of the indexation coefficient, we note that in

the loss function (44), b appears only in c ; therefore, minimization of H
with respect to b is equivalent to minimization with respect to

(holding

y constant). this procedure yields the optimal value of 4
a2

=

(45)

—-- (1+ap) —-

with the definition of

By equating

in (33) we can obtain the optimal

value of the indexation coefficient.
for

Substituting
the loss function becomes

*

(46)

22

H(b ;y) =
(a+c)

2

in equation (44) and assuming that =r=O

—31—

*

where

H(b ;y) indicates that the loss function is evaluated under the condi-

tion that only the coefficient of wage indexation is set optimally, while the

value of y is set at an arbitrary level. When the exchange rate is fixed
(y-9 the value of the loss function is

*

(46')

and,

H(b ;')

—

=

Y—

P

()2

when the exchange rate is flexible (y0) the value of the lOSS

(46'')

H(b )I

is

222

22
*

function

= ____

° (a-I-c)2

ct2(cY2+cY2) + (l+a)2cy25

As is evident from comparison of equations (46') and (46").

(47)

H(b;y)I

H(b;y)10

Thus, except for extreme cases (like, for example, when there are no real shocks),
the welfare loss for an economy for which only the wage indexation coefficient
is set optimally is higher under fixed exchange rates than under flexible exchange rates. This result confirms the proposition established by Flood and
Marion (1982).

The foregoing analysis presumed that the value of y is set at an
arbitrary level which need not correspond to its optimal value. In order to
obtain the optimal value of the coefficient of intervention in the foreign
exchange market, we differentiate the loss function (44) with respect to
and equate the derivative to zero:

—32—

(48)

The

--

assumption

- + 2(a+y—)a2

,2 =0

that the coefficient of wage indexation has been set at its

optimal value b

*

implies that at this point aH/=0 and, therefore, equation

,

(48) implies that the optimal foreign—exchange intervention coefficient is

(49)

*

y =—ct

Substituting (49) into the loss function (44) and recalling that in the present

stage of the analysis we have assumed that policy is constrained to set 0
yields

*
(50)

H(b '

*

=

cr2pa2
(c+c)

—

a2a2
2
2 2
a a + (l+cyp)

where H(b*, y*) indicates that the loss function is evaluated under the
conditions that both wage indexation and exchange rate intervention are optimal.
By subtracting equation (50) from (46) we obtain the marginal benefit

from the additional instrument of exchange rate intervention. It can be shown
that this marginal benefit is proportional to (a ÷ y)2a2

Thus,when wages

are optimally indexed, the benefit from exchange rate intervention is proportional
to the squared discrepancy between the actual value of y and the constrained optimal
value (—a), as well as to the variance of prices which arise from the foreign

sector (through x). It follows, therefore, that if o = 0

and wages are optimally

indexed economic welfare is independent of the exchange rate regime. In this case,
however, as is evident from equation (50), there is still welfare loss that is

proportional to a2

—33—

Inspection of equation (46) shows that when there are no real shocks,

that is when a=O, H(b;y)=0.

Thus, in this case, the single instrument of

optimal indexation Is capable of eliminating the welfare loss. Under these
circumstances, of course, the use of exchange rate intervention in addition
to optimal wage indexation would also eliminate the welfare loss (as is seen

=

from equation (50) with

0),

but the marginal gain from the additional

instrument would be zero and the optimal exctange rate regime would be indeter-

minate. In contrast, it can be shown that if the only available instrument
was that of exchange rate intervention, then the optimal use of this instrument
would not eliminate the welfare loss which, in turn, would be proportional to
the squared discrepancy between the actual value of b and unity (its optimal

value). It follows, therefore, that
=

H(b;y)

(51)

cr2O
1_I

H(b*,

*)

2o
ii

= 0 <

H(y*;b)

a2 =0
1.1

These inequalities suggest that when there are no real shocks, the instrument
of wage indexation has a comparative advantage in minimizing the welfare cost
of labor market distortions as compared with the instrument of exchange rate
intervention.

Equation (50) suggests that when

o = 0,

H(b*, .v*)

= 0.

Thus, in this

case, the optimal use of the instruments of wage indexation and exchange rate
intervention eliminate completely the welfare loss even though the value of

was constrained to equal zero. Likewise, inspection of equation (46) suggests

that if both o and a are zero, as would b: the case in a closed economy,
then H(b )=0. In this closed—economy case, b =bc which is defined in equa—
tion(38'). This result corresponds to that in Aizenman (l983b) where it is shown
that, in the context of a closed economy, the optimal use of the single instru—

—34—

ment of wage indexation is capable of eliminating the welfare cost of labor
market distortion 15
The economic intuition underlying these results can be stated in terms
of the relation between the number of independent sources of information and

the number of independent feedback policy rules. Two of the key assumptions
underlying the model in this paper are that the level of employment is determined by the demand for labor and that real wages are adjusted according to
an indexation formula that links the real wage only to the observed price
level, The use of the price level in the adjustment of real wages as the only
indicator to which the indexation rule applies may not permit an efficient use

of the information that is available to economic agents. For example, in our

model it is assumed that at each point in time individuals observe (or are
able to infer without error) the shocks to prices, x

,

the

shocks to the rate

of interest, p, and the difference between the real and the monetary shocks,

- 5.

Adopting a single feedback rule that links the real wage to the price

level through the indexation coefficient does not use efficiently the more
detailed information that is available in the open economy and that could be

exploited in the adjustment of real wages. This is the reason for the proposi—

tion

*

that, except for special cases, H(b ;y) > 0
In equation (46), the value of the term in the squared brackets character-

izes the quality of the use of information in the adjustment of real wages.

comparison between this result and that of Gray (1976) illustrates the
role of the number of sources of information. In Gray's model there are two independent sources of information that can be used in determining the equilibrium real
wage. Therefore, the use of wage indexation as the single feedback rule does not
eliminate the welfare loss. In contrast, when the present model is reduced to its
closed—economy counterpart, there is only one independent source of relevant information (information about jj—S) and, therefore, the optimal use of the single instrument of wage indexation eliminates the welfare loss. This discussion implies that
if the magnitude of ji was also known along with the knowledge of prices, interest
rates and the exchange rate, then the specification of the optimal money supply,
which aims at eliminating the welfare loss, would include p as an additional
indicator.

—35—

When this term is zero, as would for example be the case when a2 = a2 =
p

x

0,

then

the information set is used most efficiently in the sense that the observed
price provides all of the relevant information for determining the optimal

adjustment of real wages. Under such circumstances, indeed, the optimal
indexation coefficient b* eliminates the welfare loss, as would be the

case in the closed economy. In general, however, if

or

are positive,

x
then the squared bracket in equation (46) would be positive, indicating that
p

the adoption of a single policy indicator when there are more independent
sources of information does not result in a market clearing real wage and,
therefore,

does not eliminate the welfare loss. Another illustration of

this argument is provided by equation (50) where it is assumed that the policy
uses two independent feedback rules. Under such circumstances, if there are
three Independent sources of information (the observed values of s, p and p),

the

*

optimal values of the two feedback rules b

welfare loss and H(b*, y*) >

0.

*

and y do not eliminate the

In contrast, if there were no shocks to the

rate of interest, there would only be two independent sources of information
(s and p); in such a case the term in the squared brackets in equation (50)

would be zero indicating that the optimal use of the two feedback rules is
capable of eliminating the welfare loss since it generates the market clearing

real wage. Up to now we have assumed that policy was constrained to set r=0
In that case, as was seen from equation (50) the optimal use of wage indexation
and foreign exchange intervention does not eliminate the welfare cost in the

presence of interest—rate shocks. Inspection of equation (44) reveals that if
policy is free to adopt also a feedback rule in response to the interest rate

indicator,

=

*

then T

would be set at T

.

In

that case the welfare loss would be

—36—

**

*
16
eliminated and H(b ,y ,r )=O.
The foregoing discussion delt with the policies necessary for the

elimination of the welfare loss arising from suboptimal real wages. The
fundamental principle, however, is more general. Policies can be designed

to eliminate the welfare cost of distortions. The general principle developed

by Tinbergen states that in order to attain n targets, economic policy must

possess at least n independent instruments. Our application demonstrated
t._.
LLLL
WI. LII

in

IJL
LI1 LILeL 7 _1_.
LLUUILJL C

.t.

-...._1 .-.-.1.......-i11

£LL LL ulIIeL1L, LI1 Uj) i..J.LILd.L

W.L.LJ.

attaining the targets only if the instruments are influenced by a sufficient

number of independent indicators.17 This sufficient number must equal the
number of independent sources of information that influence the determination
of the undistorted level of the targets.

VII. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have analysed the relation between the optimal degrees

of wage indexation and foreign exchange intervention. The optimal values of these
policy instruments were obtained as components of the solution to the broader

problem of the design of optimal monetary policy. The model used for the analysis
was governed by the characteristics of the stochastic shocks which affect the
economy and by the information set that individuals were assumed to possess.

lôThe marginal benefit from the additional interest rate instrument is computed
in equation (50) where H(b*,y*) measures the welfare loss in the absence of the
and p
additional instrument. As may be seen an increase in the variances of
raises the marginal benefit, whereas an increase in the values of
and , and In
the variance of 6 lowers the marginal benefit. Economically, the explanation for
the negative dependence of H(b*,y*) on the variance of 6 reflects the second
best situation: the welfare loss H(b*,y*) represents a dis-tortion that results
from a sub—optimal policy with respect to p, and the rise in the variance of 6
mitigates the welfare cost of this distortion.
1'The requirement that the indicators must be independent is reflected in
our case by the exclusion of the price p from the set of indicators governing
the supply of money. Clearly, of the triplet p,s, and x only two contain independent information that can be usefully exploited. Thus, of the three, we
chose to include s and x in the set of indicators.

—37—

Throughout the analysis the optimal policies are obtained with reference
to an objective function which has the desirable property of possessing explicit

welfare justification. It represents the welfare loss arising from the assumptions
that employment is governed by the demand for labor, nominal wages are precontracted
and real wages are adjusted according to an indexation formula that links the real

wage to the observed price. The use of the price level in the adjustment of real
wages as the only indicator to which the indexatlon rule applies may not permit
an efficient use of the information that is available to economic agents and that

could be exploited in the adjustment of real wages. The loss function reflects
the welfare cost associated with a discrepancy between the equilibrium change in
real wages that would occur under an optimal use of information and the actual
change in real wages that results from labor market conventions and from the

adoption of specific feedback rules.
One of the key findings of the paper concerns the conditions under which
the optimal policy, by minimizing the loss function, also eliminates the welfare

cost. It was shown that if the number of independent feedback rules that govern
policy is equal to the number of independent sources of information that are
relevant for the determination of the market clearing real wage, then the adoption of the optimal feedback rules eliminates completely the welfare cost of

labor market distortions. This proposition is important since the elimination
of the welfare cost implies that the optimal policies are capable of reproducing
the equilibrium that would be obtained under the assumption that labor markets

were cleared after the realization of the stochastic shocks. By reproducing that
equilibrium the optimal policies nullify the distortions that result from the
assumption that,because of contracts, nominal wages are predetermined.

When such

an optimum obtains the important issues concerning the implications of the assumption that employment is determined by the demand for labor, as raised by Cukierman

—38—

(1980), are inconsequential since, at the optimum

,

there

is an equality between

the demand and the supply of labor. Similarily, when the optimum obtains many of
the critical issues concerning the conceptual difficulties associated with the
existence of suboptimal contracts, as raised by Barro (1977), are also inconsequential since, at the optimum, the contracts (along with the optimal policy)

are optimal. In that sense the equilibrium which eliminates the welfare loss
is analogous to the closed economy equilibria that were analysed by Karni (1983)
and Aizenman (1983a),

The principle underlying the determination of the optimal set of feedback
rules was illustrated in terms of the design of a sophisticated monetary policy.
Alternatively, analogous feedback rules could be incorporated into the design

of a sophisticated wage indexation formula. As long as each independent source
of information that is relevant for the determination of the market clearing
real wage has a corresponding independent feedback rule, which is used optimally,
the resulting equilibrium replicates the distortion free equilibrium.
Our analysis showed that when wage indexation serves as one. of the

independent feedback rules, then a rise in the variance of the real productivity
shock and a rise in the elasticity of output with respect to labor input lower

the optimal degree of wage indexation. On the other hand a rise in the variance
of the monetary shock and a rise in the elasticity of labor supply raisa the
optimal degree of wage indexation. As for the relation between wage indexation
and foreign exchange intervention, it was shown that, around the optimum, a rise
in the degree of exchange rate flexibility raises the optimal degree of wage indexa—
tion.

We concluded our discussion with an examination of the consequences of

departures from optimal policies. In this context we compared the welfare loss
that results from the imposition of alternative constraints on the degree of wage

—39—

indexation, on foreign exchange intervention and on the magnitudes of other feedback coefficients.

One of the limitations of the analysis in this paper relates to the level

of aggregation. We have assumed that there is one composite good which is internationally traded at a (stochastically) given world price. A useful extension
would allow for a richer menu of commodities including those that are internationally

tradable and those which are non—tradable. The presence of non—tradable goods
would then relax some of the constraints that were imposed by the small country
assumption. Owing to its relative size, the economy would still be a price taker
in the world traded goods market,but the relative price of its non—traded goods

would be endogenously determined by market—clearing conditions. Such an extension should facilitate the distinction between mechanisms and policies that

operate on the price level and those that operate on relative prices. In
analysing the role of relative prices a distinction should also be made between
the relative price of traded goods ——

the

external terms of trade —— and the

relative price of non—traded goods ——

the

internal terms of trade (the, real

exchange rate). The introduction on non—traded goods should also permit an
analysis of the influence of the degree of openness (as measured by the relative
size of the traded goods sector) on the optimal values of the feedback rules that
govern policy. Previous studies suggest that the degree of openness may play a
significant role in influencing optimal policies [e.g., Frenkel and Aizenman (1982)

and Aizenman (l983a)J. The broader menu of goods should also facilitate an
analysis of the optimal indexation rules in the face of supply shocks [as in
Marston and Turnovsky (1983)],as well as an analysis of the proper price index
that should be used in the indexation formula [as in Marston(l982b)].

—40—

Another limitation of the analysis is the lack of an explicit distinction

between permanent and transitory shocks. In our specifications the stochastic
disturbances were assumed to be independent of each other and to be drawn from

a distribution with a constant variance and a zero mean, A more complete analysis
would distinguish between permanent and transitory shocks and would incorporate
the role of time preference; thereby, it would introduce dynamic considerations
into the analysis of the optimal choice of policies.
It is relevant to note that the nature of labor contracts assumed in this

paper was motivated by realism. Accordingly, we assumed that contracts specify
the nominal wage whereas the level of output is determined by firms,and that the
indexation formula is simple in that it adjusts wages to changes in the price level

rather than to a complex set of variables. Our analysis does not attempt to
contribute to the theory that explains this conventional form of labor contract
[on this see Barro (1977) and Fischer (1977b)].

Finally, we define the equilibrium that replicates the performance of
an economy in which labor markets clear without friction, as the social optimum.
Implicit in this definition of the social optimum is the assumption that individuals and firms are risk neutral since, in general [as shown by Azariadis (1978)],
when attidudes towards risk differ across economic agents, auction markets do not
allocate risk efficiently and individuals find it advantageous to enter into long—

term risk—sharing contracts. Our assumption, therefore, precludes rationalizing
the existence of labor contracts in terms of the insurance function.

Therefore,

in this framework [as in Gray (1978)], the existence of contracts reflects the

cost of continuous renegotiations.

—41—

APPENDIX

The Derivation of the Loss Function
In this Appendix we provide a formal justification for our use of
the loss function.

the

Define by ()

equilibrium real wage that clears the labor market.

This equilibrium value of the real wage clears the market for any given expected

value of the real shock conditional on the available information. Since in
equilibrium the real wage equals the expected marginal product of labor, the

amount of labor, L ,

that

clears the labor market when the real wage is (wIP)

is defined by

(A—l)

where

E[YL(L)lIt] =

()

I denotes the information set available at time t, and where YL(L)

denotes the marginal product of labor evaluated at L=L

For subsequent use

it is convenient to define the function X as the expected value of X condi-

tional on the available information I. Thus, applying this notation to
equation (A—i) yields:

(A—i')

YL(L) =

()

General equilibrium requires that the level of employment L is also consistent
with the supply of labor that is supplied by utility maximizing workers at the

given real wage (W/P) .

(A—2)

u(C,L)

To illustrate, let the utility function be

; u/C>O, u/L<O

—42—

where C denotes the level of consumption and L denotes labor, i.e., negative
leisure. Maximization of the utility function subject to the technological

constraint that production, Y ,

is

governed by the production function, Y

F(L)

and that, from the budget constraint in the absence of asset accumulation, the

valuof production and consumption must coincide, yields the desired supply

of labor. In general equilibrium, with L = L

,

the

equilibrium level of utility

is denoted by U(L)
In practice, due to a precontracted nominal wage, the realized real wage

may differ from its full equilibrium level, Since by assumption employment is
demand determined, it follows that the actual level of employemnt, L

,

when the

real wage differs from (WI?), differs from L and, associated with this level of
employment and production, the level of utility is U(L),

The welfare cost of suboptimal employment is [U(L) —

U(L)]

where \

measures the marginal utility of income. Using Harberger's formulation for the
analysis of consumer surplus (see Harberger (1971), eq. 15') we expand the utility
function in Taylor's series around the general equilibrium and omit third—order
terms to obtain Harberger's expression for the approximation of the welfare loss:

(A—3)

x

— E

1

C. —
1

1

c.1

where AC. denotes the change in the rate of consumption of good i ,

denotes the equilibrium price of good i , and where A?. measures the discrepancy
of the actual price from the full equilibrium price. In applying (A—3) to the
utility function assumed here, it is useful to decompose the expression into

terms involving goods and those involving labor (or leisure). In our case, with

—43—

a single (composite) commodity which is used as the numeraire, an application

of Harberger's formula yields —C as the welfare change associated with the
change in the consumption of that good. The same procedure is also applied to
labor, which is the second argument In the utility function, u(C,L) , and

whose equilibrium price is (W/P) .

For that component we obtain

(W/P) L + L(W/P)5 L , where the change in the real wage is measured along
the supply of labor that reflects the utility function. Combining the expressions Measuring the welfare cost of changes in consumption and labor yields (A—4)
a, the welfare loss:

—

(A—4)

where LiL =

L

—

L

C+

In

.

(W/P) iL + (W/P)5L

computing the value of the expression in (A—4) we

simplify the specification of the intertemporal budget constraint by specifying

a temporal budget constraint according to which C =

value of C can be obtained by calculating Y .

Y

and, therefore, the

Expanding the production

function in Taylor's series around the general equilibrium up to second order

terms yield

(A-5)

=

L

+ YLL(L)

Since the expansion is around the equilibrium, we substitute in (A—5) the equili—
brium real wage for

,

and then substitute the resulting expression for

xC(Y) into (A—4):
11n general, the values of expenditure and income need not be equal to
each other as long as there is equality between their discounted present values.
With undistorted capital markets, however, the two formulations are equivalent
as is known from the literature on the Ricardian Equivalence.

—44—

=

(A—6)

— LL

A(W/P)5

(iL)2 +

L

or equivalently

=2

(A-6 '

+ ') (L)

where c denotes the slope of the supply of labor9 i.e.,
=

Multiplying
(A-6")

_______

and dividing the right hand side of (A—6') by L2 yields

-

=
X

where —2. ,

2

LL +

()2

which is defined as log(i,'L)—log(L/L), approximates the percen-

tage discrepancy between equilibrium and actual employment levels2 Using the
production function to compute

(A—7)

where

= (1 + 1) : (W)

we obtain

()2

denotes the elasticity of labor supply and, as defined in the text,

a= 11(1—3) where P

denotes the elasticity of output with respect to labor

input. Substituting for (Q—i)2 from equation (27) in the text yields

(A-8)

U
T
2C + 4)[_(w-p) +
=

£—

cy+c

P

as the percentage discrepancy between L
and L, employs the approximation that log(1+x)-x
2The specification of

—45--

where (A—8) corresponds to equation (30) in the text.

Our loss function is

defined as the expected value of the welfare loss from suboptimal employment

during period t resulting from the existence of contracts that were agreed upon
on the basis of information available at period t—l .

c21 + 1

constant T

Thus, ignoring the

and treating the equilibrium wage bill, () L, as

constant (i.e., ignoring third order terms of Taylor expansion) we obtain

the loss function H:

H = E[{—(w—p)

(A—9)

+_E(ii)}2IIi}

which corresponds to equation (31) in the text.
Prior to concluding this Appendixwe can now use the loss function in
order to justify our earlier assumption concerning the initial nominal wage,
W0 .

Using the definition of the variance, the loss function (A—9) can be

written as

H = Var
[—(w—p) +E(1.1)II_i]+E[{=(wp) +E(.1)}JI_i12

(A—9')

Our assumption that the initial contractual nominal wage is set at the level
that would have prevailed in equilibrium in the absence of shocks, is necessary
in order to ensure that the second term on the right hand side of (A—9')

vanishes; for any other choice of W

this second term would be positive and

the welfare loss would not be minimized.

3

3An initial choice of W which does not correspond to the expected
equilibrium market clearing wage, yields a non—zero value of EI1—(w—p) I_i) ——
from its deterministic
the expected percentage discrepancy of the real wage
second
term on the right hand
market clearing value, and results in a positive
side of (A—9').

—46—

REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua (l983a). "Wage Flexibility and Openness," NBER Working
Paper Series, No. 1108, April 1983.
________________(l983b). "Wage Contracts With Incomplete and Costly Information," NBER Working Paper Series, No. 1150, June 1983.
Azariadis, Costas, "Escalator Clauses and the Allocation of Cyclical Risks,"
Journal of Economic Theory 18, June 1978: 119—55.

Barro,

Robert J., "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 3, No. 3, July 1977: 305—16.

Bhandari, Jagdeep S., "Staggered Wage Setting and Exchange Rate Policy in an
Economy With Capital Assets," Journal of International Money and Finance 1,

No. 3, December 1982: 275—292.
Calvo, Cuillermo A., "On Models of Money and Perfect Foresight," International
Economic Review 20, No. 1, February 1979: 83—103.
Canzoneri, Matthew B., Henderson, Dale W. and Rogoff, Kenneth S., "The Information Content of the Interest Rate and Optimal Monetary Policy," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 98, No. 4 November 1983: 545—66.
Cukierman, Alex. "The Effects of Wage Indexation on Macroeconomic Fluctuations:
A Ceneralization," Journal of Monetary Economics 6, No. 2, April 1980:
147—70.

Fischer, Stanley (l977a). "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability" in
Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.) Stabilization of Domestic and
International Economy, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Vol. 5.
c.nr,1ementary series to the Journal of Monetary
Economics, 1977. 107—47.

_______________(l977b). "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary
Policy: A Comment," Journal of Monetary Economics 3, No. 3, July 1977:
317—23.

Flood, Robert P. and Marion, Nancy P. "The Transmission of Disturbances Under
Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes With Optimal [ndexation," Quarterly
Journal of Economics XCVII, No. 1, February 1982: 43—66.
Frenkel, Jacob A. and Aizenman, Joshua. "Aspects of the Optimal Management of
Exchange Rates," Journal of International Economics 13, No. 4, November
1982: 231—56.
Frenkel, Jacob A. and Razin, Assaf. "Stochastic Prices and Tests of Efficiency
of Foreign Exchange Markets," Economics Letters 6, No. 2,1980: 165—70.

47...

Gray, J0 Anna (1976). "Wage Indexatiori: A Macroeconomic ADproach," Journal
of Monetary Economics 2, No. 2, April 1976: 221—35.

____________ (1978).

"On Indexation and Contract Length," Journal of
Political Economy 86, No. 1, February 1978: 1—18.

Harberger, Arnold C., "Three Basic Postulates for Applied Welfare Economics:
An Interpretive Essay," Journal of Economic Literature 9, No. 3
September 1971: 785—97.

Karni, Edi, "On Optimal Wage Indexation," Journal of Political Economy 91,
No, 2, April 1983: 282—92.
Marston, Richard C. (1982a). "Wages,Relative Prices and the Choice Between
Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics XV,
No. 1, February 1982: 87—103.

_________________ (l982b).

"Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative
Indexation Rules for An Open Economy," NBER Working Paper Series,
No. 1046, December 1982.

Marston, Richard C. and Turnovsky, Stephen J. "Imported Material Prices, Wage
Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization," NBER, Working Paper Series
No. 1254, December 1983.

McCallum, Bennett T., "On Non—Uniqueness in Rational Expectations Models: An
Attempt at Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics 11, No. 2
March 1983: 139—168.
Sachs, Jeffrey. "Wages, Flexible Exchange Rates, and Macroeconomic Policy,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics XCIV, No. 4, June 1980: 731—47.
Turnovsky, Stephen J. (1983a). "Wage Indexation and Exchange Market Intervention in a Small Open Economy," NBER, Working Paper Series No 1170,
July 1983.
"Exchange Market Intervention Policies in a
Small Open Economy" in J. Bhandari and B. Putman (eds.), Economic
Interdependence and Flexible Exchange Rates, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1983: 286—311.

_______________________

(1983b).

