                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 A COMMENT ON NISHIMURA, NAKAJIMA, AND KIYOTA'S "DOES THE NATURAL
 SELECTION MECHANISM STILL WORK IN SEVERE RECESSIONS? EXAMINATION
               OF THE JAPANESE ECONOMY IN THE 1990S"

                                            Tae Okada
                                       Charles Yuji Horioka

                                       Working Paper 13298
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13298


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




The authors are grateful to Kazuo Ogawa for his valuable advice. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Tae Okada and Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Comment on Nishimura, Nakajima, and Kiyota's "Does the natural selection mechanism
still work in severe recessions? Examination of the Japanese economy in the 1990s"
Tae Okada and Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 13298
August 2007
JEL No. D21,D24,L11,O47

                                              ABSTRACT

Nishimura et al. (2005) analyze the entry/exit behavior of Japanese firms during the 1990s and find
that relatively efficient firms exited while relatively inefficient firms survived during the banking-crisis
period of 1996-97. They conclude that the natural selection mechanism (NSM) apparently malfunctions
during severe recessions, but we offer a more plausible interpretation: NSM continued to function
effectively even during this period, but aberrant banking practices caused a shift in the type of natural
selection from directional to disruptive selection, with the most efficient as well as the least efficient
firms being favored and firms of intermediate efficiency being selected against.

Tae Okada
Institute of Social and Economic Research
Osaka University
6-1, Mihogaoka, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047
JAPAN
tokada@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp

Charles Yuji Horioka
Institute of Social and Economic Research
Osaka University
6-1 Mihogaoka, Ibaraki-shi
Osaka-fu 567-0047 JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp
1     Introduction
Previous authors have found that the natural selection mechanism (hereafter NSM)
of economic Darwinism works well in normal times, but in an important paper,
Nishimura et al. (2005) (hereafter NNK) analyze the entry/exit behavior patterns
of Japanese firms during the 1990s and show that this mechanism apparently did
not function eﬀectively during the severe recession of the 1990s in Japan and that
relatively eﬃcient (high total factor productivity (hereafter TFP)) firms exited
while relatively ineﬃcient (low TFP) firms survived during the banking-crisis pe-
riod of 1996-97.
    NNK’s analysis is carefully executed, and while we do not have any major quib-
bles with the analysis itself, we want to oﬀer an alternative interpretation of their
results. NNK conclude from their finding that the NSM apparently malfunctions
during severe recessions, but we oﬀer a much more plausible interpretation that
assumes that the NSM continued to function eﬀectively even during the banking-
crisis period of 1996-97 but that there was a shift from one type of natural selection
to another as a result of a number of aberrant practices followed by banks.



2     Did the NSM Continue to Function Eﬀectively
      during Japan’s Severe Recession?
NNK conclude that the NSM malfunctioned during the banking-crisis period of
1996-97, but they use an unduly narrow concept of natural selection. In this sec-
tion, we describe three types of natural selection and argue that the NSM continued
to function eﬀectively even during the 1996-97 period but that there was a shift
from one type of natural selection to another.
    In the theory of evolution, there are at least three types of natural selection:
(1) “stabilizing selection," which acts against phenotypes at both extremes of the
distribution and favors the multiplication of intermediate phenotypes, (2) “direc-
tional selection," which acts against only one extreme of phenotypes, causing a


                                          1
shift in the distribution toward the other extreme, and (3) “disruptive selection"
(sometimes also called “diversifying selection"), which acts against intermediate
phenotypes, creating a bimodal distribution (see Darlington and Mather 1949 and
Mather 1953 and 1955 for more details).
   If we apply this taxonomy to the case of the Japanese economy of the 1990s,
our interpretation is that, until 1995, the NSM functioned eﬀectively in Japan and
that the Japanese economy exhibited “directional selection," with natural selection
favoring relatively eﬃcient (high TFP) firms. Thus, relatively ineﬃcient (low TFP)
firms exited, and relatively eﬃcient (high TFP) firms survived, as shown by NNK.
   However, during the banking-crisis period of 1996-97, banks engaged in both
“forbearance lending" (“evergreening") and the “forcible withdrawal of loans"
and/or the “reluctance to lend" (these two practices are collectively referred to
as “credit crunch"), and this caused natural selection to favor firms at both ex-
tremes. This caused a shift in the type of natural selection from “directional
selection" to “disruptive selection," but the NSM continued to function eﬀectively
even during this period. In what follows, we describe in more detail the aforemen-
tioned banking practices and how they led to a shift in the type of natural selection
(see Kobayashi et al. 2002, Ogawa 2003, and Peek and Rosengren 2005 for more
details).
   “Forbearance lending" (“evergreening") refers to the practice of banks contin-
uing to lend to less eﬃcient (low TFP) firms to keep them afloat, thereby avoiding
the need to declare existing loans to these firms as non-performing. Banks en-
gaged in this practice during the banking-crisis period of 1996-97 because the
severe recession and the concomitant collapse of asset prices led to a proliferation
of non-performing loans while myopic bank managers wanted to delay writing oﬀ
those loans until they had retired and received the full amount of their lump-sum
retirement allowances, and because the Bank for International Settlements (here-
after BIS) regulations on the capital adequacy of banks introduced in 1993 required
banks to meet certain risk-based capital ratios, which created a further incentive
for banks to keep non-performing loans oﬀ their books. This practice of “forbear-


                                         2
ance lending" (“evergreening") caused relatively ineﬃcient (low TFP) firms to be
favored.
   However, banks also engaged in the “forcible withdrawal of loans" and/or the
“reluctance to lend," which refers to the practice of banks’ calling in loans to more
eﬃcient (high TFP) firms and/or reducing their lending to such firms. Banks en-
gaged in these practices during the banking-crisis period of 1996-97 because the
recession and the concomitant collapse of asset prices had reduced bank capital,
because banks had to reduce lending to satisfy the newly introduced BIS regula-
tions on the capital adequacy of banks, and because banks had to find some way
of securing the funds needed to engage in “forbearance lending" (“evergreening")
to less eﬃcient (low TFP) firms. The “forcible withdrawal of funds" and/or the
“reluctance to lend" acted against firms of intermediate eﬃciency and TFP and
forced some of them to exit.
   Finally, the most eﬃcient (highest TFP) firms presumably did not have loans
outstanding to begin with, and even if they did, they could repay those loans
without having to exit; moreover, they did not require additional loans to survive.
Thus, their survival was not at all threatened by the “forcible withdrawal of loans"
and/or the “reluctance to lend."
   Thus, the NSM continued to function eﬀectively even during the banking-crisis
period of 1996-97, but aberrant banking practices (viz., the combination of “for-
bearance lending" (“evergreening") and the “forcible withdrawal of loans" and/or
the “reluctance to lend") caused natural selection to favor both the most eﬃcient
(highest TFP) and least eﬃcient (lowest TFP) firms and to act against firms of
intermediate eﬃciency and TFP, which in turn caused a shift in the type of natural
selection from “directional selection" to “disruptive selection." This interpretation
can explain NNK’s finding that relatively eﬃcient (high TFP) firms exited while
relatively ineﬃcient (low TFP) firms survived during the banking-crisis period of
1996-97 just as well as their interpretation that the NSM malfunctions during se-
vere recessions. Moreover, our interpretation seems more plausible than NNK’s
own interpretation of their findings because they do not provide a convincing ex-


                                         3
planation of why a severe recession would ipso facto cause a breakdown of the
NSM. Indeed, NNK (p. 74) themselves assert that the combination of “forbear-
ance lending" and the “forcible withdrawal of loans" is a possible explanation of
their finding.



3     Conclusion
To summarize, in an important paper, NNK analyze the entry/exit behavior pat-
terns of Japanese firms during the 1990s and show that relatively eﬃcient (high
TFP) firms exited while relatively ineﬃcient (low TFP) firms survived in Japan
during the banking-crisis period of 1996-97. NNK conclude from this finding that
the natural selection mechanism (NSM) apparently malfunctions during severe re-
cessions, but we have oﬀered a much more plausible interpretation. Our alternative
interpretation is that the NSM continued to function eﬀectively even during this
period but that aberrant banking practices during this period (in particular, “for-
bearance lending" (“evergreening") and the “forcible withdrawal of loans" and/or
the “reluctance to lend") caused a shift in the type of natural selection from “di-
rectional selection" to “disruptive selection," with the most eﬃcient (highest TFP)
firms as well as the least eﬃcient (lowest TFP) firms being favored and firms of
intermediate eﬃciency and TFP being selected against. Thus, it was not that
the NSM malfunctioned, but rather that aberrant banking practices caused a shift
from one type of natural selection to another.
    Moreover, the shift from one type of natural selection to another during the
banking-crisis period of 1996-97 was induced not by the severe recession itself
but by the aberrant banking practices precipitated in part by the severe recession
and the concomitant collapse of asset prices and in part by other factors such
as moral hazard on the part of myopic bank managers and the introduction of
BIS regulations on the capital adequacy of banks in 1993. It was this unique
confluence of factors that produced the aberrant banking practices, and it was
the aberrant banking practices rather than the severe recession itself that caused


                                        4
the shift in the type of natural selection. Therefore, it is not appropriate to draw
sweeping generalizations from the findings of NNK about the applicability of the
NSM during severe recessions. It is quite possible that not only does the NSM
continue to function eﬀectively during severe recessions in other countries and/or
time periods, but that there is no shift from directional selection to disruptive
selection.
   NNK deserve a great deal of credit for their meticulous analysis that sheds light
on how the entry/exit behavior patterns of firms changed during the banking-crisis
period of 1996-97, but we believe that our interpretation of their findings (that the
NSM continued to function eﬀectively but that it changed from one type of natural
selection to another) is more plausible than their own interpretation (that natural
selection malfunctioned). It thus appears that natural selection is still very much
alive and well, even in Japan and even during severe recessions.



References
[1] Darlington, C.D., Mather, K., 1949. The Elements of Genetics. London: Allen
   and Unwin.

[2] Kobayashi, K., Saita, Y., and Sekine, T., 2002. Iwayuru ‘oigashi’ ni tsuite (On
   so-called evergreening). Working Paper 02-2, Research Department, Bank of
   Japan (in Japanese).

[3] Mather, K., 1953. The genetical structure of populations. Symposia of the
   Society for Experimental Biology 7, 66-95.

[4] Mather, K. 1955, Polymorphism as an outcome of disruptive selection," Evo-
   lution 9, 52-61.

[5] Nishimura, K.G., Nakajima, T., and Kiyota, K., 2005. Does the natural selec-
   tion mechanism still work in severe recessions? Examination of the Japanese
   economy in the 1990s. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 58,
   53-78.

                                         5
[6] Ogawa, K., 2003. Daifukyou no Keizai Bunseki: Nihon Keizai Chouki Teimei
   no Kaimei (An Economic Analysis of Severe Recessions: Shedding Light on
   the Long-term Stagnation of the Japanese Economy). Tokyo: Nihon Keizai
   Shinbunsha (in Japanese).

[7] Peek, J., Rosengren, E. S., 2005. Unnatural selection: Perverse incentives and
   the misallocation of credit in Japan, American Economic Review 95, 1144-1166.




                                        6
