NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RETURNS TO LOCAL-AREA HEALTH CARE SPENDING:
USING HEALTH SHOCKS TO PATIENTS FAR FROM HOME
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
Working Paper 13301
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13301

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

I would like to thank Amy Finkelstein, Jon Gruber, Robert Kaestner, Lorens Helmchen, Roberto Rigobon,
Doug Staiger, Tom Stoker, and Tavneet Suri for helpful comments and discussions. Afua Branoah
Banful provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Returns to Local-Area Health Care Spending: Using Health Shocks to Patients Far From Home
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 13301
August 2007
JEL No. I12
ABSTRACT
Health care spending varies widely across markets, yet there is little evidence that higher spending
translates into better health outcomes, possibly due to endogeneity bias. The main innovation in this
paper compares outcomes of patients who are exposed to different health care systems that were not
designed for them: patients who are far from home when a health emergency strikes. The universe
of emergencies in Florida from 1996-2003 is considered, and visitors who become ill in high-spending
areas have significantly lower mortality rates compared to similar visitors in lower-spending areas.
The results are robust across different types of patients and within groups of destinations that appear
to be close demand substitutes.
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
E52-447
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Health care spending is a major issue in the U.S., amounting to over $2 trillion per
year or 16% of GDP (Catlin et al., 2007). These figures are expected to increase with the
aging of the population and are likely to strain government budgets and private-sector
profitability (Lee and Skinner, 1999).
There is some controversy over the returns to health care spending. When
countries or regions within the U.S. are compared, large disparities in spending are found
yet health outcomes are remarkably similar (Fisher et al., 1994; Pilote, et al., 1995;
Kessler and McClellan 1996; Tu et al., 1997; O’Connor et al., 1999; Baicker and Chandra
2004; Fuchs 2004; Stukel, Lucas, and Wennberg, 2005; Sirovich, et al., 2006). Fisher et
al. (2003) studied Medicare expenditure data and found that end-of-life spending levels—
a measure of treatment intensity that controls for the health outcome—are 60% higher in
high-spending areas compared to low-spending ones in the U.S. Nevertheless, no
difference is found across regions in 5-year mortality rates following a health event such
as a heart attack or hip fracture. Related studies have suggested that higher spending is
associated with worse health outcomes (Guadagnoli et al., 1995; Fisher and Welch, 1999),
and this evidence has been cited in support of limits on Medicare growth. Alternatively,
time-series and panel data evidence of higher spending and lower mortality have
suggested that the value of life years saved by increased health care spending has been
greater than the extra expense (Cutler, McClellan, Newhouse, and Remler, 1998,
McClellan and Newhouse 1997; Murphy and Topel, 2003; Cutler and McClellan, 2001;
Nordhaus 2002; Cutler, Rosen and Vijan, 2006; Luce et al., 2006).

1

One issue that arises when comparing regions is that greater treatment levels may
be chosen for populations in worse health. For example, higher spending is strongly
associated with higher mortality rates on the individual level, as more is spent on patients
with greater health problems. At the regional level, long-term investments in capital and
labor may reflect the underlying health of the population as well.
The main innovation in this paper compares outcomes of patients who are
exposed to different health care systems that were not designed for them: patients who
are far from home when a health emergency strikes. These visitors may have a health
emergency in an area that spends a great deal on patients or one that tends to spend less.
By comparing similar visitors across these locations, differences in health outcomes can
shed light on the returns to health care spending, at least in emergency situations.1
The analysis uses the universe of hospital discharges in the state of Florida—one
of the most frequently visited states, which also has a wealth of data regarding patient
characteristics. Patients who have a health emergency in a high-spending area are found
to receive more care themselves and have significantly lower inpatient mortality rates. A
typical comparison of a high-spending area and a low-spending one would represent a
50% difference in health care spending intensity. Such a disparity is associated with a
1.6 percentage-point lower mortality rate among heart emergency patients compared to a
mortality rate of 6%.

1

Previous papers considered patients who used the nearest health care system to their homes (McClellan,
McNeil, and Newhouse 1994; Gowrisankaran & Town 1999; Stukel et al., 2007). This paper also
considers patients who use the nearest health care system, although the starting point is more likely to be
exogenous as the patients are far from home at the time of the episode and visitors may choose a
destination for a number of reasons other than the health care-spending level in the area. Similarly, the
health care market is considered rather than individual hospitals, as the market is also more likely to be
exogenous than the particular hospital chosen by a patient or emergency medical services.

2

Of course, visitors choose their destinations, and if relatively healthy individuals
were to choose high-spending areas, the main results would reflect these differences.
Much of the results section demonstrates that the estimates are robust across different
types of patients, including patient-income levels, and within groups of destinations that
can be characterized as close demand substitutes. In addition, the results suggest that
destination selection would tend to bias the results away from finding a negative
relationship between spending and mortality.
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical
framework. Section 3 describes the data, including a comparison of high- and lowspending counties in terms of patient characteristics. Section 4 presents the main
estimates of the relationship between inpatient mortality and local-area health care
spending. The analysis focuses on heart conditions, though results for other common
emergencies are reported as well. Section 5 interprets the results by considering how
local areas that spend more differ from those that spend less and presents instrumental
variable estimates of the effect of patient spending on health outcomes in these
emergency situations. Section 6 concludes.

2. Empirical Framework
Consider a simple health production function:
(1) M = M(T, X, U)
∂M
∂ 2M
∂M
∂M
∂ 2M
∂M
≤ 0;
>
0
;
>
0
;
>
0
;
< 0;
<0
2
∂T
∂X
∂U
∂T∂X
∂T∂U
∂T

where M is a health outcome (mortality), T is the level of treatment, X represents
observable (to the researcher) measures of illness severity and U represents severity

3

measures unknown to the researcher. Treatment is assumed to reduce the likelihood of
mortality with diminishing returns, and the benefits are assumed to increase with illness
severity. This production function can be defined at the patient or regional level.
The parameter of interest is the effect of treatment on health. For instance, if
spending in an area can be categorized as high or low, the parameter would be as follows:
(2) E(M|Thigh, X , U) – E (M|Tlow, X , U)
This is an estimate of the benefits to health care spending, and for small changes in
treatment levels it can be interpreted as the slope of the production function. In a linear
model, this can be summarized as:
(3) M = β 0 + β 1 T + β 2 X + U
The parameter of interest is β1 , but the inference problem is that treatment levels likely
vary with illness severity—Cov(T,U) > 0—which will bias estimates of this parameter
upwards. Previous studies have argued that observable patient characteristics are similar
across areas (see, for example, O’Connor et al., 1999; Pilote et al., 1995; Stukel, Lucas,
and Wennberg, 2005; and Fisher et al., 2003). Fisher et al. (2003) found higher predicted
mortality rates in higher-spending areas for heart attack patients, however, and
differences in unobservable characteristics may lead to an upward bias as well.
The source of the endogeneity bias can be described by the decisions made by
health care providers. Following McGuire and Ellis (1986), assume they maximize a
utility function that is additively separable between profits and health benefits for each
patient:

(4) max U (T) = ∏(T) + λ M(T, X, U)
T

4

where lambda is the weight placed on health impacts of the treatment decision. Here,
lambda is negative given that M is a measure of mortality. The maximization problem is
constrained by:
(5) T ≤ F(K, L)

and

(6) T ≤ R(X, U)
Constraint (5) is a technological one relating the available treatment to the capital,
K, and labor, L, previously chosen by the area. This constraint has been highlighted as a
source of variation in treatment across markets, as regions with greater assets tend to
provide more treatment across all patients (Fisher et al., 1994; Stukel, Lucas and
Wennberg, 2005).
Meanwhile, (6) is a resource constraint where R represents expenses that are
approved for reimbursement by third-party payers. It is a function of the severity of
illness, as third-party payers reimburse hospitals for greater expenses when patients are in
worse health. It is also a function of the generosity of the patient’s health insurance,
which can vary with patient characteristics such as household income.
At the regional level, capital and labor are not fixed in the long run. Rather, these
inputs may be chosen to maximize a population version of (4)-(6). In areas where the
population is in worse health, greater treatment levels will be covered by third-parties and
providers would have the incentive to invest in greater resources.
Now consider areas that differ in the health of their populations. This simple
model highlights three reasons why treatment and illness severity should be positively
related: larger benefits to patient health due to the complementarity between illness
severity and treatment; the greater ability to spend through less stringent constraints in
the short run; and greater investments in physical and human capital due to the prospects

5

of greater reimbursement levels in the long run. Each implies that Cov(T,U) > 0 at the
regional level. Alternatively, marginal costs that enter the profit function may be
increasing in severity as well, though such an influence may be offset by the third-party
payment mechanism highlighted in constraint (6).
To summarize, Figure 1 shows hypothetical mortality-treatment relationships for
two populations that differ by their underlying health. The figure has been drawn such
that the mortality rates across the groups are the same. If this cross-sectional relationship
between treatment levels and mortality rates were thought to stem from one production
function, it would appear that we have reached the “flat of the curve” (Enthoven, 1980;
Fuchs, 2004). If these data represent points on different production functions, as in
Figure 1, the returns to health care spending need not be zero.
This paper attempts to circumvent this endogeneity bias by considering a
population served by different hospital markets where the spending levels are unlikely to
be affected by the presence of this group: patients far from home at the time of a health
shock. For visitor i treated in county c, the linear model can be written as:
(7) M ic = β 0 + β1 Tc + β 2 X i + U ic
where the identifying assumption is: Cov(Tc,Uic) = 0.
One threat to identification is that visitors choose their destination. If they base
their decision on the health care-spending levels in the different areas, visitors in
relatively worse health may choose areas with high-treatment levels. This selection
would tend to bias the results toward finding a positive correlation between spending and
mortality. Alternatively, if healthier individuals chose high-spending areas, then the bias
would go the other direction. For example, if wealthier individuals were both healthier

6

and chose destinations that were expensive along many dimensions, one of which
happens to be health care spending, then a high level of health care spending in an area
may be an indicator for a healthier visitor population. The empirical analysis will
consider patients with similar observable characteristics, including income levels, as well
as results within groups of destinations that appear to be close demand substitutes where
observable and unobservable characteristics of patients are more likely to be similar
across health care markets.

3. Data Description

The patient-level data represent the universe of hospital discharges in the state of
Florida from 1996 to 2003. These reports are submitted to the Florida Agency for Health
care Administration and are available for research purposes. The two main advantages of
using Florida are that it is a top destination state leading to large samples of visitors, and
the state offers detailed discharge data. Elements include the patient’s age, race, sex, and
ZIP code of residence. Procedure and diagnosis codes, primary payer, day of the week,
and quarter of the year also describe the episode.
In the main analysis, a visitor is defined as an out-of-state patient, and hospital
markets are defined at the county level. The sample is restricted to counties with at least
30 such visitors with a heart emergency. This results in 44 (out of 67) Florida counties
with enough visitors to compare patient outcomes. Further, the analysis will use withinhome state variation in treatment and outcomes, and the sample has been limited to
visitors from U.S. states with at least 5 observations or from outside the U.S.

7

The main measure of resource use is total charges: the sum of the list prices for
each of the services provided. Few patients (or third parties) pay these list prices. Rather,
insurance companies negotiate discounts from these starting values. Nevertheless, total
charges are highly correlated with cost measures and serve to categorize high- versus
low-spending areas. Other measures of facility costs will be explored as well.
Following Fisher et al. (2003), end-of-life spending among the local population is
used to measure local-area spending intensity. This measure has the advantage of
controlling for patient health outcomes when describing treatment intensity. In particular,
the mean of log charges in the county was calculated for patients from Florida who were
admitted on an emergency basis and who died in the hospital.2 Algebraically, this is the
county fixed effect in a model predicting log charges for this sample of locals.
Alternative measures of treatment intensity are also compared.
The health outcome considered is inpatient mortality. One limitation of these data
is that they do not include longer-term outcomes, though for serious health emergencies
inpatient mortality is a frequent and important one. In addition, for the visitor group
inpatient mortality is tied more directly to the acute care provided by Florida health care
system, whereas long-term outcomes may be influenced by the care received once home.
Further, an advantage of the discharge data compared to previous studies that use
Medicare administrative data is that younger patients can be considered, as well as
patients enrolled in Medicare HMOs who are generally lost from Medicare expenditure
files.

2

Emergencies in this paper are defined by the admission type (emergency) and admission source
(emergency room). This limit should exclude patients who travel to a particular destination for the purpose
of hospital treatment.

8

U.S. Census of Population data from 2000 describe the patient’s ZIP code of
residence, including the median household income, racial composition, educational
composition among individuals older than 25-years old, and the population. One issue is
that 15% of the visitors are not from the U.S. and will not have a ZIP code. In addition,
the Census Bureau does not publish data for small ZIP codes. In total, ZIP code
information is missing for 25% of the visitor sample. The main results will retain these
observations by filling in the missing information with sample means and including an
indicator for missing ZIP code information in the model. Results are similar when these
observations are excluded, as shown below. Similar U.S. Census measures for the
destination county in Florida are considered as well.
In addition, results will be shown controlling for prices related to visiting that
particular county. These prices come in the form of per-diem rates calculated by the U.S.
General Services Administration (GSA). The per-diems are based on lodging and meal
rates in each county and should characterize destinations with similar prices that are
especially appropriate for visitors. Given the seasonal variation in these rates, two
measures will be used: the per diem for January 1997 and the per diem for June 1997.3
Each measure should reflect local-area cost structures, and the difference in the two
measures should identify areas that are particularly desirable for winter vacations. One
caveat is that these measures may over-control for variation in spending levels if
estimates of the returns to total expenditures (price times quantity) were sought. From a
fiscal perspective, total expenditures would appear more appropriate, though controlling
for the local-area prices attempts to control for differences in visitors who visit more or

3

1997 is the first year this lodging-rate data are available. Results were similar when 1996 data were
imputed and the series from 1996-2003 was used instead of the fixed 1997 measure as described below.

9

less expensive areas and can shed light on returns to the quantity of care provided.
Results will be reported with and without these controls.
Further, the 1995 American Travel Survey describes visitors to each of 13
destinations, spanning 24 counties in Florida. These data will be used in a specification
check that controls for these characteristics on this subset of counties. Last, American
Hospital Association data detailing information about each hospital in Florida will be
used to describe the different areas in terms of staffing ratios and wage bills.
To describe the data available and compare visitors across different areas in
Florida, Table 1 reports means for selected characteristics of patients who had a heart
emergency. Heart emergencies are defined for patients who are admitted with a primary
diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), cardiac dysrhythmias, or heart failure.4
They have the advantage of potentially being unanticipated at the time of the destination
choice.5 One caveat is that heart emergencies are amenable to highly efficient, low-cost
innovations, such as the use of beta blockers and aspirin (Heidenreich and McClellan,
2001), though the analysis here focuses on spending in the health care market overall.
The first two columns report means and standard deviations for the 750,000
Floridians with a heart emergency admission during this time period to serve as a
comparison for the visitors. The means for the visitors have been broken into two groups
based on the median level of the local-area treatment measure to compare high- and lowspending areas. The advantage of Florida having many visitors is demonstrated by the

4

These are 3-digit ICD9-CM primary diagnosis codes of 410, 427, and 428. They are the heart
emergencies among the top 10 most frequent emergencies. Results broken out for each of the top 10 most
frequently found emergencies are discussed below.
5
Only 0.16% of the AMIs among visitors were the results of a “subsequent episode of care” versus 0.4%
among locals.

10

18,000 visitor emergencies in each of the spending categories, or 5% of the heart
emergencies in Florida overall.
For patients from Florida, the local-area spending intensity measure (mean, endof-life log charges) averages 10.0, or $22,000. By construction, low-spending areas have
an average spending measure 37 log points lower than the mean for visitors in highspending areas. Areas that tend to spend more on local patients also report higher
spending on visitors themselves: a difference of 24 log points.
Visitors who have a health emergency in a high-spending area have a lower
mortality rate: 5.4% vs. 6.1%. These figures are similar in magnitude to the mortality
rate among locals (5.7%), suggesting that results for the visitor group may be informative
of returns to spending for the local group as well.
One threat to the identification is that individuals who visit high-spending areas
may differ from those who visit low-spending ones. The observable characteristics
describe the types of visitors who are found in different areas. In particular, the high- and
low-spending areas are similar in terms of sex, though visitors with heart emergencies are
more likely to be male compared to locals (62-63% vs. 52%). Visitors to high-spending
areas are 2.8 years younger than low-spending areas, whose average age of 71.6 is similar
to the local population. The empirical models will include controls for each year of age,
and results will be compared within age groups as well. Similarly, the visitors in lowspending areas are more likely to receive Medicare, partly due to the age difference and
partly due to the presence of patients from foreign countries in the high-spending group,
which includes Miami-Dade County.

11

Meanwhile, visitors in high-spending areas are more likely to be from ZIP codes
with slightly lower median household incomes and college graduation rates. Treatment
differences have been found to vary by race as well, with White patients typically
receiving more care (Institute of Medicine, 2002), though visitors to high-spending areas
are more likely to be non-White.
Further, the per-diem rates for July are slightly higher for the high-spending area
($102 vs. $97), though this is not found for the per-diem in January ($107 vs. $113).
Fortunately, health care spending varies widely even within destinations with similar
lodging and meal prices. When counties were broken into quartiles based on the January
per-diem rate, the average, end-of-life log charges from the least to most expensive are
9.9, 9.9, 10.2, and 9.9, with standard deviations of 0.24, 0.23, 0.14, and 0.11, respectively.
The timing of the emergency is also recorded, albeit at the quarter-of-year and
day-of-week levels. For Florida locals, the entry rate is roughly uniformly distributed
across quarters, with slightly higher rates during the first and fourth quarters, possibly
reflecting visitors who maintain a residence in the relatively tax-friendly state of Florida.
For visitors, the first quarter was the most common time of the year (50% in lowspending areas and 44% in the high-spending ones), with fewer during the 3rd quarter
(11% in low-spending areas and 13% in high-spending areas). Meanwhile, an admission
on Saturday or Sunday is only slightly higher for the visitor group, and they are all close
to the 2/7th rate expected for emergencies (Dobkin, 2003).
To summarize the differences across the two groups, a predicted-mortality
measure was estimated using a probit model and the full set of controls, including
individual indicators for each age and day of the week. Age, insurance type, and quarter

12

of the year appear related to mortality. Nevertheless, the predicted mortality rates are
nearly identical across the two groups, implying that they are comparable in terms of
observable characteristics that are correlated with mortality.
For further context, the local-area patients in the two groups of counties can be
compared. The differences reflect those found among the visitors, although the
magnitudes tend to be larger. For example, patients from Florida receiving care in lowspending counties are much more likely to be White (87%) compared to high-spending
areas (67%). Among high-spending counties, the fraction African American and
Hispanic are 12.8% and 17.5%, respectively, compared to 9.2% and 2.1% in lowspending areas. The other major difference across the observables is the primary payer.
Those in low-spending counties are more likely to receive Medicare fee-for-service
benefits (66% vs. 49%) and are less likely to join a Medicare HMO (8% vs. 18%). Other
differences for those in low-spending counties include ZIP codes with a slightly higher
education level (19% with less than a high school degree vs. 23%), and a slightly higher
average age (72.4 vs. 71.3). The predicted mortality rate based on all of the observable
characteristics is similar across the two sets of counties (5.66% vs. 5.70%), although
relatively large differences in observable characteristics suggest that unobservables may
differ across the two groups.

4. Results

Following the framework in section 2, the empirical models will consider the
outcome of inpatient mortality, M, for patient i hospitalized in county c, from ZIP code z
in state s, in year t as:

13

(8) M iczst = α 0 + α 1Tc + α 2 X i + α 3W z + α 4 Pc + θ s + δ t + ν iczst
where T is the measure of local-area spending: mean log charges for emergency patients
from Florida who died in the hospital in the county visited by patient i; X is a vector of
personal characteristics listed in Table 1 with indicators for each age and day of the week
as well6; W is a set of ZIP code of residence characteristics including 7 indicators for
median household income (<$30,000 and $10,000 increments up to the >$80,000
category), 2 racial-composition variables (fraction White and African American), 3
educational-composition variables (fraction of individuals 25 years and older with less
than high school, high school, and some college educational attainment), and ZIP code
population; and P is the vector of area per-diem rates in January and June 1997. Homestate fixed effects are used to compare individuals from the same state who visit different
counties in Florida, and year indicators are used to capture overall changes in survival
rates over time.7 The outcome is binary, and the results are shown using a linear
probability model to estimate differences in means across counties. Results are similar
when a probit model is used as shown below. Also, the standard errors are clustered at
the county level to reflect variation in the local-area spending measure.
Table 2 shows the main results for the universe of patients who entered the
hospital with a heart emergency. The top panel considers the local Florida population, as
in the previous literature. The first four columns report estimates from a model similar to
(8), but with charges spent on that particular patient, Ti , in place of the local-area
treatment measure. Regardless of the controls used, the estimates reveal that a 10%
6

Individual age categories are used, with the exception of larger categories for patients under the age of 20,
between 20 and 30, and above 100 years old.
7
In addition to indicators for each U.S. state, indicators for Canada, the Americas, and unknown state of
residence, which is used to describe foreign visitors, are included as well. Estimates are similar when
patients from outside the U.S. are excluded, as shown below.

14

increase in spending is associated with a 0.27 percentage-point increase in mortality, or
5% of the mean mortality rate of 5.7%. These results are consistent with the idea that
more is spent on patients who are in worse health.
When the mean end-of-life spending measure for the county, Tc , is used instead
of the patients own spending, mortality appears unrelated to the spending level in the
county. The coefficient on county spending ranges from 0.001 to 0.005 with standard
errors on the order of 0.004. These results mirror the prior literature that higher spending
is associated with a small, statistically insignificant, increase in mortality.
Panel B shows the results for patients who are not from Florida, using the same
models as in panel A. The results are nearly identical when the patient’s own charges are
used to predict mortality, with a coefficient of 0.028. When the end-of-life spending
measure for the local-area population is used, however, the sign flips and the coefficient
is closer to -0.030. A 10% increase in “spending intensity” is associated with a 0.3
percentage-point decrease in mortality, or 5% of the mean. For a two-standard deviation
increase in spending of roughly 50%, mortality rates would be 1.5 percentage points
lower, or 26% lower than the mean. The results are robust to the inclusion of controls for
patient and area characteristics, including the income level of the ZIP code where the
patient resides. The results suggest that having a heart emergency in an area that tends to
spend more on patients is associated with significantly lower mortality.
In terms of the relationship between patient characteristics and mortality (shown
in the appendix), older patients have higher mortality rates, with 85 year olds having a 6
percentage-point higher mortality rate than 60 year olds. Visitors in the 1st quarter—the
most likely time to escape cold winters—have a 1.1 percentage-point lower mortality rate

15

compared to 4th-quarter visitors, whereas those who visit in the 2nd and 3rd quarters
have slightly higher mortality rates compared to the 4th-quarter visitors. The uninsured
have a 1 to 2 percentage-point higher mortality rate compared to the different types of
insured patients. Those in Medicare HMOs have a 1 percentage-point lower mortality
rate compared to those in fee-for-service Medicare, possibly reflecting the attraction of
healthier individuals to these plans (Cao and McGuire, 2003). From the ZIP code
characteristics, the most striking result is that individuals from high-income, higheducation areas tend to have lower survival rates. The mortality rate for patients from
ZIP codes with median household income greater than 80,000 is 1.6 percentage points
higher than for patients from ZIP codes with incomes less than 30,000. Last, the perdiem rate in January is negatively related to mortality, whereas the per-diem rate in July
is positively related to mortality, though the coefficients are fairly small in terms of
economic significance.8
To test the shape of the relationship between local-area charges and mortality, the
counties were broken into quartiles based on the end-of-life spending measure. This is a
fairly coarse categorization, as is required by having 44 counties to analyze. It does
provide some confidence that the top quartile likely represents a different degree of
spending compared to the bottom quartile. In particular, for the top 3 quartiles, the
spending measure increases by 22, 40, and 65 log points compared to the bottom quartile.
Meanwhile, the reduction in mortality is fairly smooth across the quartiles with
differences compared to the 1st quartile of -0.005 (s.e.=0.006), -0.010 (s.e=0.006), and -

8

When 1996 per-diem data were imputed using a time trend though the 1997-2003 GSA data and the
model incorporated this time series rather than the 1997 values, the results were similar with coefficient on
local-area spending of -0.027 (s.e.=0.008).

16

0.019 (s.e.=0.006).9 The larger drop in the top quartile is consistent with higher returns
in more intensive areas, as suggested by models with productivity spillovers (Chandra
and Staiger, 2007).
Results across Diagnoses

Table 3 reports results for a wider range of diagnoses. This allows an exploration
of the types of conditions that may or may not benefit from hospitalizations in highspending areas compared to low-spending ones.
First, the top-10 most frequent emergency diagnoses in Florida over this time
period are considered. The above results pooled primary diagnoses of acute myocardial
infarction (heart attacks), cardiac dysrhythmias, and heart failure. Table 3 disaggregates
the data and shows that the lower mortality rates are found for each of the conditions.
Stroke patients also have a significantly lower mortality rate when served by a highspending area, with a coefficient of -0.043 compared to a mortality rate of 6.3%.
The other conditions have negative coefficients but are not statistically significant.
In particular, two conditions with reasonably large mortality rates but relatively smaller
coefficients are pneumonia and chronic bronchitis. To the extent that these patients are
more likely to include long-term visitors (otherwise, the visitor would be less likely to
make the trip), we would expect the results to more closely reflect the lack of a
relationship found among locals in panel A of Table 2. If this were true for the heart
conditions, the relationship in the main results would be biased against finding the
negative relationship.

9

These results are in the appendix. When these quartiles were not equally weighted across counties but
used the number of patients as weights instead, the second and third quartiles have a 1 percentage point
drop in mortality and a larger decline is found in the top quartile—a 2.5 percentage-point lower mortality
rate compared to the bottom quartile.

17

In addition, all emergencies were considered in a model similar to equation (8)
with three-digit diagnosis fixed effects included as well. The coefficient on end-of-life
spending in the county is -0.017 (s.e.=0.005). A 10% increase in spending is associated
with a 4.4% reduction in mortality compared to the mean mortality rate of 3.9%--a result
similar to the heart emergency result found in Table 2.
One issue when considering all diagnoses is that there are some hospitalizations
where the risk of death is essentially zero for all patients, and inpatient mortality is
simply not an informative outcome to study. To consider diagnoses with different
mortality rates, a probit model of mortality was estimated using 3-digit diagnosis codes
among diagnoses with at least 10 observations and 1 death. The predicted mortality rate
was then broken into quartiles, and a model similar to (8) was estimated within each of
the quartiles. Three-digit diagnosis fixed effects were again included. Table 3 shows that
the coefficients are negative in all four categories, though statistical (and economic)
significance is achieved for diagnoses with higher mortality rates. In the top quartile, the
mortality rate is 12%, and among the 62,000 visitors with a primary diagnosis in this
quartile, a 10% increase in local-area spending is associated with a 0.43 percentage-point
decrease in mortality (or 3.6% of the mean). The comparable figure for the third quartile
is 5.7% of the mean. It appears that the reduction in mortality is present across a wide
range of emergency situations.
Dehydration

One specification check considers a condition where relatively low-cost treatment
is fairly uniform across areas. If mortality for such a condition were related to local-area

18

spending, it would appear that factors other than the type of health care provided may
drive the mortality differences, such as the underlying health of the visiting population.
A condition that appears to be the best candidate is dehydration. Among primary
diagnoses with a mortality rate of greater than 1% and at least 300 observations , average
patient charges were the lowest for dehydration. This suggests that treatment for
dehydration should be available to hospitals regardless of their technological capabilities.
Further, the treatment appears to be fairly uniform across Florida. Consider a
model of log charges on local-area, end-of-life charges and full controls. Among 3-digit
primary diagnoses with at least 1500 visitor observations, dehydration is the diagnosis
with the smallest coefficient on the local-area spending measure (albeit not zero, with a
coefficient of 0.41 and a standard error of 0.10). In contrast, heart emergencies have a
coefficient of 0.7.
Patients with this primary diagnosis have a mortality rate of 2.2%, and in the
mortality model (8) the coefficient on the local-area spending measure is close to zero
(coefficient = -0.003, s.e.= 0.015, n=3318). If healthier individuals tended to visit highspending areas to account for the main results, a lower mortality rate among those with
this condition would be expected as well. Rather, this test is consistent with similar
underlying health status across destinations, albeit for a particular diagnosis.
Patient Characteristics

Table 1 shows that high-spending areas differed somewhat from other counties,
and a comparison of the results within similar patient groups serves to control for each
characteristic. Further, returns to spending may differ by group. Table 4 reports

19

estimates for heart emergency patients within sub-samples defined by patient
characteristics.
The first set of comparisons is for patients who are over or under the age of 65.
The over-65 group is mostly covered by Medicare (with the exception of foreign visitors,
mostly likely to be found in Miami) and is more likely to include “snow birds” who
winter in Florida. The results show a negative relationship between local-area spending
and mortality: a coefficient of -0.037 compared to a mean mortality rate of 6.8%. For
those under the age of 65 the relationship is similar compared to a lower mortality rate of
3.2% with a coefficient of -0.017.
The next comparisons are in terms of race and sex. The bulk of the visitor sample
is White, and the coefficient is similar to the main results for this group (-0.030). For the
smaller sample of African Americans (n = 1,484), higher spending is associated with a
larger reduction in mortality: a coefficient of -0.067 compared to a smaller mean
mortality rate of 0.047. Hispanic patients (n = 1,545) had a similarly large estimated
return with a coefficient of -0.052 compared to a mean mortality rate of 0.051. Returns
to spending appear to be higher for women (with a coefficient of -0.049 vs. -0.022)
compared to a higher mean mortality rate (6.4% vs. 5.4%).
The time of year can distinguish between different types of trips—vacations in the
winter and business trips and less-expensive vacations in the summer. Again, the
negative relationship is found for each group, with a larger magnitude in the third quarter
(July, August, & September). The largest group of visitors is found in the cold months of
January, February, and March (n=17,191), and the coefficient on local-area spending is
-0.026 compared to a mean mortality rate of 5%.

20

In terms of insurance status, the returns to high-spending areas are somewhat
larger for the insured compared to the uninsured (-0.033 vs. -0.024). In a separate
analysis of these emergencies, the uninsured are found to receive less treatment than the
insured and have higher mortality rates (controlling for patient characteristics and
hospital fixed effects). It appears that higher-spending areas may offer more benefits to
the insured because they tend to consume a greater amount of care once in the hospital.
Patients who come from different parts of the country may have different
underlying risks of inpatient mortality. The main results used a model that included
home-state fixed effects, and columns (13)-(16) show qualitatively similar results
regardless of the census region of origin. The northeast appears to have the greatest
reduction in mortality with increased spending (coefficient of -0.045), whereas the
Midwest has the smallest gain (coefficient of -0.021).
The last set of patient characteristics considers the median household income of
the patient’s ZIP code of residence. Higher health care spending may signal higher
incomes among the visitors, though that was not found in the means comparison in Table
1. In addition, the covariates in the main results suggested that income was positively
related to mortality for these emergencies. The main results controlled for 7 income
categories, and Table 4 reports the results by income quartile for patients who have ZIP
code information. The relationship between the returns to local-area spending and
income is not monotonic, with the largest returns found for the bottom and top quartiles.
Nevertheless, the results are qualitatively similar when estimated within each of these
groups. Last, when observations are excluded when they have missing ZIP code

21

information, which includes foreign visitors, the result is similar to the main results
(coefficient of -0.033).
Florida County Characteristics

As in the comparisons across patient types, counties that differ by local-area
health care spending may differ along a number of other grounds. These differences may
attract different types of visitors and different types of hospital staff. To test whether
these county differences drive the main results, Table 5 reports some specification
checks.10
The first set of models considers the per-diem rates used as controls in the main
results. If destinations were close substitutes, we would expect similar lodging and meal
prices. Further, if hospital-spending levels did not enter the decision to choose a
destination, then visitors to areas that are close substitutes would likely be similar as well.
In that spirit, Table 5 reports the results for sub-samples defined by quartiles of the perdiem rates in an effort to compare destinations with similar prices. The bottom quartile
represents the 17 counties where the per-diem rate is the state-level rate of $80. These
counties tend to be visited less frequently. The next three quartiles have per-diem rates
that range from $81-99, $100-116, and $117-214, respectively. The $214 per-diem rate
is for Monroe County, which includes the Florida Keys; the next most expensive county
has a per-diem rate of $132. The bulk of the data reside in the top quartile, which also
includes Miami-Dade County.

10

County fixed effects were also considered, though the change in hospital-area spending levels within
these eight years is not associated with changes in mortality. High-spending areas tend to remain so, with a
spending measure defined on a county x year basis having a 1-year correlation of 0.95. This paper focuses
on the greater amount of variation in the cross section but among a visitor sample where the variation in
local-area spending is more likely to be exogenous.

22

The results show that the bottom quartile is one of the few sub-samples where
little relationship is found between the local-area, end-of-life spending level and the
mortality rate. This is the quartile least likely to be visited, as suggested by the lack of
county-specific per-diem rates. The result may reflect the idiosyncratic nature of the
patients who choose to visit these less popular counties—visitors who may be more likely
to have longer-term ties to the area. Meanwhile, the top-3 quartiles have coefficients of 0.027, -0.056, and -0.024.11 That is, the main results are found in the more popular
destinations, even within areas with similar lodging prices—areas that are likely close
demand substitutes where variation in the hospital-area spending levels are plausibly
exogenous.12
Another approach is to use controls for county characteristics from the U.S.
Census. Controls included median household income in the county, 4 age-composition
variables, a population variable, and 3 racial-composition variables. These variables
were not statistically significant in predicting mortality in the model, and had little effect
on the main coefficient of interest, as shown in Table 5.
A final set of destination controls included indicators for the types of visitors who
frequent each destination. These data are from the 1995 American Travel Survey, as
described in Section 3. These indicators are available for a subset of destinations
spanning 24 counties. Controls included the fraction who were retired, the fraction who
were on vacation (as opposed to business), 7 household income categories, and the

11

When the quartiles were constructed based on the number of patients in each county, rather than the
equal weights shown in Table 5, the coefficients are consistently negative as shown in the appendix.
12
Another approach to compare similar destinations considered Spring Training sites for Major League
Baseball. For these 13 counties during the first quarter, the coefficient on local-area, end-of-life spending
is -0.033 (s.e.=0.009, n=8479).

23

fraction of visitors who are White.13 This model resulted in a somewhat larger
coefficient of -0.048 (s.e.=0.014), though this is largely due to the sample of popular
counties. When the ATS controls were not included in a model estimated on this subsample, the coefficient is -0.041 (s.e.=0.007). Meanwhile, little relationship is found
between spending and mortality for less-popular counties that are not included in the
ATS survey (coefficient of -0.002, n=7917). As discussed above, less popular counties
may be visited by individuals with particular ties to the area—individuals more like the
local population.
In terms of the ATS covariates, Table 5 shows that areas that with higher-income
visitors again tend to have higher mortality rates. Areas with more visitors who are
retirees are associated with lower mortality rates.
Additional Robustness Checks

Other robustness results are reported in the appendix. In particular, when a probit
model was estimated, the marginal effect of the local-area spending measure, evaluated at
the mean of the covariates, was -0.027 (s.e.=0.007). Second, when the definition of the
term “visitor” included any patient whose residence was more than 100 miles from the
center of the hospital’s county, this slightly larger sample of 40,701 has a similar
coefficient of -0.031 (s.e.=0.007). The results are also robust to the definition of the
local-area spending measure, both when using all (rather than end-of-life) emergency
spending (coefficient of -0.035), and when using spending on heart emergencies among
locals rather than all emergencies (coefficient of -0.023). Another robustness check
included indicators for co-morbidities in the form of the Charlson severity index (Quan et

13

The main results were similar when education, household size, and age categories were also included,
though multicollinearity resulted in noisy estimates of the ATS covariates.

24

al., 2005). The index took on values of 0, 1, and 2, and including an indicator for each
value did not change the main results with a coefficient on local-area spending intensity
of -0.030 (s.e.=0.007).
Censoring due to Discharges to Other Facilities

One issue when considering inpatient mortality is that patients may be transferred
to another facility and the mortality measure is censored. When discharge to another
facility was considered as an outcome, high-spending areas were not statistically
significantly more likely to have such as discharge, and the coefficient suggested a
negative relationship with the spending measure.14 This reflects more discharges home,
possibly reflecting better health upon discharge or the use of hospital care to substitute
for skilled nursing facilities or short-term hospitals. In any event, it does not appear that
censoring due to patient transfers is driving the lower inpatient mortality rate found in the
main results.
Overall, the results imply that patients who are far from home when they suffer
from a life-threatening emergency have significantly lower inpatient mortality rates when
they are treated in counties that tend to spend more on health care. This is found within
similar types of visitors, within similar destinations, and the results are robust to
estimation techniques. In addition, smaller returns are found in samples more likely to
include long-term visitors, such as patients with chronic illnesses or visitors to
destinations less popular for vacations—areas without county-specific per-diem rates and
areas not included in the American Travel Survey. Given that long-term visitors may be
more appropriately thought of as local residents, where the health care systems may be
14

In a model of such a discharge with all controls, the coefficient is -0.10 (s.e.=0.06) compared to a mean
of 0.20. Results were qualitatively similar when the estimates were based on the local-area population:
coefficient of -0.024, s.e.=0.035, compared to a mean of 0.23.

25

designed in part for them and individuals are more likely to investigate health care quality
when choosing the destination—these results suggest that any selection bias would tend
to bias the estimates toward finding no relationship between mortality and spending as in
panel A of Table 2.

5. Interpretation

Table 6 considers alternative measures of local-area inputs to test the robustness
of the main results and to describe how high-spending counties differ from low-spending
ones. The charge measure itself is considered, along with length of stay, procedure use,
and staffing levels.
The first row considers a cost measure in an attempt to control for local-area
prices and consider actual resource use. Each hospital reports a cost-to-charge ratio to
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid each year. The measure of local-area costs was
constructed the same way as the local-area charge measure: the mean log costs for
emergency patients who died in the hospital, where costs are simply the charges
multiplied by each hospital’s cost-to-charge ratio. One limitation is that these cost
measures tend to be noisy.15
The local-area cost variable has a lower mean (9.19 vs. 9.98) than the charge
measure and a smaller standard deviation (0.18 vs. 0.23). The measure is positively
correlated with the charge measure, though less than 1 ( ρ =0.67). In a model similar to
(8), the coefficient on the local-area cost measure is -0.046 with a standard error of 0.013.
15

The results here substitute the median cost-to-charge ratio for outliers as suggested by CMS. In
particular, the data are replaced when the cost-to-charge ratio for the hospital is in the top or bottom 2%.
Results were not sensitive to outlier definitions, including greater than plus-or-minus three standard
deviations, as well as replacing the cost-to-charge ratio with the extreme values of the trimmed cost-tocharge ratios as opposed to the median.

26

This implies that a two-standard deviation increase in the costs is associated with a 1.6
percentage-point drop in mortality, again 5% of the mean mortality rate. The results are
consistent with differences stemming from differences in the quantity of care provided
rather than differences in price.
Another way to explore the source of the main results is to consider the types of
charges that may differ across counties. This is facilitated by revenue codes in the
discharge data that break the total charges into categories such as intensive care or
operating room charges. One caveat is that these revenue codes may be treated
differently by hospital (and, therefore, by county), so the results should be taken with
caution.
The local-area, end-of-life spending measure was calculated for each charge
category and used in a separate regression model similar to (8). The appendix reports
estimates for each revenue code, though the results can be summarized by four
categories: surgical, diagnostic, intensive care, and other charges. Table 6 reports the
estimates, and the main results appear to stem from greater than average spending on
diagnostic procedures, intensive care, and the catch-all of other charges.16 The surgical
charge measure is unrelated to mortality and has a positive coefficient. It is also the
measure that is least related to local-area spending, with a correlation of 0.33.
To further explore the role of surgical procedures, a number of tests were
conducted regarding procedures performed. Among heart-emergency patients who died
in the hospital, the fraction of locals that underwent a surgical procedure and the mean
number of procedures were calculated. Both measures have positive coefficients in a

16

Wennberg et al. (1996) also found that diagnostic procedures such as stress tests explain much of the
variance in invasive cardiac procedure rates across service areas.

27

model of mortality with full controls, though the estimates are not statistically significant.
Similar results were found when the rate or number of surgical procedures was calculated
for all heart-emergency patients rather than restricting the calculation to those who died
in the hospital.17
These results are similar to the results in McClellan, McNeil and Newhouse
(1994) and Stukel, Lucas, and Wennberg (2005) that areas with more intensive treatment
had little gains from such treatment, though it contrasts with Stukel, et al. (2007) who
found a 16% relative decrease in mortality due to invasive treatment—a paper that used
the local-area likelihood of invasive treatment as an instrument for a given patient’s
treatment.18 Further, McClellan and Newhouse (1997) found that cardiac catheterization
rates were modestly associated with better health outcomes, and that the benefits
stemmed largely from “correlated beneficial technologies”, a result similar to the one
found here where diagnostic and intensive care spending are related to mortality, but
surgical charges are not.
A measure of resource use that is related to charges but more uniformly measured
across counties is length of stay in the hospital. Areas with longer lengths of stay for
those who eventually die in the hospital are found to have lower mortality rates for
visitors. In a model of mortality, the coefficient on local-area, end-of-life length of stay

17

In a separate analysis, volumes of coronary artery bypass surgeries and cardiac catheterizations were
calculated and counties were broken into quartiles based on these counts. Counties that had particularly
high volumes of local-area surgeries were associated with lower mortality rates compared to counties in the
2nd and 3rd quartiles.
18
Sheehan-Connor (2007) used California discharge data and the rate of interventional therapy among
California residents who entered hospitals with a heart attack 200 miles from their home as an instrument
for such therapy among locals. That paper found a negative relationship between interventional therapy
and mortality. The current paper takes the opposite approach by considering the assets available to visitors
in a county to be endogenous to local-area patient characteristics but exogenous to visitor characteristics—a
result supported by the medical literature (Fisher et al., 1994; Stukel, Lucas, Wennberg, 2005), as
described in section 2.

28

is -0.056 (s.e.=0.018). For a two-standard deviation increase in this measure, this implies
a 1.3 percentage-point drop in mortality.
Last, the main results appear to stem from “overall” spending, and this may be
reflected in staffing levels and wage bills. To explore differences across counties, the
American Hospital Association provides information about the number of physicians and
nurses at each hospital. For each county, a physician-to-admission ratio and a nurse-toadmission ratio were calculated for the year 2000, as well as labor expenses in the county
per full-time employee. These measures are not highly correlated with local-area, end-oflife charges, with correlations of 0.28, 0.11, and 0.24, respectively. They are also
unrelated to mortality with opposite signs and relatively large standard errors.
Instrumental Variables Estimates

Another way to summarize the main results is by considering the additional
spending on the visitor population associated with an emergency in higher-spending areas.
The change in mortality can then be normalized by this dollar amount to estimate the
returns to spending. That is, a 2SLS model of mortality on patient charges can be
estimated using the county spending measure as an instrument.
The first stage for patient i treated in county c from ZIP code z in state s in year t
is:
(9) Ticzst = α 0 + α 1Tc + α 2 X i + α 3W z + α 4 Pc + θ s + δ t + μ iczst
and the second stage is:

(10 ) M iczst = β 0 + β 1Tˆiczst + β 2 X i + β 3W z + β 4 Pc + θ s + δ t + ε iczst
Identification of β1 relies on the mean independence of Tc and ε . Earlier results
showed that the reduced-form results were similar within areas that appear to be close

29

demand substitutes, and that the results were not sensitive to the addition of controls for
patient and area characteristics. These robustness results are suggestive that the visitors
are not choosing the destination based on the health care-spending level and provides
some evidence that the local-area spending level is exogenous to the patient’s mortality
risk. That said, differences in local-area spending likely reflect other differences in the
area, including differences in medical technology and staff experience that may not be
fully reflected in the spending on visitors in the hospital.
Table 7 reports the instrumental-variable (IV) results using the charge measure
and the cost measure described above. Panel A shows that the first stage yields
coefficients on local-area spending and local-area costs on the order of 0.7 and 0.65.
These estimates show that visitor spending is highly associated with end-of-life spending
on locals, though less than a one-for-one relationship. F-statistics on the excluded
instrument are close to 50 when charges are considered and 16 when the noisier cost
measures are used, well above the usual rule of thumb of 10 for weak instruments (Stock,
Wright, and Yogo, 2002).
Panel B reports the two-stage least squares results for the inpatient mortality
outcome. When charges are considered, the coefficient is -0.043, with little change with
or without controls. For costs, the coefficient is -0.080 without controls and -0.069 with
controls. For the 25 log point difference shown in Table 1, these estimates imply
mortality rate reductions of 1 and 1.8 percentage points, respectively.
These are large reductions in mortality attributed to the difference in spending on
the patient, though other studies have found large effects. For example, Taylor et al.

30

(1999) found that teaching hospitals have 20-50% higher costs compared to for-profit and
government hospitals, but also had a 25% lower mortality rate.
To evaluate the size of these effects, a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the
marginal cost of a statistical life-year saved can be considered. Among heart
emergencies, a 1% increase in charges compared to the median is roughly $140.
Meanwhile, the average age in the sample is 70 years old, and 70-year-olds have a life
expectancy of 85 years old (Arias, 2007). This patient population is in worse health,
however, so assuming an additional 7 years of life for those who survive the hospital stay,
the IV estimates imply a cost of saving a statistical life year on the order of $47,000.19
The number would be lower if the cost measure were considered, though the facility
charges do not include physician fees, which are similar in magnitude to the difference
between costs and charges.
Further, the results in Table 3 suggest that this increase in spending is found for
all emergency patients. When a 2SLS model for all emergencies is considered with
three-digit primary diagnosis fixed effects included as well, the first-stage coefficient is
0.59 (s.e.=0.009) and the coefficient on instrumented charges is -0.029 (s.e.=0.008). For
costs the coefficient is -0.039 (s.e.=0.018). This sample has slightly lower median
charges, so a 1% increase is on the order of $100. This implies a cost per statistical lifeyear of $49,000 in charges.20
By comparison, McClellan and Newhouse (1997) used a difference-in-differences
strategy comparing adopting and non-adopting hospitals in terms of invasive treatments

19

$140/(0.043*0.01) divided by 7 = $46,500. The analogous calculation for the cost measure is
$65/(0.069*0.01) divided by 7 = $13,000.
20
The calculation is $100/(0.029*0.01) divided by 7 = $49,000. For costs: $50/(0.039*0.01) divided by 7
= $18,000.

31

of heart attacks and found a $70,000 cost for a statistical life year saved. Cutler, Rosen
and Vijan found a $145,000 cost per life year gained for elderly patients between 1990
and 2000. The value of an additional life year in good health is typically set at $100,000
(Cutler and McClellan, 2001). Although the back-of-the-envelope calculations here are
sensitive to the assumptions, the additional cost per statistical life year saved appears to
be below the estimated benefit.
The above estimates relate most directly to visitors, though greater amounts are
spent on locals as well. If the estimated returns to visitors reflect the returns to locals (a
return that is masked in the regression on the local population due to confounding factors),
then the cost of saving a statistical life would be similar among local patients.
There are a number of limitations to this type of analysis. It may be that
individuals that visit high-spending areas differ from those who visit low-spending areas,
though the usual selection bias of sicker patients seeking higher-quality hospital care
would tend to bias the results in favor of finding no (or a positive) relationship between
spending and mortality. Further, the visitor group may be expected to be more active
than locals given that they made the trip and may be particularly suitable for higher
treatment intensity. The mortality rates for the local and visitor populations are similar,
however, suggesting that this group is informative of the returns to spending even outside
of this traveling group.
Another limitation is that the visitor status relies on the state of residence claimed
by the patient, and there may be measurement error. This is a problem particular to
Florida where many retirees spend a winters in Florida. In general, long-term visitors to
Florida have a tax advantage of claiming Florida as the primary residence (Lannon, 2006).

32

In addition, the results in section 5 suggest that a selection bias would tend to bias the
estimates toward zero, similar to the local-area population estimates.

6. Conclusions

Estimating the returns to health care spending is necessary to evaluate our health
care system but is complicated by the fact that individuals in worse health receive more
care. In fact, there is a strong positive correlation between spending and mortality at the
individual level. Aggregating to the regional level, areas that spend more may also have
patients in worse health, which can confound comparisons, and the results here replicated
earlier findings of little relationship between spending and mortality among the
populations the health care systems were designed to serve.
In contrast, those who have a serious health emergency far from home are
exposed to different health care systems and are unlikely to impact the resources
available in these systems. The results imply that if the emergency occurred in a highspending area, the patient was significantly more likely to survive. These results were
found within groups of counties that are popular destinations with similar lodging
prices—areas that are likely to be close demand substitutes in terms of vacation
destinations to provide plausibly exogenous variation in health care systems.
In particular, areas that spend more on local patients tend to spend more on
visitors as well, and the additional cost of a statistical life year saved is found to be on the
order of $50,000—well below the typical value of life year saved of $100,000. Smaller
returns were found in sub-samples where the visitors were more likely to select the

33

destination with the health care system in mind, suggesting that the main results may
understate the benefits to health care spending.

34

References

Arias, Elizabeth. (2007) “United States Life Tables, 2003.” National Vital Statistics
Reports. 54(14). Original April 19, 2006; Revised March 28, 2007.
Baicker.Katherine and Amitabh Chandra. (2004) “Medicare Spending, the Physician
Workforce, and the Quality of Care Received by Medicare Beneficiaries,” Health
Affairs W4: 184-197.
Cao, Zhun and Thomas G. McGuire. (2003) “Service-Level Selection by HMOs in
Medicare” Journal of Health Economics 22(6): 915-31.
Catlin, Aaron, Cowan, Cathy, Heffler, Stephen, and Benjamin Washington. (2007)
“National Health Spending In 2005: The Slowdown Continues.” Health Affairs,
26(1): 142-153.
Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O. Staiger. (2007) “Productivity Spillovers in Health
Care: Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks.” Journal of Political
Economy. 115(1): 103-140.
Cutler, David.M., and Mark B. McClellan. (2001) “Is technological change in medicine
worth it?” Health Affairs 20(5): 11-29.
Cutler, David M., McClellan, Mark B., Newhouse, Joseph P. and Dahlia Remler. (1998)
“Are medical prices declining? Evidence for heart attack treatments” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113(4): 991-1024.
Cutler, David M., Rosen, Allison B., Vijan, Sandeep. (2006) “The Value of Medical
Spending in the United States, 1960-2000” New England Journal of Medicine.
355: 920-927
Dobkin, Carlos. “Hospital Staffing and Inpatient Mortality” Working Paper. June 2003.
Enthoven, Alain C. Health Plan. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 1980.
Fisher, Elliot S. and H. Gilbert Welch. (1999) “Avoiding the Unintended Consequences
of Growth in Medical Care: How Might More Be Worse?“ Journal of the
American Medical Association. 281: 446-453.
Fisher E, Wennberg D, Stukel T, Gottlieb D, Lucas F, Pinder E. (2003) “Implications of
regional variations in Medicare spending. part 2: health outcomes and satisfaction
with care.” Annals of Internal Medicine 138(4): 288-298.
Fisher, Elliott S., Wennberg, John E., Stukel, Therese A., Sharp, Sandra M. (1994)
“Hospital Readmission Rates for Cohorts of Medicare Beneficiaries in Boston and
New Haven” New England Journal of Medicine. 331: 989-995.

35

Fuchs, Victor R. (2004) “More Variation in Use of Care, More Flat-of-the-curve
Medicine.” Health Affairs. 23(6): 104-107.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Robert J. Town (1999). “Estimating the Quality of Care in
Hospitals Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of Health Economics 18: 747 –
67.
Guadagnoli, Edward, Hauptman, Paul J., Ayanian, John Z., Pashos, Chris L., McNeil,
Barbara J., Cleary, Paul D. (1995) “Variation in the Use of Cardiac Procedures
after Acute Myocardial Infarction.” New England Journal of Medicine. 333: 573578.
Heidenreich, P.A. and M. McClellan. (2001) “Trends in treatment and outcomes for
acute myocardial infarction: 1975-1995.” American Journal of Medicine 110:
165–174.
Institute of Medicine, Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
Health Care, National Academy Press, Washington, DC (2002).
Kessler, Daniel and Mark McClellan. (1996) “Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine?”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111(2): 353-390.
Lannon, Patrick J. (2006) “Domicile Planning — Don’t Take it for Granted.” The
Florida Bar Journal. 80(1): 34.
Lee, Ronald, and Jonathan Skinner. (1999) “Will Aging Baby Boomers Bust the Federal
Budget?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(1): 117-140.
Luce, B.R., Mauskopf, J., Sloan, F.A., Ostermann, J., & Paramore, C. (2006). “The return
on investment in health care: from 1980 to 2000.” Value in Health, 9 (3):146-156.
McClellan, Mark B., McNeil, J. and Joseph P. Newhouse. (1994) “Does more intensive
treatment of acute myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis
using instrumental variables.” Journal of the American Medical Association.
272: 859-866
McClellan, Mark B., and Joseph P. Newhouse. (1997) "The Marginal Cost-Effectiveness
of Medical Technology: A Panel Instrumental-Variables Approach." Journal of
Econometrics 77: 39-64.
McGuire, T.G. and R. P. Ellis. “Provider Behavior Under Prospective Reimbursement.”
Journal of Health Economics. 5. 1986: 129-151
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert Topel. (2003) “The Economic Value of Medical
Research” in Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (Eds.), Measuring the Gains

36

from Medical Research: An Economic Approach Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Nordhaus, William D. (2002) "The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved
Health to Living Standards" NBER Working Paper No. 8818.
O’Connor, Gerald T., Quinton, Hebe B., Traven, Neal D., Ramunno, Lawrence D.,
Dodds, T. Andrew, Marciniak, Thomas A., and John E. Wennberg. (1999)
“Geographic Variation in the Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction: The
Cooperative Cardiovascular Project” Journal of the American Medical
Association. 281: 627-633.
Pilote, Louise, Califf, Robert M., Sapp, Shelly, Miller, Dave P., Mark, Daniel B., Weaver,
W. Douglas, Gore, Joel M., Armstrong, Paul W., Ohman, E. Magnus, and Eric J.
Topol. (1995) “Regional Variation across the United States in the Management
of Acute Myocardial Infarction” New England Journal of Medicine. 333: 565572.
Quan H, Sundararajan V, Halfon P, Fong A, Burnand B, Luthi JC, Saunders LD, Beck
CA, Feasby TE, and WAGhali. (2005) “Coding algorithms for defining
comorbidities in ICD-9-CM and ICD-10 administrative data.” Medical Care
43(11):1073-1077.
Sheehan-Connor, Damien. “Traveler Experience as an Instrument to Assess Medical
Care Effectiveness.” Working Paper. February 2007.
Sirovich BE, Gottlieb DJ, Welch HG, and ES Fisher. (2006) Regional variations in
health care intensity and physician perceptions of the quality of care. Annals of
Internal Medicine. 144: 641-649.
Stock, James, James Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. (2002). “A Survey of Weak
Instruments and Weak Identification in GMM.” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 20:4, 518–29.
Stukel, Therese A., Fisher, Elliott S., Wennberg, David E., Alter, David A., Gottlieb,
Daniel J., and Marian J. Vermeulen. (2007) “Analysis of Observational Studies
in the Presence of Treatment Selection Bias: Effects of Invasive Cardiac
Management on AMI Survival Using Propensity Score and Instrumental Variable
Methods.” Journal of the American Medical Association 297: 278-285.
Stukel, Therese A., Lucas, F. Lee, and David E. Wennberg. (2005) “Long-term
Outcomes of Regional Variations in Intensity of Invasive vs Medical
Management of Medicare Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction” Journal of
the American Medical Association. 293: 1329-1337

37

Taylor, Donald H., Whellan, David J., and Frank A. Sloan. (1999) “Effects of Admission
to a Teaching Hospital on the Cost and Quality of Care for Medicare
Beneficiaries” New England Journal of Medicine 340: 293-299.
Tu, Jack V., Pashos, Chris L., Naylor, C. David, Chen, Erluo, Normand, Sharon-Lise,
Newhouse, Joseph P., and Barbara J. McNeil. (1997) “Use of Cardiac Procedures
and Outcomes in Elderly Patients with Myocardial Infarction in the United States
and Canada” New England Journal of Medicine. 336: 1500-1505.
Wennberg, D. E., Kellett, M. A., Dickens, J. D., Malenka, D. J., Keilson, L. M., and R. B.
Keller (1996) “The association between local diagnostic testing intensity and
invasive cardiac procedures.” Journal of the American Medical Association.
275: 1161-1164.

38

Figure 1:
Potential Mortality-Treatment Relationship
Across Populations that Differ by Their Underlying Risk
Mortality

MLow = MHigh
M(T,XHigh,UHigh)
M(T,XLow,ULow)

TLow

THigh

Treatment

Table 1: Patients with Heart Emergencies:
Locals vs. Visitors to Florida (Selected Variables)
Patient Group:

Low-Spending County High-Spending County
Visitors
Visitors
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev

Variable

Floridians
Mean Std Dev

Local-area level:
Treatment
mean log(charges) | mortality

10.01

0.23

9.79

0.15

10.16

0.12

hospital charges
log(charges)

22328
9.59

30706
0.86

20776
9.51

26060
0.88

26997
9.75

35864
0.91

Mortality

0.057

0.23

0.061

0.24

0.054

0.23

0.52

0.50

0.63

0.48

0.62

0.49

71.8

14.2

71.6

11.9

68.8

13.4

Patient-level:
Treatment

Outcome

Personal
Male
Characteristics
Age

Payer
Categories

Medicare
Medicare HMO
Medicaid
Private Insurance
Other insurance
Uninsured

0.56
0.14
0.05
0.19
0.02
0.04

0.50
0.35
0.21
0.39
0.13
0.21

0.66
0.04
0.01
0.24
0.01
0.04

0.47
0.19
0.09
0.43
0.10
0.19

0.51
0.05
0.02
0.32
0.01
0.08

0.50
0.23
0.13
0.47
0.11
0.28

Race

African American
Hispanic
White

0.11
0.11
0.75

0.32
0.32
0.43

0.02
0.01
0.95

0.15
0.09
0.22

0.06
0.07
0.84

0.23
0.26
0.37

37450
0.21
0.65
28023

10638
0.10
0.28
13630

51031
0.28
0.83
22526

20395
0.17
0.18
16311

49362
0.27
0.79
25859

18967
0.16
0.22
19330

0.27
0.24
0.23
0.26

0.45
0.43
0.42
0.44

0.50
0.21
0.11
0.19

0.50
0.40
0.31
0.39

0.44
0.21
0.13
0.21

0.50
0.41
0.34
0.41

0.27

0.45

0.28

0.45

0.29

0.45

Per-diem in January
Per-diem in July

109.29
100.63

16.67
13.46

113.41
97.14

23.61
14.02

107.62
102.37

14.64
12.73

Predicted Mortality

-

-

0.058

0.03

0.058

0.03

ZIP Code of
Median HH Income
Residence
Fraction College Grad
Characteristics Fraction white
Population
Emergency
1st Quarter
Characteristics 2nd Quarter
3rd Quarter
4th Quarter
Weekend
Area
Prices
Summary of
Covariates

Observations
753645
18066
18661
Patients with an emergency admission for heart disease in Florida, 1996-2003. Spending areas defined by median of
the local-area treatment measure: mean log charges conditional on mortality for the county. Predicted Mortality is
estimated from a probit model on the full set of controls including indicators for each age, day of the week, and year.
Means for the ZIP Code characteristics include only patients with ZIP code information, which excludes those who
primary residence is outside the U.S., resulting in sample sizes of 15,898 in low-spending areas and 14,177 in the
high-spending area.

Table 2: Treatment & Health Outcomes for Heart Emergencies
A. Florida Locals
Dependent Variable: Mortality
(1)
log(charges)
0.025
(0.003)
local area: mean log(charges) | mortality
Controls for Personal Characteristics
Controls for Patient ZIP Code Characteristics
Controls for Area Prices
Observations
Mean of Dep. Variable

No
No
No
753645
0.057

(2)
0.027
(0.002)

(3)
0.027
(0.002)

(4)
0.027
(0.002)

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

(2)
0.028
(0.002)

(3)
0.028
(0.002)

(4)
0.028
(0.002)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.001
(0.004)
No
No
No

0.005
(0.005)
Yes
No
No

0.005
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
No

0.002
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Yes

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.033
(0.009)
No
No
No

-0.030
(0.008)
Yes
No
No

-0.029
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
No

-0.032
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
Yes

B. Visitors
Dependent Variable: Mortality
(1)
log(charges)
0.026
(0.002)
local area: mean log(charges) | mortality

Controls for Personal Characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Controls for Patient ZIP Code Characteristics
No
No
Yes
Yes
Controls for Area Prices
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
36727
Mean of Dep. Variable
0.058
Regressions with local-area measures: standard errors are clustered at the county level. Personal characteristics include the variables in Table 1,
including indicators for each age, day of the week, and year.

Table 3: Results for Frequent Diagnoses & Across Illness Severity
Dependent Variable: Mortality
3-Digit ICD9-CM Diagnosis Codes
Top 10 Most Frequent
Emergency Diagnoses

local area: mean
Mortality log(charges) | mortality
Rate
Coeff.
S.E.
Obs.

410 Acute myocardial infarction

0.089

-0.030

0.011*

14866

414 Other chronic ischemic heart disease

0.007

-0.005

0.002*

11976

427 Cardiac dysrhythmias

0.030

-0.044

0.012**

9690

428 Heart failure

0.041

-0.026

0.008*

12120

434 Occlusion of cerebral arteries (stroke)

0.063

-0.043

0.017*

6367

486 Pneumonia

0.040

-0.014

0.015

11198

491 Chronic bronchitis

0.028

-0.008

0.008

6083

780 General symptoms

0.004

-0.0007

0.003

9008

786 Symptoms involving respiratory system
and other chest symptoms
820 Fracture of neck of femur (hip fracture)

0.001

-0.002

0.001*

13810

0.024

-0.009

0.012

5281

All Emergency Diagnoses Model with Diagnosis Fixed Effects

0.039

-0.017

0.005**

273016

Quartiles of Diagnosisspecific mortality rates

P(Mortality|Diagnosis) Bottom Quartile

0.004

-0.0009

0.0007

73993

P(Mortality|Diagnosis) 2nd Quartile

0.015

-0.0068

0.0054

53002

P(Mortality|Diagnosis) 3rd Quartile

0.035

-0.020

0.006**

62704

P(Mortality|Diagnosis) Top Quartile

0.119

-0.043

0.014**

61594

276 Dehydration (Volume Depletion)

0.022

-0.003

0.015

3318

Specification Check

Each row represents a separate regression with full controls. Standard Errors are clustered at the county level.
P(Mortality|Diagnosis) is predicted mortality from a probit model with 3-digit primary diagnosis indicators (for diagnoses
with at least 10 observations and at least one fatality). Models for each diagnosis-specific mortality quartile include 3digit, primary diagnosis fixed effects as well. Each sub-sample is restricted to patients from states with at least 5
observations. *=5%; **=1%.

1

Table 4: Heart Emergency Results Across Patient Types
Dependent Variable: Mortality
Age

local area: mean log(charges) | mortality
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

Age>=65
(1)
-0.037
(0.008)
26279
0.068

1st Quarter
(7)
local area: mean log(charges) | mortality
-0.026
(0.008)
Observations
17191
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.050

local area: mean log(charges) | mortality
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

Northeast
(13)
-0.043
(0.011)
11869
0.062

Age<65
(2)
-0.017
(0.009)
10448
0.032

2nd Quarter
(8)
-0.029
(0.013)
7718
0.068

Race
African Amer. Hispanic
(3)
(4)
-0.067
-0.052
(0.027)
(0.035)
1484
1545
0.047
0.051

3rd Quarter
(9)
-0.050
(0.018)
4410
0.063

Census Region
Midwest
West
(14)
(15)
-0.021
-0.035
(0.015)
(0.033)
9278
1403
0.053
0.073

4th Quarter
(10)
-0.030
(0.015)
7408
0.061

Sex
Male
(5)
-0.022
(0.007)
22840
0.054

Female
(6)
-0.049
(0.013)
13887
0.064

Lack of
Insurance
(11)
-0.024
(0.026)
2224
0.060

Insured
(12)
-0.033
(0.008)
34503
0.058

South
(16)
-0.035
(0.011)
8380
0.057

Exclude Missing
ZIP Code Income Quartile
Bottom
2nd Quartile 3rd Quartile
Top
State/ZIP
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
local area: mean log(charges) | mortality
-0.036
-0.026
-0.023
-0.044
-0.033
(0.013)
(0.009)
(0.020)
(0.014)
(0.008)
Observations
6825
6833
6835
6825
27318
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.054
0.056
0.059
0.065
0.059
Each cell represents a separate regression with full controls. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Lack of insurance
coverage is defined as charity care, self pay, or less than 30% coverage. Census region comparisons exclude visitors from
outside the U.S.

Table 5: Heart Emergency Results Across County Types
Dependent Variable: Mortality
Destination Demand Substitutes: Visitor Price Quartiles
1995 Amer.
Bottom
2nd
3rd
Top
2000 Census Travel Survey
Quartile
Quartile
Quartile
Quartile County Controls Controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.004
-0.041
-0.023
-0.023
-0.030
-0.048
local area: mean log(charges) | mortality
(0.013)
(0.025)
(0.018)
(0.007)*
(0.012)*
(0.014)**
American Travel Survey Variables
(fraction of visitors):
Family income >= $15k & <$25k
0.113
(0.080)
Family income >= $25k & <$30k
-0.067
(0.164)
Family income >= $30k & <$40k
-0.634
(0.148)**
Family income >= $40k & <$50k
-0.455
(0.138)**
Family income >= $50k & <$60k
0.427
(0.114)**
Family income >= $60k & <$75k
0.910
(0.299)**
Family income >= $75k & <$100k
-1.159
(0.246)**
Family income >= $100k
0.462
(0.147)**
Retired
-0.180
(0.028)**
Vacation
-0.034
(0.033)
White
-0.062
(0.109)
Number of Counties
17
10
8
9
44
24
Observations
4517
6795
7160
18255
36727
28810
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.069
0.057
0.060
0.055
0.058
0.058
Each column represents a separate regression with full controls. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Visitor prices
are per-diem rates calculated by the US General Services Administration. The bottom quartile represents the counties that do not
have their own per-diem rate. Census controls include race & age composition, median income, and population at the county
level. *=significant at 5%; **=significant at 1%

Table 6: Alternative Measures of Local-Area Inputs among Heart Emergencies
Mean of Measure
(Std. Dev.)
Spending

Local Area Measures:
log(costs) | mortality

Correlation with Local
log (charges)|mortality

Coefficient (s.e.) from
model of Mortality

9.19
0.67
-0.046
(0.18)
(0.013)
log(surgical charges) | mortality
7.38
0.33
0.007
(0.29)
(0.006)
log(diagnostic charges) | mortality
8.41
0.88
-0.021
(0.30)
(0.006)
log(icu charges) | mortality
8.03
0.70
-0.016
(0.25)
(0.009)
log(other charges) | mortality
9.19
0.90
-0.023
(0.22)
(0.010)
Length of Stay log(length of stay) | mortality
1.37
0.49
-0.056
(0.12)
(0.018)
Procedures
invasive procedure rate | mortality
0.33
0.44
0.037
(0.07)
(0.031)
mean number of procedures | mortality
2.38
0.40
0.006
(0.42)
(0.005)
Staffing
physicians per 1000 admissions
1.08
0.28
0.0006
(1.42)
(0.001)
nurses per 1000 admissions
25
0.11
-0.0004
(5.6)
(0.0004)
labor expenses per full-time employee
42903
0.24
1.42e-07
6368
(4.76e-07)
Each row represents a separate regression with full controls and 36,727 observations. Standard Errors are clustered at the county level
Column (1) reports the mean (standard deviation) of the alternative measure. Column (2) reports the correlation between the alternativ
measure and local area, mean log charges conditional on mortality. Costs are calculated as charges*hospital cost-to-charge ratio.
Surgical charges include operating room, anesthesia, recovery room, and cardiology charges. Diagnostic charges include laboratory,
pathology laboratory, diagnostic radiology, ct scan, and mri charges; Intensive care charges include coronary care unit charges as well
as general ICU charges.

Table 7A: Visitor Treatment Measures & Local Area Treatment Measures
Dependent Variable:
local area: mean log(charges) | mortality

log(charges)
(1)
0.704
(0.100)

(2)
0.742
(0.100)

local area: mean log(costs) | mortality
Full Controls
F-statistic
Observations
Mean of Dep. Variable

No
49.91
36727
9.63

Yes
55.58

log(costs)
(3)

(4)

0.656
(0.158)
No
17.13
36727
8.86

0.642
(0.160)
Yes
16.02

Table 7B: 2SLS: Treatment & Mortality
Mortality

Dependent Variable:
log(charges)
log(costs)

(1)
-0.046
(0.016)

Mortality
(2)
-0.043
(0.014)

(3)

(4)

-0.080
-0.069
(0.032)
(0.035)
Full Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
36727
36727
Mean of Dep. Variable
0.058
0.058
Each cell represents a separate regression with full controls. Standard Errors are clustered at the county level.
Columns (3) and (4) use a cost measure calculated as charges*hospital cost-to-charge ratio.

Table A1: Reduced-Form Estimates with (Selected) Covariates
Dependent Variable: Mortality
Local Area

Local area: mean log(charges) | mortalit
Local area: mean log(costs) | mortality

Coeff.
-0.032

S.E.
(0.008)

Coeff.

S.E.

-0.046

(0.013)

Age Indicators
Age<=20
(60 years old excluded) Age>20 & Age<30
Age = 35
Age = 45
Age = 55
Age = 65
Age = 75
Age = 85
Age = 95
Age >= 100

0.032
-0.035
-0.047
-0.006
-0.019
-0.002
0.029
0.062
0.040
0.092

(0.037)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.018)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.015)
(0.028)
(0.076)

0.033
-0.035
-0.049
-0.006
-0.019
-0.002
0.028
0.060
0.038
0.089

(0.038)
(0.012)
(0.008)
(0.018)
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.015)
(0.028)
(0.076)

Race

African American
White

0.003
0.003

(0.004)
(0.007)

0.003
0.003

(0.004)
(0.007)

Sex

Male

0.001

(0.003)

0.001

(0.003)

Time of Year

1st quarter
2nd quarter
3rd quarter

-0.011
0.008
0.004

(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.005)

-0.012
0.008
0.004

(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.005)

Day of Week
(Monday excluded)

Friday
Saturday
Sunday

-0.003
-0.000
0.001

(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.003)

-0.003
-0.000
0.001

(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.003)

Primary Payer
Medicare fee for service
(uninsured excluded) Medicare HMO
Medicaid
Commercial Insurance
Other insurance

-0.018
-0.009
-0.018
-0.026
-0.011

(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.011)

-0.017
-0.009
-0.018
-0.026
-0.011

(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.011)

ZIP Code of Residence Median Income <= 30,000
Characteristics
Median Income >30K & <=40K
Median Income >40K & <=50K
Median Income >50K & <=60K
Median Income >60K & <=70K
Median Income >70K & <=80K
Fraction with Less than HS Degree
Fraction with HS Degree only
Fraction with some college
Fraction African American
Population (thousands)
Missing ZIP code information
(includes missing state information)

-0.016
-0.018
-0.020
-0.015
-0.013
-0.003
-0.015
0.042
0.091
-0.034
0.0001
-0.004

(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.031)
(0.022)
(0.038)
(0.039)
(0.0001)
(0.006)

-0.016
-0.018
-0.020
-0.015
-0.013
-0.003
-0.011
0.042
0.094
-0.034
0.0001
-0.004

(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.032)
(0.022)
(0.038)
(0.038)
(0.0001)
(0.006)

Per Diem June 1997
Per Diem Jan 1997

0.0003
-0.0005

(0.0002)
(0.0001)

0.0004
-0.0004

(0.0002)
(0.0002)

Year =
Year =
Year =
Year =
Year =
Year =
Year =

-0.007
-0.011
-0.013
-0.006
-0.011
-0.008
-0.018

(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)

-0.007
-0.011
-0.012
-0.006
-0.011
-0.008
-0.018

(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)

1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Observations
36727
Mean of Dep. Variable
0.058
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Models include indicators for each age and day of the week as well.

Table A2: Robustness
Dependent Variable: Mortality
Estimation

Patient or Local-Area treatment measure:
charge measure

Probit
(1)
-0.027
(0.007)

cost measure
Number of Counties
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var.

Local-Area measures:
mean log(charges) | mortality
mean log(charges)

44
36527
0.058

Probit
(2)

-0.041
(0.012)
44
36527
0.058

IV Probit
(3)
-0.038
(0.008)

44
36527
0.058

Include Local-Area Local Area
Floridians Measure: Measure:
>100 miles All Patients
Heart
from home
Emergency
(9)
(10)
(11)
-0.031
-0.023
(0.007)
(0.008)
-0.035
(0.017)

IV Probit
(4)

-0.063
(0.015)
44
36527
0.058

County Per-Diem Quartiles (Patient Weighted)
Bottom
2nd
3rd
Top
Quartile
Quartile
Quartile
Quartile
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.031
-0.019
-0.080
-0.034
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.003)
(0.026)

25
10239
0.061

10
8233
0.061

4
9791
0.055

5
8464
0.054

Local-Area
Spending Quartiles
Equal Weighted by
Weights Sample Size
(12)
(13)

-0.005
-0.010
(0.006)
(0.006)
-0.010
-0.008
mean log(charges) | mortality: 3rd quartile
(0.006)
(0.004)
-0.019
-0.025
mean log(charges) | mortality: Top quartile
(0.006)
(0.006)
Number of Counties
45
44
44
44
44
Observations
40701
36727
36727
36727
36727
Mean of Dependent Variable
0.058
0.058
0.058
0.058
0.058
Each cell represents a separate regression with full controls. Standard Errors are clustered at the county level. Columns (1)-(4) use probit
estimation and report marginal effects evaluated at the means of the covariates. Columns (1) and (2) use the local-area, end-of-life spending
measure and are analogous to Table 1 column (8). Cost is the charge measure deflated by the hospital cost-to-charge ratio. Columns (3) and
(4) report the coefficient on charges or costs in a model that included a quartic in the residuals from a first stage regression of patient charges or
costs on the local-area, end-of-life measure. The number of observations is slightly smaller in the probit models that exclude 4 age and 4 homestate categories due to zero deaths in those cells. Columns (5)-(8) categorize counties by the per-diem quartiles weighted by the patient sample
rather than the equal weights in Table 5. Column (9) expands the definition of visitors to include Floridians whose primary residence is greater
than 100 miles from the center of the hospital's county.
mean log(charges) | mortality: 2nd quartile

Column (10) constructs the local-area measure using all emergency admissions rather than emergency admissions where the patient died in the
hospital. Column (11) constructs the local-area measure using all emergency admissions where the patient died in the hospital and had a
diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction, cardiac dysrthymias, or heart failure. Columns (12) and (13) report a model that included indicators
for local-area spending quartiles rather than the mean.

Table A3: Alternative Measures of Local-Area Inputs: Heart Emergencies
Mean of Measure Correlation with Local Coefficient (s.e.) from
(Std. Dev.)
log (charges)|mortality model of Mortality
(1)
(2)
(3)
Local Area Charge Measures | Mortality
log(room charges)

Obs.
(4)

7.20
0.28
0.004
36727
0.23
(0.011)
log(nursery charges)
7.47
-0.70
0.004
8844
0.67
(0.001)
log(intensive care unit charges)
7.97
0.68
-0.019
36727
0.24
(0.008)
log(coronary care unity charges)
7.92
0.47
-0.007
34994
0.29
(0.010)
log(pharmacy charges)
7.97
0.83
-0.015
36727
0.33
(0.007)
log(medical and surgical supply charges)
7.41
0.71
-0.005
36727
0.28
(0.009)
log(oncology charges)
4.15
0.86
0.005
3662
1.19
(0.001)
log(laboratory charges)
8.12
0.85
-0.019
36727
0.32
(0.006)
log(pathology laboratory charges)
5.45
0.53
-0.011
36589
0.44
(0.004)
log(diagnostic radiology charges)
6.63
0.17
-0.008
23768
0.92
(0.002)
log(therapeutic radiology charges)
7.09
0.047
0.007
36622
0.22
(0.014)
log(nuclear medicine charges)
7.44
0.60
-0.033
36727
0.19
(0.010)
log(ct scan charges)
6.83
0.089
0.004
36649
0.65
(0.002)
log(operating room charges)
6.82
0.27
-0.002
36617
0.43
(0.004)
log(anesthesia charges)
6.76
0.83
-0.022
36727
0.35
(0.005)
log(respiratory services charges)
6.05
0.65
-0.020
36683
0.31
(0.013)
log(physical therapy charges)
5.80
0.43
-0.002
35380
0.40
(0.008)
log(occupational therapy charges)
6.35
0.40
-0.022
36727
0.19
(0.011)
log(emergency room charges)
7.26
0.29
0.008
36727
0.26
(0.008)
log(cardiology charges)
7.66
0.47
0.007
36727
0.35
(0.005)
log(magnetic resonance imaging charges)
9.73
0.96
-0.028
36727
0.23
(0.007)
log(recovery room charges)
7.68
-0.032
-0.002
35702
0.29
(0.008)
log(labor room charges)
6.31
0.17
-0.010
36547
0.37
(0.005)
log(other charges)
6.40
0.008
-0.021
5733
(0.003)
1.23
Each row represents a separate regression with full controls. Standard Errors are clustered at the county level. The
number of observations varies as small counties with no charges within the given category are not used.

