                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FROM "WHITE CHRISTMAS" TO SGT. PEPPER:
                  THE CONCEPTUAL REVOLUTION IN POPULAR MUSIC

                                          David Galenson

                                       Working Paper 13308
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13308


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
From "White Christmas" to Sgt. Pepper: The Conceptual Revolution in Popular Music
David Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 13308
August 2007
JEL No. J01

                                             ABSTRACT

Irving Berlin, Cole Porter, and other songwriters of the Golden Era wrote popular songs that treated
common topics clearly and simply. During the mid-1960s Bob Dylan, John Lennon, and Paul McCartney
created a new kind of popular music that was personal and often obscure. This shift, which transformed
popular music from an experimental into a conceptual art, produced a distinct change in the creative
life cycles of songwriters. Golden Era songwriters were generally at their best during their 30s and
40s, whereas since the mid-'60s popular songwriters have consistently done their best work during
their 20s. The revolution in popular music occurred at a time when young innovators were making
similar transformations in other arts: Jean-Luc Godard and his fellow New Wave directors created
a conceptual revolution in film in the early '60s, just as Andy Warhol and other Pop artists made painting
a conceptual activity.

David Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                                3

Introduction

               Another birthday and you’re almost in tears;
               Another birthday and you’re counting the years.
                                            Irving Berlin, “Old Men”1

       In 1942, Bing Crosby sang “White Christmas” in the movie Holiday Inn. The song

became a hit in that year, spending ten weeks in first place on the Lucky Strike Hit Parade

countdown, and it went on to become perhaps the most successful popular song ever written. Not

only has Crosby’s version sold more than 30 million copies, but “White Christmas” has been

recorded by scores of other musicians, including Louis Armstrong, Frank Sinatra, Perry Como,

Nat King Cole, Charlie Parker, Fats Domino, Elvis Presley, Aretha Franklin, the Beach Boys,

the Supremes, the Jackson Five, Willie Nelson, Bob Dylan, Barbara Streisand, Bob Marley and

the Wailers, and U2.2 Irving Berlin wrote both the lyrics and music for “White Christmas.”

When the song was released in 1942, he was 54 years old.3

       In 2003, Rolling Stone magazine announced that a poll of 273 experts had named Sgt.

Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band as the greatest rock and roll album ever made. The

magazine’s music editor explained that “The Beatles, after all, were the most important and

innovative rock group in the world. And Sgt. Pepper arguably set the tone for what an album

could be.”4 Eleven of the songs on Sgt. Pepper were written by John Lennon and Paul

McCartney, and one was written by George Harrison. When Sgt. Pepper was released in 1967,

Lennon was 27 years old, McCartney was 25, and Harrison was 24.

       The age difference of the writers of “White Christmas” and Sgt. Pepper is striking: Irving

Berlin was twice as old as any of the Beatles when they produced their respective landmark

works. This might be dismissed as an isolated anomaly. In fact, however, it wasn’t. During the
                                                  4

mid-1960s, a revolution changed the nature of popular music. One consequence of this

revolution was a dramatic change in the creative life cycles of the artists who write popular

songs. This paper will describe how popular music was changed by this revolution, and will

document the change in the life cycles of popular songwriters that accompanied the revolution.

The Golden Era

               A simple melody will always linger -
               I mean the kind you pick out with one finger.
                                            Irving Berlin, “An Old-Fashioned
                                            Tune is Always New”5

       In his 1995 study of The American Popular Ballad of the Golden Era, 1924-1950, Allen

Forte observed that the popular ballad was “usually sincere, earnest, and straightforward.”

Lyricists avoided “the obscure, the esoteric, and any elements that would render the ballad

inaccessible to the ideal patron,” and made “a conscious effort to reach the average man and

woman.”6 In their 2006 monograph, Classic American Popular Song, David Jenness and Don

Velsey made similar comments. Thus they noted that “an invariable feature of the good song is

that... the metrical fitting of words and phrases to a given melodic contour follows the natural

prosody of spoken English,” and that the lyrics “are invariably in a familiar mode... They deal

with common topics: either the experience that is common to all humans, or about topics that a

generation or a group has in common.”7 In their 2006 book, America’s Songs, Philip Furia and

Michael Lasser observed that “the song writers who gave us what has come to be known as the

Great American Songbook were not writing about themselves; they were writing about us. They

were democratic populists who gave voice to the American people.”8

       The songwriters of the Golden Era generally regarded themselves as craftsmen rather

than artists, as they created “a professional tradition... based upon a relatively sophisticated
                                                   5

command of music.”9 Their desire to write songs that reflected everyday life in their society

without artistic pretentiousness was neatly expressed in a tribute paid by one great songwriter to

another, as Jerome Kern wrote of Irving Berlin that “He doesn’t attempt to stuff the public ears

with pseudo-original, ultra modernism, but he honestly absorbs the vibrations emanating from

the people, manners and life of his time, and in turn gives these impressions back to the world -

simplified - clarified - glorified.”10 Berlin himself acknowledged the modest place of his genre in

a lyric:

                  Popular song, you will never be missed,
                  Once your composer has ceased to exist,
                  While Chopin and Verdi, Beethoven and Liszt
                  Live on with each generation.11

           Forte observed that the classic popular song was “written exclusively in the

vernacular.”12 Late in his life, Berlin explained that he had always aimed to write “in the simplest

way... as simple as writing a telegram.”13 Berlin’s principal considerations in writing lyrics were

“ease, naturalness, every-day-ness... ‘Easy to sing, easy to say, easy to remember and applicable

to everyday events’ is a good rule for a phrase.”14 Looking back on his own development, Cole

Porter took pride in the fact that “My songs are easier than they used to be musically and

lyrically.”15 Throughout his career, Porter’s music was frequently described by critics as

sophisticated, but he rejected their intended praise: “I’ve worked like a dog to keep all

[‘sophisticated’] implies out of my music.” He told an interviewer that what he really wanted

was to write “genuine American folk songs.”16

           Alec Wilder observed that Irving Berlin “never deviated from his purpose of writing

songs which stem from the music of the people, whether it be ragtime, swing music, country

music, or the work of his contemporaries.”17 Berlin wanted his music to reach everyone: “The
                                                 6

mob is always right. It seems to be able to sense instinctively what is good, and I believe that

there are darned few good songs which have not been whistled or sung by the crowd.”18 His

peers generally shared this attitude. So for example George Gershwin explained why he insisted

on calling Porgy and Bess a folk opera rather than simply an opera: “I hoped to have developed

something in American music that would appeal to the many rather than to the allured few.”19

Richard Rodgers declared that “All I really want to do is to provide a hard-worked man in the

blouse business with a method of expressing himself. If he likes a tune, he can whistle it, and it

will make his life happier.”20

       The practices and attitudes of the Golden Era songwriters stemmed in large part from

their recognition of the role of their work, for their songs were virtually always created in

response to the needs of musical comedy scripts that had been written before the composers or

lyricists ever became involved. From an early date, songwriters accepted as a test of quality that

their songs should not disrupt the continuity of the play. Thus Jerome Kern told an interviewer

that “It is my opinion that the musical numbers should carry on the action of the play, and should

be representative of the personalities of the characters who sing them... In other words, songs

must be suited to the action and the mood of the play.”21 Furthermore, over time the degree of

integration of the songs into the plot, and their role in developing characters, came to be

considered increasingly important criteria for a songwriter’s success. So for example Gerald

Mast noted that “Dramatically, Porgy and Bess [1935], following the lead of Show Boat [1927]

but building with absolute consistency on its example, defined a song or musical passage as a

highly particularized expression of just that character just then just there. No American piece of

musical theater had adhered so ruthlessly to this principle before Porgy and Bess; no major piece
                                                  7

of American musical theater would retreat from it after Porgy and Bess.”22 Similarly, Geoffrey

Block observed that “As early as the 1920s [Richard] Rodgers strove to create musicals in which

songs were thoroughly integrated into the dramatic whole. In his finest efforts with [Lorenz]

Hart, including On Your Toes [1936] and Pal Joey [1940], and in his first collaboration with

[Oscar] Hammerstein, Oklahoma! [1943], Rodgers often succeeded in making the songs flow

naturally from the dialogue and express character. But it was not until Carousel [1945] that

Rodgers created a thoroughly unified musical score which also achieved a truly convincing

coordination (i.e. integration) between music and dramatic action.”23 Hammerstein

complimented his collaborator Rodgers by describing him as “essentially a composer for plays.

He writes music to depict story and character and is, therefore, himself a dramatist. He is not an

abstractionist in any sense and, as far as I can see, he has no interest in the mere creation of

sound, however unusual or ingenious. He composes in order to make words fly higher or cut

deeper than they would without the aid of his music.”24

       In addition to tailoring their songs to advance plots and develop characters, some Golden

Era song writers produced songs intended for specific actors. A biographer of Cole Porter noted

that as a Yale undergraduate, when Porter was writing the score for a fraternity musical, “Cole

expressed to [the director] a practice he retained all his life: ‘Tell me whom you select for

different parts, and I can write fitting songs the more easily.’”25 Many years later, the star actress

Ethel Merman noted that one of Porter’s most famous songs was an example of this: “What Cole

had done was to analyze my voice and turn out songs which showed off its variety. ‘You’re the

Top’ brought audiences to their feet because it was a new kind of love song.”26 More generally,

William Zinsser observed that during 1935-38, Irving Berlin, Jerome Kern, Dorothy Fields, and
                                                  8

George and Ira Gershwin all wrote some of their finest songs for the actor Fred Astaire: “They

knew that whatever they wrote, he would sing it perfectly, every note true, every syllable clear,

every nuance of emotion and humor caught with natural elegance and timing and taste. Knowing

this, they stretched their wings and reached a high level of freshness and artistry.”27

       Golden era songwriters were experimental artists. This is witnessed by both the form and

the substance of their work, as they used informal, vernacular language clearly and simply to

treat common topics, familiar to a wide audience, in a realistic and convincing way. Thus a

biographer of Irving Berlin tellingly compared his most famous masterpiece to the greatest work

of a great experimental poet: “As a song, ‘White Christmas’ is the counterpart to Robert Frost’s

great modern poem, ‘Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening,’ which uses the simplest of

rhymes and the barest of imagery to evoke a beautiful but melancholy scene.”28 The Golden Era

songwriters’ experimental approach is equally reflected in the modesty and diffidence with

which they approached their work, for their unwillingness to claim the status of artist was a

result of their perception that they were not autonomous, but rather made up only one part of a

larger genre: for them songwriting was not an end in itself, but was done in the service of

musical comedy. The greatest of the Golden Era songwriters took plots and characters designed

by others, and brought them to life with music and lyrics carefully created to complement them.

Like many other experimental artists, these songwriters therefore denied they were artists at all,

claiming instead that they were highly skilled professional craftsmen.

The Conceptual Revolution

               Dylan was a revolutionary. Bob freed your mind the way Elvis
               freed your body. He showed us that just because the music was
               innately physical did not mean that it was anti-intellectual... He
               invented a new way a pop singer could sound, broke through the
                                                 9

               limitations of what a recording artist could achieve and changed
               the face of rock and roll forever.
                                              Bruce Springsteen, 198829

               Picture yourself in a boat on a river,
               With tangerine trees and marmalade skies.
                                              John Lennon and Paul McCartney,
                                              “Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds,”
                                              196730

       The emergence of rock and roll in the 1950s separated popular music from musical

comedies, as more songs were written in order to be performed by individual singers or groups.

Yet the experimental nature of popular songwriting did not change in the early years of rock and

roll, as professional songwriters continued to use vernacular language and simple images to treat

common ideas and emotions. Elvis Presley and other important early figures in rock and roll

were celebrated as performers, but continued to sing songs written by professional writers. Thus

the critic James Miller observed that “In the early Sixties, it was customary for rock and roll acts

to record songs written by somebody else. That, after all, is how Elvis Presley had done it. It was

how the music business had been run for a century. Songwriters wrote, and singers sang - a

division of labor that helped to maintain a certain (often minimal) standard of professionalism.”31

       This situation changed during the 1960s, as a revolution occurred in popular music.

Within a few years in the middle of the decade, popular songwriting was transformed from an

experimental to a conceptual art. This not only changed the locus of the creation of popular

songs, as professional songwriters were replaced by singer-songwriters, but it also changed the

form and substance of popular music. Today, more than four decades later, the conceptual

approach to popular songwriting remains the dominant one.

       Although there were many contributors to the revolution, three men - Bob Dylan and the
                                                  10

team of John Lennon and Paul McCartney - were clearly recognized as the leaders at the time,

and their legacy continues to dominate popular music today. The influence and conceptual nature

of their art have made these musicians the subject of a vast amount of criticism and scholarship,

and numerous studies of their work effectively describe the revolution. Thus the music scholar

John Covach observed that “Lennon and McCartney begin their careers aspiring to be

songwriters in the American Pop tradition, and accordingly they view themselves as

craftspeople, using formal designs and arrangements schemes that are common to much of 1960s

pop.” A transition began in 1964: “the space between 1964 and 1967 is an important time in pop

music’s developing sense of aspiration in general... [T]he change from pop songwriters to

songwriting artists occurs gradually in the Lennon-McCartney songs from that period.” At the

end of the transition, “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band makes its mark as the album that

... elevates rock music from simple dance fare to serious listening music. Rock musicians no

longer aspire so much to be professionals and craftspeople; rather, they aspire to be artists.”32

        The art in question was to be conceptual. James Miller described the change in the nature

of the Beatles’ music during this period of transition: “Up till then, rock and roll had been

primarily a music of revelry, a medium for lifting people up and helping them dance their blues

away. Under the combined influence of marijuana and Bob Dylan’s unkempt persona, the

Beatles would turn it into something else again: a music of introspective self-absorption, a

medium fit for communicating autobiographical intimacies, political discontents, spiritual

elation, inviting an audience, not to dance, but to listen - quietly, attentively, thoughtfully.”33

Dylan’s music was changing at the same time, in a similar way, as he was becoming a

conceptual artist even more deliberately and self-consciously. Thus Miller noted that in 1964
                                                  11

Dylan recorded a number of new songs that “featured unromantic and sometimes inscrutable

lyrics that were involuted, hermetic, yet seething with an undefined, faintly intoxicating sense of

self-righteous rage.” Within a year, under the inspiration of a conceptual young genius of the

nineteenth century, he had transformed his music: “A poet and a prophet, he would write out of

his own life, with no apparent regard for the pieties prevailing in society. In the spirit of

Rimbaud, he would make himself a ‘seer by a long, gigantic and rational derangement of the

senses,’ ... and concentrating the force of his personal revelations in a music of delirious

immediacy.” 34 Mark Polizzotti remarked that “Lyrically, Rimbaud’s influence is palpable in

what Dylan termed his ‘vision music,’ songs that defy conventional definition to create a

powerfully suggestive ambient landscape... But even more than this, Rimbaud... shows through

the attitude underlying these songs: young, street-smart, arrogant, rebellious, and highly

seductive.”35

       In place of the earlier experimental popular music that treated familiar subjects clearly

and simply, from 1964 on Dylan and the Beatles created a new, conceptual popular music that

was complex and often incomprehensible. The critic Mike Marqusee noted that “As you listen to

[Dylan’s albums of 1964-66], the images, characters, tropes sail past in a strange ether. They’re

experienced as free-floating metaphors, signifiers uprooted from the signified. These songs often

feel like allegories but they cannot be decoded as such.”36 The critic David Hajdu explained that

in this music Dylan “was not pursuing refinement, sophistication, and clarity of expression, those

ideals of the Cole Porter generation of songwriters, but their near opposites: kinetic energy,

instinct, and ambiguity... He was making rock and roll a modern art, a form of idiosyncratic,

frequently obtuse personal expression.”37
                                                12

       Conceptual artists innovate by creating unexpected syntheses of earlier art forms, and this

is precisely what Dylan and the Beatles did during the mid-60s. Marqusee described the

remarkably wide variety of Dylan’s influences: “Drawing on folk, blues, country, R & B,

rock’n’roll, gospel, British beat, symbolist, modernist and Beat poetry, surrealism and Dada,

advertising jargon and social commentary, Fellini and Mad magazine, he forged a coherent and

original artistic voice and vision.” Marqusee noted that Dylan’s use of literary sources

emphasized range over depth: “Apart from the Beats, Dylan’s reading was sporadic and

undisciplined, but he was a magpie, and even a casual acquaintance with Eliot, cummings, the

French symbolists, and the surrealists left traces in his work. For all the strident populism, Dylan

in this period is without a doubt a self-conscious, avant-garde artist.” And Marqusee observed

that Dylan plundered the musical past as irreverently as an earlier conceptual innovator had

plundered the history of poetry: “in reality, the breach between Dylan and the musical traditions

he drew on was as qualitative as the breach that separated the modernists from their sources...

Recorded music enabled Dylan to ransack the American musical heritage like Ezra Pound at

loose in a library of medieval manuscripts.”38 In 1966, when Robert Shelton asked Dylan if his

songs were influential because he broke the rules, Dylan responded, “I don’t break the rules,

because I don’t see any rules to break. As far as I’m concerned, there aren’t any rules.”39

       Dylan has testified to his youthful ambition to create a revolution. In his recent

autobiography, he recalled his admiration for another earlier conceptual innovator: “Picasso had

fractured the art world and cracked it wide open. He was revolutionary. I wanted to be like

that.”40 Dylan went about creating revolutionary work in a distinctive way, intended to draw on

his subconscious. Hajdu described his method of composing during his peak years: “He laid out
                                                  13

dozens of photographs torn from newspapers and magazines in a montage on the floor and sat

down amidst them with his guitar... [H]e would close his eyes - he would not draw from the

pictures literally but would use the impression the faces left as a visual model for kaleidoscopic

language. He appeared to sing whatever came to him, disconnected phrases with a poetic feeling.

When something came out that he liked, he scrawled it down hurriedly, so as to stay in the

moment, and he would do this until there were enough words written for a song.” To stimulate

his imagination, “he chain-smoked marijuana while he composed this work.”41

       Dylan had an enormous impact on the Beatles. John Lennon explained that Dylan’s

music caused him to change his attitude toward writing songs: “I think it was Dylan helped me

realize that - not by any discussion or anything but just by hearing his work - I had a sort of

professional songwriter’s attitude to writing pop songs ... But to express myself I would write ...

the personal stories which were expressive of my personal emotions. I’d have a separate

songwriting John Lennon who wrote songs for the sort of meat market, and I didn’t consider

them - the lyrics or anything - to have any depth at all. They were just a joke. Then I started

being me about the songs, not writing them objectively, but subjectively.”42 Lennon also

explained that he directly emulated Dylan’s drug-induced lyrics, as for example he recalled that

in 1967 “I was writing obscurely, à la Dylan, never saying what you mean, but giving the

impression of something. Where more or less can be read into it. It’s a good game, I thought,

They get away with this artsy-fartsy crap; there has been more said about Dylan’s wonderful

lyrics than was ever in the lyrics at all. Mine, too. But it was the intellectuals who read all this

into Dylan or the Beatles. Dylan got away with murder. I thought, Well, I can write this crap,

too. You know, you just stick a few images together, thread them together, and you call it
                                                 14

poetry.” Lennon acknowledged that his new approach hadn’t been entirely cynical, but he

stressed it was his own voice: “Well, maybe it is poetry. But I was just using the mind that wrote

In His Own Write [the book he had published in 1964].” Like Dylan, Lennon borrowed freely

from earlier literature: “I am the Walrus,” for example, written in 1967, drew on sources as

disparate as Shakespeare, Lewis Carroll, and Allen Ginsberg.43 In that year, the critic Robert

Christgau remarked that the genius of the Beatles lay in their ability simultaneously to speak for

themselves and to appeal to a vast audience, explaining that “A good Lennon-McCartney song is

sufficiently cryptic to speak to the needs of whoever listens.”44

       The Beatles not only used hallucinogenic drugs in creating their new work, but also drew

on increasingly complex recording technology in novel ways. The group sang their last live

concert in August of 1966, and later that year they began to record music that could not have

been made outside a recording studio. James Miller notes that “spurred on by a variety of

startling new albums, including Blonde on Blonde by Bob Dylan, Pet Sounds by the Beach Boys,

and Fifth Dimension by the Byrds, [Lennon and McCartney] were... single-mindedly dedicated

to making the most mind-boggling album in the history of rock and roll.”45 They succeeded, in

the summer of 1967 releasing Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, which Rolling Stone

magazine described in 2005 as “the most important rock and roll album ever made, an

unsurpassed adventure in concept, sound, songwriting, cover art and studio technology by the

greatest rock and roll group of all time.”46

       An example of the novelty of the technical production of the new work is afforded by the

creation of what was initially intended to be the album’s first track, a Lennon composition titled

“Strawberry Fields Forever.” After the group had recorded two very different versions of the
                                                 15

song, Miller recounted that Lennon was torn between the two: “Unable to choose, he blithely

instructed [producer George] Martin to splice the two together. As a trained musician, Martin

was flabbergasted. ‘Brilliant,’ he shot back. ‘There are only two things wrong with that: the takes

are in two different keys, a whole tone apart; and they have wildly different tempos.’” Lennon,

however, was not fazed: “He had a relatively short attention span, and... wasn’t especially eager

to learn more about the technical details involved in making, and appreciating, a complicated

piece of music.” In the face of Lennon’s insistence, Martin went to work with his engineers:

“The staff rigged up a Rube Goldberg contraption to vary the frequency of the tape playback.

Luck was with them. By dropping the speed and pitch of the orchestral version, and speeding up

the slower version... they were able to splice the two together.” The result was surprising to all

involved: “Presto! Nearly four weeks and more than fifty-five hours [of studio time] after they

had begun, the Beatles had produced a new piece of music. And even George Martin had to

admit that the result was impressive. With pride, he once described ‘Strawberry Fields’ as ‘a

complete tone poem - like a modern Debussy.’”47

       In Miller’s account, “Strawberry Fields” is a classic example of a conceptual innovation

made by young, inexperienced artists who are concerned with creating new art forms and have

little regard for, or knowledge of, traditional rules and constraints: their inexperience can

effectively liberate them from conventions that constrain more experienced, or more respectful,

artists. The composer and critic Ian MacDonald observed that “Here, the Beatles show that

technical shortcomings, far from constraining the imagination, can let it expand into areas

inaccessible to the trained mind. Heard for what it is - a sort of technologically evolved folk

music - ‘Strawberry Fields Forever’ shows expression of a high order. While there are countless
                                                16

contemporary composers qualified to write music hugely more sophisticated in form and

technique, few if any are capable of displaying feeling and fantasy so direct, spontaneous, and

original.”48 George Martin, who had formal training in classical music, agreed: “I think that if

Paul [McCartney] , for instance, had learned music ‘properly’ - not just the piano, but correct

notation for writing and reading music, all the harmony and counterpoint that I had to go

through, and techniques of orchestration - it might well have inhibited him... Once you start

being taught things, your mind is channelled in a particular way. Paul didn’t have that

channelling, so he had freedom, and could think of things that I would have considered

outrageous. I could admire them, but my musical training would have prevented me from

thinking of them myself.”49

       Computer analysis of changes in the lyrics of the Beatles’ albums over time supports the

accounts offered by music critics of the conceptual revolution in their music during the mid-‘60s.

So for example although the songs of Sgt. Pepper contain only 13% more total words than the

songs on the 1964 album A Hard Day’s Night, overall the songs of Sgt. Pepper contain more

than 75% more different words than those of Hard Day’s Night. And as the vocabulary

expanded, so did the topics treated. Thus for example the word “love,” which occurs 53 times in

the lyrics of Hard Day’s Night, occurs only 13 times in those of Sgt. Pepper. Based on their

analysis of the nine albums the Beatles made from 1964 through 1970, Guy Cook and Neil

Mercer concluded that “the later songs use a much wider range of vocabulary. This reflects the

fact that the writers were dealing with more varied topics and moving beyond the conventional

vocabulary of rock and roll.”50

       The innovations of Dylan, Lennon, and McCartney quickly spread and reverberated
                                                 17

throughout popular music. An example is afforded by Brian Wilson, who had felt the challenge

of the Beatles as early as 1963, when Meet the Beatles prompted him to tell his cousin and

fellow Beach Boy Mike Love, “We’ve got to grow, go beyond the formula.”51 But it was late in

1965, when Wilson heard Rubber Soul, that he formulated a new goal for his music: “The album

blew my mind because it was a whole album with all good stuff. It was definitely a challenge for

me. I saw that every cut was very artistically interesting and stimulating.” He later recalled that

“I really wasn’t quite ready for its unity.”52 After a prayer session in which Brian and his brother

Carl prayed for an album that would be better than Rubber Soul, Brian set out “to make a

complete statement.”53 Just months later the result was Pet Sounds, which eventually came to be

recognized as Wilson’s masterpiece, and one of the most important albums of the rock era.54

Wilson described the album as “the single-minded pursuit of a personal vision. I wasn’t just

entertaining people, I was speaking directly to them, directly from my heart.”55 In addition to its

introspective lyrics that treated personal and often painful themes, in Pet Sounds Wilson

introduced a number of musical innovations, including novel chord progressions and complex

vocal arrangements, that dismayed not only many of the Beach Boys’ fans, but also the group’s

other members. Irritated by the difficulty of recording the vocals, Mike Love protested, “Who’s

gonna hear this? The ears of a dog?”56 But Pet Sounds had an almost immediate impact on other

musicians, including notably the Beatles. Paul McCartney declared it “the album of all time,”

and he often played it during breaks from the recording of Sgt. Pepper, as a challenge to him and

the other Beatles to equal it.57 Brian Wilson’s recording led Paul to ask Geoff Emerick, the

Beatles’ chief engineer, for a “really clean American sound” on “Penny Lane,” and Emerick

responded by changing his normal technique, recording each instrument by itself so there would
                                                 18

be no leakage, and each instrument would be heard more clearly.58

       Irving Berlin and his fellow professional song writers contemptuously dismissed Dylan

and the Beatles as “unprofessionals.”59 Yet the very qualities that the skilled experimental

songwriters of the Golden Era derided as amateurish were prized by the conceptual young

singer-songwriters as the secret to their success. When an interviewer in 1986 referred to the

epoch-making work he had done in the mid-‘60s, Dylan responded, “I did that accidentally.” In

1991, when an interviewer asked how he wrote songs, Dylan remarked that he had never

seriously considered it a profession: “It’s been more confessional than professional.”60 And in his

autobiography, Dylan recalled that when he was first starting out in New York, “Nothing would

have convinced me that I was actually a songwriter and I wasn’t, not in the conventional

songwriter sense of the word. Definitely not like the workhorses over in the Brill Building, the

song chemistry factory... [T]hey were the songwriting masters of the Western world, wrote all

the popular songs, all the songs with crafty melodies and simple lyrics that came off as works of

power over the airwaves.”61 Dylan’s denials that he was a professional songwriter did not imply

that he didn’t take his work seriously, however. In a 1977 interview he declared that he was

doing what he was doing because “I’m good at it.” When asked what “it” was, he replied, “I’m

an artist. I try to create art.”62James Miller argued that the unprofessional approach pioneered by

Dylan and the Beatles became characteristic of the best rock music, which offers “the sound of

surprise: not the surprise of virtuosos improvising new ways to play (the thrill of jazz), but rather

the surprise of untrained amateurs, working within their limits, finding a voice of their own - and

sometimes even elaborating new song forms unthinkable to more highly skilled musicians.”63

The Life Cycles of Great Popular Songwriters
                                                 19

               [U]nlike every other great genre of American pop, rock is all about
               being young.
                                             James Miller64

       Earlier studies have found that the life cycles of experimental and conceptual innovators

in a number of different arts differ considerably, as experimental artists tend to make their most

important contributions later in their careers than their conceptual counterparts.65 The preceding

sections of this paper have argued that popular songwriting changed from an experimental to a

conceptual art during the mid-1960s. The task for this study is to determine whether the life

cycles of songwriters changed accordingly. Specifically, the general analysis of creative life

cycles would predict that important songwriters of the Golden Era would have made their

greatest contributions later in their careers than leading songwriters of the conceptual era that

was initiated by Bob Dylan and the Beatles. Empirical evaluation of this prediction will be done

in two stages; the first will examine the timing of the careers of important Golden Era

songwriters, and the second will do the same for important popular songwriters from the mid-

‘60s on.

       Three authoritative surveys can be used both to identify the most important songwriters

of the Golden Era and to determine when they produced their most important works. These three

surveys are: 1) a ranking of the 100 most-recorded songs written in the first half of the 20th

century; 2) a ranking of the 30 “all-time favorite songs,” based on a 1953 national survey of disc

jockeys by Billboard magazine; and 3) Variety magazine’s listing of the “Golden 100 Tin Pan

Alley Songs.”66 The most important songwriters of the Golden Era were identified from these

three sources, as the sum of all the individuals who were in the following groups: all writers who

had two or more songs among the top 40 songs in source (1) above; all writers who had two or
                                                20

more songs in source (2); and the 10 writers who had the most songs listed in source (3).

       This selection process yielded a total of 14 songwriters, who are listed in Table 1. The

process was designed to identify the greatest songwriters of the Golden Era, and it clearly does

include those writers who have been judged most important by authoritative studies of the

subject. Thus the listing includes the only six writers - Jerome Kern, Irving Berlin, Cole Porter,

George Gershwin, Richard Rodgers, and Harold Arlen - who were given individual chapters in

Alec Wilder’s American Popular Song: The Great Innovators, 1900-1950; these six are also the

only writers who received individual chapters in Allen Forte’s The American Popular Ballad of

the Golden Era, 1921-1950. Forte referred to these writers collectively as the “Big Six.”67

Although no distinction will be made in the quantitative analysis between composers and

lyricists, it might be noted that six of the sample members were composers (Arlen, Duke, George

Gershwin, Kern, McHugh, and Rodgers), six were lyricists (Fields, Ira Gershwin, Hammerstein,

Harbach, Hart, and Mercer), and two were both (Berlin and Porter).

       The same three surveys can be used to identify these songwriters’ most important works.

Appendix Table 1 lists all the songs among the top 40 in source (1) that were written by

members of the sample constructed for this paper. There are 17 songs in the table, and these

yield a total of 25 observations on songwriters’ ages when the songs were created. These

observations are summarized in an age distribution in Table 2.

       Appendix Table 2 lists all the songs from source (2) written by sample members. The 13

songs in the table yield 21 observations on songwriters’ ages when these songs were written.

These observations are summarized as an age distribution in Table 2.

       Appendix Table 3 lists all the songs from source (3) written by sample members. The 47
                                                 21

songs yield 71 observations on songwriters’ ages. These are again summarized in a distribution

in Table 2.

       Examining Table 2 as a whole, the three different sources produce very similar results. In

all three samples, the age group with the most entries is the 30s, as this decade accounts for more

than 40% of the entries in all three samples. And in all the samples, in each case with more than

25% of the entries, the second most important age group is the 40s. The 20s is the third most

important age group in two of the samples, and ties for third place in one; in none of the three

samples does this decade account for more than 21% of the entries.

       In all three samples, at least 79% of the entries are for ages 30 and above. And in all three

samples, there were far more entries for ages 40 and above than for ages below 30. Table 2 thus

indicates that the greatest song writers of the Golden Era were most likely to be in their 30s

when they wrote their greatest songs. When this was not the case, they were more likely to be in

their 40s than in their 20s when they did their best work.

       Two large and authoritative surveys provide quantitative evidence on the best songs of

the era of rock and roll. One is a ranking of VH1's 100 Greatest Albums, published in 2003,

based on a poll of more than 700 musicians, songwriters, disc jockeys, radio programmers, and

critics.68 The second is a ranking of Rolling Stone’s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, published

in 2005, as selected by a panel of 273 voters, including singers, songwriters, musicians,

producers, record executives, artist managers, and critics.69

       Consideration of the VH1 and Rolling Stone rankings immediately underscores a

fundamental change that was part of the conceptual revolution in popular music, namely a shift

from the individual song to the album as the key product: all three of the earlier surveys took
                                                 22

individual songs as their focus, whereas both of the later rankings assumed that albums were the

proper unit of observation. These units are so obvious to those who conducted the surveys that in

no case is the choice of the unit of observation discussed in the source. The Beatles’ producer,

George Martin, recalled that when the group released Rubber Soul in 1965, “For the first time we

began to think of albums as art on their own, as complete entities.”70 From then on, the most

important popular music would generally be recorded not as stand-alone single songs, but as

collections of songs that were linked by a concept or style. So for example in 1967 the Beatles

would present a landmark album made up of “a suite of songs loosely linked by autobiographical

themes as well as the conceit that they were all being performed by a fictional group, Sgt.

Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.”71

       Appendix Table 4 lists the best five albums from each of four decades - the ‘60s through

the ‘90s - as ranked by VH1. The songwriters listed are all those who received writing credits

and for whom birthdates could be identified. The competition for places in this table for the

1960s was particularly intense: the five top albums of that decade are ranked among the greatest

eight albums of all time. While the Beatles occupy three of the decade’s five entries for the

decade, Dylan fails to qualify, for his highest-rated album ranks ninth overall. In total, the 20

albums in Appendix Table 4 yield 58 observations on songwriters’ ages. These are summarized

in an age distribution in Table 3.

       Appendix Table 5 lists the best five albums from each of the decades from the ‘60s

through the ‘90s as ranked by Rolling Stone. Here the Beatles again fill three of the five slots

from the ‘60s, with Sgt. Pepper in first place, and Dylan has one entry in each of the two decades

of the ‘60s and ‘70s. Overall, there is considerable agreement between the VH1 and Rolling
                                                 23

Stone rankings, as half of all the albums in Tables 4 and 5 appear in both tables. In total, the 20

albums of Appendix Table 5 yield 63 observations on songwriters’ ages; these are summarized

in an age distribution in Table 3.

       Before examining the ages of the songwriters, it might be noted that Appendix Tables 4

and 5 provide strong support for an aspect of the conceptual revolution noted earlier. Thus in

every case - in all the albums listed in the two tables - the songwriters were also the performers

who recorded the songs. This would come as no surprise to critics, for as Martin Goldsmith

explained, this became a necessary element of success after the conceptual revolution: “Before

the Beatles came along, pop musicians rarely sang their own songs; neither Frank Sinatra nor

Elvis Presley was a composer. After the Beatles, groups were expected to perform their own

material; relying exclusively on cover songs was a sure sign of a second-rate band.”72

       The age distributions of Table 3 present a clear contrast to those of Table 2. The age

group of the 20s dominates both distributions in Table 3; 76% of the writers in the first

distribution, and 68% in the second, were in their 20s. In both distributions the second most

important decade is the 30s, but in neither case does it account for as much as one third as many

observations as the 20s. And in neither case do songwriters over 40 account for more than 11%

of the total observations. The evidence of Table 3 thus clearly indicates that from the ‘60s on, the

most important popular songs were overwhelmingly written by songwriters below the age of 30.

Age and the Popular Songwriter

               When you’re young, you’re probably writing stronger and a lot
               quicker.
                                          Bob Dylan, 200173

       Although there has been little discussion of why the ability to write excellent popular
                                                 24

songs tended to increase with age among Golden Era writers, a number of scholars and critics

have noted that it clearly did in particular cases. So for example Allen Forte remarked that “A

complete study of [Irving] Berlin’s songs would have to take into account the very early songs,

some of which are indescribably bad - for example ‘My Harem’” (1914) [when Berlin was 26]. It

is difficult to believe that this was written by the Irving Berlin of ‘White Christmas.’”74 Robert

Kimball observed that “Between 1916 and 1928 [ages 25-37]... [Cole] Porter struggled to find

his own voice. It was his friend, Irving Berlin, who told him one of his problems was that he was

trying to write like other people instead of his own style.”75 And Alec Wilder wrote that he “was

astonished to find in [Jerome] Kern’s early work only capable, professional, but uninspired

songs... in no way indicative of what was to come.” Wilder in fact believed that “had [Kern] not

grown in style and invention [after the age of 29] he would not be remembered today. And more

than that, even when he did become a sophisticated, memorable writer, he still continued to

change.”76

       As discussed earlier, Golden Era songwriters generally contended that they were

craftsmen rather than artists, and they made considerable efforts to avoid appearing pretentious

or self-absorbed. One consequence of this was that they rarely made introspective statements.

Their infrequent evaluations of their own careers tended to be short and pithy. So for example

late in his life Irving Berlin commented on his own early songs that “I call’em bad. They were

not only bad, they were amateurish.”77 A rare extended statement about why a Golden Era writer

improved with age was made by the composer Richard Rodgers in a posthumous tribute to his

long-time collaborator Lorenz Hart: “It seems to me that Larry’s later lyrics were of higher

degree of excellence than his early ones and that they achieved this through a growing maturity
                                                  25

of their own. Later on he seemed almost to substitute warmth for wit, and while he really didn’t

know how not to be clever, he began to show off less and to be more concerned with emotion.

‘Where or When,’ for instance, had much of the philosophical in it and I can think of no lyric

more touched with tenderness than ‘Funny Valentine.’ In the face of the pin-wheel brilliance of

some of Larry’s work, one is inclined to forget the deeper phases of his writing.”78

        Probably even less attention has been devoted to the general question of why the greatest

popular music has been written by the young in the past four decades. In a 1984 press

conference, Paul McCartney conceded that “I would have to admit for myself, looking at all the

songs I’ve written, probably there’s a period in there that was my hottest, ‘Yesterday’ [1965],

‘Here, There and Everywhere’ [1966]. There’s a bunch of stuff that all came during a few years

and I suppose it was because we were at our height and the novelty of it was a very important

factor.”79

        Bob Dylan has made a number of comments about his changing abilities, in part because

interviewers have frequently raised the issue of his decline. In 1984, referring to his work of the

‘60s, Dylan told an interviewer that “I can’t write those songs today. No way. But I look at those

songs, ‘cause I sing ‘em all the time, I wonder where they came from and how they came... I

couldn’t do them now, and I don’t even try, I’d be a fool to try.” In 1997 he told a reporter that

“I’ve written some songs that I look at, and they just give me a sense of awe. Stuff like ‘It’s

Alright, Ma’ [1965], just the alliteration in that blows me away. And I can also look back and

know... where I was really saying something that just happened to have a spark of poetry to it.”

In 2001, Dylan tried to describe how he had written “Like a Rolling Stone,” but conceded that he

couldn’t: “It’s like a ghost is writing a song like that. It gives you the song and it goes away, it
                                                  26

goes away. You don’t know what it means. Except the ghost picked me to write the song.” 80

Dylan gave a more extended treatment of this theme in his autobiography, within an account of a

visit he made to New Orleans in 1989 to work with a prominent producer, Daniel Lanois, in the

hope of reviving his recording career. Dylan recalled that as they worked together, Lanois would

say to him “We need songs like ‘Masters of War,’ ‘Girl from the North Country,’ or ‘With God

on Our Side’ [all 1963].” Dylan just nodded in response: “I didn’t have anything like those

songs.” Eventually, Lanois gave up. “I would have liked to been able to give him the kinds of

songs that he wanted, like ‘Masters of War,’ ‘Hard Rain’ [1963], ‘Gates of Eden’ [1965], but

those kinds of songs were written under different circumstances, and circumstances never repeat

themselves. Not exactly. I couldn’t get to those kinds of songs for him or anyone else. To do it,

you’ve got to have power and dominion over the spirits. I had done it once, and once was

enough. Someone would come along eventually who would have it again - someone who could

see into things, the truth of things - not metaphorically, either - but really see, like seeing into

metal and making it melt, seeing it for what it was and reveal it for what it was with hard words

and vicious insight.”81 In contrast to one aspect of these statements, however, in which Dylan

professes not to understand why his creativity had diminished, in 1995 he explained that age, and

conscious attention to invention, interfered with his particular gift: “As you get older, you get

smarter and that can hinder you because you try to gain control over the creative impulse... If

your mind is intellectually in the way, it will stop you.”82

        Experimental artists’ work tends to improve with age, as they gain a greater

understanding both of life - their subject- and of their art. Thus Richard Rodgers believed Lorenz

Hart’s lyrics improved as Hart gained greater self-confidence and emotional maturity.
                                                 27

Conceptual artists’ work tends to deteriorate with age, as they lose the freshness of their early

approach, and become constrained by acquired habits of thought. Thus the aging Paul

McCartney looked back to the novelty of writing hits in the early years of the Beatles, and Bob

Dylan could only look back with regret and awe at the powerful imagery he had created in his

youth.

Conclusion

                We shall always be too busy delineating characters in our plays to
                spend very much time on ourselves. A good thing, too.
                                             Oscar Hammerstein, on his
                                             collaboration with Richard Rodgers,
                                             195183

                My songs were written with me in mind.
                                            Bob Dylan, 199184

         During the first half of the twentieth century, American popular songwriters developed a

professional tradition. The best of these writers, individually or in teams, combined fluent and

often witty use of vernacular language with a sophisticated knowledge of music. Their best

songs expressed universal emotions simply and clearly, with melodies that were easy to learn

and remember.

         A handful of artists transformed popular music during a brief period in the mid-1960s.

The leaders of this revolution created a new kind of popular music that was neither simple nor

clear. Complex verbal images were often combined with new recording technologies to make

songs that eluded precise interpretation. These songs typically expressed the attitudes and

emotions of the artists who wrote them.

         Golden Era songwriters wrote songs to fit the needs of musical comedies. Their songs

were intended to advance the plots of these productions, and to develop their characters. These
                                                 28

songs were written to be sung by professional actors, and might even be tailored to the

personalities and abilities of specific singers. In contrast, Bob Dylan, the Beatles, and other

leading popular songwriters of the ‘60s and beyond wrote for themselves. They performed their

own songs, which were typically autobiographical in nature. Their work privileged imagination

and fantasy over description and realism.

       Dylan, the Beatles, and other rock musicians created a conceptual revolution. The

popular songwriting of the Golden Era had been an experimental art, at its best based on highly

skilled work by experienced practitioners. During the mid-‘60s, a new breed of songwriter

invented a conceptual popular music, in which a relative lack of musical training and experience

allowed radical departures from traditional conventions and practices. This revolution changed

the face of popular music, as singer-songwriters became the rule in an art that had previously

been based on a strict division of labor between writers and performers. And as the music

became more personal, new forms of behavior emerged. So for example like conceptual

innovators in other arts, popular singers began deliberately to create new identities for

themselves: “Dylan, as precursor to all the self-conscious self-inventors of pop, employed his

identity masks willfully: shockingly but not exactly spontaneously. It hardly detracts from

Dylan’s greatness to suggest that each new shift was the result of calculation as much as any

‘natural’ artistic progression... It was a perverse and innovative strategy for pop.”85

       This study has shown that the creative life cycles of Golden Era songwriters differed

significantly from those of the new conceptual songwriters. The most important Golden Era

songwriters were generally at their best during their 30s and 40s. In contrast, Dylan, Lennon, and

McCartney were the first among scores of important songwriters of the past four decades who
                                                  29

have done their greatest work in their 20s.

        It is interesting that the sharp drop in the creativity of aging rock songwriters has often

been noted in particular cases, including notably those of Dylan, Lennon, and McCartney. Many

explanations have been offered for these dramatic declines. Yet these explanations have

invariably been specific to the individual artists in question. In contrast, this study has offered a

general explanation. The loss of creativity with age suffered by Dylan, Lennon, McCartney, and

so many of their successors as they have aged is not a phenomenon caused by factors unique to

these individuals, or even to rock music. Instead, these artists appear to be prime examples of the

loss of conceptual creativity with age, one of the most powerful and pervasive patterns in human

creativity.

Coda: Beyond Popular Music

               I think the Beatles are working in the same way I make movies...
               The Beatles and the Rolling Stones are very important because
               they are popular and intellectual at the same time... That is what I
               am trying to do in movies.
                                              Jean-Luc Godard, 196886

        The conceptual revolution in popular music did not occur in isolation, for young

innovators were making similar transformations of a number of other arts: thus Jean-Luc Godard

and his fellow New Wave directors created a conceptual revolution in film in the early ‘60s, just

as Andy Warhol and other Pop artists turned painting into a conceptual activity.87 What is

particularly interesting about these conceptual revolutions is how durable they have been, for

conceptual innovators have tended to dominate all of these arts throughout the intervening

decades. It is possible that this durability is in all these cases due to a common internal dynamic,

which has two elements. One of these is the growing public appreciation of conspicuous and
                                               30

dramatic innovation, which produces a heightened demand for new forms in each of these arts,

and raises the rewards for novel contributions. The second is the glamor associated with these

activities, which produces a large supply of potential innovators. These elements have combined

in these arts to create regimes in which conceptual approaches, that can quickly yield new

results, have been preeminent. These arts have consequently been characterized by a steady flow

of new ideas, produced by a succession of young artists who typically make a single novel

contribution early in their careers.88 Understanding the conceptual revolution in popular music

may therefore do more than heighten our recognition of the importance of Bob Dylan and the

Beatles, for it may also help us to appreciate the growing importance of conceptual innovation

more generally in our society.
                                             31

Footnotes

I thank Joshua Kotin for discussions.

1.     Rosen 2002, 169.

2.     Mast 1987, 39; Rosen 2002, 6-7.

3.     The song was probably written in 1940; Rosen 2002, Chap. 2.

4.     Gunderson 2003.

5.     Rosen 2002, 17.

6.     Forte 1995, 28-29.

7.     Jenness and Velsey 2006, 9-10.

8.     Furia and Lasser 2006, xxvi.

9.     Wilder 1972, xxxvi; also Rosen 2002, 182; Furia and Lasser 2006, xxvi.

10.    Woollcott 1925, 215.

11.    Jablonski 1999, 66.

12.    Forte 1995, 28.

13.    Rosen 2002, 4.

14.    Furia 1998, 43.

15.    McBrien 1998, 364.

16.    McBrien 1998, 200.

17.    Wilder 1972, 119.

18.    Furia 1998, 194.

19.    Wyatt and Johnson 2004, 218.

20.    Block 2002, 201.

21.    Boardman 1980, 149-50.

22.    Mast 1987, 85.
                                             32

23.   Block 1997, 170-71.

24.   Block 2002, 81.

25.   McBrien 1998, 45.

26.   McBrien 1998, 171.

27.   Zinsser 2000, 103.

28.   Furia 1998, 204. On Frost as an experimental poet, see Galenson 2006a, 159-60.

29.   Hedin 2004, 203.

30.   MacDonald 2005, 240.

31.   Miller 1999, 195.

32.   Womack and Davis 2006, 38-39.

33.   Miller 1999, 227-28.

34.   Miller 1999, 221, 227. On Rimbaud as a conceptual poet, see Galenson 2006a, 216-18.

35.   Polizzotti 2006, 39.

36.   Marqusee 2003, 138.

37.   Hajdu 2001, 234, 280.

`
38.   Marqusee 2003, 131, 151. On Pound as a conceptual poet, see Galenson 2006a, 158.

39.   Shelton 1986, 344.

40.   Dylan 2004, 55. On Picasso as a conceptual artist, see Galenson 2006a, 11-13.

41.   Hajdu 2001, 233-34.

42.   Wenner 1971, 126.

43.   Golson 2000, 184-85.

44.   Sawyers 2006, 118.

45.   Miller 1999, 253.

46.   Levy 2005, 9.
                                             33

47.   Miller 1999, 254-55; also see Everett 1999, Chap. 2; Martin 1979, 214.

48.   MacDonald 2005, 220.

49.   Martin 1979, 139.

50.   Cook and Mercer 2000, 99-100.

51.   Lambert 2007, 147.

52.   Lambert 2007, 224.

53.   Lambert 2007, 224; White 1994, 252.

54.   Pet Sounds ranked second in the Rolling Stone poll referred to above, and third in a VH1
      poll of the greatest rock albums; Levy 2005, 12-13; Hoye 2003, 6-9.

55.   Lambert 2007, 223.

56.   Gaines 1995, 146.

57.   MacDonald 2005, 215; Emerick 2006, 142.

58.   Emerick 2006, 142.

59.   Rosen 2002, 182.

60.   Cott 2006, 336, 384.

61.   Dylan 2004, 227.

62.   Ricks 2005, 11.

63.   Miller 1999, 19.

64.   Miller 1999, 19.

65.   E.g. see Galenson 2006a.

66.   Whitburn 1986, 632-33; Hamm 1979, 489-92.

67.   Forte 1995, 4.

68.   Hoye 2003, xv.

69.   Levy 2005, 7, 218-19.
                                            34

70.   Miller 1999, 230.

71.   Miller 1999, 256; also see Moore 1997, 72,

72.   Goldsmith 2004, 169.

73.   Cott 2006, 427

74.   Forte 1995, 87. Ten different songs by Berlin appear in Appendix Tables 1-3. Only one
      of these was written before the age of 30.

75.   McBrien 1998, 75. Six different songs by Porter appear in Appendix Tables 1-3. All were
      written when he was 38 or older.

76.   Wilder 1972, 32-33. Five different songs by Kern appear in Appendix Tables 1-3. All
      were written when he was 40 or older.

77.   Jablonski 1999, 290.

78.   Block 2002, 268.

79.   Giuliano and Devi 1999, 103.

80.   Cott 2006, 317, 396, 432.

81.   Dylan 2004, 195, 218-19.

82.   Ricks 2005, 8.

83.   Block 2002, 82.

84.   Cott 2006, 381.

85.   McKinney 2003, 107. For a parallel in another conceptual art, see Galenson 2006b.

86.   Sterritt 1998, 15.

87.   Cowie 2004; Galenson 2001, Chap. 7.

88.   Galenson 2006a, Chap. 8; Galenson and Kotin, 2007.
Table 1: Most Important Songwriters of the Golden Era.

                                                     Year of birth   Year of death
 Arlen, Harold                                           1905            1986
 Berlin, Irving                                          1888            1989
 Duke, Vernon                                            1903            1969
 Fields, Dorothy                                         1905            1974
 Gershwin, George                                        1898            1937
 Gershwin, Ira                                           1896            1983
 Hammerstein, Oscar                                      1895            1960
 Harbach, Otto                                           1873            1963
 Hart, Lorenz                                            1895            1943
 Kern, Jerome                                            1885            1945
 McHugh, Jimmy                                           1894            1969
 Mercer, Johnny                                          1909            1976
 Porter, Cole                                            1892            1964
 Rodgers, Richard                                        1902            1979

Source: see text and Appendix Tables 1-3.
Table 2:       Distributions of Ages of Golden Era Songwriters When They Wrote Their Most
               Important Works

   Source:                 (1)                          (2)                 (3)
 Ages               n             %                n          %        n           %
 20 - 9             3             12               1          5       15           21
 30 - 9             11            44               11         52      29           41
 40 - 9             7             28               7          33      19           27
 50 - 9             2              8               1           5       7           10
 60 - 9             2              8               1           5       1            1
 Total              25           100               21         100     71           100

Sources: See text for discussion. For data, see:
       (1) Appendix Table 1.
       (2) Appendix Table 2.
       (3) Appendix Table 3.
Table 3: Age Distributions of Rock Songwriters When They Wrote Their Most Important Works

     Source:                    VH1 Ranking                  Rolling Stone Ranking
 Ages                      n                  %               n                %
 20 - 9                    44                 76             43                68
 30 - 9                    10                 17             13                21
 40 - 9                    3                   5              6                10
 50 - 9                    1                   2              1                 1
 60 - 9                    0                   0              0                 0
 Total                     58                 100            63               100

Source: see text and Appendix Tables 4-5.
Bibliography

Block, Geoffrey. 1997. Enchanted Evenings. New York: Oxford University Press.

Block, Geoffrey, ed. 2002. The Richard Rodgers Reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Boardman, Gerald. 1980. Jerome Kern. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cook, Guy, and Neil Mercer. 2000. “From Me to You: Austerity to Profligacy in the Language
      of the Beatles.” In Ian Inglis, ed., The Beatles, Popular Music and Society. New York: St.
      Martin’s Press, pp. 86-104.

Cott, Jonathan, ed. 2006. Bob Dylan: The Essential Interviews. New York: Wenner.

Cowie, Peter. 2004. Revolution! The Explosion of World Cinema in the Sixties. New York: Faber
       and Faber.

Dylan, Bob. 2004. Chronicles: Volume One. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Emerick, Geoff. 2006. Here, There and Everywhere. New York: Gotham Books.

Everett, Walter. 1999. The Beatles as Musicians. New York: Oxford University Press.

Forte, Allen. 1995. The American Popular Ballad of the Golden Era, 1924-1950. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press.

Furia, Philip. 1998. Irving Berlin. New York: Schirmer.

Furia, Philip, and Michael Lasser. 2006. America’s Songs. New York: Routledge.

Gaines, Steven. 1995. Heroes and Villains. New York: Da Capo Press.

Galenson, David. 2001. Painting Outside the Lines. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Galenson, David. 2006a. Artistic Capital. New York: Routledge.

Galenson, David. 2006b. “You Cannot be Serious: The Conceptual Innovator as Trickster.”
      NBER Working Paper 12599.

Galenson, David, and Joshua Kotin. 2007. “From the New Wave to the New Hollywood: The
      Life Cycles of Movie Directors from Godard and Truffaut to Spielberg and Eastwood.”
      Unpublished paper, University of Chicago.

Giuliano, Geoffrey, and Vrnda Devi. 1999. Glass Onion. New York: Da Capo Press.

Goldsmith, Martin. 2004. The Beatles Come to America. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and
       Sons.

Golson, G., ed. 2000. All We Are Saying. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin.

Gunderson, Edna. 2003. “It’s certainly a thrill: ‘Sgt. Pepper’ is best album.” USA Today, Nov.
      11.

Hajdu, David. 2001. Positively 4th Street. New York: North Point.

Hamm, Charles. 1979. Yesterdays. New York: W. W. Norton.

Hedin, Benjamin, ed. Studio A: The Bob Dylan Reader. New York: W. W. Norton.

Hoye, Jacob, ed. 2003. VH1's 100 Greatest Albums. New York: Barnes and Noble.

Jablonski, Edward. 1999. Irving Berlin. New York: Henry Holt.

Jenness, David, and Don Velsey. 2006. Classic American Popular Song. New York: Routledge.

Lambert, Philip. 2007. Inside the Music of Brian Wilson. New York: Continuum.

Levy, Joe, ed. 2005. Rolling Stone: The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. New York: Wenner.

MacDonald, Ian. 2005. Revolution in the Head. second revised ed. London: Pimlico.

Marqusee, Mike. 2003. Chimes of Freedom. New York: New Press.

Martin, George. 1979. All You Need Is Ears. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Mast, Gerald. 1987. Can’t Help Singin’. Woodstock: Overlook Press, 1987.

McBrien, William. 1998. Cole Porter. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

McKinney, Devin. 2003. Magic Circles. Cambridge: Harvard University

Miller, James. 1999. Flowers in the Dustbin. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Moore, Allan. 1997. The Beatles: “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.” Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.

Polizzotti, Mark. 2006. Highway 61 Revisited. New York: Continuum.

Ricks, Christopher. 2005. Dylan’s Visions of Sin. New York: Ecco.

Rosen, Jody. 2002. White Christmas. New York: Scribner.
Sawyers, June. 2006. Read the Beatles. New York: Penguin.

Shelton, Robert. 1986. No Direction Home. New York: William Morrow.

Sterritt, David, ed. 1998. Jean-Luc Godard Interviews. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.

Wenner, Jann. 1971. Lennon Remembers. San Francisco: Straight Arrow Books.

Whitburn, Joel. 1986. Pop Memories, 1890-1954. Menomonee Falls, WI: Record Research.

White, Timothy. 1994. The Nearest Faraway Place. New York: Henry Holt.

Wilder, Alec. 1972. American Popular Song. New York: Oxford University Press.

Womack, Kenneth, and Todd Davis, eds. 2006. Reading the Beatles. Albany: State University of
     New York Press.

Woollcott, Alexander. 1925. The Story of Irving Berlin. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons.

Wyatt, Robert, and John Johnson, eds. 2004. The George Gershwin Reader. Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.

Zinsser, William. 2001. Easy to Remember. Jaffrey, NH: David R. Godine.
Appendix Table 1:   Ages of Sample Members When They Wrote Songs Ranked Among the
                    40 Most- Recorded, 1890-1954


 Rank   Song                                    Writer(s)                   Age
 5      “Summertime”                            G. Gershwin                 37
 8      “White Christmas”                       Berlin                      54
 9      “All the Things You Are”                Kern                        54
                                                Hammerstein                 44
 10     “Night and Day”                         Porter                      40
 11     “Begin the Beguine”                     Porter                      43
 14     “The Man I Love”                        G. Gershwin                 26
                                                I. Gershwin                 28
 15     “Over the Rainbow”                      Arlen                       34
 18     “Yesterdays”                            Kern                        48
                                                Harbach                     60
 20     “Lover, Come Back to Me”                Hammerstein                 33
 21     “What Is This Thing Called Love?”       Porter                      38
 22     “I Can’t Get Started”                   Duke                        33
                                                I. Gershwin                 40
 24     “I Can’t Give You Anything But Love”    McHugh                      34
                                                Fields                      23
 28     “Blue Skies”                            Berlin                      39
 31     “Always”                                Berlin                      37
 35     “Smoke Gets In Your Eyes”               Kern                        48
                                                Harbach                     60
 37     “Ol’ Man River”                         Kern                        43
                                                Hammerstein                 33
 40     “Embraceable You”                       G. Gershwin                 32
                                                I. Gershwin                 34

Source: Whitburn 1986, 632.
Appendix Table 2:   Ages of Sample Members When They Wrote Songs Ranked Among 30
                    All-Time Favorites by Billboard

 Rank   Song                                     Writer(s)                  Age
 5      “Begin the Beguine”                      Porter                     43
 6      “Laura”                                  Mercer                     36
 9      “Night and Day”                          Porter                     40
 10     “Blue Moon”                              Rodgers                    33
                                                 Hart                       40
 12     “Lover”                                  Rodgers                    30
                                                 Hart                       37
 13     “I Can’t Get Started”                    Duke                       33
                                                 I. Gershwin                40
 15     “That Old Black Magic”                   Arlen                      37
                                                 Mercer                     33
 17     “I’m in the Mood for Love”               McHugh                     41
                                                 Fields                     30
 19     “Smoke Gets in Your Eyes”                Kern                       48
                                                 Harbach                    60
 20     “Embraceable You”                        G. Gershwin                32
                                                 I. Gershwin                34
 21     “Always”                                 Berlin                     37
 24     “White Christmas”                        Berlin                     54
 26     “On the Sunny Side of the Street”        McHugh                     36
                                                 Fields                     25

Source: Whitburn 1986, 639.
Appendix Table 3:       Ages of Sample Members When They Wrote Songs Listed in Variety
                        Magazine’s “Golden 100”

 Song                                         Writer(s)                             Age
 “Alexander’s Ragtime Band”                   Berlin                                 23
 “All Alone”                                  Berlin                                 36
 “All the Things You Are”                     Hammerstein                            44
                                              Kern                                   54
 “Always”                                     Berlin                                 37
 “A Pretty Girl is Like a Melody”             Berlin                                 31
 “April in Paris”                             Duke                                   29
 “Begin the Beguine”                          Porter                                 43
 “Bewitched, Bothered, and Bewildered”        Hart                                   46
                                              Rodgers                                39
 “Blue Moon”                                  Hart                                   39
                                              Rodgers                                32
 “Blues in the Night”                         Mercer                                 32
                                              Arlen                                  36
 “Come Rain or Come Shine”                    Mercer                                 37
                                              Arlen                                  41
 “Easter Parade”                              Berlin                                 45
 “Exactly Like You”                           Fields                                 25
                                              McHugh                                 36
 “Get Happy”                                  Arlen                                  25
 “God Bless America”                          Berlin                                 51
 “How Deep is the Ocean?”                     Berlin                                 44
 “I Can’t Give You Anything but Love”         Fields                                 23
                                              McHugh                                 34
 “I Get a Kick Out of You”                    Porter                                 42
 “I Got Rhythm”                               I. Gershwin                            34
                                              G. Gershwin                            32
Appendix Table 3, continued


 “I’m in the Mood for Love”          Fields        30
                                     McHugh        41
 “It Might as Well be Spring”        Hammerstein   50
                                     Rodgers       43
 “I’ve Got the World on a String”    Arlen         28
 “I’ve Got you Under My Skin”        Porter        44
 “Just One of Those Things”          Porter        43
 “Lover”                             Hart          38
                                     Rodgers       31
 “Lover Come Back to Me”             Hammerstein   33
 “Marie”                             Berlin        40
 “My Funny Valentine”                Hart          42
                                     Rodgers       35
 “My Heart Stood Still”              Hart          32
                                     Rodgers       25
 “Night and Day”                     Porter        40
 “Old Black Magic”                   Mercer        33
                                     Arlen         37
 “Ol’ Man River”                     Hammerstein   32
                                     Kern          42
 “On the Sunny Side of the Street”   Fields        25
                                     McHugh        36
 “Over the Rainbow”                  Arlen         34
 “Smoke Gets in Your Eyes”           Harbach       60
                                     Kern          48
 “Somebody Loves Me”                 G. Gershwin   26
 “Some Enchanted Evening”            Hammerstein   54
                                     Rodgers       47
 “Stormy Weather”                    Arlen         28
 “Summertime”                        G. Gershwin   37
Appendix Table 3, continue

 “Swanee”                           G. Gershwin   21
 “‘S Wonderful”                     I. Gershwin   31
                                    G. Gershwin   29
 “The Man I Love”                   I. Gershwin   28
                                    G. Gershwin   26
 “What is This Thing Called Love”   Porter        38
 “White Christmas”                  Berlin        54
 “Who?”                             Harbach       52
                                    Hammerstein   30
                                    Kern          40
 “With a Song in My Heart”          Hart          34
                                    Rodgers       27
 “You’ll Never Walk Alone”          Hammerstein   50
                                    Rodgers       43

Source: Hamm 1979, 489-92.
Appendix Table 4:   Ages at Which Songwriters Wrote Most Important Albums, by Decade,
                    VH1 Rankings


 Rank   Artist, Album                                 Writer(s)                 Age
        1960s
 1      Beatles, Revolver                             Lennon                    26
                                                      McCartney                 24
                                                      Harrison                  23
 2      Beach Boys, Pet Sounds                        B. Wilson                 24
                                                      Asher                     26
                                                      Love                      25
                                                      Sachen                    24
 3      Jimi Hendrix Experience, Are You              Hendrix                   25
        Experienced?                                  Roberts                   31
 4      Beatles, Rubber Soul                          Lennon                    25
                                                      McCartney                 23
                                                      Harrison                  22
 5      Beatles, Abbey Road                           Lennon                    29
                                                      McCartney                 27
                                                      Harrison                  26
                                                      Starr                     29
        1970s
 1      Marvin Gaye, What’s Going On                  Benson                    35
                                                      M. Gaye                   32
                                                      Nyx                       57
                                                      Stover                    33
                                                      A. Gaye                   49
 2      Stevie Wonder, Songs In the Key of Life       Wonder                    26
 3      Rolling Stones, Exile on Main Street          Jagger                    29
                                                      Richards                  29
                                                      Taylor                    24
                                                      Harpo                     48
 4      The Who, Who’s Next                           Townshend                 26
                                                      Entwhistle                27
 5      Joni Mitchell, Blue                           Mitchell                  28
(Appendix Table 4, continued)

        1980s
 1       U2, Joshua Tree                                  Bono          27
                                                          Clayton       27
                                                          Edge          26
                                                          Mullen        26
 2       Prince and the Revolution, Purple Rain           Prince        26
 3       Public Enemy, It Takes a Nation of Millions to   Chuck D       28
         Hold Us Back                                     Sadler        27
                                                          Flavor Flav   29
                                                          Rodgers       22
                                                          Griffin       28
 4       Michael Jackson, Thriller                        Jackson       24
                                                          Temperton     33
                                                          Bettis        36
                                                          Porcaro       25
                                                          Ingram        26
                                                          Jones         49
 5       Prince, Sign “O” the Times                       Prince        29
        1990s
 1       Nirvana, Nevermind                               Cobain        24
                                                          Grohl         22
                                                          Novoselic     26
 2       Lauryn Hill, The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill     Hill          23
 3       U2, Achtung Baby                                 Bono          31
                                                          Clayton       31
                                                          Edge          30
                                                          Mullen        30
 4       Jeff Buckley, Grace                              Buckley       28
 5       Pearl Jam, Ten                                   Gossard       25
                                                          Vedder        27
                                                          Ament         28

Source: Hoye 2003
Appendix Table 5:   Ages at Which Songwriters Wrote Most Important Albums, by Decade,
                    Rolling Stone Rankings
 Rank   Artist, Album                               Writer(s)                 Age
        1960s
 1      Beatles, Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club   Lennon                    27
        Band                                        McCartney                 25
                                                    Harrison                  24
 2      Beach Boys, Pet Sounds                      B. Wilson                 24
                                                    Asher                     26
                                                    Love                      25
                                                    Sachen                    24
 3      Beatles, Revolver                           Lennon                    26
                                                    McCartney                 24
                                                    Harrison                  23
 4      Bob Dylan, Highway 61 Revisited             Dylan                     24
 5      Beatles, Rubber Soul                        Lennon                    25
                                                    McCartney                 23
                                                    Harrison                  22
        1970s
 1      Marvin Gaye, What’s Going On                Benson                    35
                                                    M. Gaye                   32
                                                    Nyx                       57
                                                    Stover                    33
                                                    A. Gaye                   49
 2      Rolling Stones, Exile on Main Street        Jagger                    29
                                                    Richards                  29
                                                    Taylor                    23
                                                    Harpo                     48
 3      Bob Dylan, Blood on the Tracks              Dylan                     34
 4      Bruce Springsteen, Born to Run              Springsteen               26
 5      John Lennon, Plastic Ono Band               Lennon                    30
                                                    Ono                       37
        1980s
 1      Clash, London Calling                       Jones                     25
                                                    Strummer                  28
                                                    Taylor                    41
                                                    Simonon                   24
(Appendix Table 5, continued)

 2       Michael Jackson, Thriller                     Jackson        24
                                                       Temperton      33
                                                       Bettis         36
                                                       Porcaro        25
                                                       Ingram         26
                                                       Jones          49
 3       U2, Joshua Tree                               Bono           27
                                                       Clayton        27
                                                       Edge           26
                                                       Mullen         26
 4       Bob Marley and the Wailers, Legend            Marley         39
                                                       Tosh           40
                                                       Mayfield       42
 5       Public Enemy, It Takes a Nation of Millions   Chuck D        28
         to Hold Us Back                               Sadler         27
                                                       Flavor Flav    29
                                                       Rodgers        22
                                                       Griffin        28
        1990s
 1       Nirvana, Nevermind                            Cobain         24
                                                       Grohl          22
                                                       Novoselic      26
 2       U2, Achtung Baby                              Bono           31
                                                       Clayton        31
                                                       Edge           30
                                                       Mullen         30
 3       Radiohead, The Bends                          J. Greenwood   24
                                                       C. Greenwood   26
                                                       O’Brien        27
                                                       Selway         28
                                                       Yorke          27
 4       The Notorious B. I. G., Ready to Die          B.I.G.         22
 5       Pavement, Slanted and Enchanted               Malkmus        26

Source: Levy 2005.
