                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INCOME, AGING, HEALTH AND WELLBEING AROUND THE WORLD:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE GALLUP WORLD POLL

                                           Angus Deaton

                                       Working Paper 13317
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13317


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




I am grateful to the Gallup Organization for providing me access to the Gallup World Poll, and to
Tim Besley, Anne Case, Ed Diener, Carol Graham, John Helliwell, Danny Kahneman, David Laibson,
Richard Layard, Andrew Oswald, Glenn Phelps, Raksha Arora and Jim Smith for comments and suggestions.
I acknowledge financial support from the National Institute on Aging through grants No. R01 AG20275-01
to Princeton and P01 AG05842-14 to the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Angus Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Income, Aging, Health and Wellbeing Around the World: Evidence from the Gallup World
Poll
Angus Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 13317
August 2007
JEL No. I1,I31,O1,O15,O57

                                               ABSTRACT

During 2006, the Gallup Organization conducted a World Poll that used an identical questionnaire
for national samples of adults from 132 countries. I analyze the data on life satisfaction (happiness)
and on health satisfaction and look at their relationships with national income, age, and life-expectancy.
Average happiness is strongly related to per capita national income; each doubling of income is associated
with a near one point increase in life satisfaction on a scale from 0 to 10. Unlike most previous findings,
the effect holds across the range of international incomes; if anything, it is slightly stronger among
rich countries. Conditional on national income, recent economic growth makes people unhappier, improvements
in life-expectancy make them happier, but life-expectancy itself has little effect. Age has an internationally
inconsistent relationship with happiness. National income moderates the effects of aging on self-reported
health, and the decline in health satisfaction and rise in disability with age are much stronger in poor
countries than in rich countries. In line with earlier findings, people in much of Eastern Europe and
in the countries of the former Soviet Union are particularly unhappy and particularly dissatisfied with
their health, and older people in those countries are much less satisfied with their lives and with their
health than are younger people. HIV prevalence in Africa has little effect on Africans' life or health
satisfaction; the fraction of Kenyans who are satisfied with their personal health is the same as the
fraction of Britons and higher than the fraction of Americans. The US ranks 81st out of 115 countries
in the fraction of people who have confidence in their healthcare system, and has a lower score than
countries such as India, Iran, Malawi, or Sierra Leone. While the strong relationship between life-satisfaction
and income gives some credence to the measures, as do the low levels of life and health satisfaction
in Eastern Europe and the countries of the former Soviet Union, the lack of correlations between life
and health satisfaction and health measures shows that happiness (or self-reported health) measures
cannot be regarded as useful summary indicators of human welfare in international comparisons.

Angus Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

This paper looks at the effects of income and age on self-reported wellbeing in more than

a hundred countries. I am particularly concerned with self-reports of life satisfaction, of

health, and of disability, with how these measures change with age, and with how the

effects of age differ across countries according to their level of development and their

region of the world. The analysis is based on the Gallup World Poll, which collected data

from samples of people in each of 132 countries during 2006; with the exception of

Angola, Cuba, and Myanmar, the samples are nationally representative of people aged 15

and older. Because the survey used the same questionnaire in all countries, it provides an

opportunity to make cross-country comparisons while, at the same time, providing

enough data to permit within-country disaggregation, for example, by age, sex, ethnicity

or education.

   The World Poll data are particularly rich in self-reported measures, including a

“ladder” question for life-satisfaction, questions on whether or not people are satisfied

with their state of health, whether they have health problems that prevent them from

doing things that people at their age can usually do, whether or not they have confidence

in the healthcare or medical system, and whether or not they are satisfied with their

standard of living. While these measures are far short of those that might appear in a

comprehensive health and economics survey for a single country or a group of similar

countries, they have the great advantage of having been asked in exactly the same way in

all of the countries. The question is not, therefore, whether these self-reports are adequate

measures of individual health—they clearly are not—but whether they provide useful

measures of population health. In particular, it is possible that individual self-reported




                                              2
satisfaction or health measures are more a function of individual personality, individual

temperament, or individual expectations than of any objective circumstance, but the same

might not be true for the population, or for age groups within it. In consequence, one of

my main objectives is to investigate the usefulness of these simple, cheap, and

comparable questions as supplemental measures of population or subpopulation health.

   I begin with a theoretical discussion of age-effects and income effects on life

satisfaction, where life satisfaction is interpreted as period sub-utility in the economists’

standard life-cycle model of consumption. Such a formulation essentially assumes that

income and happiness are positively linked, but it offers more interesting predictions

about the effects of age, for example that life satisfaction should fall more rapidly with

age in countries with higher adult mortality rates, for example in places with high

prevalence of HIV-AIDS. Under appropriate and plausible assumptions, the theory also

predicts an inverse U-shaped age-profile of utility. I follow this, in Section 3, with a brief

summary of what the happiness literature—including the literature in psychology—says

about the relationship between happiness and age.

   Section 4 turns to the World Poll data. I look first at general life-satisfaction based on

a ladder question, how it varies with national income, with age, and with age at different

levels of national income. Like earlier studies using a smaller range of countries, I find

that the citizens of richer countries are on average more satisfied with their lives than the

citizens of poorer countries. Unlike most earlier studies, this effect of income is not

confined to poor, unhappy countries, but extends right across the range, from Cambodia,

Sierra Leone, Togo, Niger, and Chad, which share the unenviable distinction of being in

the bottom ten countries both by income and by life-satisfaction, to Norway, Switzerland,




                                              3
Denmark, Australia, and Canada, which rank in the top ten according to both income and

life-satisfaction. Each doubling of national income is associated with a near one unit

increase in average life-satisfaction measured on an eleven point scale from 0 (“the worst

possible life”) to 10 (“the best possible life”). If anything, the effect of national income

on national happiness is somewhat stronger in the rich countries than in the poor

countries.

    Recent growth in national income, unlike income itself, lowers average life-

satisfaction. This result contradicts much earlier literature that argues that improvements

in living standards make people better-off, but that the effect wears off over time.

    The pattern of life satisfaction at different ages differs according to the level of

economic development. In 2006, life satisfaction was much worse among the elderly than

among the young in poor and middle-income countries. By contrast, in rich countries,

especially the English speaking rich countries, the elderly were relatively satisfied with

their lives, sometimes more satisfied than those in midlife. The elderly in the countries of

Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union are particularly dissatisfied with their lives. I

find no evidence from the 2006 cross-sections that life-satisfaction declines with age

more rapidly in countries where adult mortality is particularly high.

    In Section 5, I show that in almost all countries and for all age groups, satisfaction

with health declines with age, and is lowest among the elderly. More interesting is the

fact that the rate of deterioration is much faster in poor than in rich countries, and in some

of the richest, satisfaction with health actually rises toward the end of life. Reports of

limiting health conditions behave similarly, worsening much more rapidly with age in

poor countries than in rich. It appears that one of the benefits of being rich, or at least of




                                               4
living in a rich country, is that wealth slows the ravages of age on health, or at least on

satisfaction with health. While satisfaction with health is higher in places where more

people have confidence in their health and medical systems (or vice versa), confidence in

the healthcare system is only weakly correlated with GDP. Particularly remarkable is the

position of the largest rich country, the United States, where only 52 percent of the

population express themselves satisfied with the healthcare and medical system, a figure

that is not only much lower than the comparable figure in any other rich country—for

example, in Britain the fraction is 63 percent—but also lower than the fractions in (to

take a few examples from many) India, Iran, Sierra Leone, or Malawi. The US ranks 81st

among the 115 countries for which these data were collected.

   All of the health measures, in levels and in rates of decline with age, are particularly

unfavorable in Eastern Europe and the countries of the former Soviet Union. Some of the

dissatisfaction with health in these countries can certainly be linked to their recent decline

in health and life-expectancy. But there have been much larger declines in life-

expectancy elsewhere associated with the HIV/AIDS epidemic, and people in countries

with high prevalence do not express anything like the same levels of dissatisfaction with

their health. Indeed, the fraction of Kenyans who are satisfied with their personal health

is the same as the fraction of Britons, and is higher than the fraction of Americans.

   Section 6 discusses the usefulness of the satisfaction measures for the purpose of

assessing population health and wellbeing. The ladder question on life-satisfaction is

strongly correlated with per capita GDP across countries, and increases linearly with the

logarithm of income in rich countries as well as poor. However, the links between life-

satisfaction and life expectancy or HIV prevalence, or even between health-satisfaction




                                              5
and these measures, show too many anomalies to make life-satisfaction a good indicator

of health and income combined. The same would be true for some combination of life

satisfaction and health satisfaction. Particularly troubling is the fact that HIV prevalence

appears to have little or no effect on the fraction of the population reporting

dissatisfaction with their health. Using such a measure to guide or evaluate policy would

lead to the unacceptable position that dealing with HIV/AIDS in Africa need not be an

urgent priority.



2. Life-satisfaction, income, and age: theoretical considerations

Economists have devoted a good deal of attention to life-cycle behavior. While these

theories were designed to predict the life cycle pattern of consumption, saving, and labor

supply, they can also be used to think about the life-cycle pattern of utility. While it

would be a mistake to take these predictions too seriously, they provide a framework for

consideration and interpretation.

   The life-satisfaction question in the World Poll asks people to imagine an eleven-rung

ladder where the bottom (0) represents “the worst possible life for you” and the top (10)

represents “the best possible life for you.” Respondents are then asked to report “on

which step of the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the present time.” Such a

question might elicit an evaluation of the respondent’s complete life, as seen from “the

present time,” or perhaps more likely, an evaluation of today’s contribution to the

lifetime stream. From a standard life-cycle perspective, complete life utility is

                                        T
                                 U = ∑ (1 + δ ) − t St υ (ct , at )                        (1)
                                        0




                                                 6
where t represents age (or time), and runs from birth (0) to death (T), δ is the rate of time

preference, St is the survival rate, the probability of surviving from time zero to time t,

and υ (ct , at ) is the instantaneous utility—or “felicity,” to separate it from U—function

which depends on consumption at age t and other factors a sometimes referred to as

“taste shifters”. I follow the standard, but by no means innocuous, assumption that utility

is intertemporally additive, which allows us to talk about instantaneous and lifetime

utility in a simple way. For someone currently of age t, the part of (1) from the past will

be known, with the remainder an expectation. Consumption is chosen so as to maximize

(1) subject to a lifetime income and wealth constraint in which money can be moved

from one period to another through lending and borrowing, for simplicity at a constant

real interest rate r.

    In this model, income—together with initial wealth and the interest rate—constrains

how much utility is possible, so that, by assumption, higher incomes generate higher

utility, within each period, and for life as a whole. Given this economic definition of

happiness, there is no ambiguity about the proposition that income makes people happier.

The effects of age, here represented by t, are somewhat more interesting.

    Suppose first that life-satisfaction is taken to refer to lifetime utility U. In the absence

of uncertainty, lifetime utility U does not change over time. With uncertainty, U will

change from period to period in response to new information and the changes in

consumption induced by that information. For example, under the assumptions of the life-

cycle permanent income model, consumption follows a random walk, which will induce

random changes in U. But there will be no pattern to the changes in consumption, nor in

U, so that there should be no systematic change in U with age. Happiness is what lifetime



                                               7
circumstances, both past and future, make it to be, and should not change systematically

with age. Unless there is perfect risk-sharing across people, consumption inequality—and

under some assumptions, utility inequality—will increase with age, see Deaton and

Paxson (1994).

    If, instead of life time utility U, we interpret the satisfaction questions as referring to

instantaneous utility or felicity, there is more scope for variation with age. Given that

consumption is optimally set over the life-cycle, and taking the certainty case for

simplicity, we must have

                                  υ1 (ct , at ) = λ (1 + δ )t (1 + r ) − t St−1              (2)

where the subscript 1 denotes the partial derivative of felicity with respect to its first

argument—the marginal utility of consumption—and λ is the lifetime marginal utility of

wealth, which is independent of age. If the changes over time in consumption, the interest

rate and the discount rate are all relatively small, (2) gives the approximation

                                υ11      υ
                                    Δct + 12 Δat = − r + δ − Δ log St                        (3)
                                υ1       υ1

where Δ indicates a change over time, and double partial derivatives are shown as

double subscripts. Note that the proportional change in the survival rate is approximately

equal to the mortality rate, so that (3) can be rewritten

                                  υ11      υ
                                      Δct + 12 Δat = − r + δ + mt                            (4)
                                  υ1       υ1

where mt is the mortality rate at age t. Note that, because we are talking about decision

making about life-cycle consumption, the relevant mortality rates are those in adulthood,

not childhood or infancy, and the former vary a good deal less across poor and rich

countries than do the latter.


                                                       8
   Equation (4) has a number of useful implications. The marginal utility of

consumption is positive and declining ( υ1 > 0 and υ11 < 0 ) so that, if a is constant,

consumption will rise over time in response to r and fall in response to impatience or

mortality (the survival rate St is falling with t). In thinking about the implications for this

across countries, it is hard to see why there should be any systematic relationship

between the level of national income and the difference between r and the rate of time

preference, but there are certainly major differences in adult mortality rates. Provided the

factor υ11 / υ1 does not change too much with age, the optimal lifetime choice of

consumption will have faster rates of consumption decline the higher is the mortality rate;

the shorter future provides an incentive to consume and be happy now or to “eat, drink,

and be merry, for tomorrow we die.” Since the mortality rate rises rapidly with age, the

rate of consumption decline should accelerate with age to match. Of course, consumption

is not utility and the change in utility depends also on what is happening to at .

   The change in utility is given by

                                       Δut = υ1Δct + υ2 Δat                                 (5)

and where Δct and Δat are linked by (4). Making the substitution, and assuming for

simplicity that r and δ are equal, we have

                                       υ1       ⎛    υυ ⎞
                               Δut =       mt + ⎜υ2 − 1 12 ⎟ Δat                            (6)
                                       υ11      ⎝     υ11 ⎠

The first term shows that mortality has a negative effect on the rate of decline of utility,

essentially because the rate of consumption decline rises as mortality rises. To think

about the second term, suppose we normalize the taste factors a so that more a is

associated with higher utility. The obvious interpretation is that a measures the capacity


                                                9
to enjoy consumption—or individual efficiency as a utility machine. Although the life-

cycle pattern of a will be chosen by the individual, at least in part, it is plausible that it

would have an inverse U-shape, rising at first as people accumulate human capital, self-

knowledge, and the ability to enjoy themselves—learn to be happy—and then eventually

falling as the capacity to enjoy fails with age. By this view, the marginal utility of

consumption is higher when a is higher, so that υ12 > 0 . Consumers will adapt their

consumption, not to compensate for changes in a, but to take advantage of them by

consuming most when a is highest; consumption is higher in those periods of life where it

does the most good, in this case, in midlife. Equation (4) shows that, discounting and

mortality effects apart, consumption change tracks taste change, and equation (6) shows

that the effects on utility are magnified by the addition of the direct utility effects of

changes in a. A similar story could be told about children, whose average numbers follow

an inverse U-shape, and who, since they are generally purposively chosen might be

supposed to enhance utility—although the empirical happiness literature often disputes

this, see Argyle (1999), Clark and Oswald (2002), and Layard (2005)—as well as

increasing the marginal utility of consumption by providing more opportunities for the

parents to spend money to enjoy themselves. Once again, instantaneous utility would be

predicted to have an inverse U-shape with age.

    A simple explicit example illustrates further. Suppose that we continue to assume that

r = δ , and that the utility function takes the form

                                      1 T
                                U=       ∑
                                     1− ρ 0
                                            (1 + δ ) − t St (at ct )1− ρ                         (7)




                                                  10
where ρ is a parameter with 0 < ρ < 1. The quantity at in (7) simply acts to augment

consumption. For this specification, the rate of change of consumption with age is given

by

                                              1          1− ρ
                                  Δ ln ct =       mt +            ln at                      (8)
                                              ρ           ρ

while happiness—defined here as (1 − ρ ) −1 ( at ct )1− ρ —changes with age according to

                                            1− ρ          1− ρ
                                Δ ln ut =          mt +            ln at                     (9)
                                              ρ               ρ

so that the effect on mortality on the rate of change of happiness is constant, and as the

mortality rate rises ever more rapidly with age, the rate of decline of happiness will

accelerate. At the same time, if we look across countries with different adult mortality

rates, the rate of decline of happiness with age should be higher in the higher mortality

countries.


3. Insights from the psychology and happiness literatures

The psychology literature takes a different approach to questions of how happiness is

affected by income and by age. In particular, there is no basic assumption that income

promotes happiness; income is simply one of life’s many circumstances which may or

may not be associated with happiness.

     One thread emphasizes the importance of personality and temperament as

determinants of life-satisfaction. In the most extreme version, referred to as “set-point”

theory, people cannot be permanently moved from their personal happiness set-point

level, and while changing life circumstances—consumption, income, and even divorce or

the death of a loved one—affect life satisfaction, they do so only temporarily. If this strict



                                                  11
version is correct, and if the distribution of temperaments is the same in different

countries, we should expect to see no difference in average life-satisfaction across

populations, at least with the exception of populations that have recently experienced a

large positive or negative change in their circumstances. More precisely, average life

satisfaction across countries should depend positively on changes in national income, but

should not depend on the level of national income. Within countries, happiness should be

independent of age.

   More generally individual life-satisfaction is taken to depend on some combination of

temperament and circumstance, and there has been a lively debate about which

circumstances are important, and about which—if any—have permanent as opposed to

merely transitory effects. For example, it is often argued that income is relatively

unimportant, and relatively transitory compared with family circumstances,

unemployment, or health, see Easterlin (2003). Note that even if variations in

temperament are more important than circumstances at the individual level, the same

need not be true of the population because temperamental differences might average out

over populations, though nothing rules out national differences in temperament. If

temperament does average out, population measures of life-satisfaction could be useful

indicators of population wellbeing, even when they are poor measures for individuals.

The conflict between concepts of capabilities or functionings, which are the measures

argued for by Sen (1999), and of which health and income are the most important, is

possibly much more severe for individuals than for nations. By contrast, if the strict form

of set-point theory is true, it is impossible to make individuals or nations permanently

happier, including through the improvements in national health and national income that




                                             12
would increase capabilities and that are normally seen as the main goals of economic

development.

   The role of one particular circumstance, income, is of particular interest. Many

within-country studies have found only a small effect of income on happiness relative to

other life-circumstances such as employment or marital status, see for example Helliwell

(2003) or Blanchflower and Oswald (2004). Kahneman et al (2005) argue that even these

measures overstate the effects of income. They suggest that more income may do nothing

for happiness, and that the observed correlation between life satisfaction and income

comes from a “focusing illusion,” induced by the life-satisfaction question, which

prompts respondents to compare their incomes with some standard, such as their own

previous incomes or with the incomes of others. It is therefore possible that, over the long

run, increases in income will generate no increase in life-satisfaction. This result is

consistent with the micro-level evidence from the German Socioeconomic Panel by Di

Tella et al (2005), who regress life satisfaction on income and on several lags of income,

and find that life-satisfaction adapts completely to income within four years. It is only

income change that matters, not income itself. At the country level, a long-run zero effect

of income is also consistent with the famous findings of Easterlin (1974, 1995) that for

those countries for which we have data, happiness does not increase over long time spans,

in spite of large increases in per capita income. Such theories and findings are in sharp

contrast to the standard economic model developed above in which more consumption—

or more lifetime wealth, or lifetime income—makes people happier.

   Whether or not set-point theory works for other circumstances—such as the death of

a spouse, or the permanent loss of work—the results for income suggest that there is little




                                             13
or no long run relationship between national income and national happiness, so that one

might reasonably infer that this would also be so across countries, given that most

international income differences are long established. But the evidence does not support

this inference. Although the US and Japan may have failed to become happier as they

grew richer, poor countries, such as India or Nigeria, are less happy than rich countries,

such as the US or Japan, see for example Ingelhart and Klingemann (2000), Graham

(2005), Layard (2005), Leigh and Wolfers (2006) or the careful and balanced survey by

Diener and Oishi (2000). As Diener and Oishi note, one argument, due to Veenhoven

(1991), is that more income improves happiness only until basic needs are met; beyond

the point where there is enough income so that people are no longer hungry, their

children do not die from readily preventable diseases, and absolute poverty has been

eliminated, income does not matter for happiness. While this story seems plausible, they

also note that it might be only after these basic needs have been met that the possibilities

for intellectual and cultural development can be fully explored. This is akin to Robbins’

(1938) account of the Brahmin who claimed to be “ten times as capable of happiness as

that untouchable over there.”

   An important source of previous empirical evidence is the World Values Survey,

which covers rich countries, together with a smaller number of poor countries, as well as

a group of countries from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Authors who

have worked with these data have tended to conclude that (a) richer countries are happier,

(b) the cross-country effect of income on happiness is larger than the within-country

effect of income and happiness, and (c) that among the rich countries, there is no

relationship between national income and national happiness, see again Ingelhart and




                                             14
Klingemann (2000, Figure 7.2) and Layard (2005, page 32) who writes that for “the

Western industrial countries, the richer ones are no happier than the poorer.” Findings (a)

and (c) are consistent with the basic needs story together with a set-point or adaptive

model in rich countries where basic needs are met, while (b) is a consequence of the

comparison between poor countries as a group and rich countries as a group. As we shall

see, the results from the World Poll are very different.

   The literature on the relationship between happiness and age is essentially empirical;

Helliwell (2003) and Easterlin (2006) review the literature, including work that finds

essentially no effect of age, work that finds that older people are happier, and work that

finds a U-shaped profile over the life course. As one might expect, these results are

sensitive to which other variables are controlled—health in particular—and to what role

is assigned to cohort and period effects when estimating age effects, see Blanchflower

and Oswald’s reply (2007) to Easterlin.



4. Life satisfaction, income and age: evidence from the World Poll

Figure 1 shows a world map of the life-satisfaction measure from the 2006 World Poll

data. The numbers for each individual range from 0 to 10, and the shading corresponds to

the (sample weighted) averages for the 121 countries used here. The map looks similar to

an income plot of the world: North America, Europe, Japan, Australasia, and Saudi

Arabia are happy as well as rich, and the really unhappy places on the planet are in sub-

Saharan Africa, plus Haiti and Cambodia. The only countries in the bottom twenty

according to life-satisfaction and that are relatively well-off in income terms are Georgia




                                             15
and Armenia. At the other end, there are two relatively poor places in the happiness top

twenty, Costa Rica and Venezuela.

   Figure 2 summarizes a great deal of information, about the relationship between life

satisfaction and national income, and about how that relationship changes with age, or

equivalently, how the age profile of average life satisfaction varies across countries. The

horizontal axis, for all plots, is per capita GDP in 2003 (the nearest year for which there

is complete data in the Penn World Table) measured in purchasing power parity dollars at

2000 prices. Each circle is a country, with diameter proportional to population, and marks

average life satisfaction and GDP for that country. Important countries are labeled; most

of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa are on the bottom left, India and China are the two

large circles near the left, the western European countries appear near the upper right, and

the USA is the large country on the top right. There are also seven plotted lines on graph,

only six of which are clearly visible. Each of these corresponds to an age group, 15–19,

20–29, 30–39, 40–49, 50–59, 60–69, and 70 plus. For each of these seven groups, and for

each country, I calculated the average life-satisfaction. Each line is a non-parametric

regression plot for one age group of its average-life-satisfaction against national per

capita GDP (taken to be the same for all age groups in the country.) These lines can be

thought of as a disaggregation by age of the average plot represented by the circles.

   As with the map in Figure 1, life-satisfaction increases with GDP per head. The slope

is steepest among the poorest countries, where income gains are associated with the

largest increases in happiness, but it remains positive and substantial even among the rich

countries; it is not true that there is some critical level of GDP per capita above which




                                             16
income has no further effect on happiness. Since this result is different from the earlier

findings reviewed in the previous section, I investigate it further.

   Figure 3 plots average happiness against the logarithm of income, and this simple

transform is enough to make the relationship close to linear. Column 1 of Table 1 shows

the basic regression for the 114 countries for which we have both life-satisfaction and per

capita PPP GDP from the Penn World Table. The coefficient is 0.859 with an estimated

standard error of 0.051. Using the same sample, the quadratic in column (2) improves the

fit only slightly; the t-value on the squared term is only 2.2. Note too that the quadratic

term has a positive sign, so that the effect of log income on life satisfaction is estimated to

increase at higher levels of income per head. Columns 3 and 4 split the sample at

$12,000; Figure 2 shows that this is a level that splits the poor and middle-income

countries from the rich countries. Once again, the slope in the upper income countries is

higher, although it has a large estimated standard error. If we restrict the sample to the 24

countries whose per capita GDP is above $20,000, the estimated slope is 0.617 with a

standard error of 0.649, which is clearly consistent both with a zero slope, and with a

slope that is the same as the slope in the poor countries; visual inspection of Figure 3

shows that the latter is the obvious conclusion. The final two columns address the same

question in a slightly different way, interacting the term in log income with, first, in

column (6), an indicator that per capita income is above $12,000, and then second, in

column (7), an indicator that per capita income is above $20,000. In both cases, the

interaction term is estimated to be positive, and is significantly different from zero in the

final column.




                                              17
   These results support the visual impression in Figure 3, that the logarithmic fit with a

constant slope is adequate for all countries, rich or poor, and if there is any evidence for

deviation, it is small and in the direction of the slope being higher among the richer

countries.

   Why are these results so different from those studies that have concluded that, among

the rich countries, national income has no effect on national life satisfaction? Figure 4

shows the data that supports these findings, taken from the 1981, 1990, and 1996 waves

of the World Values Surveys, with each country marked by its three letter “isocode” as

used by the Penn World Table and World Bank. For comparability with the World Poll, I

have included only countries that appear in both sources, and I have excluded regions or

cities. Even so, Figure 4 reproduces the main features of previous analyses. There is a

steep relationship between happiness and income on the left of the graph, which becomes

much flatter among the rich countries on the right. To see how this relates to the World

Poll data, note four points: (a) apart from South Africa (ZAF) and Korea (KOR), all of

the countries at the bottom left are in Eastern Europe or were once part of the Soviet

Union, including Moldova, Ukraine, Armenia, Belarus, Russia, Bulgaria, Latvia, Estonia,

Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia, Romania, Estonia, and Slovakia; (b) if

we look at the few long-term poor countries in the sample, Ghana, China, Philippines,

Bangladesh, India, Peru, and the Dominican Republic, they all are much happier than the

Eastern European countries; (c) as a consequence of (a) and (b), the sharply curved nature

of the happiness to income relationship comes, not so much from the poor countries, but

from the Eastern European and former Soviet countries, whose unhappiness is almost

certainly not primarily due to their low incomes; (d) Figure 4, unlike Figure 3, shows




                                             18
income on an absolute, rather than a logarithmic scale. Once the transformation is made,

the happiness to log income relationship is close to linear except, once again, for the

countries of Eastern Europe, see also Leigh and Wolfers (2006).

   Figure 5 combines the World Poll and World Values Survey data using a logarithmic

scale for income; it is identical to Figure 3 with the WVS data overlaid. The World Poll

data are shown in red and correspond to the right hand scale; the World Values Survey

data in blue and correspond to the left-hand scale. The World Poll uses an 11 point scale

(0 to 10) and the World Values Surveys a 10 point scale (1 to 10.) The most important

difference between the two surveys is that all the points at the bottom left of the diagram

are red points, mostly from Africa. The World Poll covers many more very poor

countries than do the World Values Surveys and the happiness and income data for these

countries lie close to the line for middle-income and rich countries alike. Otherwise, the

two data sets are more notable for their similarities than their differences. India and China

are richer and unhappier in the more recent World Poll; which perhaps comes, not from

substance, but from the fact that the World Poll is a national sample whereas the WVS,

particularly the earlier rounds, selected Indian and Chinese (and Nigerian) samples

largely from literate people in urban areas. At the same time, some of the Eastern

European and former Soviet countries, unhappy though they are in 2006, are less

unhappy than in the earlier surveys. But there is no broad contradiction between the two

surveys, and the World Values Surveys provide no evidence against the finding from the

World Poll that, throughout the range of national incomes, higher average incomes are

associated with higher levels of average life satisfaction.




                                             19
   It is of course possible that income is standing in for something else, such as relative

income, income relative to expectations or to past income (growth), or for other variables

correlated with income, of which health is plausibly the most important. Indeed, the

international pattern of life-satisfaction in relation to per capita GDP is very similar to the

pattern between life-expectancy and income, first documented by Preston (1975).

   Table 2 investigates the growth and health stories. Column 1 regresses average life-

satisfaction on the logarithm of income in 2003 and the average growth rate of income

from 2000 to 2003. Note that this is mechanically equivalent to regressing life

satisfaction on the logarithms of income in both 2000 and 2003, or indeed to regressing

life satisfaction on the logarithm of income in 2000 and its growth from 2000 to 2003.

The addition of growth to the regression does not eliminate the effect of income in levels,

so that there is no evidence that the effect of income is spurious, picking up only the

correlation between income and its growth rate. It is not true that it is only the growth of

income that matters, not its level. Secondly, and more surprisingly, at any given level of

income, economic growth is associated with lower reported levels of life-satisfaction, a

result that seems inconsistent with any of the accounts in the literature, although see

Diener, Diener, and Diener (1995) who also find a negative effect of growth on happiness

in an international sample of college students, though not in their national samples.

Indeed, this is one of the most puzzling and surprising results in this paper.

   Note that growth from 2000 to 2003 is the change in log income divided by three, so

that the regression in column 1 can also be interpreted as a levels regression in which log

income in 2003 attracts a negative coefficient, and log income in 2000 a positive one,

with their sum remaining at 0.860. Essentially these data cannot tell which year’s income




                                              20
is the most important one, a finding that is confirmed by adding further lags of log

income (not shown). Yet in all of these alternative specifications, the sum of the

coefficients on the lags remains roughly constant, which is consistent with life-

satisfaction responding to the long-term average income, as in a permanent-income

model of life satisfaction. Column (2) also shows that the precise period of income

growth is not important, and that the model does just as well assigning the negative

effects of growth to the three years from 2000 to 2003, or the decade from 1990 to 2000,

or some combination of the two. The addition of earlier growth rates does nothing to

enhance or change these results.

   It is also worth noting that the coefficients on growth, even when divided by three,

are larger in absolute value than the coefficient on the current level of income. This

implies that a regression of life-satisfaction on lagged income and current growth will

still show a negative effect of growth; the coefficient on lagged income is the same as

that on current income in the original regression. This finding rules out the possibility

that the negative effect of growth comes from identifying those countries whose current

income overstates their long-run income, and who should therefore be less happy than

those who have been richer for longer. However we count it, income makes countries

happy and income growth makes them unhappy.

   The countries of Eastern Europe and of the former Soviet Union have some of the

lowest levels of life-satisfaction in the world, much lower than warranted by their

incomes. The upheavals associated with the fall of communism are likely factors, though

they do not show up in the regressions as working through the fall in incomes, if only

because these countries were not among the countries with the worst growth record from




                                             21
2000 to 2003. Consideration of earlier growth rates is not possible, because many of the

countries did not exist in 1990, and are therefore excluded from the regression in column

(2), see the footnote to the table. But given the robustness of the estimated negative

effects of growth between columns (1) and (2) it seems most likely that it is features of

the transition other than declines in income that are responsible for dissatisfaction with

life.

    Columns 3, 4, and 5 investigate the role of life expectancy and its rate of change.

Because life expectancy is the standard period measure, formed from current survival

rates, it is not a long-term measure that changes only slowly in response to changes in the

epidemiological and social environment. There were 28 countries in the sample whose

life expectancies fell from 1990 to 2000. Eighteen of these are in sub-Saharan Africa—as

are all of the double-digit declines—one is Iraq (sanctions and Saddam Hussein), and the

other nine are countries of the former Soviet Union, including Russia itself. (Note that

estimates of life-expectancy are available for these countries in 1990, although income

estimates are not.) Yet the table shows that life-expectancy plays a very limited role in

explaining international variations in life satisfaction. The introduction of the life-

expectancy variables has only a small effect on the estimated effects of income, so that it

is not true that income is standing proxy for life-expectancy. Life-expectancy itself does

not show up significantly in any of the regressions, though the increase in life-expectancy

from 1990 to 2000 has a significant positive effect on average life-satisfaction. The

estimated coefficient is 0.047, which would exert a sizeable negative effect on life-

satisfaction in countries in sub-Saharan Africa with large declines in life expectancy,

such as Botswana (–20 years), Zimbabwe (–19 years) or South Africa (–16 years), but




                                              22
cannot explain the low levels of life satisfaction in the FSU countries where the declines

were much smaller, such as Russia (–2 years).

   I have repeated the life-satisfaction and health regressions using infant and child

mortality measures instead of, and in addition to, life expectancy. These generate no new

insights, largely because of the strong interrelations between the three measures in a

single cross-section. Indeed, in the poorest and highest mortality countries, amongst

whom the variation in life-expectancy is largest, life expectancy is often imputed using

measures of infant and child mortality, so it is not surprising that the data should be

unable to separate out their effects, if indeed they exist.

   I have also experimented with a measure of the HIV prevalence rate (taken from the

World Development Indicators). Although this is certainly measured with error, it

reliably identifies those countries most severely affected, and to ensure that is the case, I

constructed a dummy variable that identifies the thirteen countries with an estimated

2003 prevalence of 5 percent or more, namely Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Haiti,

Kenya, Mozambique, Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia, and

Zimbabwe. Whether added to the regressions in column (1) or column (3) of Table 2, the

dummy attracts a small and insignificant coefficient (not shown). This is surely an

extraordinary finding, that reported life satisfaction is unaffected by a plague whose

severity is unparalleled in modern times. And even if people do not know that they are

HIV positive, it is hard to believe that their satisfaction with life is unaffected when more

than a fifth of adults are infected, and when burials of the victims are a daily occurrence.

   Figure 2 shows that the relationship between life-satisfaction and income differs

across the age-groups or, perhaps more obviously, that the relationship between life-




                                              23
satisfaction and age depends on the level of development. Most notably, among the low

and middle-income countries, reported life-satisfaction declines as people age. However,

among the rich countries, the lines come together, and eventually cross so that, among the

world’s richest countries, there is no monotone relationship between life-satisfaction and

age. Figure 6 explores these regularities in more detail for the transition countries among

which there is an almost uniform picture of life-satisfaction declining with age,

sometimes quite sharply. (These graphs show unconditional averages of life-satisfaction

with age with neither standardization nor controls.) Whatever aspects of the transition it

is that make people unhappy, the effects appear to be much more pronounced among the

elderly. Perhaps it is they who have suffered the adverse consequences of disruption, who

were most satisfied with their old lives, and who cannot expect to live long enough to see

any improvements that might occur in the future. For them, there is only transition, no

promised land.

   Figure 7 shows similar age-profiles of life-satisfaction for the rich English speaking

countries of the world. Not only are these people generally much happier than people in

the previous figure, but their life-satisfaction is in most cases U-shaped in age. Because

of our inability to control for cohort or period effects, we cannot tell whether these U-

shapes are age-effects for people in the English speaking countries, or some mixture of

period and cohort effects. The results from other countries (not shown here) suggest that

there is no general (unconditional) U-shape for life-satisfaction with age in the 2006

cross-section. Not only is life-satisfaction declining with age in the countries in Figure 4,

but there is also somewhat milder (and less uniform) decrease with age in Latin America.

There is no systematic pattern in the countries of Africa, Asia, or Western Europe other




                                             24
than Britain and Ireland. The obvious explanation is that there are period or cohort effects

that are specific to countries or to groups of countries. The age-related decline in life-

satisfaction in Eastern Europe and the FSU in Figure 4 is unlikely to be a pure age effect,

but is more probably an interaction of a period effect (the transition) that was particularly

hard on the elderly. In the rich English-speaking countries, the relatively high satisfaction

of the elderly might be linked to the substantial intergenerational transfers from young to

old in those countries, though this explanation would also hold for much of the rich

world. The lack of a decline in happiness with age in sub-Saharan Africa is also hard to

reconcile with its generally high rates of adult mortality.

   I have replicated the income results in Tables 1 and 2 by age group, and the results

are qualitatively similar to those for all age groups combined. For each of the age groups,

the level of national income is an important positive determinant of life-satisfaction, and

the rate of growth of income a negative determinant. In further work, when the individual

income numbers from the World Poll are more developed, it may be possible to use the

data to look at income distribution across age groups, or indeed to compare the within

national effects of income on happiness with those estimated here from the international

comparisons.



5. Perceptions of health, disability, and health systems

I now turn from overall life-satisfaction to satisfaction with health. World Poll

respondents are asked whether they are satisfied or dissatisfied with the state of their

personal health. The next question is whether they “have any health problems that

prevent you from doing any of the things people of your age usually do,” again with a




                                              25
dichotomous answer, yes or no. I refer to this as the disability question. Figures 8 (for

health satisfaction) and 9 (for disability) are drawn in the same way as Figure 2, plotting

the fraction satisfied with their health or the fraction with a disability against average per

capita income, for everyone together—the circles with diameters proportional to

population—or separately by age—the fitted nonparametric curves. In Figure 9, for

disability, the circles are drawn separately for two of the age groups, ages 30–39 (black

circles), and ages 60–70 (blue circles).

   These figures show that people are less often disabled and are more likely to be

satisfied with their health in richer countries, and that, less surprisingly, they become

more disabled and less healthy as they age. As was the case for life satisfaction, the rate

at which things get worse with age is greater in poor and middle income countries than in

rich countries, where income seems to provide some protection against the effects of

aging. Indeed, at the top right of Figure 8, the 50–59 age group is less satisfied with its

health than is either of the two older groups. There is even a similar reversal for reported

disabilities between the 50–9 and 60–9 group in Figure 9. It is most improbable that these

reversals can be attributed to any objective health conditions or disabilities. Perhaps the

50–9 group is particularly intolerant of the first signs of aging.

   In health satisfaction, as in life satisfaction, the countries of Eastern Europe and the

former Soviet Union report extraordinary low levels. Ukraine ( rank 1), Russia (3),

Georgia (4), Armenia (5), Belarus (6), Moldova (8), Hungary (9), Latvia (12), Estonia

(14), Romania (15), and Kazakhstan (17) are eleven of the twenty worst countries in the

world in health satisfaction, ranking alongside much higher mortality countries such as

Haiti (2), Rwanda (7), Uganda (10), Burundi (11), Cambodia (14), Chad (16), Benin (18),




                                              26
and Cameroon (19). (South Korea is 20th, for no immediately obvious reason.) In all of

these countries, the fraction of people reporting themselves satisfied with their health is

between a half and two-thirds, which is worth contrasting with the situation in some of

countries worst-hit by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, Tanzania (70 percent), Zimbabwe (75

percent), Botswana and South Africa (both 78 percent), and Kenya (82 percent). Indeed,

the percentage of Kenyans satisfied with their health is the same as the proportion of

Britons, and is a percentage point higher than the fraction of Americans. While objective

mortality rates have an affect on health satisfaction, at least in changes if not in levels, so

do other factors, and the declines in life expectancy in the countries of the former Soviet

Union have clearly had a much larger effect on reported life satisfaction than have the

much larger declines in life expectancy in the African countries affected by HIV/AIDS.

    The way in which health satisfaction declines with age is illustrated for two sets of

countries in Figures 10 and 11; the former shows five selected rich countries, including

the US and Britain, while the latter shows the Eastern European and FSU countries. In

the 15–19 age group, almost everyone is satisfied with their health. In the rich countries,

satisfaction falls relatively slowly, and in the US, actually improves with age after age 50,

(probably coincidentally) overtaking the generally more stoical British at around the age

at which the respective age-specific mortality curves cross. In the Eastern European and

FSU group, health satisfaction falls very rapidly with age, and very large fractions of the

elderly report themselves as dissatisfied with their health.

    Table 3 explores the correlates of health satisfaction, following the same general

procedures as in Tables 2 and 3. Column (1) shows, consistently with the figures, that the

fraction of people satisfied with their health is higher in higher income countries,




                                              27
although even allowing for the fact that the scale is a tenth as large, the effect is a good

deal smaller than for life-satisfaction. As was the case for life satisfaction, recent

economic growth is negatively associated with health satisfaction conditional on the level

of GDP per capita. In column (2), the level of life expectancy has no effect on health

satisfaction, although increases in life expectancy between 1990 and 2000 are associated

with higher health satisfaction. Because declines in life expectancy are associated either

with HIV/AIDS (itself mostly in sub-Saharan Africa), or with the transition countries of

Eastern Europe, I have constructed three dummy variables, one for the Eastern European

countries, one for sub-Saharan Africa, and one the dummy for HIV prevalence that has

already been described. The first of these dummies (“east”) attracts a negative and

significant coefficient, the second (sub-Saharan Africa) an insignificantly negative one,

and the third (HIV) a coefficient that is neither negative nor significant. With these

dummies included, the change in life expectancy no longer has any effect, and the

significance of the income variables is also reduced. This is perhaps not surprising given

the evidence in Figure 6, where it is clear that the poor health satisfaction in the transition

countries could not be attributed entirely to the objective decrease in life expectancy.

These results also reinforce the fact that even high levels of HIV prevalence do not much

affect the health satisfaction reports, certainly not in proportion to their dire effects on

mortality. I have also interacted the dummies with the change in life expectancy (results

not shown) to test the possibility that the changes in life expectancy have different effects

in the different areas, or with different causes, but the estimated effects are neither

significant nor informative.




                                              28
   One variable which does predict average health satisfaction is what people think of

their healthcare system. The World Poll asks people to report whether or not they have

confidence in their health care or medical system. The average of this for each country is

entered in the last row of the last column of Table 3, where it has a large and statistically

significant coefficient. Of course, because this is itself a subjective response, we do not

know whether it is a better or worse indicator of the actual performance of the healthcare

system than health satisfaction is itself a good indicator of objective health. Put

differently, both health satisfaction and healthcare confidence may be functions of third

factors which themselves vary by region, time, or age group. And it would certainly be

unwarranted to interpret the last column of the table as evidence that the healthcare

system is effective in delivering health.

   The degree of confidence in the healthcare system varies widely from country to

country, and although it is correlated with income—see Figure 12—the correlation is

weak. Note particularly the astonishingly low confidence that Americans in 2006 had in

their healthcare and medical system. Almost all the inhabitants of rich countries are well-

satisfied with their healthcare and medical systems; that the US is an exception in this

regard is well-known, see Davis et al (2007), who find also that the US does not lag in the

effectiveness of healthcare, but does in other dimensions such as equity, access, and

safety. Experience is much more diverse among the poor countries of the world, but

people in some poor countries (such as Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, and Cuba) have

great confidence in the healthcare system, and the majority of poor countries do much

better than does the US, even if they deliver much worse health outcomes. The ranking of

the US in the World Poll (81 out of 115) is even worse than in WHO (2000), though it




                                             29
should be noted that the WHO’s methodology has been robustly challenged by several

commentators, see in particular Williams (2001).

    Given the high correlation between the subjective evaluations in different domains,

here between personal health and the healthcare system, it is worth returning to life

satisfaction and asking whether we can “explain” life satisfaction in terms of health

satisfaction. This follows Easterlin (2006) who relates overall life satisfaction to

satisfactions in the various domains and thus aggregating satisfactions into an overall

evaluation. Certainly, if we repeat the regressions in Table 2 with health satisfaction on

the right hand side, there is a large (close to 4) and statistically significant coefficient, and

with this variable added, life expectancy, the change in life expectancy, and the rate of

economic growth lose their significance. While such regressions are useful for

understanding the life satisfaction responses (though one might just as well argue for

regressing health satisfaction on life satisfaction), they are less useful for deciphering the

relationship between the satisfaction reports and the objective circumstances of life.



6. Discussion

The currently dominant approach for measuring population well-being is based on Sen’s

ideas of measuring people’s abilities to function, or their capabilities to lead a life worth

living. Without health, there is very little that people can do and, without income, health

alone does little to enable people to lead a good life. Other factors, such as education, or

the ability to participate in society, are important too, although income and health tend to

get the primary attention in evaluations of development progress, for example in the

Millennium Development Goals. For many reasons, elaborated by Sen and others, self-




                                               30
reports of satisfaction with life, with income, or health are given little weight. People may

adapt to misery and hardship, and cease to see if for what it is. They do not necessarily

perceive their lack of freedom as a problem; the child who is potentially a great musician,

but never has a chance to find out, will not express her lack of satisfaction, and whole

groups can be taught that their poor health, or their lack of political participation, are

natural or even desirable aspects of a good world.

    Some of these issues have an empirical as well as philosophical component, and it is

possible that reports of life satisfaction, at least on average, provide a clear-eyed

aggregate of the different components of peoples’ capabilities. Some of the results in this

paper are quite supportive of that position, much more so than I had originally expected.

In particular, the very strong international relationship between per capita GDP and life

satisfaction suggests that, on average, people have a good idea of how income, or the lack

of it, affects their lives. It is simply not true that the people of India are as satisfied with

their lives as the people of France, let alone Denmark, nor is it true that people in sub-

Saharan Africa, or Afghanistan, or Iraq, or Cambodia, are as happy as people in India.

Beyond that, the misery of many of the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet

Union seems plausible enough, as does the special misery of the elderly in those

countries. As a result, the map in Figure 1 clearly corresponds in broad detail to what an

overall map of capabilities might look like, always supposing we could construct such a

thing.

    But when we turn to health and its effects on life-satisfaction, the poll results diverge

from what would be required in the capabilities approach. Longer life expectancy surely

enables people to do more with their lives yet, conditional in income, it has no apparent




                                               31
effect on life satisfaction. Instead, it is changes in the expectation of life that seem to

have an effect, no matter whether life expectancy is high or low. Even satisfaction with

health, a much more focused question, is not related to life expectancy, though in some

specifications it is sensitive to changes in life expectancy, consistent with a focusing

illusion for health. The extraordinary low health satisfaction ratings for Eastern Europe

and the countries of the former Soviet Union are a testament, not to their poor population

health, but to the effects of a decline in health among a population that was used to a

better state of affairs. It is also the case that in the rich countries it is people in their 50s,

not in their 60s or 70s, who report the least satisfaction with their health and the highest

level of disability. Again, this is a group whose health is actually much better than that of

their elders, but who are experiencing health problems for the first time; perhaps it is not

poor health that is hard to bear, but the first intimations of mortality. In the poor

countries, and particularly in Africa, where the joint evolution of man and parasites has

ensured that, for hundreds of thousands of years, morbidity has been a constant

companion throughout life, Iliffe (1995), health satisfaction declines rapidly with age.

But this does not mean that health satisfaction is a good indicator of health capabilities in

the poorest countries. That it is not so is demonstrated by the fact that countries with high

rates of HIV prevalence do not systematically report poorer health status, a finding that is

in line with earlier reports that self-reported health measures are often better in places

where people are sicker, and presumably more adapted to being sick, Sen (2002), Chen

and Murray (1992).

    In spite of the positive relationship between life satisfaction and national income, and

in spite of the plausibility of unhappiness and health dissatisfaction in the countries of




                                                32
Eastern Europe, neither life satisfaction nor health satisfaction can be taken as reliable

indicators of population wellbeing, if only because neither adequately reflects objective

conditions of health.

    Even if this conclusion is accepted—and for a different view see Graham (2005)—the

satisfaction questions are clearly of interest in their own right, as is the analysis of their

correlates. These are among the best measures that we have of an important aspect of

human experience, and we need to understand what and why they are. In this respect, this

analysis of the World Poll data has confirmed a number of earlier findings, but has

yielded some new and different results. One surprising finding is Figure 3, the close to

linear relationship across countries between average life satisfaction and the logarithm of

income per head. There is no evidence that the cross-country effects of income vanish

among the richer countries. It is also true that life satisfaction responds to changes in

circumstances, though the effects of economic growth are negative and not positive, as

would be predicted by previous discussion and almost all previous micro-based empirical

evidence. Health satisfaction, in contrast, responds very weakly to (perhaps

unsatisfactory) objective measures of health, though there is a response of the correct sign

to changes in life expectancy, at least in some specifications.

    The 2006 within-country age profiles of life-satisfaction are quite different from

country to country, sometimes declining, sometimes exhibiting a U-shape, and sometimes

showing no particular pattern. But in the 2006 cross-sections, there is a systematic

tendency for both life and health satisfaction to decline more rapidly with age in poorer

countries. As with many other things, wealth helps buffer the effects of aging on at least

the perception of good health and the good life.




                                               33
List of works cited:

Argyle, Michael, 1999, “Causes and correlates of happiness,” in Daniel Kahneman, Ed

   Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, eds., Well-being: the foundations of hedonic

   psychology, New York, Russell Sage, 353–73.

Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew Oswald, 2004, “Welll-being over time in Britain

   and the USA,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 1359–86.

Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew Oswald, 2007, “Is well-being U-shaped over the

   life-cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 12935, Februray.

Chen, Lincoln and Christopher Murray, 1992, “Understanding morbidity change,”

   Population and Development Review, 18, 481–504.

Clark, Andrew, and Andrew Oswald, 2002, “Well-being in panels,” University of

   Warwick, Department of Economics, processed.

Davis, Karen, Cathy Schoen, Stephen C. Schoenbaum, Michelle M. Dory, Alyssa L.

   Holmgren, Jennifer L. Kriss and Katherine K. Shea, 2007, “Mirror, mirror on the

   wall: an international update on the comparative performance of American health

   care,” New York, The Commonwealth Fund.

Diener, Ed, Marissa Diener, and Carol Diener, 1995, “Factors predicting the subjective

   well-being of nations,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 851–64.

Diener, Ed and Shigehiro Oishi, 2000, “Money and happiness: income and subjective

   well-being across nations,” in Ed Diener and Eunkook M. Suh, eds., Culture and

   subjective well-being, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press, 185–218.

Deaton, Angus, 1997, The Analysis of household surveys, Baltimore. Johns Hopkins.




                                           34
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson, 1994, “Intertemporal choice and inequality,”

   Journal of Political Economy, 102, 437–67.

Di Tella, Rafael, John Haisken–DeNew, and Robert MacCulloch, 2005, “Happiness

   adaptation to income and to status in an individual panel,” processed, October.

Easterlin, Richard A., 1974, “Does economic growth improve the human lot?” in Paul A.

   David and Melvin W. Reder, eds., Nations and households in economic growth:

   essays in honor of Moses Abramovitz. New York, Academic Press, 89–125.

Easterlin, Richard A., 1995, “Will raising the incomes of all increase the happiness of

   all?” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 27, 35–48.

Easterlin, Richard A., 2003, “Explaining happiness,” Proceedings of the National

   Academy of Science, 100(19), 11176–83.

Easterlin, Richard A., 2006, “Life cycle happiness and its sources: intersections of

   psychology, economics and demography,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 27,

   463–82.

Graham, Carol, 2005, “Insights on development from the economics of happiness,”

   World Bank Research Observer, 201–31.

Helliwell, John F., 2003, “How’s life? Combining individual and national variables to

   explain subjective well-being,” Economic Modeling, 20, 331–60.

Iliffe, John, 1995, Africans: the history of a continent, Cambridge. Cambridge University

   Press.

Inglehart, Ronald, and Hand-Dieter Klingemann, 2000, “Genes, culture, democracy, and

   happiness,” in Ed Diener and Eunkook M. Suh, eds., Culture and subjective well-

   being, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press, 165–83.




                                            35
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan B. Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A.

   Stone, 2006, “Would you be happier if you were richer? A focusing illusion,”

   Science, 312, 1908–10.

Layard, Richard, 2005, Happiness: lessons from a new science, New York, The Penguin

   Press.

Leigh, Andrew and Justin Wolfers, 2006, “Happiness and the human development index:

   Australia is not a paradox,” The Australian Economic Review, 39(2), 176–84.

Preston, Samuel H., 1975, “The changing relation between mortality and level of

   economic development,” Population Studies, 29, 231–48.

Robbins, Lionel, 1938, “Interpersonal comparisons of utility: a comment,” Economic

   Journal, 48, 635–41.

Sen, Amartya K., 1999, Development as freedom, New York, Knopf.

Sen, Amartya K., 2002, Health: perception versus observation, British Medical Journal,

   324, 860–1.

Veenhoven Ruut, 1991, “Is happiness relative?” Social Indicators Research, 24, 1–34.

Williams, Alan, 2001, “Science or marketing at WHO? A commentary on “World Health

   2000,” Health Economics, 10, 93–100.

World Health Organization, World Health Report 2000—Health systems, improving

   performance, Geneva. WHO.




                                          36
                                                Table 1

Cross-country regressions of average life-satisfaction on the logarithm of per capita
                                       GDP

                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
Income cutoff         None        None         y<          y >=         y>=         None         None
                                               12,000      12,000       20.000
lny                   0.850       –0.859       0.708       1.743        0.617       0.751        0.677
s.e.                  (0.051)     (0.778)      (0.085)     (0.287)      (0.649)     (0.081)      (0.064)

(lny)2                --          0.101        --          --           --          --           --
s.e.                              (0.046)

lny*I(y>12,000)                                                                     0.032        --
s.e.                                                                                (0.021)

lny*I(y>20,000)                                                                     --           0.073
s.e.                                                                                             (0.018)
R2              0.716             0.728        0.480       0.521        0.040       0.722        0.752

Number of             114         114          78          36           24          114          114
countries

Notes: y is real chained GDP per capita in 2003 in 2000 international $ from the Penn World Table version
6.2. I(y>12,000) is an indicator variable that is 1 if y is greater than 12000, similarly for I(y>20,000).
Regressions are not weighted by population.




                                                     37
                                                 Table 2

Cross-country regressions of average life-satisfaction on levels and lags of per capita
                           GDP and on life-expectancy


                             (1)            (2)             (3)            (5)            (6)
Income cutoff                None           None            None           y < 12,000 y >=
                                                                                      12,000
ln y 2003                    0.860          0.890           0.910          0.698          1.297
s.e.                         (0.049)        (0.053)         (0.110)        (0.173)        (0.359)

growth rate 00–03            –4.47           –3.65          –4.64          –3.50          –8.02
s.e.                         (1.41)         (1.58)          (1.39)         (1.52)         (5.76)

growth rate 90–00            --             –3.32           --             --             --
s.e.                                        (2.51)

Life expectancy 2000         --             --              –0.009         0.001          0.038
s.e.                                                        (0.011)        (0.014)        (0.046)

LE 2000 – LE 1990            --             --              0.047          0.036          –0.074
s.e.                                                        (0.019)        (0.022)        (0.120)
R2                           0.740          0.763           0.757          0.556          0.582

Number of countries          114            103             114            78             36

Notes: See Table 1. Among the countries that are dropped between columns (2) and (3) are Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Latvia, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Ukraine.




                                                   38
                                               Table 3

                 Cross-country regressions of average health-satisfaction

                             (1)                 (2)                (3)                (5)
ln y 2003                    0.0219              0.0472             0.0156             0.0127
s.e.                         (0.006)             (0.014)            (0.014)            (0.014)

growth rate 00–03            –1.346               –1.384            –0.722             –0.725
s.e.                         (0.225)             (0.219)            (0.238)            (0.231)

Life expectancy 2000         --                  –0.003             –0.000             –0.000
s.e.                                             (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.002)

LE 2000 – LE 1990            --                  0.007              0.001              0.000
s.e.                                             (0.002)            (0.003)            (0.003)

east                         --                  --                 –0.137             –0.118
                                                                    (0.024)            (0.024)

ssa                          --                  --                 –0.056             –0.041
                                                                    (0.034)            (0.034)

hiv                          --                  --                 0.015              –0.001
                                                                    (0.036)            (0.035)

confidence in                --                  --                 --                 0.121
healthcare                                                                             (0.045)
R2                           0.303               0.357              0.529              0.559

Number of countries          112                 112                112                112

Notes: East is a dummy that is one for Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union, SSA is a dummy that
is one for sub-Saharan Africa, and HIV is a dummy that is one if the estimated prevalence of HIV/AIDS is
greater than 5 percent among 15 to 49 year olds.




                                                      39
                         Legend                         3.1 - 4.5        4.5 - 5.5           5.5 - 6.5      6.5 - 7.5   7.5 - 8.5   Missing




Figure 1: Life satisfaction around the world: population means of 0 to 10

                                                                                                              Denmark Age 70+
             8




                                                                            Ages 15-19               Finland
                                                             Ages 20-29
                                                                                                                                         USA
            7




                                        Brazil                                                                UK
                                                    Mexico
                                                                                                         Japan
Mean life satisfaction




                             Pakistan
              6




                         India
                                                                                     Korea
                                                                                                         Ages 50-59
                                                                                                         & 60-69
                                                               Russia
5




                                                                        Ages 40-49
                                                   Ages 30-39
                                           China
            4
            3




                         0                        10000                20000               30000                                              40000
                                                 GDP per capita in 2003, 2000 PPP chained dollars, PWT 6.2

Figure 2: Life satisfaction, per capita GDP, and age




                                                                                             40
                                               78
Mean life satisfaction

                                               6
                                               5
                                               4
                                               3




                                                                       6               7                  8             9               10             11

                                                                                    GDP per capita in 2003, 2000 PPP chained dollars, PWT 6.2
Figure 3: Life satisfaction and the logarithm of GDP per capita
                  Avergae life satisfaction from World Values Survey




                                                                                           COL                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                           DNK       DNK        CHE
                                                                                                                       PRI
                                                                                         MEX                             SWEISL    ISL
                                                                                                                                   SWE
                                                               8




                                                                           GHA                                IRL    FIN  AUS  NOR
                                                                                                                            CAN NLDCAN
                                                                                                                           FIN      SWE
                                                                                       MEX      IRL                GBR NLD FIN   BELUSA NOR     USA     USA
                                                                                                                                                       NOR
                                                                                        CHL                                    GBR GBRAUS
                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                       BRA                             BEL
                                                                                           ARG                                ITA
                                                                            CHN     DOMBRA                     PRT ESP
                                                     7




                                                                                            HUN CHL
                                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                PHL
                                                                               CHN       ZAF   ARG                                   FRA JPN
                                                                           NGA       POL VEN  KOR ESP      ITA FRA
                                                                           NGA                               ESP
                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                          SVN                         JPN
                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                            BGD PERTUR  POL           CZE SVN
                                                                             IND
                                                                            IND     TUR ZAF SVK
                                                                                          HRV HUNEST
                                           6




                                                                                     ROM
                                                                                   MKD
                                                                                         ZAF
                                                                             BIH
                                                                             AZE   KOR              RUS

                                                                                                 EST
                                                                                               LTU
                                5




                                                                                             LVA
                                                                                 GEO        BGR
                                                                                               RUS
                                                                              ARM            BLR
                     4




                                                                                    UKR
                                                                              MDA

                                                                       0                         10,000                     20,000                30,000
                                                                                                          GDP per capita in 2003

Figure 4: Life satisfaction and national income from the World Values Surveys,
1981, 1990, and 1996




                                                                                                                   41
                                                                                                                    8
                                     8




                                                                                                                        mean life satisfaction (World Poll)
                                                                                                                    7
                     mean life satisfaction (WVS)
                                              7




                                                                                                                    6
                                   6




                                                                                                                    5
                       5




                                                                                                                    4
                                     4




                                                                                                                    3
                                                    6           7              8            9             10   11
                                                                            Log of GDP per capita in 2003

Figure 5: Life Satisfaction and log per capita income, World Poll and World Values
Surveys compared
                         7




                                                                                                       CZE
                         6




                                                                                    SVN         LTU
Mean life satisfaction
                         5




                                                                                      UZB
                         4




                                                                                                ARM      UKR
                                                                                    GEO


                                               Countries not labeled are: POL, SVK, AZE, EST,
                         3




                                               KAZ, KGZ, MDA, RUS, BLR
                                                        20                  40                    60           80
                                                                                       Age

Figure 6: Declining life-satisfaction with age in Eastern Europe and the FSU


                                                                                          42
                                                         8




                                                                     CAN

                                                                                                                 USA
                                  7.5




                                                                                                                                  NZL
             Mean life satisfaction




                                                                                              AUS

                                                                                                                                     GBR


                                                                                                                                      IRL
              7                                          6.5




                                                                   20                        40                           60                         80
                                                                                                          Age

  Figure 7: U-shaped life satisfaction in rich English-speaking countries
                                                         1
Fraction of the population satisfied with their health




                                                                                                                            KWT
                                                                                                  SAU
                                                                           VEN                                                                    ARE




                                                                                 ZAF
                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                               USA


                                                                                                                          JPN
                                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                       KAZ
                                                                           ROM
                                                                   UGA                       HUN
                                                                                                              15-20
                                                         .6




                                                                                    BEL
                                                               RWA         ARM                           20-30
                                                                     GEO                    RUS
                                                                                                      30-40           Circles are proportional to population
                                                                                                                      and are for averages over all ages > 15
                                                                             UKR              40-50
                                                                                                                           (No data for China or Iraq)
                                                                                          50-60
                                                                                  60-70
                                                         .4




                                                                           70+
                                                               0                 10000                   20000                  30000                  40000
                                                                                 Per capita GDP in 2003, 2000 chained PPP dollars
  Figure 8: Health satisfaction, age, and income




                                                                                                                 43
                                                                     Blue circles age 60-70
                                    .8

                                                                                                       70 plus
                                                                                                            60-70
       Fraction reporting disability




                                                                                                                  50-60
                               .6




                                                                                                                     40-50
                                                                                                                        30-40
                                                                                                                           20-30
                                                                                                                               15-20
                  .4                .2




                                                                            Black circles age 15-19
                                     0




                                                            0                 10000                   20000                    30000   40000
                                                                            Per capita GDP in 2003, 2000 chained PPP dollars
 Figure 9: Disability, age, and income
                                                      1.1
Fraction of the population satisfied with their health
                          0.9           1.0




                                                                                                                                AUT

                                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                 USA                                       CAN
             0.8




                                                                                                                           GBR
                                  0.7




                                                                20                            40                          60           80
                                                                                                      AGE


 Figure 10: Health satisfaction and age, selected rich countries




                                                                                                             44
                                                         1
Fraction of the population satisfied with their health
                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                              SVN
                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                ARM
                                                         .4
                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                   UKR
                                                         0




                                                                                                            20                         40      AGE                60                       80



Figure 11: Health satisfaction and age, Eastern Europe and FSU
                                                                                                    1
                                                        Mean confidence in health system (weighted)




                                                                                                                                                                       SGP
                                                                                                            VNM           THA         MYS                                AUT
                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                          ARE
                                                                                                                      CUB
                                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                                    NOR




                                                                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                                                            JPN
                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                                KOR              ITA


                                                                                                                                              GRC          PRI
                                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                               .4




                                                                                                                  ZWE       BRA
                                                                                                        ETH                                     TTO
                                                                                                                    MAR
                                                                                                                           UKR          RUS
                                                                                                            MRT

                                                                                                            TCD           POL         LTU
                                                     .2




                                                                                                        0                   10000               20000                    30000              40000
                                                                                                                      Per capita GDP in 2003, 2000 chained PPP dollars

Figure 12: Satisfaction with healthcare and income




                                                                                                                                                      45
