NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL PROPERTY RIGHTS IN FINANCIAL CONTRACTING
Kenneth Ayotte
Patrick Bolton
Working Paper 13316
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13316

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

We would like to thank law audiences at Columbia, Virginia, Northwestern, Berkeley, Chicago, Yale
and ALEA 2007, business/finance audiences at Columbia, Haas, Fuqua, and Oxford. Special thanks
to Jesse Fried, Henry Hansmann, Avery Katz, Ed Morrison, Eric Posner, and Eric Talley for helpful
discussions and feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Kenneth Ayotte and Patrick Bolton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Property Rights in Financial Contracting
Kenneth Ayotte and Patrick Bolton
NBER Working Paper No. 13316
August 2007
JEL No. K11,K12
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose a theory of optimal property rights in a financial contracting setting. Following
recent contributions in the property law literature, we emphasize the distinction between contractual
rights, that are only enforceable against the parties themselves, and property rights, that are also enforeceable
against third parties outside the contract. Our analysis starts with the following question: which contractual
agreements should the law allow parties to enforce as property rights? Our proposed answer to this
question is shaped by the overall objective of minimizing due diligence (reading) costs and investment
distortions that follow from the inability of third-party lenders to costlessly observe pre-existing rights
in a borrower's property. Borrowers cannot reduce these costs without the law's help, due to an inability
to commit to protecting third-parties from redistribution. We find that the law should take a more
restrictive approach to enforcing rights against third-parties when these rights are i) more costly for
third-parties to discover, ii) more likely to redistribute value from third-parties, and iii) less likely to
increase efficiency. We find that these qualitative principles are often reflected in observed legal rules,
including the enforceability of negative covenants; fraudulent conveyance; corporate veil-piercing;
and limits on assignability.
Kenneth Ayotte
Northwestern University
School of Law
357 East Chicago Avenue
Chicago, IL 60611
ka2051@columbia.edu
Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

The economics of contracting literature and legal scholarship conceive of property rights in
very diﬀerent ways. Economists, starting with the seminal contribution of Coase (1960), emphasize the role of property rights as a starting point for contracting. While the traditional
statement of the “Coase theorem” stresses the irrelevance of the allocation of property rights
for economic eﬃciency, later contributions by Alchian and Demsetz (1972) and Jensen and
Meckling (1976) on the one hand argue that property rights can aﬀect incentives, due to the
status of the property owner as a residual claimant, and Williamson (1979) and Klein, Crawford and Alchian (1978) on the other argue that property rights provide protection against
ex-post opportunism. Subsequently, Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990)
have defined property rights instead as residual rights of control, and have shown that allocations of property rights can be valuable in alleviating holdup problems when contracts
are incomplete. These formal analyses of property rights have been used to explain firm
boundaries, capital structure, and authority relationships within organizations.
Although there may be diﬀerences in their conceptions of property rights, economists
usually start from the perspective that property rights are optimal allocations of rights
within a contracting coalition. This perspective, and its implication for the role of the legal
system, is important. When all aﬀected parties start around a common bargaining table, as
is often assumed in economic models, there is no role for a legal system beyond enforcing the
contractual agreements reached by the parties. Left to their own devices, rational parties will
be expected to allocate all relevant rights contractually, in a way that maximizes total social
surplus.1 As a result, the economist’s framework to date has little to oﬀer in the way of a
positive analysis that explains features of property and contract law, nor does this framework
oﬀer normative prescriptions for the design of these laws, other than the recommendation
that voluntary agreements should always be strictly enforced.
The economist’s conception of property rights stands in sharp contrast to the concept
1

Economists’ viewpoint often presupposes that the law is also necessary to defend an initial allocation of

ownership rights to assets (however they may be determined), but this is not entirely obvious. Even if the
law is completely silent on this issue and all assets are in the “public domain” at the outset, if all parties
are available to bargain over the uses of assets going forward, eﬃciency is achievable.

This implies that

legal intervention in the realm of property rights (over and above enforcing contracts) is necessary only when
third-parties outside the initial contracting coalition are aﬀected.

2

of property as defined in recent legal scholarship (Merrill and Smith 2000, 2001a, 2001b,
Hansmann and Kraakman 2002). This literature distinguishes property rights from ordinary
contractual rights by defining property rights as rights in rem (rights to assets that are good
against third-parties), while contractual rights are rights in personam (good only against the
contracting parties themselves). In other words, property rights are unique because they bind
not only the parties to a contract, but also bind third-parties who lie outside a contracting
coalition. In this paper, we create the first formal model to explore the consequences of this
definition of a property right. Specifically, our definition of a property right follows the one
used by Hansmann and Kraakman (2002):
“Property rights diﬀer from contract rights in that a property right in an asset,
unlike a contract right, can be enforced against subsequent transferees of other
rights in the asset.”
The importance of this definition of property rights is that the law can play a more
active role in increasing the eﬃciency of contractual agreements when third-parties outside
a contracting coalition become relevant.2

When information about pre-existing rights is

costly to acquire, these third-parties may be unknowingly aﬀected by the rights of others.
As a result, the law, as these authors argue, might optimally standardize the property rights
that can be created to limit externalities to unrelated parties (Merrill and Smith 2000), and
it may also set limits on the notice required to make property rights enforceable (Hansmann
and Kraakman 2002).
With this in rem feature of property in mind, we formally analyze the design of property
laws in a financial contracting setting.

We start with a firm run by an agent (call the

agent A) that requires funding from two lenders, who each provide valuable capital to an
investment project, but each lender contracts with the firm at a diﬀerent point in time. As a
result, the lenders may have competing claims to the firm’s cash flows, and knowledge of the
rights of pre-existing loan contracts may be imperfect.3 The financial contracting context
2

We should note that there are alternative definitions of what constitutes a “property right” in legal

scholarship. For example, some define a property right as a right that is enforced through a “property rule”
such as specific performance, while a contractual right is a right that is enforced through monetary damages.
(Calabresi and Melamed 1972; Ayres and Talley 1995; Kaplow and Shavell 1995) This definition gives rise
to diﬀerent legal design problems than the one we consider here, however.
3
Our model assumes a sharp diﬀerence regarding the information about the contracts of other parties,

3

is a particularly important environment in which to consider these issues, because of the
possibility that insolvency can result in incomplete satisfaction of a lender’s claim. Thus, a
mere in personam right to sue a bankrupt debtor can be substantially less valuable than an
in rem right (such as priority rights to seize and sell collateral) that also binds past and/or
future creditors.

When the law allows for the borrower to give an early lender (call this

lender P 1) stronger property-like protections, it can alleviate credit constraints by protecting
P 1 against borrower moral hazard and the claims of a later lender (call this lender P 2). On
the other hand, P 2 might act more conservatively in extending funds when he is uncertain
about the pre-existing rights of P 1. He might insist on being compensated for due diligence
expenses to verify these pre-existing rights, and if he can not be suﬃciently reassured, might
forgo lending entirely.
Our model generates several findings.

First, in a world without reading costs, there

can be aﬃrmative reasons for the law to allow A to grant P 1 not only seniority over P 2
(say, through a first-priority security interest in the final cash flow), but also an additional
property right, known in law as a restraint on alienability. This right prevents A from legally
transferring some of his remaining cash flow rights to a new lender. This right is valuable
in a world in which monitoring A’s behavior is costly for P 1, and A has the incentive to
over-borrow from P 2 to continue his project ineﬃciently at P 1’s expense.

Intuitively, to

ensure that his claim is repaid, P 1 may require not only seniority, but also that A retain
suﬃcient cash flow rights so that his incentives to make the project succeed are preserved.
Given this aﬃrmative justification for restraints on alienability (protecting earlier lenders
from dilutive contracts by subsequent lenders), one might wonder why the law often limits
the enforceability of these rights in practice. Our model suggests an answer when P 2 must
expend reading costs to observe and fully understand the pre-existing rights of P 1. If P 1
and A anticipate that P 2 will not conduct any costly due diligence to discover P 1’s rights,
this would open the door for P 1 to write a redistributive contract with A that diverts as
much value from P 2 as the law will enforce. With this possibility in mind, P 2 will insist
that A reimburses him for suﬃcient due diligence costs, enough so that P 1 and A will not be
tempted to redistribute. In equilibrium, ineﬃcient deadweight reading costs are incurred,
which is costly to acquire, and the observability of one’s own contract, which is assumed to be costlessly
understood by the parties themselves.

Thus, our model leaves room for legal intervention into property

rights, but not into contractual rights. Nevertheless, the assumption of limited observability has been made
in the contractual context; see Katz (1990).

4

and when these costs are suﬃciently large, credit rationing to A may occur.
Importantly, all of these deadweight reading costs are borne by A in equilibrium, but A
cannot eliminate them, because he cannot (in a costless, observable way) credibly demonstrate to P 2 that he has not written a redistributive contract with P 1. This logic diﬀers
from Merrill and Smith (2000), who argue that legal restrictions on property rights are valuable because they limit externalities across firms (i.e. an A-P 1-P 2 coalition increase due
diligence costs for other A-P 1-P 2 coalitions by creating a novel property right).4

In our

model, restrictions can be valuable because they reduce externalities within a firm (i.e. A
and P 1 impose due diligence costs on P 2, which A pays for in equilibrium, but can not
reduce without the credible commitment provided by the law).
Our model results in three qualitative principles that govern optimal enforcement of
property rights. We find that the law should take a more restrictive approach to enforcing
a right (given by A to P 1) against a third party (P 2) when the right (i) is more costly for
P 2 to discover; (ii) is more redistributive from an uninformed third-party, and (iii) is less
likely to increase the eﬃciency of contractual relationships. We analyze a series of examples
in financial contracting settings, and find that these principles are often reflected in existing
law. The principles echo central themes in Hansmann and Kraakman (2002), who argue that
an optimally designed law balances the value of a right to its users against the incremental
verification costs borne by non-users. Our model shows that when redistributive rights are
enforceable, these verification costs are most severe.

Hence, an optimal law restricts the

enforceability of these rights in particular.5
The rest of the paper will proceed as follows. Section 2 will introduce the general model
4

Merrill and Smith use the phrase “zone of privity” to include all parties that are relevant to a particular

transaction, which would include P 1, P 2 and A in our setup. Unlike Merrill and Smith, who argue that
all costs inside the zone of privity are internalized, we find that because of reading costs and the threat
of opportunism, P 1 and A can not internalize the costs to P 2, giving rise to a role for the law even if
externalities outside the zone of privity are not important.
5
Our analysis is also related to the large literature on optimal priority and the eﬃciency of secured
credit.

Bebchuk and Fried (1996, 1997) argue for mandatory limits on the priority of secured creditors

in bankruptcy; unlike our model, their argument relies heavily on the existence of involuntary creditors or
small creditors who find it costly to adjust interest rates. Schwartz (1991) argues that current law regarding
creditor priorities should be replaced by a pure first-in-time rule, which is similar to the Coasean legal
environment we consider here. Schwartz’s model allows for costs of revealing information to creditors, but
does not consider the role the law might play in reducing them.

5

and Section 3 solves for optimal contracts in a world where all information about pre-existing
contracts is costlessly observable by third-parties. Section 4 solves the model in the presence
of reading costs by third-parties, which leads to our key results regarding the optimal legal
design of property rights and generates comparative statics that can be applied to existing
features of the law. Section 5 discusses some of these features and how they relate to the
principles in our model, and Section 6 concludes.

2

Model

We consider a simple model of a firm with a single project that requires two rounds of
financing from two diﬀerent lenders. At date 1, a wealthless agent (A) is endowed with a
valuable idea, and must raise an amount of i1 from a principal (P 1) to start the project.
To continue the project at date 2, the agent requires an additional cash input of i2 from a
second principal (P 2). To focus on the interface between principal P 1’s and P 2’s claims,
we shall make the restrictive assumption that P 2 can contribute no more than the required
investment outlay i2 and that P 1 can not contribute the entire amount i1 + i2 6 . Also, both
principals operate in competitive lending markets, all parties are assumed to be risk-neutral,
and there is no discounting.

2.1

Technological assumptions

If the project receives two rounds of financing (i.e. it is continued at date 2 rather than
liquidated) it produces a random cash flow at date 3. If the project does not receive the
required funding at date 2, it is liquidated for a known value L > 0. The final cash flow
outcome depends on the realization of the state of nature at date 2, which becomes observable
to P 2 and A at date 2 before the continuation decision is made. We allow for two states of
6

There may be several reasons why each principal is only willing to invest a limited amount. For one,

the lenders may be wealth constrained, or they may prefer to have a limited exposure in a firm for riskdiversification reasons. Finally, principal P 1 may be reluctant to invest more than i1 for fear that the agent A
simply wastes the surplus funds. It is possible to extend our model to allow for an endogenous determination
of each principal’s investment and to show that under some quite intuitive conditions each principal would
not want to invest more than the required amount ij . However, for the sake of simplicity and brevity we
omit the discussion of this more general model.

6

State realized (s)

Continuation
decision

Effort
decision

Date 3 expected payoffs

e=1

X − i1 − i2 − c

e=0

pX + (1 − p )γL − i1 − i2

Continue

sg
Liquidate

sb

L − i1
pX + (1 − p )γL − i1 − i2

Continue

Liquidate

L − i1

Figure 1:
nature, ŝ ∈ {sg , sb }. The good state of nature, sg , occurs with probability π and the bad
state, sb , with probability 1 − π.

In the bad state of nature the project yields a cash-flow of X at date 3 with probability

p and with probability (1 − p) the project yields no cash flow but a liquidation value γL,

where γ < 1. In the good state of nature the cash-flow outcome of the project depends on
the agent’s eﬀort choice e ∈ {0, 1} at date 2. If the agent chooses e = 1 then the project
yields a final cash flow X with certainty. If the agent chooses e = 0, the project yields the

same cash-flow as in the bad state of nature. The agent’s private cost of choosing high eﬀort
(e = 1) is c > 0, and the cost of e = 0 is normalized to zero.
We summarize the date 2 timeline and the project’s expected payoﬀs in Figure 1.

2.2

Contracting assumptions

The agent A and principal P 1 can write a bilateral long-term debt contract at date 1.
Similarly, the agent and principal P 2 can write a bilateral debt contract at date 2. Each
bilateral contract specifies the amount the principal agrees to lend ij and a repayment Fj at
date 3. The contract between P 1 and A can also specify a maximum amount Φ1 of date 3
cash flows A is allowed to pledge to P 2, and whether the claim F1 is senior, on par, or junior
to F2 .
7

Importantly, our assumptions rule out the possibility that contract terms may be contingent on the state of nature sl , l = g, b. We justify this restriction on the usual grounds that
the state of nature sl , while observable to A and P 2 at date 2, is not verifiable in court.7 We
also rule out the possibility for now that P 1 is available to monitor the firm, or to renegotiate
his contract with A at date 2 after the realization of the state of nature sl . Thus, P 1 is a
passive lender who can only lend at date 1 and collect at the final date. This assumption is
admittedly strong, but is made to demonstrate in the simplest possible fashion the potential
conflicts between P 1 and P 2 when they lend at diﬀerent points in time.8
The four key economic issues in our contracting problem are as follows. First, the agent’s
repayment obligations Fj must be low enough that the agent has an incentive to put in high
eﬀort (e = 1) in state sg . Second, F1 must be suﬃciently low to make room for continuation
financing by P 2 at date 2, whenever continuation is eﬃcient. Third, P 1 also faces a threat of
dilution of the value of his claim F1 at date 2, when the agent issues a new claim F2 to P 2. It
is, of course, possible for P 1 to limit this dilution risk by issuing a senior claim F1 . However,
as we show below, issuing a senior claim is not a suﬃcient protection against dilution in our
setup. To obtain full protection P 1 must also specify a limit Φ1 on date 3 cash flows the
agent is allowed to pledge to P 2. Fourth, and most importantly for our analysis, the very
protections against the risk of dilution that P 1 specifies in his contract may, in turn, create
a risk of loss for P 2. This latter risk arises from the fact that P 1’s contract with A may
contain covenants that limit P 2’s claims on the firm’s cash flows, and the due diligence that
P 2 must expend to discover these covenants in the fine print of P 1’s contract is costly and
imperfect. We discuss the formal representation of the due diligence technology in Section
4.
7

The non-verifiability of the state is not at all crucial to the results, but it simplifies the set of contracts

that can be written.
8
The assumption that P 1 is not available at all at date two implies among other things that P 1 cannot
accelerate his loan in response to an attempt by P 2 to collude with A against P 1.

While repayment

accelerations do sometimes occur in practice, they require that P 1 monitor A carefully, which is costly.
Moreover a surprise acceleration of a loan might also hurt P 2.

8

3

Optimal Contracting in a world with no information
costs

Economic models of contracting with multiple principals, similar to the one outlined above,
are cast in a world where, i) there are no information costs; ii) there is freedom of contracting;
iii) property rights are exogenously given; and, iv) contracts are perfectly enforced by courts9 .
What precise form property rights take in these models is typically not spelled out explicitly.
It is helpful, therefore, to begin our discussion in this section by teasing out explicitly the
underlying assumption on property rights in these models. We then proceed with an analysis
of optimal contracts when there are no information costs.

3.1

Legal rules: The Coasean environment

In this section we attempt to spell out the benchmark legal environment that has become
standard in the economics literature. We refer to this environment as the Coasean legal
environment. It has, in our view, the following three main components:
a) Well-defined, fully-alienable, and fully-divisible property rights
In our common agency setup, A’s initial endowment is his idea (and his human
capital), and the principals P 1 and P 2 are endowed with their cash stocks. The assumption
on property rights is that these individuals begin at date one with full ownership rights to
these assets and that these will be perfectly enforced by a court. Full ownership rights are
defined as a bundle of property rights similar to the notions of usus, fructus, and abusus
under Roman law:
Thus, the full owner of an asset has all of the following property rights:
a) the exclusive right to use the asset (usus),
b) the exclusive right to receive income from the asset (fructus),
c) the exclusive right to modify or transform the asset (abusus).
Furthermore, we also single out among abusus rights,
d) the exclusive right to transfer any subset of these rights by contract (alienability).
Thus, in the Coasean legal environment, full ownership is a starting point, and the bundle
of property rights that comprise ownership can be freely divided.
9

See Bernheim and Whinston (1985, 1986), Segal (1999) and Bolton and Dewatripont (2005)

9

b) Freedom of Contracting: Courts will enforce all contracts regarding transfers of
property rights (based on information they can verify), with no restriction on the space of
allowable contracts, other than that the property right being transferred must be under the
initial ownership of one of the contracting parties. Note that this definition allows for parties
to write enforceable contracts that place restraints on alienability. In the present context,
for example, if A has the right to the cash flows from an asset X, she may retain the right
to spend the cash, but she could also transfer to P 1 the right to sell these cash flows to a
third-party or to pledge them as collateral for a debt contract.
c) First-in-time (FT) rule: in the Coasean legal environment, when any inconsistency
arises between contracts, the first contract written will have priority.
We should emphasize the extreme nature of the FT rule in the Coasean legal environment,
which diﬀers from most real-world laws of property and contract. To give a concrete example
that will be relevant to our model, suppose A writes the following sequence of contracts with
P 1 and P 2:
C1 : P 1 will lend 45 dollars to A and is entitled to the first 50 dollars of the firm’s final
cash flow. Any subsequent claim on the firm’s cash flow by any third-party is null and void.
C2 : P 2 will lend 25 dollars to A and is entitled to 30 dollars of the firm’s final cash flow.
Now suppose that the final cash flow is 100. In the Coasean legal environment, P 1 would
receive 50, A would receive 50, and P 2 would receive zero. In contract C1 , A transferred
away his right to pledge future cash flows to subsequent lenders. Thus, the FT rule would
require that P 2’s claim be voided; he would have no right to recover anything from A, even
though A had knowledge of his inability to pledge cash flow to P 2, and he receives a payout
that would allow him to pay P 2 in full.

3.2

Optimal Contracting with no reading costs

We shall restrict ourselves to a subset of parameter values for which the optimal contract
for P 1 and A, and for P 2 and A, is such that continuation with high eﬀort is optimal in the
good state and liquidation at date 2 is optimal in the bad state.
For ease of exposition, we will use the notation Rg to denote the maximum pledgeable
income to P 1 in the good state, conditional on continuation with eﬀort:
Rg ≡ X −

c
− i2
1−p

10

(1)

To see that this is the maximum pledgeable income to P 1, note that in order to encourage
A to choose high eﬀort, A requires a suﬃcient stake wg in the output when the project
succeeds.

An optimal contract will pay the agent wg when the cash flow is X and 0 if

output is 0. Thus, in order to elicit eﬀort from A, the following incentive compatibility
constraint must be satisfied:
wg − c ≥ pwg
which reduces to

wg ≥

c
.
1−p

c
. Since P 2 will not
Therefore, the maximum pledgeable income to all lenders is X − 1−p

participate unless he receives an expected payment equal to his monetary contribution, P 2
must be repaid i2 . Thus the maximum pledgeable income to P 1 is as in (1).
With this notation, the parameter restrictions we maintain throughout the paper are:
Assumptions:
A1)
X − c − i2 > L

The first assumption tells us that in the good state, continuation with high eﬀort is
economically eﬃcient relative to liquidation.
A2)
pX + (1 − p)γL − i2 < L
Assumption A2 says that continuation with low eﬀort is ineﬃcient relative to liquidation;
hence liquidating the project will be optimal in the bad state at date 2. Assumptions A1
and A2 together imply also that high eﬀort is eﬃcient relative to low eﬀort in the good state.
A3)
πRg + (1 − π)L ≥ i1
Assumption A3 implies that the first-best action plan, which involves continuation in
the good state with eﬀort and liquidation in the bad state, can generate enough cash flow
to repay P 1 for his loan. Since we assume that L < i1 , A3 also implies that Rg > L; i.e.

11

continuation with eﬀort produces more pledgeable income to P 1 than liquidation in the good
state.
Finally, we shall also assume that:
A4)
X − Rg ≥

i2
.
p

As we will show in the next section, assumption A4 implies that P 1 may be at risk of
dilution of his claim in the bad state if he writes a debt contract with A where Φ1 = X.
This assumption is central to our analysis, since it implies that P 1 will not be fully protected
against the risk of dilution by seniority alone.
3.2.1

First-best outcome

Suppose a benevolent, social welfare-maximizing planner could observe the state of the world
and make all investment and eﬀort decisions. Under the assumptions above (A1-A4), the
social planner would choose to fund the project, to continue the project in the good state at
date 2 while at the same time choosing high eﬀort (e = 1), and to liquidate the project at
date 2 in the bad state. This first-best action plan would maximize social welfare, which is
given by
π(X − c − i2 ) + (1 − π)L − i1
3.2.2

Implementation: state-contingent contracts

If the contracting parties can write (bilateral) state-contingent contracts, then this first-best
action plan can be implemented as a subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) of the following
contracting game.
At date 1, the agent makes the following take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer of a state-contingent
debt contract to P 1. Agent A borrows i1 from P 1 and in exchange agrees to:
1. liquidate the project and to pay the entire liquidation proceeds L to P 1 at date 2 in
the bad state, and
2. to repay P 1 a face value of debt
F1 =

i1 − (1 − π)L
π
12

at date 3 in the good state, and finally
3. to make F1 senior to any subsequent claims on the firm.
Given that this contract covers P 1’s investment i1 in expected terms, P 1’s (weak) best
response is to accept this contract.
It is easy to see that the best response to this contract for A in the good state at date 2
is to oﬀer P 2 the following contract: A borrows i2 dollars from P 2 in exchange for a junior
debt claim with face value F2 = i2 . Again, as this contract covers P 2’s investment i2 , P 2’s
(weak) best response is to accept this contract.
Finally, to see that A’s contract oﬀer at date 1 is a best response to the respective
equilibrium moves of P 1 at date 1, and A and P 2 at date 2, observe that under this contract
A gets the first-best expected payoﬀ π(X −c−i2 )+(1−π)L−i1 which is equal to total social

welfare under the first-best action plan. This is the highest expected payoﬀ A could achieve

in any equilibrium, since any deviation from the first-best action plan at date 2, induced
by another contract oﬀer, would be anticipated by P 1 and priced into the loan contract
through a higher F1 (i.e. a higher interest rate). In other words, A’s private objective is
perfectly aligned with social welfare in a Coasean legal environment, and therefore A’s choice
of contract implements the first-best social outcome.
3.2.3

Incomplete contracts: the insuﬃciency of seniority

While a first-best outcome is straightforward to implement under complete contracting, it
is less obvious under incomplete contracting (when courts cannot observe the state of the
world). At first glance, one might expect that a simple senior debt contract alone would be
suﬃcient to generate the socially eﬃcient outcome even with non-contingent debt contracts.10
Indeed, if P 1 has a senior debt claim one might expect that this would generate the
right social incentives for P 2 to refuse to lend in the bad state, since he bears more of the
cost of failure than P 111 . Even so, under assumption A4, this is not the case. Since under
assumption A4 we have X > Rg + ip2 , it is still in the joint interest of P 2 and A to continue
the firm ineﬃciently at the expense of P 1, and thus to dilute the value of P 1’s debt claim.
10

The idea that junior debt can be used to dilute senior claims in the presence of moral hazard was

originally formalized in Bizer and DeMarzo (1992).
11
Since P 1’s loan is senior, he will recover the entire cash flow in the low state if the project fails, γL while
P 2 will receive nothing. Thus, the consequences of failure are more severe for P 2 than for P 1.

13

Indeed, P 2 is then willing to lend i2 and take a junior debt claim with face value F2 =

i2
p

and A would then receive an expected payoﬀ from continuation of
p(X − F1 − F2 ) > p(X − Rg −

i2
) > 0,
p

which is strictly higher than what A gets in liquidation.12
Thus, under the parameter assumptions in the model, seniority alone is not suﬃcient
to protect P 1. Though social welfare is destroyed by the ineﬃcient continuation, the value
transferred from P 1 to the P 2/A coalition outweighs this loss when A4 holds. Thus, the
incentives of P 2 and A are not aligned with social welfare when a simple senior debt contract
is written. Since A bears this eﬃciency loss in equilibrium, A would prefer to give P 1
stronger rights than seniority alone in order to achieve eﬃciency and maximize his private
payoﬀ. Giving an additional property right to P 1 to specify a limit Φ1 of date 3 cash flows
A is allowed to pledge to P 2 achieves this goal.
3.2.4

The value of restraints on alienability

In the good state P 2 is willing to lend i2 in exchange for debt with face value F2 = i2 , since
the project will succeed with certainty.13 In the bad state, however, the project fails with
12

It is possible to correct this ineﬃciency by giving A a payment in the event of liquidation, of say φL,

suﬃcient to oﬀset the positive gain A would get under continuation. Deviations from absolute priority in
bankruptcy could, thus, be rationalized in our model as a way of forestalling ineﬃcient continuation.
In a somewhat richer model, however, one might be concerned that by structuring the agent’s incentives
in this way one might undermine her incentives to perform at date 1. For example, if eﬃciency requires that
A raise the probability of reaching the good state from λ to π > λ at date 1, by taking action a = 1 with
private eﬀort-cost ψ, rather than the free action a = 0, then rewarding the agent in the event of liquidation
might be counterproductive.
Indeed, the agent’s incentive constraint at date 1 :
π(X − F1 − F2 ) − ψ ≥ λ(X − F1 − F2 )
without any payment in liquidation might be satisfied, while the constraint with a payment φL in liquidation
:
π(X − F1 − F2 ) + (1 − π)φL − ψ ≥ λ(X − F1 − F2 ) + (1 − λ)φL
might not.
13
By definition of Rg , as long as P 1 is promised no more than this amount, P 2 can be promised i2 if the
good state occurs, and A will prefer high eﬀort. Therefore, the probability of success will be 1 and P 2 will

14

probability 1 − p if it is continued. As we have pointed out above, P 2 will then require a
face value of debt higher than i2 (F2 must be at least

i2
)
p

in order to be compensated for this

added default risk. Thus, the following contract will result in a first-best outcome:
Proposition 1 Under assumptions A1 to A4, an optimal contract between P 1 and A is
such that A takes a loan i1 in return for a date 3 senior (collateralized) debt repayment of
F1 =

i1 − (1 − π)L
,
π

and a commitment not to pledge more than Φ1 = i2 to P 2 at date 3.
The best response for P 2 and A at date 2, then is to sign a new loan contract only in the
good state specifying a loan of i2 in return for a (riskless) junior claim of i2 at date 3.
Proof. see appendix
In order to implement the first-best, P 1 requires not only seniority, but also that A make
a credible commitment not to pledge new cash-flow in excess of i2 . This commitment can be
achieved by transferring to P 1 (or abandoning altogether) the right to pledge the project’s
cash flows to future lenders over and above i2 . Thus, Φ1 is a form of negative covenant, which
would apply to all future debts in excess of i2 , whether these are secured or unsecured. Since
P 2 understands that A can legally pledge no more than i2 , he is not willing to lend in the
bad state, and the first-best is achievable.14 We will refer to the optimal contract between P 1
and A in Proposition 1 as the eﬃcient contract, and denote this contract C1f b .
It is important to note the eﬃciency gains that come from granting a property right in
A0 s assets to P 1 that binds P 2, instead of a mere contractual right that binds only A. To see
this, suppose that if A breaches its contract with P 1 (by promising P 2 junior debt with face
value greater than i2 ), P 1 has only a contractual right to sue A for breach of its contract,
but can not invalidate P 2’s debt. In this environment, the first-best outcome would not
obtain.15 This would follow because, at date 2, A would convey to P 2 a property right in
be repaid with certainty.
14
If P 2 can take a claim on A’s personal assets (his dividend from the firm at the end of date three) then
he would be equally happy to lend into an ineﬃcient continuation in the bad state.

Thus P 1’s right to

restrict alienability must extend beyond the corporate form and also to A’s assets more generally in order
to eﬀectively shut down P 2’s loan.
15
A similar point is made by Schwartz (1996), arguing for property-like protections for unsecured creditors
with negative covenants because contractual remedies may be insuﬃcient.

15

the project’s cash flows that binds P 1. When P 1 wins his breach of contract suit against
A, the property available to satisfy the judgment would be only the property A has left to
transfer, which would be the cash flows from the firm after paying P 2.16 Anticipating this
outcome, P 2 will be willing to lend in the bad state, and the ineﬃcient continuation will not
be prevented.17

4

Equilibrium Contracting with Reading Costs

We have shown that in our model there are eﬃciency gains to be had by allowing firms to
create restraints on their ability to alienate cash flow rights. Moreover, in a world with no
transactions costs and perfectly observable contracts, there are only benefits and no costs
to these restraints. The limits on alienability merely allow the firm to commit to protecting
early lenders against the ex-post risk of dilution at the hands of subsequent lenders. Thus,
in a perfect world with fully observable contracts there are aﬃrmative reasons to allow for
such divisions of property rights to be enforceable. In this section, we introduce contract
reading costs and show that limits on alienability also create costs for third parties. When
alienability of assets can be restricted in any way contracting parties desire, it becomes more
diﬃcult and costly for third parties to determine which assets are alienable and under what
contingencies. The reading costs third parties face are a form of negative externality that
the contracting parties impose on others. What is more, the contracting parties are not well
placed, as we shall show, to internalize these externalities.

4.1

The contracting game with reading costs

We begin this subsection with a description of the contracting game between A, P 1, and
P 2. Before negotiations between P 2 and A start, P 2 is unable to observe the contract C1
16

This argument assumes that P 1 would have no rights to sue P 2 as well (say, for tortious interference

with contract).

If this were possible, the first-best could be achieved by this means.

According to our

definition, P 1’s right to prevent additional debt would be considered a property right, since P 1 has a right
that binds a third-party rather than a right which is only good against A.
17
Of course, P 1 could take A0 s remaining cash flow right, making him indiﬀerent between continuation
and liquidation. Adding a small private benefit to continuation for A would make the property right strictly
more valuable than the contractual right only.

16

between P 1 and A without incurring reading costs. Thus, when negotiations begin, P 2 can
only form a prior belief over what type of contract P 1 and A have signed at date 1. As
in standard signaling games, P 2 can, however, rationally revise his beliefs about the initial
contract between P 1 and A when he sees A’s contract oﬀer C2 and conducts due diligence.
We assume that the contracting game at date 2 then proceeds as follows:
1. Agent A begins by making a loan contract oﬀer C2 = {i2 , F2 , ρ} to P 2, which contains

the terms of the second loan, F2 (as well as its priority status in repayment at date 3)
and also a commitment by agent A to reimburse ρ dollars of P 2’s due diligence costs.18

2. P 2 proceeds with the due diligence specified in A’s contract oﬀer19 .

Due diligence

results in an observed contract Ω(C1 ).
3. Nature decides whether P 2’s due diligence is eﬀective, which occurs with probability
P (ρ) =
ρ
).
ρ+κ

ρ
,
ρ+κ

or ineﬀective, which occurs with the complementary probability (1 −

If eﬀective, P 2 will observe (and understand) the true contract P 1 and A have

written. (Ω(C1 ) = C1 ). If ineﬀective, P 2 observes the eﬃcient contract (Ω(C1 ) = C1f b ),
regardless of the contract P 1 and A have actually written. The second lender P 2
knows P (ρ) but not nature’s decision.
4. Finally, after completing the due diligence P 2 decides whether or not to lend given his
updated beliefs about C1 .
This simple setup is intended to capture the possibility that P 1 and A may have written
terms into their contract that have the eﬀect of redistributing date 3 cash-flows to them rather
than P 2. The second lender’s uncertainty can come from two possible sources. First, he
may be unsure that he observes the entirety of the pre-existing loan contracts that A has
written. For example, he may be wary that A did not disclose a hidden obligation, such as
a loan guarantee to a parent company, that would reduce the assets available to P 2 in the
event of default. Second, even if P 2 is confident that he possesses all relevant pre-existing
contracts, some of the covenants in these contracts may be overlooked, or have implications
18

For simplicity, we assume that due diligence costs can be paid in-kind; that is, A can commit to P 1 that

these costs will be spent on due diligence (as opposed to being divertable by P 2).
19
We assume that when indiﬀerent P 2 always conducts the due diligence. Thus, P 2 always conducts a
level of due diligence that A fully reimburses.

17

for P 2’s rights that are misleading. The parameter κ > 0 then represents the diﬃculty of
discovering the meaning or implications of a clause: as κ approaches zero, even low levels
of due diligence will discover hidden terms with probability approaching one; as κ grows
toward infinity, a given due diligence expenditure discovers hidden terms with probability
approaching zero.
Although P 2 may not always discover a hidden term, he understands that when P 1’s
contract appears normal to him, he still “may have missed something”, and makes his lending
decision given this risk. Lender P 2 is aware, however, that the more due diligence that P 1
and A willingly reimburse, the less likely is the possibility that P 1 and A may have included
a redistributive clause in C1 , since discovery of the clause by P 2 would preclude further
lending and result in an ineﬃcient liquidation. Thus, due diligence gives P 2 confidence to
lend, even if it never results in complete certainty about P 1’s contract.

4.2

Equilibrium Contracting and Due Diligence

We begin our analysis by pointing out that there does not exist a Bayes-Nash equilibrium
of the game with reading costs, which implements the first-best outcome without any due
diligence by P 2. To see this point, suppose that P 2 simply follows the same lending policy
as before without reading the details of the contract between P 1 and A and hoping that P 1
and A would have written the eﬃcient contract. Could the eﬃcient contract between P 1
and A still be an equilibrium move in a world with reading costs? If so, then the presence
of reading costs for third parties would not be a serious concern for welfare, as agents would
simply continue to draft contracts as if they were in a transactions-cost free world and they
would not have to worry about imposing negative externalities on others.
However, as intuition suggests and as the next lemma establishes, when P 1 and A expect
P 2 not to do any due diligence and to follow the eﬃcient lending policy irrespective of
what form their own contract takes, then their best response is to write a contract that
involves maximal redistribution from P 2 to themselves (call this contract C1x ).

Adding

some additional notation, let Vx denote the joint continuation payoﬀ to P 1 and A in the
event that they write this maximally redistributive contract and P 2 lends20 . Then we have
20

The maximally redistributive contract C1 would set Φ1 = 0, so that P 1 and A would be able to claim

the entire cash-flow net of eﬀort costs: (X − c).
In principle, the law could even allow for negative Φ1 , implying that P 1 could seize P 2’s property (over

18

the following lemma:
Lemma 2 Suppose that P 2 always accepts the contract C2 = {i2 , i2 , 0} in the good state

without incurring any due diligence costs. Then the best response for P 1 and A is to write
a maximally redistributive contract C1x that takes the following form:
Principal P 1 agrees to lend i1 dollars to A in exchange for a senior debt claim with
face value F1 =

i1 −(1−π)L
π

and a covenant that fully restricts alienability of future cash-flows

(Φ1 = 0). In the Coasean legal environment, P 1 and A would receive the maximum possible
joint continuation payoﬀ Vx = X − c.
This lemma implies that in a Coasean legal environment in which third parties incur
contract reading costs, it will be impossible to avoid these costs completely, because this
would increase the likelihood of opportunism by P 1 and A.
We now proceed to describe what we will term the least-cost separating equilibrium of the
contracting game. This will be the equilibrium with the lowest feasible (deadweight) due
diligence costs that supports lending by P 1 and P 2 in equilibrium. As is well known, the set
of possible Bayes-Nash equilibrium outcomes in a signaling game is typically large and our
game is no exception. This multiplicity is driven by the general form the conditional belief
function can take and the weak restrictions imposed by the equilibrium consistency-of-beliefs
requirement in a Bayes-Nash equilibrium. However, in our game as in other signaling games
a particular belief function appears to be particularly reasonable intuitively.
We assume that the belief function is such that P 2 will attach positive probability weight
to at most two contracts: the eﬃcient contract C1f b , and the maximally redistributive contract
C1x . Let ν(C1 ) ∈ [0, 1] denote P 2’s belief that C1f b was written. As in standard signaling

games, P 2 can rationally revise his beliefs about C1 to ν 2 (C1 | C2 , Ω(C1 )) when he sees A’s
contract oﬀer C2 and the observed contract Ω(C1 ) that results from his investigation. We

assume this belief function takes the general form that any contract oﬀer C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ}

— where ρ is below a cutoﬀ value ρ∗ — is interpreted by P 2 as signaling the redistributive
contract C1x . In that case P 2’s updated beliefs are ν 2 (C1 | C2 , Ω(C1 )) = 0 and P 2’s best

response is to reject such a contract. On the other hand, all contract oﬀers C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ},

with ρ ≥ ρ∗ provide suﬃcient reassurance to P 2 that he is willing to investigate, and he will
lend as long as Ω(C1 ) = C1f b .

and above i2 ) if P 2 makes a loan. In a world with no reading costs, there would be no loss in enforcing
these extremely redistributive contracts, because P 2 would never sign them.

19

We now characterize the cutoﬀ ρ∗ that implements the least-cost separating equilibrium.
Consider some ρ ≥ ρ∗ , so that P 2 will lend after observing C1f b . Intuitively, P 1 and A will

find one of two possible strategies optimal given P 2’s beliefs.

One strategy is to write contract C1f b , which is optimal for P 1 and A given a fullyinformed P 2. If P 1 and A were to agree on this contract, followed by the same contract oﬀer
C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ}, their joint continuation payoﬀ in the good state would be
X − i2 − c
The other strategy is to write the maximally redistributive contract C1x , hoping that P 2
will not discover it. This contract would return the highest possible joint payoﬀ Vx = X − c

to the parties if the investigation is ineﬀective, but will result in liquidation if P 2’s due

diligence is eﬀective. The expected joint continuation payoﬀ of P 1 and A in the good state
from writing C1x is

µ

¶
µ
¶
ρ
ρ
L+ 1−
Vx
ρ+κ
ρ+κ

With these expressions in hand, the following inequality tells us for what level of due
diligence costs P 1 and A will prefer to write the eﬃcient contract, given P 2’s beliefs:
X − i2 − c ≥

µ

¶
µ
¶
ρ
ρ
L+ 1−
Vx
ρ+κ
ρ+κ

(2)

Since equilibrium requires that P 2’s beliefs must be consistent with the behavior of P 1
and A along the equilibrium path, the lowest feasible cut-oﬀ ρ∗ is given by the solution ρ for
which (2) holds as an equality:
ρ∗ =

κ{Vx − (X − i2 − c)}
X − i2 − c − L

(3)

κi2
X − i2 − c − L

(4)

In the Coasean legal environment (in which the law allows fully-flexible design of property
rights), this expression reduces to:
ρ∗ =

In the least-cost separating equilibrium, P 1 and A must set aside ρ∗ up-front to compensate P 2 for his due diligence: if they oﬀer less, P 2 will rationally believe that the contract
is redistributive and refuse to lend.
20

The final step in implementing this equilibrium is to verify that, inclusive of these due
diligence costs, P 1 and A prefer to implement an equilibrium that involves P 1 lending at
date 1, and continuing with eﬀort in the good state by borrowing from P 2. This requires a
slightly modified assumption to reflect the presence of positive reading costs:
A3b: π(Rg − ρ∗ ) + (1 − π)L ≥ i1

Under this assumption the project can feasibly repay P 1 inclusive of P 2’s due diligence
costs, which are paid only in the good state.
With these assumptions in hand, we summarize this subsection by describing fully the
least-cost separating equilibrium in the following proposition:
Proposition 3 Under the assumptions above (A1, A2, A3b, A4), the least cost separating
Bayes-Nash equilibrium of the lending game with reading costs is as follows. At date 1, P 1
and A agree on contract C1f b taking the following form:
1. P 1 lends i1 + ρ∗ to A. In turn, A invests i1 in the project and holds ρ∗ until date 2;
2. P 1 obtains a senior debt claim of F1 =

i1 +ρ∗ −(1−π)(L+ρ∗ )
,
π

and a commitment not to

pledge more than Φ1 = i2 to P 2.
At date 2, in the good state:
1. A oﬀers contract C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ∗ } to P 2,
2. P 2 conducts due diligence, accepts the contract after observing Ω(C1 ) = C1f b ,and invests
i2 in the firm;
3. A chooses high eﬀort (e = 1) and the project yields X at date 3.
At date 2 in the bad state: P 2 refuses to lend and the project is liquidated, paying L + ρ∗
to P 1.
Proof. See the appendix.
In this equilibrium, since we have assumed (by assumption A3b) that ρ∗ is not too large,
the only ineﬃciency caused by the presence of reading costs for P 2 are the deadweight costs
of due-diligence ρ∗ .

21

It is important to note, however, that the direct costs of due diligence are not the only
economically relevant costs to imperfect observability. When assumption A3b is relaxed, so
that
π(Rg − ρ∗ ) + (1 − π)L < i1 ≤ πRg + (1 − π)L,
then P 1 does not expect to be repaid his initial contribution, and refuses to lend.

As a

result, due diligence costs cause credit-rationing: firms that would otherwise receive funding
under costless observability can not obtain an initial loan from P 1.
Whether the deadweight costs are the reading costs actually expended, or the indirect
costs of underinvestment in valuable projects, it is clear that these losses will be higher when
ρ∗ is higher. A casual examination of (3), then, gives the following comparative statics:
Corollary 4 Relative to the first-best world with no reading costs, the social welfare loss in
a world with positive reading costs is greater when:
1. Due diligence expenditures are less eﬀective (higher κ);
2. The net gains from redistribution to P 1 and A (Vx − (X − i2 − c)) are larger;
3. The net present value of P 2’s loan (X − i2 − c − L) is smaller.
Proof. These follow immediately from the definition of ρ∗ .
These comparative statics are intuitive. The less eﬀective is due diligence in finding a
hidden term, the more cost must be expended to eliminate the redistribution threat. When
the net gains from redistribution (Vx − (X − i2 − c)) are large relative to the cost of being

caught (X − i2 − c − L), P 2 must be able to catch a redistributive covenant with greater
probability for P 1 and A to prefer to write an eﬃcient contract rather than a maximally
redistributive one.
4.2.1

Optimal Property Rights with Omniscient Courts

Up to this point, we have assumed a legal environment (which we termed the Coasean legal
environment), in which the law allows contracting parties maximum flexibility in designing
property rights that the law will enforce.

In the setting with costless observability, the

first-best action plan is possible in the Coasean environment, implying that no alternative
legal rule can be preferred.
22

In a world with reading costs, however, the Coasean legal environment is not a welfaremaximizing legal rule. To see this, suppose a social planner can observe and condition legal
rules on the same set of variables that the parties can contract upon. Then an optimal legal
rule would limit the rights that A could grant to P 1, to eliminate the risk of expropriation.
With this risk eliminated, P 2 will be free to lend without requiring due diligence.
Lemma 5 In a world with perfect, omniscient courts, an optimal legal rule modifies the
Coasean legal environment by adding the following limitations on the space of enforceable
rights:
1. A limit on A’s indebtedness: A can promise P 1 a face value of no more than
F1 =

i1 − (1 − π)L
.
π

2. A rule against excessive restraints on alienability: A and P 1 can set Φ no less than i2 .
In this modified legal environment, the first-best action plan can be implemented by the
sequence of contracts in Proposition 1 with no reading costs expended by P 2.
Proof. Omitted.
The lemma demonstrates, at least in principle, that legal rules limiting the set of enforceable property rights can increase social welfare. Nevertheless, the obvious critique of
the above intervention is that it would require an unrealistic level of knowledge by courts
to implement successfully in practice. Given that firms vary along many dimensions that
are unobservable, the optimal cap on F1 and Φ will be firm-specific and diﬃcult to identify
precisely on a case-by-case basis. As a result, legal rules that limit the space of enforceable
property rights in practice will be subject to a trade-oﬀ: stricter restrictions may reduce
due diligence and credit rationing costs, but due to their imperfect design, tighter restrictions will impose costs on parties who would write these contracts even in a world of perfect
observability.
4.2.2

Optimal Property Rights under Imperfect Legal Enforcement

To see this trade-oﬀ in our formal model, consider the following imperfect legal rule: at
date 2, A may promise P 2 up to i2 dollars that is senior to P 1. If A writes this contract
with P 2, it will be enforced notwithstanding the terms of the contract between A and P 1.
23

This modified legal environment is similar in spirit to some legal rules that give later lenders
non-waivable priority over earlier lenders, such as the priority given to debtor-in-possession
lenders in bankruptcy.21
To compare welfare (which is also A’s expected payoﬀ) under these two legal environments, note that total expected welfare in the least-cost separating equilibrium in the
Coasean legal environment (assuming that P 1’s participation constraint is satisfied) is given
by
π(X − c − ρ∗ ) + (1 − π)L − i1 − i2

(5)

While investment eﬃciency is guaranteed in the Coasean legal environment (continuation
with eﬀort in the good state, and liquidation in the bad state), the deadweight due diligence
costs ρ∗ are incurred in equilibrium. Social welfare under the modified legal environment
that “rules in” the new loan is the following:
π(X − c) + (1 − π)(pX + (1 − p)γL) − i1 − i2

(6)

If P 2 knows for sure that he will recover at least the value of his loan, he would be willing
to lend at fair terms to A at date 2 without the need for any due diligence. But as we have
seen, the cost of providing P 2 with a certain return is that P 2 and A have the incentive to
invest and continue in the bad state of the world. Comparing social welfare in (5) and (6),
we observe that as long as
πρ∗ > (1 − π)(L − pX − (1 − p)γL)
the “rule-in” legal environment will be social welfare-improving relative to the Coasean
environment.
The comparative statics underlying the inequality are intuitive. When ρ∗ increases (which
will be higher when κ and Vx are higher all else equal), the more restrictive legal environment
improves welfare relative to the Coasean environment. On the other hand, L−pX −(1−p)γL

represents the forgone eﬃciency gains when the bad state occurs. As these eﬃciency gains
rise, the Coasean environment is more likely to be preferred. Finally, the probability (1 − π)

can be thought of as a measure of the likelihood that the potentially unenforceable right
21

See Bisin and Rampini (2006), who argue that a reorienting of creditor priorities in bankruptcy can be

valuable for moral hazard reasons in a world where exclusivity is not enforceable. See Triantis (1993) for a
discussion of debtor-in-possession financing in bankruptcy.

24

would be used in equilibrium. When the states of the world in which the right is valuable
are suﬃciently unlikely, the more restrictive environment is more likely to be preferred.
It is worth emphasizing that this result is driven by the inability—in a world that allows
complete contractual freedom—of P 1 and A to commit to protecting P 2. If the inequality
above holds, P 1 and A would like to commit to oﬀering P 2 a senior claim, because of the
due diligence cost savings, even though this would result in an ineﬃcient continuation in the
bad state. But although they prefer this outcome, they can not achieve it in the Coasean
environment. Any attempt to oﬀer this “guaranteed seniority” to P 2 would not be credible
unless accompanied by an oﬀer to reimburse ρ∗ in due diligence costs. Lender P 2 is aware
that, due to the first-in-time rule in the Coasean world, P 1’s contract could contain a term
setting Φ = 0, which would essentially nullify P 2’s contract.

Thus, P 2 will react with

suspicion to any proposal that does not include reimbursement of due diligence, and refuse
to participate.
In a world where legal design and courts are imperfect, there is a diﬃcult trade-oﬀ to
resolve in the design of property laws in a financial contracting setting.

While we can

not resolve these trade-oﬀs quantitatively, the analysis in this section suggests three general
principles that are relevant for resolving this trade-oﬀ:
Principle 1 The law should be less likely to enforce a right if it is more costly for third-parties to
discover (higher κ)
Principle 2 The law should be less likely to enforce a right if it is more redistributive from third
parties (Vx )
Principle 3 The law should be more likely to enforce a right if the expected eﬃciency gains are
larger ((1 − π)(L − pX − (1 − p)γL))
These principles are summarized graphically in Figure 2:

5

Legal Rules and Optimal Property Rights

With these principles in mind, we now discuss some examples of legal rules regarding property
rights. Our goal is to demonstrate that in a variety of situations, the general principles in
our model regarding optimal legal design are often reflected in the way property rights are
enforced in practice.
25

Optimal Property Rights: General Principles
Which property rights should the law allow P1 and A to enforce against P2?

Difficulty of
discovering
the right by
P2 (k)

Law should
not enforce

If the right is more likely to
produce efficiency gains,
then the “should not
enforce” range becomes
smaller

higher k
When rights are more costly
to discover (higher k), the law
should be more restrictive

lower k
Law should
enforce

For sufficiently low costs
of discovery by P2 (low k),
any division of rights
between P1 and A should
be enforced

“Redistribution potential” of
the right to P1 and A (Vx)

Figure 2:
5.0.3

Principle 1: Discovery costs

Perfected and unperfected security interests Our model predicts that the law will
employ a more restrictive approach to enforcing rights against third-parties, all else equal,
when these rights are more costly for a third party to discover. U.S. law regarding secured
credit provides an illustration of this principle. Under Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial
Code (UCC), a secured creditor can acquire important rights that bind third-parties if the
claim is perfected.22

For example, a perfected security interest will follow the collateral if

the debtor sells it to a third-party.

Also, if the debtor pledges the same collateral to a

subsequent lender, the first creditor will have priority over the second.
Under the UCC, obtaining perfection requires that the creditor give the world notice of
the security interest, usually by recording it in a filing system that third-parties can check.23
22

Note here that our definition of a property right is diﬀerent from the definition that is sometimes used

in this context.

For example, a lender whose security interest has attached but not perfected is often

said to have a property right, though the secured creditor has rights only against the debtor, not against
third-parties.
23
There are some exceptions to this general rule.

In some cases, a security interest can be perfected

by acquiring possession of the collateral, which also serves a notice function to third-parties.

There are

also some cases in which neither notice filing nor possession is required. Under revised Article 9, sales of
“payment intangibles” are automatically perfected and thus do not require notice filing. Schwarcz (2006)

26

If the secured creditor fails to record, the security interest is said to have attached but not
perfected. In this scenario, the law allows the secured lender to enforce contractual rights
that are good against the borrower, such as the ability to declare default and accelerate the
loan, but the law will not enforce property rights that bind third-party buyers or lenders
against the asset.
The notice-filing system guarantees that a security interest (or the absence thereof) can
be verified easily, which reduces the required investigation costs of third-parties.24 Without
such a system, the later lender (P 2) must rely on the cooperation of the debtor (A) to make
knowledge of the early lender’s (P 1) prior interests available at low cost. For the reasons
we have discussed in the model, the debtor may have the incentive to make this information
costly to discover. Hence, the law applies a restrictive approach to enforcing property rights
when the interest is not recorded.
Perfected security interests and negative pledge covenants The legal restriction
on the property rights of an unperfected secured creditor also applies to unsecured creditors
with negative covenants in their contracts.

For example, many bond indentures contain

“negative pledge” clauses that are intended to prevent the borrower from granting security
to a future lender. Other negative covenants limit the amount of total debt that a borrower
can incur in the future.
Our model demonstrates that enforcement of these covenants as property rights can be
valuable in preventing overinvestment, but the law may refuse to enforce them. In practice,
courts usually deny property-like remedies to unsecured creditors with negative pledge clauses
when these clauses are violated.2526 The exceptions to this general rule have occurred when
the court verifies that the subsequent lender had actual knowledge of the negative covenant
and violated it willingly. In such situations, courts have created remedies for the negative
argues that this poses a problem for securitization of such assets, as potential buyers of these intangibles can
not be certain about their priority status with respect to potential competing interests.
24
In addition to mere recording, the standardization of the security interest also likely reduces investigation
costs. We discuss standardization in an earlier version of this paper (Ayotte and Bolton 2007)
25
The oldest known case on this subject is Knott v. Shepherdstown Manufacturing, 5 S.E. 266 (W. Va.
1888) in which the court denied an equitable lien to an unsecured creditor with a negative pledge clause,
arguing that the breach of the negative covenant gave rise only to a claim for damages.
26
Similarly, an unsecured creditor can not subordinate future unsecured creditors unless they explicitly
agree to the subordination (Schwartz 1989)

27

pledge holders that bind the subsequent lender.27
The usual rationale given for the diﬀerence between the perfected security interest and
the negative pledge is the absence of a registration system for negative pledges that reduce
verification costs (Bjerre 1999). Like an unrecorded security interest, discovery of a negative
pledge requires the cooperation of the borrower, which is less reliable than a recording
system.
Enforcing the negative pledge against P 2 when he has actual knowledge is also consistent
with our model. If the court can verify that P 2 was aware and understood the negative
covenant, then there is no cost to enforcing P 1’s rights exactly as he intends. Importantly,
however, the law generally does not place the burden on P 2 to discover negative covenants,
which helps limit P 2’s required verification costs.28
5.0.4

Principle 2: Redistributive rights

Fraudulent conveyance Our model suggests that the law adds value by refusing to enforce a division of rights that is particularly redistributive from third-parties.

The law

of fraudulent conveyance is intended to invalidate exactly these redistributive transfers of
rights.

Under the Uniform Fraudulent Transfers Act (UFTA), an unsecured creditor can

avoid (invalidate) a transaction if it satisfies the conditions for actual fraud or constructive
fraud. Actual fraud requires demonstrating fraudulent intent on the part of the parties to the
transaction (in this context, A and P 1) to redistribute from P 2. The tests for constructive
fraud require the creditor to demonstrate that the transaction left the firm in poor financial
condition, so that it is insuﬃciently capitalized, or unlikely to be able to pay future debts
when they come due.29 It is exactly these transactions that are likely to be redistributive
27

In the case First Wyoming Bank v. Mudge (748 P.2d 713 Wyo. 1988) the court found that a secured

lender who knowingly violated a negative pledge clause was held liable for tortious interference with contract
(the negative pledge holder was able to obtain damages from the later secured lender).
28
This does not fully resolve the issue from a normative standpoint, of course. Bjerre (1999) argues
that Article 9 should be expanded to allow registration of negative pledge clauses (prohibitions on future
secured debt), thus allowing them to bind third-parties. Pursuing this logic further, the law could allow any
negative covenant to be publicized, including stronger covenants (such as the ones we model here through
the Φ parameter) that void any subsequent debt, secured or otherwise.

In a prior version of this paper

(Ayotte and Bolton 2007) we discuss this issue in more detail.
29
Constructive fraud can be established if the creditor can show that the debtor firm a) received less than
reasonably equivalent value for the transfer, and b) that the debtor was in a precarious financial situation

28

from P 2.
Fraudulent conveyance attacks often arise in leveraged buyouts that subsequently fail.
To make the example concrete, suppose P 1 and A engage in a leveraged recapitalization,
whereby P 1 lends money to a corporation controlled by A in exchange for a large debt claim
secured by A’s assets. The corporation pays A the proceeds from the debt issue as a dividend,
leaving A’s firm highly levered. If the corporation later borrows from P 2, and then files for
bankruptcy, P 2 may be able to attack the recapitalization as a fraudulent conveyance, and
avoid the transfer of property rights (the security interest) given to P 1.
Notably, consistent with Principle 1, some courts have refused to apply fraudulent conveyance law to protect future creditors in situations where the cost of becoming informed
about past transactions is suﬃciently low. In the case Kupetz v. Wolf, the court refused to
protect creditors who invested after a well-publicized leveraged buyout:
“Because fraudulent conveyance statutes were designed to protect creditors
from secret transactions by debtors, the same rules should not apply when the
transaction is made public. Future creditors may not complain when they knew
or could easily have found out about the transaction. This certainly appears to
be the case in this particular LBO. The transaction was well-publicized and the
Trustee has not claimed or presented evidence that any of the future creditors
were not aware of Wolf & Vine’s financial dealings.” (emphasis added)30
The proper role for fraudulent conveyance law is a topic that has received substantial
attention in existing legal scholarship. Baird and Jackson (1985) argue that creditors can
use protective covenants to prevent fraudulent conveyances (such as a leveraged buyout that
dilutes earlier unsecured creditors) voluntarily if they so choose, but under current law, firms
can not “contract out” of fraudulent conveyance protection if courts apply it erroneously or
over-broadly.

We agree with this point in principle, depending on how the opt-out is

achieved. Our model does not justify any mandatory restrictions on P 1’s ability to limit
his own rights that are good against P 2 (or vice versa).31
at the time of the transfer (Blum, 2004).
30
845 F.2d 842 (9th Cir. 1988)
31
Moreover, in such a context, A would have every incentive to reveal this contractual term to P 2, as it
would result in more generous lending terms from P 2. This is not true in the opposite case (where A and
P 1 restrict P 2’s rights), as A has the incentive to disguise this information.

29

This suggests that an optimal fraudulent conveyance law could be a default rule that
allows creditors to opt-out of the protection in their own loan contract.32

However, our

model can be used to explain why the law might refuse to enforce a contract between A and
P 1 that prevents P 2’s right to seek the fraudulent conveyance remedy, as this would require
P 2’s investigation to discover a right that may be harmful to him.

In this context, our

model implies that there is a valid trade-oﬀ between the benefits of reducing due diligence
expenditures and credit-rationing, and the costs of ineﬀective or incorrect enforcement of
this standard by courts.
Piercing the corporate veil Though we have focused on seniority of claims within a firm
as a means of protecting P 1’s claims against dilution by P 2, another means of protecting
P 1 is through the creation of separate legal entities. For example, A might create a parent
company and a wholly-owned subsidiary, and allow P 1 to lend at the parent level, while P 2
lends at the subsidiary level. This would imply that P 2 would be senior to P 1 with respect
to assets held at the subsidiary level, but P 2 would have no ability to reach the assets at
the parent level if the subsidiary’s assets are not suﬃcient to repay P 2.
When such multi-tiered organizational structures exist, P 2’s information about which
entity owns which assets, and the nature of the relationship between the two entities, is
obviously important. As we have seen, A might have an incentive, for example, to disguise
the fact that P 2 is lending to an under-capitalized subsidiary rather than a well-capitalized
parent company. When such misrepresentation is possible due to vague boundaries between
entities, creditors can attempt to pierce the veil of the subsidiary and pursue the parent’s
assets to satisfy their claim.33 While the application of veil-piercing by courts is diﬃcult to
generalize, Thompson (1991) finds that the most common reasoning includes undercapitalization of the subsidiary and the misrepresentation of entity boundaries by the firm. The
first rationale is consistent with Principle 2: the more thinly-capitalized the subsidiary, the
32

This is true, of course, subject to the risk that a creditor may fail to observe or understand a term in

his own contract, as in Katz (1990).
33
Veil-piercing is an equitable doctrine that is determined on a case-by-case basis, but most commentators
summarize that it is a remedy to be applied only in cases of fraud or approaching fraud: “the separate
personality of the corporation will be disregarded or the corporate veil pierced whenever the separateness of
the corporate form is employed to evade an existing obligation, circumvent a statute, perpetuate a fraud or
crime or generally commit an injustice or gain an unfair advantage.”

30

lower the recovery for the later lender if veil-piercing is not allowed.34 The second rationale
is consistent with Principle 1, that in misrepresenting the boundary of the entity, the firm
made discovery costs prohibitively large.
5.0.5

Principle 3: Eﬃciency

Limitations on anti-assignment clauses Our model suggests a trade-oﬀ in legal design
between limiting verification costs, and allowing for divisions of rights that enhance eﬃciency.
One example of balancing these competing forces can be found in the treatment of contractual
anti-assignment clauses. For instance, a firm operating as a franchisee (A) may desire to
grant a security interest in his franchisee rights to a lender (P 2) as a means of obtaining
cheaper credit, but the franchisor (P 1) may value the right to restrict who can become a
franchisee. In a diﬀerent context, a bank (A) might wish to sell its rights to payment on a
loan to an investor (P 2), but the borrower (P 1) may be concerned about who his creditors
are in the future.
These applications are a slight departure from the model in that the principals are not
both lenders, but the underlying trade-oﬀ is similar. If the law allows complete contractual
freedom between P 1 and A to limit A’s ability to assign his rights to P 2, this could result
in redistribution from an uninformed P 2 who attempts to acquire A’s rights, and later finds
himself empty-handed.

The possibility of this outcome would increase the required due

diligence of potential P 2’s before agreeing with A, and potentially limit the liquidity of
these financial contracts in secondary markets if P 2 attempts to resell them.35

On the

other hand, limiting the scope of P 1 and A to create such restraints might hinder eﬃcient
contracting.

For example, after making a loan to a borrower, a relationship bank might

be tempted to assign a loan to a lender who would be unwilling to forgive minor covenant
violations, simply because this “tough” lender is willing to buy the loan at a high price.36
34

Easterbrook and Fischel (1985) argues, in the same spirit as our model, that allowing for veil-piercing

in these contexts can be understood as a means of providing incentives for firms to disclose their undercapitalization to creditors when a full investigation of the firm’s finances is prohibitively costly.
35
Some anecdotal evidence from Canada supports this feature of our model. In Quebec and Ontario,
anti-assignment provisions are not part of the commercial code. As a result, Fingerhut (2006), in an article
targeted at practicing lawyers, warns that “additional due diligence is called for when the collateral includes
Quebec or Ontario receivables.”
36
Consistent with this logic, Guner (2007) finds that borrowers extract concessions from banks that are

31

Allowing these restraints on assignment to be enforceable helps the bank commit to the
relationship with the borrower.
Revised Article 9 resolves this tension in a way that balances the key trade-oﬀs of eﬃciency gains against verification costs. In contracts that fall under §9-408 the UCC invalidates agreements between A and P 1 that attempt to restrict assignability to P 2.37 This
restriction allows potential third-parties to lend against or purchase these assets without
taking the steps to verify that these anti-assignment clauses are not present.

To protect

P 1, however, the law allows a contractual anti-assignment provision to limit P 2’s rights to
enforce the security interest against P 1. Thus, a borrower in a commercial lending context
can ensure that he will not be subject to the aggressive collection tactics of an unknown loan
buyer if he contracts for this protection, yet the loan buyer can be certain that in purchasing
rights to payment, his potential losses from failing to discover an anti-assignment clause are
limited.38

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we adopt a definition of property rights that departs from most of the economics literature on the subject and follows a definition of property rights in recent legal
scholarship.

Because this definition emphasizes that property rights are rights that bind

third-parties, a key concern is that third-parties may be imperfectly informed about the
pre-existing rights that aﬀect them. In a financial contracting context, these concepts are
particularly important because borrowers may become insolvent. As a result, lenders are
particularly worried about the presence of rights that bind other lenders with competing
claims.
We develop a formal theoretical model in which lenders and borrowers are rational, in that
likely to sell loans through lower interest rates.
37
Paragraph §9-408 includes, among other things, “general intangibles” such as franchise and licensing
agreements, and sales of “payment intangibles” such as commercial loans.

For a thorough discussion of

these issues, see Morse (2001), Plank (2001) and Schwarcz (1999).
38
The reader might wonder what the value of a security interest in the intangible to P 2 would be in the
presence of an anti-assignment clause if P 2 can not enforce his rights against P 1.

If P 2 were a secured

lender to A against the intangible, the protection P 2 would obtain in this case is, among other things, the
right to adequate protection payments if A files for bankruptcy. For an example, see Plank (2001), p. 331.

32

they anticipate the strategic behavior of other players, and can write sophisticated contracts
that attempt to mitigate ineﬃcient, opportunistic behavior. The model demonstrates that,
in a world with costless and complete information, a legal environment that allows parties
maximum flexibility to create and enforce any allocation of divided property rights is optimal.
When observability is costly, however, there can be a role for the legal system to limit the
space of property rights that are enforceable.
In a world with full enforceability, third-parties will not participate without conducting
suﬃcient due diligence to reassure themselves that redistribution at their expense has not
occurred. In equilibrium, these deadweight costs of due diligence are borne by the borrowing
firms. Importantly, though, this does not rule out a role for optimal design of property laws.
In our model, there is no way for firms to reduce these costs, due to an inability to commit
to protecting third-parties from redistribution. The law can add value by providing firms
with a credible mechanism to make this commitment. If the cost of discovering a right is
large enough, and the right is potentially redistributive, then the law will optimally refuse
to enforce such a right. The law in our model can be seen as mandatory, in that the law
will mandate a relationship between the enforceability of a right and the cost of discovering
that right by third-parties which can not be adjusted by contract. On the other hand, if
contracting parties can demonstrate to a court that they made third-parties aware of their
pre-existing rights, then our model suggests the rights should be enforced.
In our investigation into existing law, we find several examples that broadly confirm the
qualitative trade-oﬀs in the model. Laws that govern financial contracting in which thirdparties are aﬀected often limit the ability of early lenders to create enforceable property
rights that can be redistributive. The law is less likely to enforce a property right when it
is unlikely that the right has an eﬃciency rationale, and is more likely to enforce the right
when knowledge about the right is relatively inexpensive for a third-party to acquire.
While our formal model is intended to add an additional element of realism to the study of
legal design in a financial contracting setting, there are other important factors our analysis
does not address that are important. For instance, many of the mandatory standards in the
law that are intended to protect third-parties also entail substantial ex-post litigation costs.
In a world with costly courts that make judgment errors, later lenders could threaten to use
the legal protections we document above in an opportunistic way as a means of extracting
value from earlier lenders. This could lead to deadweight costs and ineﬃcient allocations

33

as a result, tipping the scales toward a more permissive legal environment. On the other
hand, the ability of the early lender to protect himself by monitoring the firm’s contracting
with the later lender is not present in the current model. Adding the possibility of costly
monitoring would imply that P 1 has other means of protecting himself from dilution by P 2,
reducing the cost of less-permissive legal rules.

References
[1] Alchian, A. and H. Demsetz (1972). “Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization.” American Economic Review, 62(5):777-95.
[2] Ayotte, K. and P. Bolton (2007). “Optimal Property Rights in Financial Contracting”
Working Paper.
[3] Ayres, I. and E. Talley (1995) “Solomonic Bargaining: Dividing a Legal Entitlement To
Facilitate Coasean Trade”, 104 Yale L. J. 1027.
[4] Baird, D. G. and T. H. Jackson (1985), “Fraudulent Conveyance Law and its Proper
Domain”. 38 Vanderbilt L. Rev. 829.
[5] Bebchuk, L.A. and J. Fried (1996) “The Uneasy Case for the Priority of Secured Claims
in Bankruptcy” 105 Yale L.J. 857.
[6] _____. (1997). “The Uneasy Case for the Priority of Secured Claims in Bankruptcy:
Further Thoughts and a Reply to Critics” 82 Cornell L. Rev. 1279
[7] Bisin, A. and A. Rampini (2006) “Exclusive Contracts and the Institution of Bankruptcy” 27 Economic Theory 277.
[8] Bizer, D.S. and P.M. DeMarzo (1992) “Sequential Banking”. 100 Journal of Political
Economy, 41-61.
[9] Blum, B. (2004) Bankruptcy and Debtor/Creditor, Examples and Explanations, 3rd ed.
[10] Bjerre, C.S. (1999) “Secured Transactions Inside Out: Negative Pledge Covenants, Property and Perfection”, 84 Cornell L. Rev. 305.
[11] Calabresi, G. and A.D. Melamed (1972) “Property Rules, Liability Rules and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral”, 85 Harvard L. Rev., 1089-1128.

34

[12] Coase, R. H. (1960). “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics,
3(1), 1—44.
[13] Easterbrook, F. H. and D. R. Fischel (1985) “Limited Liability and the Corporation”
52 Chi L. Rev 89.
[14] Epstein, R.A. (1982) “Notice and Freedom of Contract in the Law of Servitudes”, 55
So. Cal. L. Rev. 1353
[15] Grossman, S., and Hart, O. (1986). “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory
of Vertical and Lateral Integration.” Journal of Political Economy, 94:691-719.
[16] Guner, A.B. (2007) “Loan Sales and the Cost of Corporate Borrowing” forthcoming,
Review of Financial Studies
[17] Hansmann, H. and R. Kraakman (2002). “Property, Contract and Verification: The
Numerus Clausus Problem and the Divisibility of Rights” 31 Journal of Legal Studies
S373-S420.
[18] Hart, O., and Moore, J. (1990). “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm.” Journal
of Political Economy, 98:1119-58.
[19] Jackson, T. and A. Kronman (1979) “Secured Financing and Priorities Among Creditors” 88 Yale L. J. 1153-1182.
[20] Jensen, M. and W. Meckling (1976) “Theory of the Firm, Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure” Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305-360.
[21] Kaplow, L. and S. Shavell (1995) “Do Liability Rules Facilitate Bargaining? A Reply
to Ayres and Talley” 105 Yale L. J., 221.
[22] _____. (1996) ‘Property Rules Versus Liability Rules: An Economic Analysis”, 109
Harvard L. Rev 713.
[23] Katz, A. (1990). “Your Terms or Mine? The Duty to Read the Fine Print in Contracts”
Rand Journal of Economics, 21(4), 518-537.
[24] Klein, B., R. Crawford and A. Alchian (1978) “Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents
and the Competitive Contracting Process”, Journal of Law and Economics, 21: 297326
[25] Merrill, T. and H. Smith (2000) “Optimal Standardization in the Law of Property: The
Numerus Clausus Principle” 110 Yale L.J. 1-70.
35

[26] ____. (2001a) “What Happened to Property in Law and Economics?” 111 Yale L.J.
357-398.
[27] ____. (2001b). “The Property/Contract Interface” 110 Colum. L. Rev. 773.
[28] Morse, D. W. (2001) “Revised Article 9 Anti-Assignment Clauses: Then and Now”
Unpublished manuscript, The Association of Commercial Finance Attorneys.
[29] Plank, T. W. (2001) “The Limited Security Interest in Non-Assignable Collateral Under
Revised Article 9” 9 American Bankruptcy Institute Law Review 323.
[30] Schwarcz, S. L.(1999) “The Impact on Securitization of Revised Article 9” 74 Chi.-Kent
L. Rev 947.
[31] ____. (2006) “Automatic Perfection of Sales of Payment Intangibles: A Trap for the
Unwary” working paper, Duke Law School.
[32] Schwartz, A. (1996) “Priority Contracts and Priority in Bankruptcy” 82 Cornell L. Rev.
1396.
[33] _____. (1998) “A Contract Theory Approach to Business Bankruptcy”, 107 Yale
L.J. 1807.
[34] Thompson, R.B. (1991) “Piercing the Corporate Veil: An Empirical Study”76 Cornell
L. Rev 1036.
[35] Triantis, G. G. (1993) “A Theory of the Regulation of Debtor-in-Possession Financing”
46 Vand. L. Rev. 901.
[36] Warren, E. and J. L. Westbrook (2005) “Contracting Out of Bankruptcy: An Empirical
Intervention”, 118 Harvard L. Rev. 1197
[37] Williamson, O. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
New York: Free Press.
[38] Williamson, O. (1979). “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics, 22:3-61.
[39] Williamson, O.(1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.

7

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1:
36

Proof. Note first that under the contract written between P 1 and A, P 2 is not willing to
lend to A at date 2 in the bad state. By lending i2 principal P 2 gets an expected repayment
which is less than the loan i2 . Indeed, the most P 2 can hope to get is
pi2 + (1 − p) max{0, γL − F1 } = pi2
since
i1 − (1 − π)L
=
π
πγL + (1 − π)L − i1
L − i1
<
< 0.
π
π
γL − F1 = γL −

Next, P 2 is willing to lend to A at date 2 in the good state under the contract written
between P 1 and A, since X − (i2 + F1 ) >
π(X −

c
,
1−p

or

c
− i2 ) − (1 − π)L ≥ i1
1−p

by assumption A3. And when X − (i2 + F1 ) >

c
,
1−p

A’s best response is to choose high

eﬀort (e = 1), since then:

X − (i2 + F1 ) − c > p(X − (i2 + F1 ))

(7)

as
F1 ≤ Rg ≡ X −
by assumption A3, and by definition of Rg ,
X − Rg ≥

c
− i2
1−p

c
.
1−p

The RHS of (7) is A’s expected payoﬀ under the low eﬀort choice (e = 0), since when the
project fails and only yields a liquidation value γL the firm’s total liabilities (i2 + F1 ) exceed
its assets γL, so that A gets zero.
Proof. When A chooses high eﬀort the firm gets a cash flow of X for sure at date 3. The
firm’s debt is therefore safe, so that P 1 is willing to lend i1 in return for a debt repayment
of the same amount at date 3.

37

7.0.6

The Bayes-Nash Equilibrium and Proposition 3

An equilibrium of our game is taken to be a Bayes-Nash equilibrium, where:
1. All agents play a best response given their beliefs, and
2. All players’ updated beliefs are consistent with all agents’ best responses.
More concretely,
a P 1 and A choose C1 at date 1 given P 2’s expected equilibrium best response,
b A chooses the contract oﬀer C2 optimally at date 2 given the past choice of C1 at date
1 and given P 2’s beliefs ν 2 (C1 | C2 , Ω(C1 )),
c P 2 best responds by deciding whether or not to lend when Ω(C1 ) is observed. (We
assume that P 2 conducts any due diligence that is reimbursed by A irrespective of his
beliefs).
d P 2’s beliefs ν 2 (C1 | C2 , Ω(C1 )) are consistent with the equilibrium choices, C1 and C2 .
Under these assumptions, and under the belief-function ν 2 (C1f b | C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ}, Ω(C1 ) =

C1f b ) = 1 for ρ ≥ ρ∗ and ν 2 (C1f b | C2 , Ω(C1 )) = 0 otherwise, the least-cost separating Bayes-

Nash equilibrium of the full contracting game is stated in Proposition 3.

The proof of

Proposition 3 is as follows:
Proof. Given that under due diligence ρ∗ we have
µ
¶
µ ∗ ¶
ρ∗
ρ
L+ 1− ∗
(X − c),
X − i2 − c =
ρ∗ + κ
ρ +κ

(8)

it is a (weak) best response for P 1 and A to agree to contract C1f b . Given the choice of C1f b ,
P 20 s investigation will produce Ω(C1 ) = C1f b . Thus, P 2’s equilibrium beliefs ν 2 (C1f b | C2 =

{i2 , i2 , ρ∗ }, Ω(C1 ) = C1f b ) = 1 are consistent with P 1 and A’s equilibrium play. It is a (weak)

best response for A to oﬀer contract C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ∗ } at date 2, and a (weak) best response

for P 2 to accept C2 in the good state, but to reject it in the bad state. In particular, A
cannot obtain a higher payoﬀ by oﬀering any other contract C2 = {i2 , i2 , ρ}, with ρ 6= ρ∗

at date 2. Indeed, any contract with ρ > ρ∗ would involve unnecessarily high due diligence
expenditures, and any contract such that ρ < ρ∗ would be rejected by P 2 given his updated
beliefs, yielding a payoﬀ of L + ρ∗ to P 1 and A. To show this is less than X − i2 − c, note

that by A3b, π(Rg − ρ∗ ) + (1 − π)L ≥ i1 . Combining this assumption with L < i1 , and the
definition of Rg , it follows that X − i2 − c > Rg > L + ρ∗ .
38

