NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE MODELS ARE NOT AS BAD AS YOU THINK
Charles Engel
Nelson C. Mark
Kenneth D. West
Working Paper 13318
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13318

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

Prepared for the NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2007. Conference in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
March 30-31, 2007. We thank Joong Shik Kang and Enrique Martinez-Garcia for very able research
assistance. We thank Paolo Pesenti and participants in the Second Annual Workshop on Global Interdependence,
at Trinity College, Dublin for very helpful comments. We also thank Barbara Rossi and Ken Rogoff
for their helpful comments at the Macro Annual conference. Each of the authors gratefully acknowledges
grants from the National Science Foundation that have supported this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Charles Engel, Nelson C. Mark, and Kenneth D. West. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange Rate Models Are Not as Bad as You Think
Charles Engel, Nelson C. Mark, and Kenneth D. West
NBER Working Paper No. 13318
August 2007
JEL No. F31,F41
ABSTRACT
Standard models of exchange rates, based on macroeconomic variables such as prices, interest rates,
output, etc., are thought by many researchers to have failed empirically. We present evidence to the
contrary. First, we emphasize the point that "beating a random walk" in forecasting is too strong a
criterion for accepting an exchange rate model. Typically models should have low forecasting power
of this type. We then propose a number of alternative ways to evaluate models. We examine in-sample
fit, but emphasize the importance of the monetary policy rule, and its effects on expectations, in determining
exchange rates. Next we present evidence that exchange rates incorporate news about future macroeconomic
fundamentals, as the models imply. We demonstrate that the models might well be able to account
for observed exchange-rate volatility. We discuss studies that examine the response of exchange rates
to announcements of economic data. Then we present estimates of exchange-rate models in which
expected present values of fundamentals are calculated from survey forecasts. Finally, we show that
out-of-sample forecasting power of models can be increased by focusing on panel estimation and long-horizon
forecasts.
Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu
Nelson C. Mark
Department of Economics and Econometrics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
nmark@nd.edu

Kenneth D. West
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
kdwest@wisc.edu

There appears to be a consensus among researchers in exchange-rate economics that the
standard models that relate exchange rates to monetary variables, prices, interest rates, etc., are off the
mark. For example, Sarno and Taylor (2002, pp. 136-137) state, “Overall, the conclusion emerges that,
although the theory of exchange rate determination has produced a number of plausible models, empirical
work on exchange rates still has not produced models that are sufficiently statistically satisfactory to be
considered reliable and robust…In particular, although empirical exchange rate models occasionally
generate apparently satisfactory explanatory power in-sample, they generally fail badly in out-of-sample
forecasting tests in the sense that they fail to outperform a random walk.” Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2006, p. 552) observe, “The poor explanatory power of existing theories of the nominal exchange rate is
most likely the major weakness of international macroeconomics. Richard A. Meese and Kenneth Rogoff
(1983a) and the subsequent literature have found that a random walk predicts exchange rates better than
macroeconomic models in the short run.” Evans and Lyons (2002, pp. 170-171) assert, “Macroeconomic
models of exchange rates perform poorly at frequencies higher than one year. Indeed, the explanatory
power of these models is essentially zero (Meese and Rogoff 1983a, Meese 1990). In the words of Frankel
and Rose (1995, p. 1704), this negative result has had a ‘pessimistic effect on the field of empirical
exchange rate modeling in particular and international finance in general.’ The pessimistic effect has been
with us 20 years.”
We present evidence that exchange rate models are not so bad after all. We approach the
problem from several angles, but all of the approaches are linked by the observation that short-run
movements in exchange rates are primarily determined by changes in expectations – exactly as the
standard models say. We begin in section 1 by demonstrating that standard models imply near random
walk behavior in exchange rates, so that their power to “beat the random walk” in out-of-sample forecasts is
low. We then offer various alternative means for evaluating exchange-rate models: (1) using in-sample fit
of the models, but highlighting the role of endogeneity of monetary policy in explaining nominal and real
exchange rate behavior (section 2); (2) examining whether exchange rates incorporate news that helps to
predict the future macroeconomic fundamentals, as implied by the models (section 3); (3) re-examining the
question of whether the models can account for the volatility of exchange rates (also section 3); (4)
reviewing the recent literature that has examined the response of exchange rates to announcements of
macroeconomic news (section 4); (5) presenting estimates of the model in which expectations of
fundamentals are drawn from survey data (also section 4); and, (6) demonstrating that the predictive power

1

of the models can be greatly increased by using panel techniques and forecasting exchange rates at longer
horizons (section 5). Conclusions are in section 6.
We begin by examining the theorem in Engel and West (2005) that demonstrates that under
plausible assumptions, the models actually imply that the exchange rate should nearly follow a random
walk. Therefore, it should not be surprising that the exchange rate models cannot provide better forecasts
than the random walk model. As we will elucidate, the key insight behind the theorem is that current
economic fundamentals have relatively little weight in determining the exchange rate in standard models.
Much greater weight is put on expectations of future fundamentals, even fundamentals several years into
the future.
We elaborate on the implications of the theorem. We show that in a standard parameterization of
the famous Dornbusch “overshooting” model, the exchange rate nearly follows a random walk. We make
this characterization in spite of the fact that the best-known feature of this model is that exchange-rate
changes should be predictable – that the exchange rate overshoots its long-run value in response to
monetary shocks. We also argue that Meese and Rogoff’s (1983a) exercise, in which the model forecasts
use actual ex-post (rather than forecasted) values of the fundamentals, is potentially flawed, because the
out-of-sample fit of the models can be made arbitrarily worse or better by algebraic transformations of the
model. Indeed, the out-of-sample fit of the standard models can be made much better (under the MeeseRogoff methodology) if the models are written in a way that emphasizes the importance of expectations in
determining exchange rates.
If we do not use the criterion of outperforming the random walk model in out-of-sample forecasting
power, how then should we evaluate exchange rate models? We offer a number of alternatives.
First, we can look at the in-sample fit of the models. Most empirical monetary models of the 1970s
and 1980s paid little attention to the endogeneity of monetary policy. But if exchange rates are primarily
driven by expectations, then correctly modeling monetary policy is critical. Changes in current economic
fundamentals, for example, may have a greater impact on exchange rates indirectly through the induced
changes in expectations of monetary policy than through any direct channel. Engel and West (2006), Mark
(2007), Clarida and Waldman (2006) and Molodtsova and Papell (2007) have explored the empirical
performance of models based on Taylor rules for monetary policy. In a traditional flexible price model, an
increase in current inflation depreciates the currency. But it is important to understand the policy reaction
to higher inflation. In the new Taylor-rule models, higher inflation leads to an appreciation in inflationtargeting countries, because higher inflation induces expectations of tighter future monetary policy.

2

We review these models, and also make note of the important result of Benigno (2004): the Taylorrule models offer a potential solution to the “purchasing power parity” puzzle. In particular, the models offer
the possibility that persistent real exchange rates do not require unrealistic assumptions about the
stickiness of nominal price setting, and potentially de-link the two altogether.
Engel and West (2004, 2005) propose testing two implications of the present value models. They
emphasize that because we acknowledge that there are “unobserved fundamentals” (e.g., money demand
shocks, risk premiums), the exchange rate may not be exactly the expected present value of observed
fundamentals. But if exchange rates react to news about future economic fundamentals, then perhaps
exchange rates can help forecast the (observed) fundamentals. If the observed fundamentals are the
primary drivers of exchange rates, then the exchange rates should incorporate some useful information
about future fundamentals. We verify this proposition using Granger causality tests. Engel and West
(2004) also develop a technique for measuring the contribution of the present discounted sum of current
and expected future observed fundamentals to the variance of changes in the exchange rate, which is valid
even when the econometrician does not have the full information set that agents use in making forecasts.
Here we find that the observed fundamentals can account for a relatively large fraction of actual exchangerate volatility, at least under some specifications of the models.
Standard tests of forward looking models under rational expectations make the assumption that the
sample distribution of ex post realizations of economic variables provides a good approximation of the
distribution used by agents in making forecasts. But (as Rossi (2005) has recently emphasized) when
agents are trying to forecast levels of variables that are driven by persistent or permanent shocks, the
econometrician might get a very poor measure of the agents’ probability distribution by using realized ex
post values. The problem is enhanced when the data generating process is subject to long-lasting regime
shifts (caused, for example, by changes in the monetary policy regime.) For an economic variable such as
the exchange rate – which is primarily driven by expectations – it might be useful to find alternative ways of
measuring the effect of expectation changes.
Several recent papers (Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2002), Faust, Rogers, Wang, and
Wright (2007), Clarida and Waldman (2006)) have looked at the effects of news announcements on
exchange rates, using high frequency data. We review these studies, and argue that the response of
exchange rates to news is precisely in line with the predictions of the Taylor rule models.
We also provide new evidence of another sort. We directly measure expectations of inflation and
output using surveys of professional forecasters. The particular survey we employ asks forecasters twice a

3

year to provide predictions for inflation and output growth in a dozen advanced countries for the current
year, each of the next five years, and an average for years 6-10. From these surveys, we are able to
construct a present value of current and expected future fundamentals implied by the Taylor rule model.
We find strong confirmation of the model – higher output growth and higher inflation in the US relative to
the other countries leads to an appreciation of the dollar relative to the other currencies.
While we argue that theoretically the models may have low power to produce forecasts of changes
in the exchange rate that have a lower mean-squared-error than the random walk model, we also explore
ways of increasing the forecasting power. Mark and Sul (2001) and Groen (2005) have used panel errorcorrection models to forecast exchange rates at long horizons (16 quarters, for example.) We find that with
the increased efficiency from panel estimation, and with the focus on longer horizons, the macroeconomic
models consistently provide forecasts of exchange rates that are superior to the “no change” forecast from
the random walk model.
We find ourselves in the uncomfortable position of both pointing out that common formulations of
monetary models imply that the models should have little power to produce better forecasts than a random
walk, while at the same time finding more forecasting power for the models than many previous studies
(though in line with the findings of the studies that employ panel techniques, cited above.) There are two
possible resolutions to this conflict. First, in section 5, we demonstrate in an example that if the foreign
exchange risk premium – whose behavior is not well understood, and which is not observable to the
econometrician – is stationary with an innovation variance that is relatively small (compared to variances in
innovations of standard “observed” fundamentals), then the models might have predictive power relative to
the random walk at long horizons in the error-correction framework. So it may be that indeed, using panel
techniques, we have confirmed the usefulness of the models in forecasting at horizons of 16 quarters. The
other resolution to the conflict is that our prediction results might prove fleeting: History has shown that
models that seem to fit well over some time periods end up not holding up as the sample extends. That
might hold true for forecasting power as well. While it is encouraging that our forecasting results confirm
the findings of Mark and Sul (2001) on an extended sample, these results may ultimately prove not to be
robust. But the Engel and West (2005) theorem tells us that out-of-sample prediction power relative to a
random walk is not a reliable gauge to judge exchange rate models.

4

1.

Present-Value Models and Random Walks
Let st denote the log of the exchange rate, measured as the log of the domestic currency price of

foreign currency. Thus, depreciation of the currency implies an increase in st . Consider models of the
exchange rate that relate the value of the currency to economic fundamentals, and to the expected future
exchange rate:
(1)

st = (1 − b)a1 ' x t + ba 2 ' x t + bEt st +1 ,

0 < b < 1.

x t is a vector of economic “fundamentals” that ultimately drive exchange-rate behavior. Many familiar
exchange-rate models based on macroeconomic fundamentals take this general form, as subsequent
examples will demonstrate.
Equation (1) is an expectational difference equation with a no-bubbles forward solution given by:
(2)

⎛ ∞
⎞
⎛ ∞
⎞
st = (1 − b)Et ⎜ ∑ b j a1 ' x t + j ⎟ + bEt ⎜ ∑ b j a 2 ' x t + j ⎟ .
⎝ j =0
⎠
⎝ j =0
⎠

The log of the exchange rate is determined as the expected present discounted value of current and future
fundamentals. As in many models of other asset prices, if the discount factor is large (close to one),
expected future fundamentals matter a lot more than the current value of the fundamental. For example, if
the fundamentals were expected to change between period t and t+1 to new permanent values, x t+1 , the
exchange rate would be a weighted average of the current and the future fundamental – but with much
more weight placed on the future fundamental:
st = (1 − b )[ a 1'x t +

b
b
a 2 'x t ] + b[ a 1'x t+1 +
a 2 'x t+1 ] .
1− b
1− b

That is, in a model such as this, when fundamentals are very persistent we can say that the exchange rate
is primarily determined by the expected future path of the fundamentals, with little weight given to the
current fundamental.
The monetary exchange-rate models of the 1970s and 1980s take the form given by equation (1).
They are based on a Cagan-style money demand model. For the home country we can write:
(3)

mt − pt = α + γ y t − λ it + v t ,

where mt is the log of the money supply, pt is the log of the home consumer price level, y t is the log of
output, it is the home interest rate (in levels), and v t is a stochastic shift term. Defining the real exchange

5

rate as qt = st + pt* − pt , and assuming the foreign money demand equation has the same parameters as
the home, we can write:
(4)

mt − mt* − st + qt = γ ( y t − y t* ) − λ ( it − it* ) + v t − v t* .

Foreign variables are denoted with a *.
Now we will introduce the relationship:
(5)

it − it* = Et st +1 − st + ρt .

This relationship defines ρt , the deviation from uncovered interest parity. As is well known, a vast
empirical literature has rejected the hypothesis that ρt = 0 . But so far there is no consensus on a model
for ρt . Perhaps it is a risk premium, a short-run deviation from rational expectations, or some other market
imperfection. It is possible that movements in ρt are important in explaining exchange rate movements
(as Obstfeld and Rogoff (2003) have suggested), but we do not explore that avenue in this paper. We treat

ρt as an “unobserved” fundamental – an economic variable that might drive the exchange rate, but a
variable for which we do not have direct observations. The money demand shifts, v t and v t* are also
treated as unobserved fundamentals.
When we combine equations (4) and (5), we get an equation that takes the form of equation (1):
(6)

st =

1
λ
λ
mt − mt* + q t − γ ( y t − y t* ) − (v t − v t* ) ) +
E t s t +1 .
ρt +
(
1+ λ
1+ λ
1+ λ

In this case, the discount factor, b, from equation (1) corresponds to

λ
1+ λ

in equation (6). The linear

combination of fundamentals a1'x t is given by mt − mt* + qt − γ ( y t − y t* ) − (v t − v t* ) , while ρt corresponds
to a 2 'x t . The no-bubbles forward solution to equation (6), then, is:
(7)

st =

⎛ ∞ ⎛ λ ⎞j
⎞
⎛ ∞ ⎛ λ ⎞j
⎞
1
λ
*
*
*
−
+
−
−
−
−
+
γ
(
)
(
)
ρt + j ⎟
Et ⎜ ∑ ⎜
m
m
q
y
y
v
v
E
⎟
⎜
(
)
∑
t
j
t
j
t
j
t
j
t
j
t
j
t
j
t
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎟ 1 + λ ⎜ j =0 ⎝ 1 + λ ⎠
⎟
1 + λ ⎜⎝ j = 0 ⎝ 1 + λ ⎠
⎠
⎝
⎠

.
Equation (7) is representative of the type of model that we contend is “better than you think”. That
is, it is a rational-expectations model based on macroeconomic fundamentals. It is the traditional models
that were explored in depth in the 1970s and 1980s. Moreover, a model such as this is derived in a

6

straightforward way by log-linearizing equations from modern optimizing macroeconomic models. In fact,
the money demand equation (3) can be obtained directly from a dynamic model in which agents maximize
utility of consumption and real balances. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2003) derive such an equation when
consumption and real balances enter separably into utility as power functions:
1−ϖ

V ⎛M ⎞
1 1−σ
Ct + t ⎜ t ⎟
1− σ
1 − ϖ ⎝ Pt ⎠

,

where Vt is a random shift factor in preferences for real balances. The only difference between the money
demand equation derived from the first-order condition in the money-in-the-utility function model and the ad
hoc money demand equation is that the log of consumption, ct , appears as the activity variable in money
demand, rather than the log of income, y t , as in equation (4). Using equation (5), Obstfeld and Rogoff
(2003) derive an expression for the exchange rate analogous to equation (7).
Equation (7) is not entirely satisfactory as an “exchange rate equation” because the real exchange
rate, qt , appears as an explanatory variable on the right-hand-side of the equation. Equilibrium models
with flexible goods prices would elaborate on this equation by relating the equilibrium real exchange rate to
underlying economic variables such as productivity and current account balances. Or, the simplest such
model, which assumes purchasing power parity, treats qt as a constant. These models might also relate
output differentials to other economic driving variables.
The sticky-nominal-price models of Dornbusch (1976) and subsequent authors treat the real
exchange rate and perhaps the output differential as endogenous variables whose dynamics are in part
determined by the stochastic process for money supplies.
We note also that monetary policy might be endogenous, so that the relative money supplies are
set in response to the realizations of macroeconomic variables. We return to discussion of this in much
greater detail later.
One might argue that equation (6) holds by definition. That is, equation (4) defines the money
demand errors, v t − v t* , and equation (5) defines the deviation from interest parity, ρt . The exchange-rate
equation (6) must hold if we allow a role for these suitably defined unobserved fundamentals. But while we
need to acknowledge a role for unobserved fundamentals, this class of models is only interesting if the
observed fundamentals do a good job of explaining exchange rates.
As the quotes that we begin this paper with suggest, a standard way of evaluating exchange-rate
models is to compare their out-of-sample forecasting power to that of the random walk model. There are
7

many variants of the standard model, which might depend on the way the fundamentals are measured, or
the set of fundamentals that are included in order to account for the behavior of qt , y t − y t* , v t − v t* , and/or

ρt . Because of the possibility of overfitting or data mining (by a single researcher, or by exchange-rate
researchers collectively), in-sample fit is considered an unreliable benchmark.

Good out-of-sample

forecasting power is a higher hurdle, and has become the standard by which exchange-rate models are
judged.
Engel and West (2005) (hereinafter referred to as EW05), however, demonstrate that under some
plausible conditions, these models actually have the implication that the exchange rate is “nearly” a random
walk. In typical samples, the models actually imply that the change in the exchange rate is not predictable.
The theorem states that as the discount factor, b, goes to one, the change in the log of the
exchange rate between time t-1 and t becomes uncorrelated with information in the time t–1 information
set. The conditions under which that holds are either (i) a1'x t is integrated of order 1, and a 2 'x t is zero, or
(ii) a 2 'x t is I(1).
Note first that this theorem does not require a1'x t or a 2 'x t to be pure random walks. If it did, the
theorem would be trivial, since the weighted sum of random walk processes that would appear in the
present-value formulas are also random walks.
Second, this theorem does not say that for discount factors less than one, the log of the exchange
rate is exactly a random walk. It says, in essence, that for large values of the discount factor, the log of the
exchange rate is approximately a random walk.
To illustrate the theorem, suppose a1'x t is a scalar x t , and that a 2 'x t is identically zero. As
shown below, this is a special case of the monetary model. Suppose further that x t has a unit root, but is
not a random walk. Assume

x t − x t −1 = φ ( x t −1 − x t −2 ) + ε t , ε t ∼ i.i.d.
Then the solution for the change in the exchange rate is given by:
st − st −1 =

φ (1 − b)
1
εt .
( x t −1 − x t −2 ) +
1 − bφ
1 − bφ

It is clear from this example that the change in the exchange rate is predictable from the lagged change in
the fundamental x t . But as b → 1 , the coefficient on the lagged money supply goes to zero, and the
exchange rate approaches a random walk.

8

The theorem is proved in EW05. Intuitively, suppose first that a 2 'x t is identically zero. Consider
the discounted sum,

∞

∑b a 'x
j =0

j

1

t+j

. Using a Beveridge-Nelson decomposition, we can write a1 ' x t as the

sum of two components, a pure random walk “permanent” component, and a transitory component, τ t . We
have that vart (τ t + j ) approaches a constant as j gets large, but the conditional variance of the random walk
component grows in proportion to j. So from the perspective of time t, the permanent component becomes
more and more important in accounting for the ex ante variation in a1 ' x t+j as j gets large. When the
discount factor is close to one, the discounted sum puts a lot of weight on values of a1 ' x t+ j in the future.
As b → 1 , the discounted sum begins to look more and more like a sum of pure random walk variables.
Now allow non-zero values for both a1'x t and a 2 'x t . Because the present value of a 1'x t is
multiplied by (1-b), movements in st are dominated by the present value of a 2 'x t as b → 1 . For reasons
sketched in the previous paragraph, st will behave like a random walk for b near 1 if a 2 'x t has a unit root.
If this theorem is applicable to exchange rate models, it suggests that we should not evaluate the
models by the criterion of beating a random walk in out-of-sample forecasting power. How close the
exchange rate is to a random walk, if it is generated by a present-value model as in equation (2), depends
in practice on how close the discount factor is to one, and how persistent is the transitory component of the
economic fundamentals. EW05 calibrate these for some standard exchange-rate models, and show that
apparently the models imply near-random-walk exchange-rate behavior.
For example, consider a simple monetary model in which uncovered interest parity holds ( ρt = 0 ),
purchasing power parity holds ( qt = 0 ), there are no money demand errors ( v t = v t* = 0 ) and in which the
income elasticity of money demand is unity ( γ = 1 ). In this case, the exchange rate model simplifies to
(8)

st =

⎛ ∞ ⎛ λ ⎞j
⎞
1
Et ⎜ ∑ ⎜
mt + j − mt*+ j − ( y t + j − y t*+ j ) ) ⎟ .
(
⎟
⎟
1 + λ ⎜⎝ j = 0 ⎝ 1 + λ ⎠
⎠

A quite conservatively low estimate of λ for quarterly data, from studies of money demand and exchange
rates, is λ = 10 , which implies b ≈ 0.90 .1 In the data for the U.S. relative to each of the other G7

It is important to recognize that the interest semi-elasticity of money demand depends on the units in which interest rates are
expressed. For example, a value of λ of 0.025 estimated with quarterly data when interest rates are annualized and expressed
in percent terms must be multiplied by 400 to get the relevant estimate when interest rates are in the same units as the change in
the log of the exchange rate.

1

9

countries, the highest serial correlation for ∆ ( mt − mt* − ( y t − y t* ) ) is 0.41. But the computations of EW05

(

)

show that for b = 0.90 and a serial correlation of ∆ mt − mt* − ( y t − y t* ) equal to 0.50, that the correlation
of ∆st and ∆st −1 is only 0.05, and the correlation of ∆st with ∆ ( mt −1 − mt*−1 − ( y t −1 − y t*−1 ) ) is 0.06. That
is, if the exchange rate were generated from equation (8), it would exhibit near-random-walk behavior. The
exchange rate is predictable, but (as EW05 discuss) we would not be likely to reject the random walk in
sample sizes that are typically available to open-economy researchers.
We note that the technical conditions for the random walk rule out a stationary process for a 2 'x t .
In the monetary model, this means that the risk premium, ρt , if it is present, must not be stationary. (See
equation (7).) In practice, however, if this term has nearly a unit root, the random walk will nearly follow, as
illustrated in the computations in EW05. Nevertheless, in practice, it is a critical question as to whether
arguably stationary terms such as risk premia can be exploited to make predictions that beat the random
walk. We discuss this further in section 5 below, when we present results from panel prediction exercises.
We observe that a discount factor close to one is helpful to reconcile the observation that the
variance in innovations in exchange rates is large relative to the variance of innovations in interest
differentials. Using equation (5), and if we associate a 2 'x t with the risk premium ( a 2 'x t = ρt ), we can
rewrite equation (1) as:
(9)

(1 − b)(st − a1 ' x t ) = b( it − it* ) .

Typically the volatility of innovations in the fundamentals a1'x t is small compared to that of exchange rates.
But innovations in st − a1 ' x t have a much higher variance than innovations in the interest differential,
it − it* . In a model such as this, reconciliation of these facts could be accomplished by having the discount
factor b close to one, or by appealing to the claim that there are unobserved components of the
fundamentals that have a high variance. It is of course much more satisfying not to have to rely on the
volatility of an unobserved variable to account for exchange rate volatility, so models with the discount
factor near one are appealing on this score.
We turn now to two examples to help elucidate the EW05 theorem.

Example 1
The Hong Kong dollar (HK$) per U.S. dollar (US$) nominal exchange rate is apparently a
stationary random variable. It fluctuates between 7.75 and 7.85 HK$ per US$. That means that the US$

10

per Japanese yen (¥) and HK$ per ¥ exchange rates are cointegrated (with cointegrating vector (1,-1).)
The Engle-Granger representation theorem tells us that if the US$/¥ and HK$/¥ exchange rates are
cointegrated, then at least one of them is predictable.
We use this example to illustrate the EW05 theorem. Suppose, then that the US$/¥ exchange rate,
stUJ is generated by a present value model,
∞

stUJ = (1 − b )∑ b j x tUJ ,
j =0

where x tUJ is an I(1) fundamental. The HK$/¥ exchange rate, stHJ , is determined by an analogous model,
with x tHJ as the I(1) fundamental. If stUJ and stHJ are cointegrated, then x tUJ and x tHJ must also be
cointegrated, say x tUJ = x tHJ + zt , for some stationary zt . For simplicity, assume zt has a mean of zero
Then
(10)

∞

∞

∞

j =0

j =0

j =0

stHJ = (1 − b)∑ b j x tHJ = (1 − b )∑ b j x tUJ + (1 − b )∑ b j zt = stUJ + (1 − b )zt ,
∞

where zt ≡ ∑ b j zt is stationary and has finite variance even in the limit as b → 1 . Thus, we can write for
j =0

the HK$/US$ exchange rate, stHU .
(11)

stHU = stHJ − stUJ = (1 − b)zt ,

and as b → 1 , stHU → 0 (i.e., a constant, equal to zero here since zt has a zero mean.) In other words,
the EW05 theorem implies that while stUJ and stHJ each approach random walks as b → 1 , stHU
approaches a constant.
To get a better sense of the behavior of these exchange rates for b < 1 , consider the following
simple example. Suppose ∆x tUJ = et , et ∼ i.i.d. (that is, x tUJ is a random walk), and let zt defined above
also be i.i.d. Then zt = zt , and stHJ = stUJ + (1 − b)zt , implying
(12)

∆stHJ = ∆stUJ + (1 − b)∆zt = et + (1 − b)( zt − zt −1 ) = et + (1 − b)zt − (stHJ−1 − stUJ−1 ) .

So, upon defining the i.i.d. variable v t = et + (1 − b)zt , we can write the VECM for stUJ and stHJ as:
(13a)

∆stUJ = et

(13b)

∆stHJ = v t − (stHJ−1 − stUJ−1 ) .

11

According to equation (13b), ∆stHJ is predictable using the lagged HK$/US$ exchange rate,
HJ
UJ
HJ
UJ
HJ
stHU
follows a random
−1 = st −1 − st −1 . But as b → 1 , st −1 − st −1 → 0 , and we get the EW05 result that st

walk.

Example 2
Probably the best cited exchange rate model ever is Dornbusch’s (1976) overshooting model. At
first glance, it seems as though EW05’s theorem could not apply to Dornbusch’s model. The most
celebrated aspect of the model – the fact that in response to a permanent money supply shock, the
exchange rate overshoots, responding more in the short run than in the long run – implies that exchange
rate changes are predictable. When the currency depreciates in response to a domestic monetary
expansion, we can predict that it will appreciate toward its long-run equilibrium value.
The EW05 theorem actually is not designed to answer the question of whether the exchange rate
in the Dornbusch model theoretically is nearly a random walk. Since equations (3), (4) and (5) hold in the
Dornbusch model, then the present value relationship (6) also holds. The EW05 theorem takes the data
generating processes for the fundamentals as given, and asks what the implied exchange rate behavior is
for large values of the discount factor. That is subtly different than asking what happens in the model to the
behavior of the exchange rate as the discount factor goes to one, because a change in the discount factor
may change the implied data-generating process for the fundamentals. In other words, the EW05 theorem
suggests that if the exchange rate is determined by the model (6), with the observed DGPs for the
fundamentals, and the discount factor is close to one, then the exchange rate will be nearly a random walk.
Here we briefly examine the theoretical behavior of the exchange rate in the Dornbusch model
when the discount factor is nearly unity, allowing for the fact that the data generating process for the
fundamentals – particularly the real exchange rate – is affected by the discount factor.
We look at a version of the model very close in spirit to Dornbusch’s original model. We use
equations (3), (4), and (5), and, as in Dornbusch, assume that uncovered interest parity holds exactly,

ρt = 0 . As in the overshooting analysis of Dornbusch, we will take output as exogenous. Dornbusch
examined the impact of a permanent change in the money supply in a non-stochastic model. In the
stochastic setting, this is equivalent to looking at a random walk process for the money supply. Since
output shocks and money demand shocks have identical effects on the exchange rate as money supply
shocks (up to the sign of the effect), we will simply assume that the “fundamentals” follow a random walk:
(14)

∆ ( mt − mt* − γ ( y t − y t* ) − (v t − v t* ) ) = ut ,

ut ∼ i.i.d.

12

We need to supplement the model with a price adjustment equation. The open-economy macro
literature of the 1970s and 1980s assumed a backward looking element to price setting. The log of the
domestic price level for time t, pt −1 , is preset in time t − 1 , and adjusted to eliminate part of the deviation of

pt −1 from its long-run equilibrium level. As in Dornbusch, we will assume purchasing power parity holds in
the long run, so pt − pt −1 eliminates part of the time t − 1 PPP deviation, st −1 + pt*−1 − pt −1 . In addition,
there is a forward looking trend term to price adjustment. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1984) emphasize that priceadjustment equations that do not include the forward looking element lead to counter-intuitive dynamics
when considering expected future changes in policy, or non-stationary dynamics in the fundamentals.
Here, we implement a version of what they call a Mussa rule – the trend term is the expected change in the
market-clearing exchange rate. We have:
(15)

pt − pt −1 = θ (st −1 + pt*−1 − pt −1 ) + Et −1st + pt* − (st −1 + pt*−1 ) .

This pricing rule is symmetric, in that the analogous pricing rule for the foreign country yields equation (15)
as well. Equation (15) implies that the real exchange rate follows a first-order autoregressive process:
(16)

Et −1qt = (1 − θ )qt −1 .

Note that the persistence of the real exchange rate is entirely determined by the speed of adjustment of
nominal prices. We return to this point below when we discuss the “PPP puzzle”. However, the real
exchange rate does depend on monetary shocks and on the discount factor, which work through their effect
on innovations in the real exchange rate.
If we substitute equations (14) and (16) into the present value formula (7), we derive:
(17)

st − st −1 = −

θ
1 + λθ
(1 − b )θ
1 − b + bθ
qt −1 +
ut = −
q t −1 +
ut ,
1 + λθ
1 − b + bθ
λθ
bθ

where, recall, the discount factor is b =

λ
1+ λ

. Equation (17) demonstrates the famous overshooting

result. In response to a shock, ut , the exchange rate jumps more than one-for-one,

1 + λθ

λθ

. The volatility

is greater the stickier are prices (the smaller is θ .) But the change in the exchange rate is predictable.
When st is above its PPP value in period t − 1 (so qt −1 is positive), then Et −1 (st − st −1 ) < 0 . We can see,
however, that the EW05 result holds in this model. As b → 1 , st − st −1 ≈ ut .
As noted above, the real exchange rate behavior does depend on the value of b:

13

(18)

qt = (1 − θ )qt −1 +

1 + λθ

λθ

ut = (1 − θ )qt −1 +

1 − b + bθ
ut .
bθ

Assume that λ = 10 , a conservatively low value if calibrated to quarterly data. Also, assume

θ = 0.25 , which implies a half life of price adjustment of 2.4 quarters. This speed of price adjustment is in
line with the typical calibration of modern sticky-price macroeconomic models. However, it would imply
from equation (16) real exchange rate convergence that is much faster than what is typically observed
among advanced countries. With these parameters, how well could we predict nominal exchange rate
changes using the lagged real exchange rate? The implied R-squared from the regression in equation (17)
is 0.012, or slightly greater than 1 per cent. While the exchange rate change is predictable in theory, in
practice it would not be predictable in any reasonably sized sample.
One might expect that if price adjustment were slower (that is, θ lower), that perhaps exchange
rate changes would be more predictable. Since the overshooting is greater, the exchange rate has further
to adjust to reach its long-run value, and perhaps we can predict that change. In fact, lower values of θ
reduce the predictability of exchange rate changes. After a shock to the fundamentals, it is true that the
gap between the exchange rate and its long-run value is wider the smaller is θ . The overshooting for a
given monetary shock is proportional to 1/ θ . But, the predictable percentage change in the exchange rate
toward its long-run value is smaller in proportion to θ . These two effects precisely offset each other. But
the other effect of small values of θ is to make the variance of innovations to the exchange rate larger –
the overshooting is larger. So the variance of the unpredictable component of changes in the exchange
rate grows relative to the variance of the predictable component as θ gets smaller.
To further develop intuition, we can ask about longer-run changes in the exchange rate. We find:
(19)

st + k

k
⎛ (1 − θ ) j −1 + λθ ⎞
(1 − (1 − θ )k )
qt + ∑ ⎜
− st = −
⎟ ut + k +1− j .
λθ
1 + λθ
j =1 ⎝
⎠

There are two effects as the horizon for forecasts gets longer. First, for higher k, the variance of the
(1 − (1 − θ )k )
is increasing in k. But, since
predictable part of the exchange rate change increases, since
1 + λθ
the exchange rate has a unit root, the variance of the unpredictable part grows without bound as k grows.
That can be seen from the second term on the right-hand-side of equation (19), which has a variance that
is greater than k times the innovation variance. In practice, for the parameters considered above ( λ = 10
and θ = 0.25 ), the maximum R-squared in this regression comes at 6 quarters, and has a value of 0.027.
At 16 quarters, the implied R-squared is 0.018.

14

Using future values to ‘forecast’: Meese-Rogoff revisited
While recent literature has attempted to validate exchange rate models by comparing their out-ofsample forecasting power to that of the random walk, Meese and Rogoff (1983a) did something different.
They apparently gave the exchange rate models an advantage relative to the random walk model.
Forecasting from the exchange rate model requires forecasting the values of the fundamentals. But Meese
and Rogoff evaluated the exchange rate models using the actual realized values of the fundamentals,
rather than forecasting them.
The more recent literature has not used the Meese-Rogoff technique, and instead compared
monetary exchange rate models to the random walk model using true out-of-sample forecasting power. By
this standard, monetary models have not fared well in general. See, for example, Cheung, Chinn and
Garcia-Pascual (2005), who find that the models generally do not have significantly better forecasting
power than the random walk model. Below, we note that monetary model forecasts based on panel
estimation techniques at long horizons (such as in Mark and Sul (2001)) do seem to have greater
forecasting power than the random walk. We also examine the forecasting power of models in which
monetary policy is endogenized (as in Molodtsova and Papell (2007).) But here we want to reconsider the
Meese-Rogoff technique.
As an example (this is one model actually considered by Meese and Rogoff), use equation (4) to
solve for the log of the exchange rate, under the assumption of PPP ( qt = 0 ):
(20)

st = mt − mt* − γ ( y t − y t* ) + λ ( it − it* ) + ut ,

where here the error term ut is associated with the error terms in money demand, v t − v t* .
Rossi (2005) emphasizes that Meese and Rogoff may not have fully accounted for the serial
correlation in ut . She notes that if the exchange rate is cointegrated with the economic fundamentals
included in equation (20), then ut is stationary, but it might be serially correlated. Suppose ut = ρut −1 + ε t ,

ε t ∼ i.i.d. Then the model forecast for time t + 1 should be
mt +1 − mt*+1 − γ ( y t +1 − y t*+1 ) + λ ( it +1 − it*+1 ) + ρ ut .
Rossi argues that even with this addendum, the models still might be at a “disadvantage” relative to the
random walk. This is because ρ is plausibly near one, in which case estimates of ρ tend to be biased
downwards. Hence imposing a unit root (imposing ρ = 1 ) might result in long-horizon forecasts superior
to ones that rely on an estimate of ρ that is far below its true value. Moreover, when ρ is estimated,

15

distributions of test statistics tend to be nonstandard, a result captured by Rossi by modeling ρ as “local to
unity”.
Suppose we impose ρ = 1 , then our forecast of st +1 is given by:

mt +1 − mt*+1 − γ ( y t +1 − y t*+1 ) + λ ( it +1 − it*+1 ) + ut
= ∆ ⎡⎣mt +1 − mt*+1 − γ ( y t +1 − y t*+1 ) + λ ( it +1 − it*+1 ) ⎤⎦ + st

.

In other words, taking into account the serial correlation of the residual, we should be using the change in
the fundamentals to “forecast” the change in the exchange rate.
Note however that Meese and Rogoff (1983b) allow for a grid of possible values for ρ , including

ρ = 1 , and still find that the models do not improve the out-of-sample fit compared to the random walk.
We make a different observation about the Meese and Rogoff standard for evaluating the
exchange rate models. There is a sense in which the out-of-sample fit of the model is arbitrary – the model
can be rewritten to make the fit arbitrarily good or bad. That is, suppose that x t is the model for some
variable y t , and we have: y t = xt + ωt . The variance of ωt , σ ω2 , serves as a measure of the goodness of
fit of the model under the Meese-Rogoff approach.

Now, consider rewriting the model as:

y t = ( x t − (1 − a ) y t ) / a + ωt / a = zt + ϖ t , where a is an arbitrary constant, zt ≡ ( x t − (1 − a ) y t ) / a , and

ϖ t = ωt / a . The model is not changed – the second equation is simply an algebraic manipulation of the
first. But the variance of the error in the rewritten model – the variance of ϖ t -- is (1/ a )2 times the
variance in the first model.
For example, using the log approximation to the pure arbitrage covered interest parity condition, we
have ft − st = it − it* , where ft is the log of the one-period ahead forward exchange rate. Substitute this
expression into equation (20), and rearrange terms to get:
(21)

st =

1
λ
1
ft +
ut .
(mt − mt* − γ ( y t − y t* )) +
1+ λ
1+ λ
1+ λ

This representation of the model is very similar in spirit to equations (1) or (6): the exchange rate is a
weighted average of the (observed) economic fundamentals, and the expected future exchange rate, here
measured as ft . This way of writing the exchange rate equation emphasizes the weight of expectations of
the future relative to current fundamentals. But it also gives us an error term with a much lower variance.
2

⎛ 1 ⎞
The variance here is ⎜
⎟ times the variance of the error term in equation (20). We have been using a
⎝ 1+ λ ⎠
16

value of λ = 10 for quarterly data in our examples so far, which would imply that the variance of the error
term is lower by a factor of

1
.
121

Which is the correct way to write the model? Since they are algebraically equivalent, it is hard to
argue for one in favor of the other, and indeed that is exactly the problem with the Meese and Rogoff
methodology. Moreover, both ways of writing the model have natural economic interpretations. If the
model is true with no error, then the right-hand-sides of equations (20) and (21) are equal:
(22)

mt − mt* − γ ( y t − y t* ) + λ ( i t − i t* ) =

1
λ
ft .
(mt − mt* − γ ( y t − y t* )) +
1+ λ
1+ λ

When there is an error term, using the formulation in (20) magnifies the error because it includes −λ st as
an “explanatory” variable.
To be clear, this critique does not apply to genuine out-of-sample forecast comparisons. At some
level, it is obvious that we cannot simply rewrite the model and produce out-of-sample forecasts that have
arbitrarily lower variance. If we could, we would not be writing or reading this paper, and instead would be
out using this technique to get very rich. While we can rewrite the right-hand-side of the model to arbitrarily
change the in-sample fit, it follows from equation (22) that our forecast of the right-hand-side is the same no
matter which way it is written.
Finally, we note that it is often asserted that the “forecast” using the actual realized values of the
explanatory variables must produce better forecasts of the exchange rate than when the right-hand-side
variables must be forecast. However, this is not in general true if the explanatory fundamental variables
are correlated with the “unobserved” variables. Unless we take this correlation into account, the fit could
potentially be worse using the ex post fundamentals.
Our general point, then, is that the Meese-Rogoff procedure of using realized values of the
explanatory variables is not invariant to the way the model is written. Plausible ways of rewriting the model
can give much lower mean-squared-errors for the model.
Of course, we cannot conclude that if the model is not useful in forecasting exchange rate
changes, we have support for the model. Any model can fail to forecast exchange rates. We turn now to
alternative means of assessing exchange-rate models.

17

2.

Taylor-rule models

Overview
Meese and Rogoff originally suggested the out-of-sample fit criterion as a check on empirical
studies that found good in-sample fit. Here, we return to examination of the in-sample fit, but with more
attention paid to the market’s expectations of future values of the macroeconomic fundamentals.
The monetary models that we have explored so far have been formulated in such a way that the
endogeneity of monetary policy has been essentially completely ignored. We have used money supply to
capture the monetary fundamental, and have focused on formulations in which nominal interest rates move
to equilibrate money supply and money demand. We have not tried to relate movements of the money
supply to the macroeconomic variables that policymakers might target.
But modern monetary macroeconomic models formulate the determination of interest rates and
monetary equilibrium quite differently.

First, they emphasize the endogeneity of monetary policy.

Advanced countries have managed to stabilize inflation and apparently establish monetary policy credibility
over the past twenty or twenty-five years. If our models of exchange rates are to capture expected future
fundamentals, we need to recognize that market forecasts of the future incorporate their assumptions about
monetary policy reactions to changes in the macro environment. Second, since the mid-1980s, central
banks have used short-term interest rates as their policy instrument, rather than the money supply.
Engel and West (2006) and Mark (2007) (hereinafter, EW06 and M07) specify the monetary policy
rules for the home and foreign country as interest-rate reaction functions for the central bank. Specifically,
they assume the home country (in their empirical studies, the home country is Germany, prior to the
adoption of the euro) sets the nominal interest rate to target the deviation of expected inflation from the
central bank’s target, Et π t +1 ; the output gap, y t ; and, possibly, the deviation of the nominal exchange rate
from its purchasing power parity value – that is, the real exchange rate, qt . The latter term is included to
capture the notion that the monetary authorities in some countries tend to raise interest rates when their
currency depreciates. For example, Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1998) find empirical support for this notion in
Japan and some other countries. We summarize the monetary policy rule in equation (23):
(23)

it = γ q qt + γ π Et π t +1 + γ y y t + δ it −1 + umt .

We assume γ q > 0 , γ π > 1 , γ y > 0 , and 0 ≤ δ < 1 . Here, umt represents an error or shift in the
monetary policy rule.
The foreign country (taken to be the U.S. in EW06 and M07) follows a similar policy rule:

18

(24)

it* = γ π Et π t*+1 + γ y y t* + δ it*−1 + u mt* .

Here, we assume that the parameters on the inflation deviation and the output gap are the same in the
home and foreign country, but assume that the foreign central bank is passive with respect to exchange
rate fluctuations.
Using the uncovered interest parity relationship (including the u.i.p. deviation,

ρt ),

it − it* = Et st +1 − st + ρt , we can manipulate these equations to get a forward-looking expression for the
real exchange rate:
(25)

∞

qt = b ∑ b j Et zt + j ,
j =0

where
b≡

1
,
1+ γ q

zt = − ⎡⎣(γ π − 1)(Et π t +1 − Etπ t*+1 ) + γ y ( y t − y t* ) + δ ( it −1 − it*−1 ) + (umt − umt* − ρt ) ⎤⎦ .
M07’s formulation actually sets γ q = 0 , because his estimates of the Bundesbank’s monetary
policy reaction function yielded insignificant estimates for this parameter. With that change, we can still
represent the real exchange rate with a present value expression, but the discount factor, b, is equal to
one. We can do that if zt has a zero (unconditional) mean – implying qt has a zero mean, or long-run
purchasing power parity holds – and satisfies a mild summability condition. Any ARMA process satisfies
the condition, though we note that fractionally integrated processes do not. In this but not all contexts,
there will be little difference in empirical results that impose γ q = 0 and empirical results that, consistent
with the estimates in Clarida et al. (1998), impose small but positive values such as γ q = 0.10 . Through
most of the empirical work below, we assume that in quarterly data, γ q is a small positive number, less
than 0.10 but strictly greater than zero.
The equation for the real exchange rate given by equation (25) does not solve a full general
equilibrium model in terms of exogenous variables. The fundamentals – inflation and the output gap – are
determined by underlying driving variables, such as productivity disturbances and cost-push shocks. We
note, nonetheless, that equation (25) has an interesting implication – ceteris paribus, an increase in home
relative to foreign inflation leads to a home real appreciation. This prediction stands in contrast to the usual
interpretation of the effect of an increase in expected inflation in the monetary models we investigate

19

above. In those, an increase in expected inflation at home lowers home money demand, leading to a home
depreciation. Here, when γ π > 1 , and increase in expected inflation leads the home central bank to raise
the home real interest rate, leading to an appreciation.
EW06 and M07 estimate the model as summarized by equation (25). The present-value model
requires a measure of expected inflation, output gap, and interest rates for all periods in the future. It also
requires an estimate of future expected values of u mt − u mt* − ρt . The empirical researcher faces a severe
problem in estimating such a model, because the market forms expectations based on many sources of
information that are not measurable by the econometrician.
EW06 and M07 handle estimation of the expected present value sum, (25), in similar ways. First,
they ignore u mt − u mt* − ρt , treating these as “unobservable” determinants of the real exchange rate. We
now describe EW06’s methodology, then note the differences between EW06 and M07. First, EW06 do not
include the lagged interest rate in the monetary policy rule, so they have set δ = 0 . EW06 then must
measure Et ⎡⎣(γ π − 1)(π t + j +1 − π t*+ j +1 ) + γ y ( y t + j − y t*+ j ) ⎤⎦ for all j. EW06 do not estimate the parameters γ π
and γ y -- instead they base them on estimates of the Taylor rule on post-1979 data in Clarida, Gali, and
Gertler (1998). EW06 also use Clarida et al.’s estimate of γ q , from which the discount factor, b, is
calculated. Then, EW06 estimate a VAR in π t +1 − π t*+1 , y t − y t* , and it − it* . From the VAR, expected
values of π t +1 − π t*+1 , and y t − y t* for all periods can be constructed, and then the present value can be
calculated.
EW06 then compare the “model” real exchange rate – the value of the right-hand-side of equation
(25), where expectations are calculated as just described – to the behavior of the actual
deutschemark/dollar real exchange rate. EW06 estimate the model on post-1979 data, using monthly data,
1979:10-1998:12. The correlation of the model real exchange rate and actual real exchange rate is 0.32.
That is not extremely high, but it is not too bad, and represents a promising start in this literature. We note,
however, that the model real exchange rate estimated by EW06 has a standard deviation about one-fifth of
that of the actual real exchange rate.
The approach of M07 differs from EW06 in a number of ways. First, M07 estimates the parameters
of the Taylor rule, for two periods 1960:II-1979:II, and 1979:III-2003:IV, using quarterly data. Second, as
noted above, Mark does not include the real exchange rate in the interest-rate rule for Germany. Third,

20

M07 does include the lagged interest rate in the policy rule. Fourth, M07 compares the behavior of the
model real exchange rate to the actual real exchange rate over a longer period, 1976:II-2003:IV.
The correlation of the model and actual real exchange rate in M07 is quite similar to that in EW06,
equal to 0.304 (when the output gap is measured using deviations the HP-filter). However, the model
volatility of the real exchange rate is much larger in M07, and more nearly matches that of the real
exchange rate. The variance of 1-quarter changes in the real exchange rate from the model is 36.81
percent from the model, compared to 20.06 percent in the data.

Purchasing power parity puzzle
In advanced economies, real and nominal exchange rate changes are highly correlated. A
plausible model of real exchange rate behavior must account for this correlation. For an international
macroeconomist, a model of nominal exchange rates that cannot be reconciled with real exchange rate
behavior is not appealing, and vice-versa. Some existing literature (as exemplified by Rogoff (1996))
argues that both sticky and flexible price models fail to replicate some important exchange rate
characteristics. As explained below, such authors argue that flexible price models have a hard time
explaining volatility of real exchange rates, while sticky price models have difficulty explaining persistence
of real exchange rates. But recent work by Benigno (2004) and others shows that with suitable modeling of
price stickiness and monetary policy, real exchange rate persistence can be plausibly explained as coming
from persistence in interest rates.
It is possible to understand the high correlation of real and nominal exchange rates in an
environment in which nominal goods prices adjust quickly (no price stickiness), if we assume that monetary
authorities stabilize nominal prices. In that case, we should think of nominal exchange rates as being
driven by underlying real shocks that drive the real exchange rate. That is, since st = qt + pt − pt* , if
nominal prices are flexible but pt and pt* are stabilized by monetary policy, then movements in st will be
highly correlated with those in qt . However, as Rogoff (1996) emphasized, while flexible-price models can
account for the extreme persistence of real exchange rates that we see among advanced countries, they
are unable to explain the high volatility.
Alternatively, we might consider models in which pt and pt* have low volatility (that is, low
innovation variance) at least in part because of nominal price stickiness. In models with price stickiness,
Rogoff notes, we have better explanations of real exchange rate volatility. Specifically, we can appeal to
the Dornbusch overshooting model (that we have described in Section 1). Monetary shocks cause volatile

21

nominal exchange rate changes –see equation (17). But empirical studies have found the half-life of real
exchange rates to be greater than two years. In sticky-price models of the Dornbusch vintage, the
sluggishness of real exchange rates is directly tied to the speed of adjustment of nominal prices. Indeed,
that can be seen directly from equation (16) – in this version of the model, if the response of real exchange
rates to shocks has a half-life of two-plus years, so does the deviation of nominal prices from their flexibleprice equilibrium level. Accounting for the slow adjustment of real exchange rates requires unrealistic
assumptions about the sluggishness of price adjustment. Rogoff concludes that we cannot easily reconcile
real exchange rate behavior with the monetary models of price stickiness either.
Benigno (2004), however, shows that models with two modifications to the Dornbusch-style model
de-link real exchange rate persistence and the speed of nominal price adjustment. First, replace the ad
hoc price adjustment equation (15) with a Calvo-style price adjustment equation. A fraction of firms each
period reset their prices, recognizing that they will not be able to reset prices in every period. They set
prices to maximize the value of the firm – the expected present value of current and future dividends. Thus
prices are set in a purely forward-looking manner. Second, monetary policy is endogenous. Central banks
set nominal interest rates by a Taylor rule, reacting to the inflation level and the output gap.
We demonstrate the point here in the model from Engel and West (2006), which is derived directly
from the working paper version of Galí and Monacelli (2005). The home country is small relative to the
foreign country. That is reflected in the behavior of consumer price inflation in each country. Home-country
inflation is a weighted average of inflation of domestically-produced goods and home-currency inflation of
foreign produced goods:
(26)

π t = (1 − α )π dt + απ ft .
The law of one price holds for imported goods in the home country:

(27)

π ft = ∆st + π t* .

This equation embodies the assumption that the home country is small. The term π t* represents both the
foreign-currency rate of inflation of foreign-produced goods, and the foreign consumer price inflation. The
notion is that the home country is so small relative to the foreign country that, while the foreign country
does import goods from the home country, the weight of home country prices is infinitesimally small in the
overall foreign consumer price index.
Firms in each country set prices by a Calvo-price setting rule:
(28)

π dt = β Etπ dt +1 + κ y t + uct

22

(29)

π t* = β Etπ t*+1 + κ y t* + uct*

y t and y t* represent the output gaps in the home and foreign countries. uct and uct* are cost-push shocks.
The parameter κ captures the speed of price adjustment. In each period, the larger the proportion of firms
that are able to adjust their prices, the larger is κ .
In each country, the monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate to react to expected
consumer price inflation, and the local output gap. In addition, the home country puts some weight on the
real exchange rate in its Taylor rule:
(30)

it = γ q qt + γ π Et π t +1 + γ y y t + u mt

(31)

it* = γ π Et π t*+1 + γ y y t* + u mt* .

We assume parameter values that ensure a stationary solution. Sufficient assumptions are that all
parameters are positive, that γ π > 1 , and that αγ π < 1 . umt and umt* are monetary policy errors.
Demand for output from each country depends on consumption levels and the terms of trade. But,
in turn, the relative consumption levels are proportional to the real exchange rate through the familiar
equilibrium condition that arises under complete markets. The terms of trade are proportional to the real
exchange rate. Details are in Gali and Monacelli. We can then write:
(32)

y t − y t* = θ qt + u yt − u yt* ,

where u yt − u yt* represents a relative productivity shock.
Here we briefly summarize how various shocks affect the economic variables in the system:
• A positive monetary policy shock (i.e., an exogenous monetary tightening) causes an appreciation.
Inflation and output also decline.
• A positive Phillips curve shock that, given output and expected inflation, raises inflation transitorily and
leads to a real appreciation.
• Suppose there is a positive real shock to the IS curve that, given the real exchange rate, raises output.
Then in equilibrium, output rises, the real exchange rate falls, and the inflation rate of home produced
goods rises relative to the foreign produced goods.
In order to highlight the comparison of real exchange rate behavior in this model to that of the
Dornbusch model, we will set cost push shocks and productivity shocks to zero, leaving only monetary
errors, which are assumed to follow an AR(1) process. We define the relative policy error as:
(33)

ut = umt − u m* t ,

23

with
(34)

ut = φut −1 + ε t , 0 ≤ φ ≤ 1 .
Using equations (26) – (34), we get a solution for the real exchange rate:

(35)

qt = c m ut ,

where

cm ≡ −(1 − βφ ) / d m < 0

d m ≡ (1 − βφ )[γ + η (1 − φ )] + κθ (γ π − 1)φ

γ ≡ γ q + γ yθ

η ≡ (1 − αγ π ) /(1 − α ) .
The important thing to note about the solution for the real exchange rate is that it is proportional to the
monetary policy error. Real exchange rates have no persistence, except to the extent that there is
persistence in monetary policy errors. In the lingo of the new Keynesian literature, the real exchange rate
exhibits no endogenous persistence. Greater price flexibility is represented by a larger value for κ . We
see from the expressions for cm and d m that as κ grows, the impact effect of shocks falls ( cm falls). So
while some price stickiness ( κ < ∞ ) is required to make the real exchange rate respond to monetary
shocks, the degree of price stickiness does not affect the persistence of real exchange rates, but only
affects the impact effect of monetary shocks.
In this model, the link between real exchange rate persistence and the speed of adjustment of
nominal prices is broken. It might be possible in this simple framework to account for the persistence of
real exchange rates, because in practice relative short term nominal interest rates among advanced
countries are very persistent. It is usually not possible to reject a unit root in it − it* (at least not
statistically). We note here that similar effects on the persistence of the real exchange rate would be
generated in the model if shocks to the monetary rule were serially uncorrelated, but the lagged interest
rate appeared in the rule with a positive coefficient near one.
Intuitively, even if there are a large proportion of firms that reset their prices each period, the firms
that set their prices must take into account the effects of monetary policy.

Suppose there is an

expansionary monetary shock. The firms that adjust their price cannot raise prices fully to the level they
would attain if all prices were set flexibly, because their prices might then be quite high relative to firms that
have not adjusted prices this period. As argued for the closed economy model of West (1988), the

24

combination of persistence in monetary shocks and non-synchronized price setting can stretch out the price
adjustment process, even if a large fraction of firms adjust prices at any given time.
The simple model presented here is not realistic enough to describe the most important moments
in the macroeconomic data. For example, the output gap and inflation inherit the same persistence as the
real exchange rate. Benigno (2004) shows how various types of asymmetries can contribute to even more
sluggish real exchange rate adjustment – asymmetries in the price-setting rules, in monetary policy, etc.
The other aspect of the PPP puzzle is real exchange rate volatility. Again, we do not attempt to
calibrate the simple model above to see if it is able to generate realistic volatility for plausible values of the
parameters. However, Benigno (2004) and Benigno and Benigno (2006) do undertake such exercises in
somewhat richer models, and find success in matching both the persistence and volatility of real exchange
rates.
We do not mean to suggest that the PPP puzzle is solved. For example, estimated open-economy
DSGE models frequently do not produce parameter estimates that will fully account for the persistence and
volatility of real exchange rates (see Jung (2007), for example.) But we do believe that the Taylor-rule
models provide a fruitful direction for future research. In the open-economy empirical literature, much effort
has been put into reconciling the speed of adjustment of real exchange rates to the speed of adjustment of
prices. Various authors have suggested that the half-life of real exchange rates might be overstated
because of estimation bias. (See, for example, Murray and Papell, 2002, who emphasize the imprecision
in estimates of the speed of reversion of real exchange rates. But Choi, Mark, and Sul (2006) find an
unbiased point estimate of the half life of 3 years, with a 95% confidence interval between 2.3 to 4.2 years.)
Others have suggested that aggregation bias can account for sluggish real exchange rate adjustment.
That is, individual goods prices might adjust more quickly than the real exchange rate because the CPIbased real exchange rate aggregates individual prices, and aggregates adjust more slowly (Imbs, Mumtaz,
Ravn, and Rey, 2005.) Others have attempted to reconcile the behavior of prices and real exchange rates
by appealing to non-linearities (e.g., Taylor, Peel, and Sarno, 2001), or to some sort of slow adjustment of
nominal exchange rates, perhaps due to transactions costs in foreign exchange markets (Cheung and Lai,
2004). What is intriguing about the open-economy models based on Taylor rules and Calvo price
adjustment is that there may be no need to reconcile sluggish real exchange rate adjustment with the
frequency of price setting.

25

3.

Granger-causality tests and variance bounds
We have emphasized that in models encapsulated by equations (1) and (2), the market’s

expectations of future fundamentals are the key to understanding exchange-rate movements. But we then
are faced with the dilemma of measuring expectations. We can follow the tack taken by Engel and West
(2006) and Mark (2007), and use the forecasts from a statistical model for the fundamentals as measures
of the market’s expectations. But the market surely uses more information than is contained in a simple
VAR forecast, so this method mismeasures expectations.
In this section, we examine two alternative approaches to evaluating present value models of
exchange rates.

First, we examine whether exchange rates can help forecast future (observed)

fundamentals. Second, we ask whether the present value of observed fundamentals is sufficiently volatile
to account for observed exchange-rate volatility. In section 4, we look at alternative methods of measuring
expectations.

Forecasting fundamentals
If the exchange rate reacts to news about future fundamentals, then perhaps the exchange rate is
useful in forecasting those fundamentals. Econometric evaluation of this observation was pioneered by
Campbell and Shiller (1987). But the Campbell-Shiller analysis is not directly applicable to exchange rate
models. This is because future fundamentals typically include some variables that are unobservable, even
ex post. As explained in EW05, then, the present value models do not necessarily imply that the exchange
rate will Granger cause fundamentals. But if the unobserved fundamentals are not the primary drivers of
exchange rates, then perhaps movements in exchange rates are useful to forecast macroeconomic
variables such as relative money supplies, outputs, prices or interest rates. That is, while the presence of
unobserved fundamentals breaks the tight restriction tested by Campbell and Shiller, it is possible that the
exchange rate might Granger cause the standard observed fundamentals. For this reason, we examine
whether exchange rates Granger cause the fundamentals from the monetary and Taylor-rule models.
Following the example illustrated by EW05, set a 2 'x t from equation (1) equal to zero for simplicity,
and write a1'x t = x ot + xut , where xot stands for the fundamentals whose ex post values are observed by
the econometrician, and xut signifies the unobserved fundamentals. We can rewrite equation (2) as:
(36)

⎛ ∞
⎞
st = (1 − b)Et ⎜ ∑ b j ( x ot + xut ) ⎟ .
⎝ j =0
⎠

26

In section 5 below, we present evidence from panel cointegration tests that st is cointegrated with the
observed fundamentals from the monetary and Taylor-rule models. In other words, the unobserved
fundamentals, xut , are found to be stationary. Equation (36) suggests that the exchange rate might contain
news about future observed fundamentals, xot , though it also is affected by news about future unobserved
fundamentals. We ask, then, whether the exchange rate can help forecast the observed fundamentals, in
the sense that it Granger causes them.
We write the relationship between the observed fundamentals and the log of the exchange rate in
error-correction form:
(37a)
(37b)

I

J

i =1

j =1

st − st −1 = α1 + β1 ( x ot −1 − sot −1 ) + ∑ γ 1i (st − i − st −1− i ) + ∑ δ 1 j ( x ot − j − x ot −1− j )
I

J

i =1

j =1

x ot − x ot −1 = α 2 + β 2 ( x ot −1 − sot −1 ) + ∑ γ 2 i (st − i − st −1− i ) + ∑ δ 2 j ( x ot − j − x ot −1− j ) .

The null that the exchange rate does not Granger cause the fundamentals is represented by the restriction

β 2 = γ 21 = γ 22 = … = γ 2 J = 0 . If we reject this null, it means we “accept” the hypothesis that the exchange
rate is helpful in forecasting future values of xot . Conversely, in order to accept the hypothesis that the
observed

fundamentals

Granger

cause

the

exchange

rate,

we

must

reject

the

null

β1 = δ11 = δ12 = … = δ1J = 0 . We set the lag length J to 4.
In Table 1, we report results of these tests.

We try three permutations of the observed

fundamentals from the monetary model: ∆(mt − mt* ) − ∆( y t − y t* ) , which follows from the monetary model
when the income elasticity of money demand is unity; and ∆(mt − mt* ) and ∆( y t − y t* ) separately.
We also examine whether the exchange rate can help forecast fundamental variables implied by
the Taylor rule models. Rewrite the Taylor rule model as:
(38)

it − it* = γ (st − ( pt − pt* )) + ut .

Here, we have simply rolled into the disturbance term all the variables that might be targeted by the central
bank other than the real exchange rate. Then using interest parity (and including the deviation from interest
parity into the general disturbance term), we can rewrite equation (38) in one of two ways:

γ

st =

(40)

st = γ ( pt − pt* ) + γ ( it − it* ) − ut + (1 − γ )Et st +1 .

1+ γ

( pt − pt* ) −

1
1
ut +
Et st +1
1+ γ
1+ γ

(39)

27

These models suggest using ∆( pt − pt* ) and ∆( it − it* ) as measures of the fundamentals.
We perform the tests on quarterly data for the U.S. plus eighteen other OECD countries.2 We use
an update of the data Mark and Sul (2001), beginning in 1973:I, and have extended through the end of
2005. Nominal exchange rates are from the IFS CD-ROM (line code AE), end-of quarter observations.
Exchange rates for the euro countries after 1998 were glued onto the euro-dollar rate with the appropriate
normalization. We used quarterly industrial production indices for all countries as a proxy for national
income because quarterly GDP is unavailable for several countries in the sample. The IMF’s International
Financial Statistics (IFS line code 66) provides our measure of industrial production. Our measure of
money is from the IFS and is the sum of money (line code 34) plus quasi-money (line code 35) for all
countries with the following exceptions for Great Britain, Norway, and Sweden due to availability. Money is
M0 from the IFS for Great Britain, M2 from the OECD’s Main Economic Indicators for Norway, and M3 also
from the OECD for Sweden. The IFS continues to report currency, demand deposits and other deposits for
euro-zone countries after the introduction of the euro. Price levels are measured using the CPI from the
IFS (line code 64).
Mark and Sul (2001) did not use data on interest rates. We use line 60c (Treasury bill rate) from
IFS as a source for short-term interest rate. However, for some countries, interest rate data was not
available for much of our time span from this source. For these countries, we report NA in Table 1 for
causality tests involving interest rates. However, for Japan, we were able to get the data on interest rate
differential from Todd Clark, who has kindly provided the dataset used in Clark and West (2006).
Here, following Engel and West (2005), we estimate the tests country-by-country (rather than using
panel estimation), using the Akaike criterion to determine lag length.
The tables show that the exchange rate does have modest power in forecasting future
fundamentals. This finding is certainly not uniform across all fundamentals and across all countries. The
forecasting power seems more uniformly good across countries for the fundamentals based on Taylor
rules: relative prices and relative interest rates.
The second panel in each table shows results from the reverse causality test: can the
fundamentals forecast the change in the exchange rate. Here we find a surprisingly large number of
rejections of the null that the fundamentals do not Granger cause changes in exchange rates. This
evidence is in conflict with much of the literature, which has found the models have little power to forecast
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Japan, Korea, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.

2

28

exchange-rate changes. In section 5 below, we discuss circumstances under which the models might be
useful in forecasting exchange rate changes (that is, we discuss possible cases in which the conditions of
the EW05 theorem do not hold.) We explore the models’ ability to forecast exchange rates in that section
using the more rigorous criterion of out-of-sample forecasting power.

Volatility
Let us define:
∞

hIt = (1 − b )∑ b j E ( x t + j | ΩIt ) ,

0 < b < 1.

j =0

htI is the expected present discounted value of x t + j . Expectations are taken with respect to the
information set Ω It , which is the market’s information at time t. We think of this present value as being a
component of the determinants of the exchange rate. Specifically, htI is associated with the present value
of the macroeconomic fundamentals that drive exchange rates that can be observed by the
econometrician.
As we have stated informally above, the econometrician may measure this present value with
error, because the econometrician’s information set at any time t, Ω Jt , is contained in the market’s
information set. The econometrician can calculate:
∞

hJt = (1 − b )∑ b j E ( x t + j | Ω Jt ) .
j =0

Engel and West (2004) demonstrate that if x t is an I(1) random variable, as the discount factor, b,
gets close to one, var(hJt − hJt −1 ) ≈ var(hIt − hIt −1 ) . This theorem does not say that the econometrician’s
measure, hJt , gets close to hIt as b → 1 . But the result can be used in the following way: Suppose we
observe only some subset of the fundamentals that drive the exchange rate, which we call x t . By
calculating hJt (where we estimate E ( x t + j | ΩJt ) from a statistical model, in this case a 4th-order
autoregression in ∆x t ), we can derive a measure of var(hJt − hJt −1 ) ≈ var(hIt − hIt −1 ) . We can then ask how

var(hIt − hIt −1 ) compares to var(st − st −1 ) ; i.e., how much of the variance of the change in the exchange
rate can be accounted for by the variance of the change in hIt .
To be sure, this calculation cannot tell us whether the present value hIt is a good model of the
exchange rate. It merely seeks to answer the question of whether the observed fundamentals are volatile

29

enough to account for the volatility in the exchange rate (as measured by the variance of the change in the
exchange rate.) This question is of some interest because exchange rates are known to be very volatile,
so it is natural to ask whether there is “excess” volatility. Here, we do not mean to ask whether the
variance of changes in the log of the exchange rate have a greater variance than can be explained by the
present value model, because we cannot observe all of the fundamentals that belong in the present value.
Instead, in essence, we ask whether the observed fundamentals can account for enough of exchange-rate
volatility that they are plausible candidates for explaining highly volatile nominal exchange rates.
We first consider the monetary fundamentals: x t = mt − mt* − ( y t − y t* ) .

Table 2 reports

var(hJt − hJt −1 ) / var(st − st −1 ) . We report results for values of the discount factor b equal to 0.90, 0.95, and
0.99.
The table shows that the monetary fundamental can generally account for a fairly high fraction of
exchange rate variance. The case of Canada is unusual because the measure of the variance ratio is
greater than one, so that if the model is correct, the unobserved fundamentals would have to be negatively
correlated with the monetary fundamentals. Excluding the case of Canada, the variance ratio is on average
equal to 0.48 when b = 0.95 .
We can write the Taylor-rule model of equation (25) as a model for nominal exchange rates:
(41)

st = Φ t + Γ t ,

where
(42)

∞

Φ t = (1 − b )∑ b j Et ( pt + j − pt*+ j ) ,
j =0

∞

Γ t = ∑ b j Et ( zt + j − π t + j +1 + π t*+ j +1 ) ,
j =0

and b and zt are defined as in equation (25). (Equation (41) expresses st in the form of equation (2), with

Φt and Γ t corresponding to equation (2)’s present values in a1 ' x t and a 2 ' x t respectively.)
In the second column of Table 2, we treat Γ t as an unobserved fundamental, and assume that zt
contains a unit root. We are then relying only on Φt to account for the volatility of the exchange rate, and
not Γt . Φt accounts for less of the variance than we found with the monetary model. Again, take for
example the case of b = 0.95 . The present value of the fundamentals can account for only the fraction
0.19 (averaged across all countries) of the exchange rate variance.

30

We leave to future work the examination of the model when Γt is included. We note that it is
unlikely that the condition that zt have a unit root is satisfied in our data for OECD countries, but if zt is
highly persistent – so that its largest root is near unity – our method of calculating the implied volatility
should work in practice.

4.

Using Surveys to Measure Expectations

Announcement studies
Present-value models as characterized by equation (2) have the implication that news about
current and future fundamentals influence exchange rates. We could examine the plausibility of models by
testing whether exchange rates react to news about future fundamentals in the way predicted by the
models.
When government agencies announce data measurements – GDP growth, unemployment rates,
inflation, etc. – economic agents learn about the current value of fundamentals, and also revise their
expectations of future fundamentals. “News” is the information contained in the announcement – the
difference between the announced level of the economic variable and the market’s expectation. The
problem confronting researchers, as we have noted, is measuring expectations. We can proceed (as in, for
example, the studies of the Taylor-rule model by Engel and West (2006) and Mark (2007) discussed above)
by inferring expectations from the estimates of a VAR or other statistical model. However, it is likely that
the market uses many other sources of information to form expectations that are contained in typical
statistical analyses, so the researcher may mismeasure expectations.
An alternative means of measuring expectations is from survey data. In particular, several recent
studies have examined the response of exchange rates to announcements of economic news, and use a
measure of the market’s expectation of that announcement culled from surveys of market participants. In
particular these studies have typically used the surveys conducted by Money Market Services. Since 1977,
MMS has conducted a survey each Friday of some 40 money managers at commercial and investment
banks, recording forecasts of all indicators to be released (in the U.S.) in the subsequent week. The news
contained in the release is measured as the difference between the announced value and the median
forecast of that value by the MMS survey.
At least four recent papers have made use of high frequency data (Faust et al. 2003, 2007;
Andersen, et al. 2003, and Clarida and Waldman 2007). These studies examine the response of the
exchange rate from shortly before to shortly after the announcement (for example, in a 10-minute window.)

31

Many earlier studies performed similar studies (such as Engel and Frankel, 1984, and Hardouvelis, 1988),
but using exchange rate changes measured at less high frequencies (for example, from open of the New
York market to close of the New York market on the day of the announcement.)
The recent studies uniformly find responses of dollar exchange rates in line with the predictions of
the Taylor rule model. Specifically, news of activity variables that suggest an expanding economy in the
U.S., or announcements of higher inflation (greater than expected), lead to an appreciation of the dollar at
the time of the announcement. To see this, write out equation (25), omitting the lagged interest rates and
“unobserved” variables for convenience:
(44)

⎛ 1
qt = −∑ ⎜
⎜
j =0 ⎝ 1 + γ q
∞

j +1

⎞
*
*
⎟⎟ Et ⎡⎣(γ π − 1)(π t + j +1 − π t + j +1 ) + γ y ( y t + j − y t + j ) ⎤⎦ .
⎠

Recall the restrictions on the coefficients: γ q > 0 , γ π > 1 , γ y > 0 .
Denote the exchange rate immediately before the announcement as qt − , and immediately after,

qt + , and use a similar notation to capture the change in expectations. Then we have:
(45)

⎛ 1
qt + − qt − = −∑ ⎜
⎜
j =0 ⎝ 1 + γ q
∞

j +1

⎞
*
*
⎟⎟ (Et + − Et − ) ⎡⎣(γ π − 1)(π t + j +1 − π t + j +1 ) + γ y ( y t + j − y t + j ) ⎤⎦ .
⎠

From this expression, we see that the dollar should appreciate ( qt falls) if U.S. inflation is announced to be
greater than expected, or if news revises upward expectations about the future U.S. output gap.
Andersen et. al. (2003) examine the response of the value of the dollar in terms of Swiss francs,
(synthetic) euros, British pounds, Japanese yen, and German marks from January 3, 1992 through
December 30, 1998. They look at the reaction to a wide range of macroeconomic announcements. The
findings strongly go in the direction predicted by the Taylor-rule model. For example, for all five exchange
rates, the dollar appreciates (on average) to positive news about U.S. GDP, non-farm payrolls, retail sales,
industrial production, durable goods orders, construction spending, factory orders, and several other
indicators of economic activity. If we interpret this news as meaning that agents revise their opinion about
the current and future output gaps in the U.S. upward, the Taylor rule model indeed posits an appreciation
of the dollar. The mechanism is that the Fed is expected to increase interest rates, which makes U.S.
assets more attractive, inducing a dollar appreciation to equilibrate the asset market. Strikingly, it is also
the case that the dollar appreciates against all five currencies with news about PPI or CPI inflation: when
inflation in the U.S. is greater than expected, the dollar appreciates.

32

Faust et. al. (2007) look at the response of the German mark/euro and the British pound to
macroeconomic announcements between January 9, 1987 and December 18, 2002, again for several
macro variables. Their findings are very similar to those of Andersen et. al.: For both currencies, the dollar
appreciates in response to positive news about U.S. economic activity. When there is a positive surprise to
GDP, housing starts, nonfarm payrolls, retail sales, or a negative surprise to initial unemployment claims or
unemployment, the dollar appreciates. Moreover, the dollar appreciates to positive inflation surprises to the
PPI for both currencies, and to the CPI for the dollar/pound rate.
Clarida and Waldman (2007) examine the reaction of the dollar value of the Japanese yen,
Canadian dollar, Norwegian krone, Swedish krona, Swiss franc, euro, British pound, Australian dollar, and
New Zealand dollar from July 2001 to December 2005. This study differs from the previous two in that it
uses data on macroeconomic announcements from non-U.S. countries. In particular, it looks at the
reaction to news about inflation from each of these countries, as measured by the surprise component of
the announcement of consumer price inflation. Expectations are measured from surveys conducted by
Blomberg News Service.
The specification examines how the local currency responds to news about local inflation. In a
regression that pools across all currencies, Clarida and Waldman find that an announcement of higher
inflation (greater than expected) leads to a stronger currency. The findings carry over to country-by-country
regressions, though they are a bit weaker in the two countries (the U.S. and Japan) that do not explicitly
target inflation. Indeed, in England and Norway, there is evidence that the effect changed as the countries
changed monetary policy to inflation targeting.
Faust et al. (2003) examine a slightly different situation: They look at the effects of surprise
changes in the Fed’s target for its policy instrument, the Fed funds rate, using high frequency data. They
look at the response of the dollar value of the mark/euro and the pound to 62 announcements from March
1994 to October 2001. The expected Fed funds rate is measured from Fed funds futures data. As the
models would predict, there is a strong and significant effect on the currencies, where a surprise increase in
the Fed funds rate appreciates the dollar.
Engel and Frankel (1984) looked at the effects of announcements of the money supply in the US in
the early 1980s on the value of the dollar. That study related the change in the exchange rate to the
difference between the announced value of the money supply, and the expected value of the announced
money supply as calculated from the MMS survey of forecasters. The flavor of the finding is similar to the
recent studies –an unexpectedly high U.S. money supply led to an appreciation of the dollar. Why? The

33

markets apparently believed that the central bank was likely to react to this announcement by contracting
the money supply. Indeed, Engel and Frankel also found that short term interest rates reacted positively to
the money surprise. In the early 1980s, the Fed (supposedly) had a money supply target, so the reaction of
the real exchange rate reflected the credibility of Fed policy. Likewise the exchange rate reaction to news
about inflation in the Clarida and Waldman paper reflects credibility of inflation targeting central banks.
Hardouvelis (1988) looks at the reaction of interest rates and exchange rates to announcements of
a number of economic variables in the October 1979 – August 1984 period. His findings are consistent
both with Engel-Frankel and Clarida-Waldman.

That is, he finds that the dollar consistently and

significantly appreciates in response to positive surprises in the money supply, as in Engel-Frankel, and as
we would expect if the Fed were credibly targeting the money stock. But the reaction of the dollar to
announcements of CPI and PPI inflation is mixed. Across seven exchange rates, the sign of the response
varies and is never statistically significant. This finding contrasts with the more recent literature which finds
that positive home inflation surprises almost uniformly lead to a stronger home currency. But we note that
the period of Hardouvelis’s study is one in which the Fed probably had not yet established the credibility it
had in the 1990s and later for fighting inflation.

Long-run expectations based on surveys
In order to evaluate directly the model of the real exchange rate given by equation (44), we need a
measure of expected inflation and output gap for all periods into the future. Rather than measuring
expectations of macroeconomic fundamentals far into the future by using VARs, we consider survey
measures of expectations. Consensus Forecasts publishes a monthly volume that surveys economic
forecasters, and constructs an average forecast for a large number of economic and financial variables.
Twice a year, in April and October, for some of these variables, they canvass forecasters for their forecast
of that the variable will take in the current year, in each of the next five years, and then for an average for
years 6 through 10 from the current year.
We use these surveys to construct the present value relationship in equation (44). We use the
surveys from April 1997 to October 2006, for the U.S., Japan, Germany, France, the U.K., Canada, Italy,
the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.3 We use forecasts of inflation and output.
There are three important limitations to this data:

We note that there are missing values for Japan and Norway for October 2001, and for Norway and Switzerland for April 1997
to October 1998.

3

34

1)

The survey asks for expectations of output, but the model requires expectations of the output gap.

The expected relative output gap, Et ( y t + j − y t*+ j ) corresponds to expected relative output for all j when the
full employment level of output in the home and foreign country remain in constant proportion.
2)

The surveys record expectations only 10 years into the future, while the sum in equation (44)

requires expectations infinitely far into the future. To handle the truncation, for inflation we assume that the
expectations recorded for years 6-10 for each country will hold into the indefinite future. However, it is
unrealistic to assume that expected output growth differentials will continue forever. The survey provides
output growth expectations for years 6-10 for each country. We assume (at each survey date) that the
market expects the output growth for years 11 onward for each country to equal the average output growth
expected for all countries.
3)

There is not much data. We have observations only twice a year, for 10 years. We estimate the

model in first-differences, which removes country fixed effects. So, we have at most 19 observations for
each country. For a few countries, there are some missing data points and we have fewer observations.
For each date, we construct a present value of forecasts of current and future inflation, and current
and future output, using a semi-annual discount factor of 0.9. We choose this value based on estimates of

γ q in the monetary policy rule in Germany by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998). We construct the present
values for output and inflation for the U.S. relative to each of the other countries.
We estimate the regression for real exchange rates in first differences:
(46)

qt − qt −1 = a + b1 (PDVyt − PDVyt −1 ) + b2 (PDVπ t − PDVπ t −1 ) + b3 (qt −1 − qt −2 ) + ut .

Here, PDVyt refers to the present discounted values of relative output expectations, and PDVπ t to the
present discounted value of relative inflation expectations. We began with a specification implied by the
model, with b3 = 0 , but found serial correlation in the residuals. We re-estimated including the lagged
dependent variable, and we report results from both regressions below.4
We estimate the above equation by OLS, but acknowledge two potential problems: First, it is likely
that there still is serial correlation in ut . Suppose ut is the first difference in the expected discounted sum of
the errors in the monetary policy rule above,

umt − umt* − ρt
. With the real exchange rate sampled every
1+ γ q

six months, expected changes in the monetary rule for one year or more in the future will result in serially
The source for consumer price data used to construct the real exchange rates is the same as in the rest of the paper (IFS, line
64.) We use the annual average exchange rate (IFS, line rf) for the nominal exchange rate.
4

35

correlated values for ut . This problem is party attenuated by the inclusion of the lagged change in the real
exchange rate in the regression. We also have ignored the possibility of correlation between the error term
and the explanatory variables in the regression, leading to coefficient estimates that might be inconsistent.
We estimate equation (44) for each of the 11 U.S. real exchange rates. The coefficients in the
regressions are only occasionally significant and so we do not report them. However, this is not surprising
given the paucity of data. We note that in the country-by-country regressions, the coefficient on the relative
output present values have the correct sign in 10 of 11 cases, and the coefficient on the relative inflation
present value is correctly signed in 9 of 11 cases.
To increase efficiency, we estimated the model as a panel. We note that estimating in differences
eliminates country-specific fixed effects to levels of the real exchange rate. We estimated the panel model
in three versions: with no intercept, with a common intercept, and with country-specific intercepts. In the
two specifications with intercept terms, the estimated intercepts were small and statistically insignificant in
all cases. The estimated coefficients on the discounted sums were essentially unaffected by the inclusion
of these intercept terms, and the standard errors of the estimates increased a very small amount when
intercepts were included. The results are presented below for the no-intercept case:
Regression results, b3 = 0
Y discounted
π discounted

Coefficients
-0.6106
-3.8850

Standard Error
0.2052
2.3606

Regression results, b3 ≠ 0
Y discounted
π discounted
q lagged

Coefficients
-0.8802
-4.3405
0.2522

Standard Error
0.2115
2.2901
0.0678

Note especially the coefficient on the discounted sum of current and future expected inflation – it is
negative. As we have emphasized, when central bank policy to target inflation is credible, an increase in
home relative to foreign inflation leads to a home real appreciation.
There are obvious limitations to this empirical exercise. Aside from the data limitations described
above, researchers must use survey data on expectations with a modicum of caution. We really do not
have any idea whether the forecasts from the surveys do correspond to the forecasts of market
36

participants, and there is also the possibility that the professional forecasters are not reporting their true
expectations accurately. (For example, they may “talk their book”.) But, on the other hand, the limitations
of using forecasts from VARs are also well-recognized: the markets use more information than is contained
in the VAR, there may be shifts in the data-generating process not captured by the VAR, etc. It is
interesting and reassuring that the model fits well using this data on long-run expectations.

5. Out-of-Sample Forecasts based on Panel Estimates
Motivation
Mark and Sul (2001), Rapach and Wohar (2002) and Groen (2005) have in fact found that panel
error-correction models (ECM) based on the simple monetary model using the “fundamental”
mt − mt* − ( y t − y t* ) , or the closely related purchasing power parity model, in which the fundamental is
given by pt − pt* do have power to forecast exchange rates out of sample. The forecasting power is
particularly strong at long horizons.
In this section, we replicate Mark and Sul (2001) with a longer sample, confirming the finding that
the random walk can be beaten in a panel study. We do not have a precise economic or econometric story
as to why panel estimates do so much better than country-by-country estimates. We conjecture that the
efficiency of panel estimation is key.
In any event, we know from the argument in section 1 that beating the random walk requires a
stationary unobserved component to the fundamentals. Consistent with the monetary model in equation
(7), we label this component ρt , and our discussion interprets this as a risk premium. On the one hand,
the EW05 result shows that acceptable formulations of the monetary model imply that the exchange rate
should look very much like a random walk. The calculations in EW05 find that the exchange rate would be
nearly unforecastable if it is entirely determined by the observable fundamentals, given the observed datagenerating processes for these fundamentals. But it is also possible that, in an ECM framework, the
monetary model could be used to forecast changes in exchange rates, especially at longer horizons, when
the unobserved ρt is present.
Consider this example, which is very similar to the type of model that Campbell (2001) uses to
account for long-horizon predictability in stock prices:5

See also Mark and Sul (2002) for a related discussion of the asymptotic power of long-horizon regression tests in errorcorrection models.

5

37

Suppose the exchange rate is determined by:

st = (1 − b) x t + b ρt + bEt st +1 .
Assume the fundamental x t , is observed, and for simplicity assume it follows a random walk process:

x t − x t −1 = ε t , ε t ∼ i.i.d. , σ ε2 ≡ var(ε t ) .
We could assume that the first difference is serially correlated, as in Example 1 in section 1 above. When b
is close to one, the observed fundamental imparts near-random-walk behavior to the exchange rate. Our
point here is made more transparent by simply assuming the observed fundamental is a random walk.
Now assume the deviation from uncovered interest parity, ρt , which is the unobserved
fundamental, follows a stationary first-order autoregressive process:

ρt = αρt −1 + ut , ut ∼ i.i.d. , σ u2 ≡ var(ut ) .
The forward-looking no-bubbles solution for the exchange rate is:
(47)

st = x t +

b
ρt .
1 − bα

Assume that the econometrician does not have an independent observation of the risk premium.
However, if the model is correct, then the econometrician can observe the “error”, zt ≡ x t − st , which is an
indirect observation on ρt , since
(48)

z t = x t − st =

−b
ρt .
1 − bα

Now, suppose we are interested in forecasting the k-period change in the log of the exchange rate,
using an error-correction model. We have:

b
( ρt + k − ρt )
1 − bα
b
b k k− j
+
(α k − 1) ρt +
∑ α ut + k
1 − bα
1 − bα j =1

st + k − st = x t + k − x t +
k

= ∑ ε t +k

(49)

j =1
k

= ∑ ε t + k + (1 − α k )zt +
j =1

b k k− j
∑ α ut + k
1 − bα j =1

How good are forecasts of the change in the exchange rate at the k-horizon? We can use the
theoretical R-squared from the above error-correction model, assuming the parameters are known, to
gauge this. We calculate this R-squared for the k-period ECM as:
(50)

(α k − 1)2 var( xt )
(1 − α k )2 σ u2
R =
=
.
var(st + k − st )
(1 − α k )2 σ u2 + (1 − α 2k )σ u2 + (k (1 − α 2 )(1 − bα )2 σ ε2 / b 2 )
2
k

38

This R-squared may take on a humped-shape pattern in k. For the shortest horizons, it may be
small, but may initially increase as k increases. However, as k goes to infinity, the R-squared goes to zero.
Calibrating this model is difficult because we do not have a good measure of the variance of
innovations to ρt , or a measure of its serial correlation. Suppose that the ratio of standard deviations of
the innovations of the observed fundamental to ρt is 3: that is, σ ε / σ u = 3 . Suppose further that the
serial correlation of ρt in quarterly data is 0.95., and set the discount factor as b = 0.90 . Then we find that
R12 = .02 , meaning little short-run predictability. But initially, as the horizon increases, the predictability
from the ECM rises. At 16 quarters, we have R162 = 0.21 , and the maximum R-squared occurs at 44
quarters, with a value of R442 = 0.28 . It seems possible that we would not detect any short-run forecasting
power for the model in this case, but that at longer horizons the forecasting power would become more
apparent. As we shall see, this intuition is not well borne out when we estimate forecasting equations
country by country; by and large, there is not much more predictability at long (k = 16 quarters) than at
short (k = 1 quarter) horizons. But when we estimate a panel, and forecasts rely in part on mean reversion
in panel estimates of time effects, we find distinctly more predictability at 16 than at 1 quarter horizons.
Perhaps this occurs because all of the exchange rates are dollar exchange rates, and there is a common
element to the risk premium. That is, ρ it = ρt + ς it for exchange rate i, so that the panel estimation is
picking up the common component of the risk premium, ρt .

Forecasting methodology
Here we update the previous studies. It has been claimed that the forecasting power of models is
sensitive to the sample (for example, see Faust, Rogers, and Wright (2003)), so it is useful to re-examine
previous studies using more current data.
Our econometric analysis centers on panel estimation of the short-horizon predictive regression,
(51)

sit + k − sit = β k zit + ε it + k ,

where

z it ≡ x it − sit , and ε it ≡ ζ i + θt + u it .
Here, i indexes the country and t is the time period. We give the regression error ε an unobserved
components interpretation where ζ i is an individual-specific effect, θ t is a time-specific effect that allow us
to account for a limited amount of t cross-sectional dependence, and u it is the residual idiosyncratic error.

39

z it ≡ x it − sit

is the error-correction term representing the deviation of the exchange rate from the

fundamentals for country i. Monetary fundamentals are defined as in Example 1,
(53)

x it ≡ m0t − mit − γ ( y 0t − y it )

with γ = 1 and where the U.S. serves as the base country (denoted by `0’). Alternatively, PPP
fundamentals are defined as:
(54)

x it = p0t − pit .
We also consider fundamentals based on the Taylor rule. As in Molodtsova and Papell (2007), we

develop an error correction formulation for the Taylor rule model by noting that under uncovered interest
parity, Et sit +1 = i 0t − i it + sit . We then replace i 0t − i it with the components of the (relative) Taylor rules. So
here we use i 0t − i it = 1.5(π 0t − π it ) + 0.1( y 0gt − y itg ) + 0.1(sit + pit − p0t ) , a Taylor rule that we posit (rather
than estimating the coefficients.) Here, y g is the output gap, computed with an HP filter. The parameter
on the inflation gap is fairly standard (and coincides with the estimated Taylor rules in M07). We have used
a slightly smaller coefficient on output gap than is typically used, on the grounds that many of the countries
in our sample have announced pure inflation targeting regimes. We have used a parameter of 0.10 on the
real exchange rate as in our Taylor-rule models discussed above. Thus we have:
(55)

x it = 1.5(π 0t − π it ) + 0.1( y 0gt − y itg ) + 0.1(sit + pit − p0t ) + sit .

The Taylor rule model then gives us Et sit +1 − sit = x it − sit . Following Molodtsova and Papell (2007), we
use the forecasting model Et sit + k − sit = β k ( x it − sit ) . Molodtsova and Papell find that the Taylor rule
model is able to forecast well at short-horizons using univariate methods, while finding little support for the
monetary or PPP models at any horizon.
The predictive regression is most appealing when z is I(0), or equivalently when x and s are
cointegrated. Since we are not estimating the cointegration vector, we can test for cointegration with
standard unit-root tests. We use Sul’s (2006) RMA test, in which the null hypothesis being tested is that z it
is I(1) for all i. Details are in the notes to Table 3. The results reported in that Table indicate that we reject
the null of no cointegration for PPP and Taylor rule fundamentals but not monetary fundamentals. In the
interest of simplicity, however, and in light of the possible low power of unit root tests, we forecast using z
as defined above for monetary as well as PPP and Taylor rule fundamentals.
We generate out-of-sample forecasts both at a short-horizon (k=1) and at a long-horizon (k=16).
We begin by estimating the predictive regression by LSDV on observations available through 1982.4. The

40

k=1 regression is then used to forecast the 1-quarter ahead exchange rate return in 1983.1 and the k=16
regression to forecast the 16 quarter ahead exchange rate return through 1986.4. We then update the
estimation sample by one period by adding the observation for 1983.1 and repeat the procedure. This
recursive updating scheme gives us 92 k=1 forecasts and 77 overlapping k=16 forecasts. We compare the
panel regression forecasts against those implied by the random walk model. We do this for both for the
monetary, PPP and Taylor rule fundamentals. In the Taylor rule forecasts, we compute the output gap with
an HP filter, using only the data in the estimation sample.
Because the time effect enters contemporaneously in the predictive regression, the k-period ahead
forecast requires a forecast of the time effect. We use the recursive mean of the time effect as this forecast
and form the exchange rate prediction according to
(56)

⎛1 t ⎞
sit + k − sit = ζˆi + ⎜ ∑θˆi ⎟ + βˆ z it .
⎝ t j =1 ⎠

We measure relative forecast accuracy with Theil’s U-statistic – the ratio of the root-mean-square
prediction error (RMSPE) from two competing models. U<1 if forecasts from the predictive regression are
more accurate than the random walk. We report t-statistics from the Clark and West (2006, 2007)
procedure for testing for equal predictive ability of two nested models.
The data are the same as used in section 3, except that we control for seasonality by filtering the
money and output series by applying a one-sided moving average of the current observation and 3-lagged
values.

Results
The prediction results for the US are displayed in Table 4. We compare the predictive power of the
models against two versions of the random walk: with drift and without drift. Engel and Hamilton (1990)
and Diebold et. al. (1994) make the case for using the random-walk-with-drift null. Engel and Hamilton
present evidence that one can reject the null that the drift in the exchange rate of the dollar (against the
yen, mark, and pound) is constant in their sample. They then note “The driftless random walk is just a
special case of this hypothesis. Imposing a particular value for the drift (in this case, zero) may of course
improve the fit over selected subsamples…” (p. 701). That is, using a zero drift random walk as the null
imposes a restriction that does not come from theory, but instead from peeking at the data. However, a
and Meese and Rogoff (1983a) did use the driftless random walk as the null, and indeed in our sample the
driftless random walk outperforms the random walk with drift in forecasting exercises. So we report the
performance of the model against both null hypotheses.

41

At the 1-quarter horizon, the monetary fundamentals (Table 4a) produce a lower RMPSE than the
random walk with drift for 13 of the 18 currencies, but they outforecast the random walk with no drift for 6 of
the 18 exchange rates. In only 4 cases does the monetary model significantly (at the 10% level, using the
1-sided t-test based on the Clark-West statistic) outforecast the random walk with no drift at the short
horizon, but the model performs significantly better than the random walk with drift for 9 exchange rates.
The PPP fundamentals (Table 4b) also generally produce lower RMPSEs than the random walk
with drift (in 15 out of 18 cases), but not so for the driftless random walk (a lower RMPSE in only 7 of 18
cases), at the 1-quarter horizon. In general, the performance of the PPP model and the random walk are
very similar at the 1-quarter horizon, with U statistics very near unity. The PPP model produces
significantly lower RMPSEs than the random walk with drift for six exchange rates, but it outperforms the
driftless random walk significantly in only three cases at the 1-quarter horizon.
The Taylor rule model’s performance (Table 4c) at the 1-quarter horizon is similar to that of the
PPP model. The RMPSE of forecasts from the Taylor rule model are very close to those from the random
walk, both with and without drift. The Taylor rule model actually produces a lower RMPSE than the random
walk with drift for 14 of the 18 currencies, but does so for only 2 currencies for the driftless random walk.
Of the 14 cases in which the Taylor-rule model yields lower RMPSEs than the random walk with drift, only
three are significantly lower.
The forecasting performance of the models relative to the random walk at the 1-quarter horizon is
not very good, which is exactly what the EW05 theorem predicts. However, the picture changes when we
look at the 16-quarter ahead forecasts.
The monetary model (Table 4a) produces lower RMPSEs than the random walk with drift for all but
two currencies (Greece and Australia) at the 16-quarter horizon, though for only 11 of the 18 currencies
when the null is the random walk without drift. The average U-statistic across all of the 18 currencies is
quite low, 0.769. The monetary model does very well in forecasting some currencies. The monetary
models’ forecast is significantly better than the random walk with drift for 15 currencies, and significantly
better than the random walk without drift for eleven currencies. In the latter case, the average U statistic is
0.951.
It is interesting to examine the models in which the random walk with no drift performs better than
the random walk with drift. The British pound is a case in point – the ratio of the RMPSE for the random
walk with no drift to the random walk with drift is 1.541 (=.9405/.6102.) The monetary model outforecasts
the random walk with drift, but not the driftless random walk. It would have taken a courageous forecaster

42

to choose the random walk with no drift as the forecasting model in 1983. The pound depreciated from a
price of $2.58 in June 1973 (and $2.42 in October 1980) to $1.09 in February 1985. It surely must have
seemed like there was downward drift in the dollar/pound rate at that point, but indeed the pound eventually
appreciated to $1.87 in May 1988 then fluctuated and reached a value of $1.96 in December of 2006. It is
clear why the random walk model with no drift does better than the random walk with drift if the drift were
estimated over the 1973-1985 period, but that clarity comes perhaps only with hindsight. We have
performed recursive t-tests currency-by-currency for the null of no drift in the random walk using 16 quarter
changes.6 Roughly speaking, at any given date between 1982 and 2005, we would reject the null of no drift
for about half the exchange rates.
The PPP model (Table 4b) produces a lower RMPSE than the random walk with drift for all
currencies except the Greek drachma. In this case, the improvement is significant in 15 of the cases, and
the average U statistic is 0.702. Compared to the random walk with no drift, the PPP model produces a
lower RMPSE in 14 of the 18 cases, and it is significantly better for 13 of the currencies. The average U
statistic is 0.876, and 0.770 across the 14 currencies for which the RMPSE was lower than the random
walk. The PPP model is able to deliver large improvements in forecast accuracy relative to the random
walk at longer horizons.
The results are mixed at the 16-quarter horizon for the Taylor rule model (Table 4c). The model
produces RMPSEs that are lower than the random walk with drift for 14 currencies, but only 2 are
significantly lower. The random walk with no drift outperforms the Taylor rule model in terms of RMPSE for
11 of the 18 currencies.
Table 5 produces the analogous statistics to Table 4, but when the models are estimated country
by country, rather than by panel. It is clear from the table that the panel estimates improve the forecasts
relative to the single-equation estimation for the monetary and PPP models, in terms of RMPSE. However,
the Taylor rule model performs about as well with single-equation estimation as with the panel. Perhaps
this occurs because the restrictions imposed by the panel – that the model is identical across all countries –
are far too strong in this case, because monetary rules differ too much across the set of 18 countries.
There is one interesting aspect of Table 5 that requires comment. There are several cases (for
example, see the 16-quarter ahead forecast for Sweden for the PPP model, reported in Table 5b) in which
the Clark-West t-statistic indicates that the model significantly outperforms the random walk (both with drift
and without drift), even though the Theil U statistic is greater than one, indicating that the RMPSE for the
6

The results are not reported, but are available upon request.

43

model was greater than for the random walk. We can understand this, taking the particular example of the
PPP model for Sweden: In this case, there is a very high positive correlation between the 16-quarter
change in the exchange rate and the 16 quarter ahead forecast from the structural model (around 0.67).
The structural forecast, however, overshoots by a long margin - that is, the forecast points in the right
direction (tends to be positive when subsequent 16 quarter change is positive, negative when 16 quarter
change is negative), but is much too large in absolute value. Because the forecasted change is too large,
the model has a large MSPE and the U statistic is greater than one. But because it is highly correlated with
the actual change in the exchange rate, there is strong evidence against the random walk.
Table 6 summarizes the results presented in detail in Tables 4 and 5. Overall, our conclusion is
that the models estimated using panel techniques and producing forecasts at long horizons have some
power to beat the random walk. The results are not uniformly strong across the models, in keeping with the
EW05 theorem, but it does appear that this approach increases the forecasting power of the models.

6. Conclusions
For many years, the standard for evaluating exchange rate models has been out of sample fit. In
particular, exchange rate models have been deemed successful or unsuccessful based on their ability to
produce better forecasts than the random walk model.
However, many of the models actually imply that the exchange rate should nearly follow a random
walk. We should not expect the models to have much power to forecast changes in exchange rates. This
might be disappointing news for forecasters working on Wall Street, but may be good news for openeconomy macroeconomists. The usual finding that the models cannot beat a random walk – especially at
short horizons – does not mean that open-economy models have been using the “wrong” exchange rate
model, or models that have been refuted by the data.
In fact, and in contrast to many previous studies, we have found evidence that the monetary
models do help to forecast changes in exchange rates. That is, with panel techniques, our findings are that
the model generally produces better forecast than the random walk – lower mean-squared prediction
errors. We find these results encouraging, because they confirm the positive findings of previous studies
that have used monetary exchange-rate models estimated by panel techniques to forecast exchange rates.
But we do not intend to rely on these positive results as our sole piece of evidence in favor of the models.
As we have explained, out-of-sample forecasting power relative to the random walk is an unreliable gauge
for measuring the models.

44

At the same time, failure to predict changes in the exchange rate is not a badge of honor for a
model. We must develop other means for evaluating and comparing models. This task is made especially
difficult because of the fact that plausible models capture the fact that exchange rates are asset prices, and
are therefore primarily driven by expectations. Because we do not have a direct measure of the market’s
expectation, we cannot test the models directly.
The array of evidence presented in this paper – including out-of-sample forecasting comparisons –
lends weight to monetary models of exchange rates. That is, to a large extent, the evidence is consistent
with the view that nominal exchange rate movements are monetary phenomena. It is, however, especially
important to pay attention to how monetary policy is formulated, because expectations of future monetary
conditions play an important role in determining current exchange rates.
We do not intend to claim that the evidence in this paper is conclusive in favor of macroeconomic
models of the exchange rate. There may well be room for models with private information (such as
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006)), or models based on the microstructure of foreign exchange markets
(e.g., Evans and Lyons (2003)) to improve our understanding of currencies. Moreover, our empirical
verification of the models here is by no means the final word. We hope, instead, that this paper sparks a
renewed interest in the empirical examination and comparison of exchange rate models, but using tests
that can fairly support or reject one model in favor of another.

45

References
Andersen, Torben G.; Tim Bollerslev; Francis X. Diebold; and, Clara Vega, 2003, Micro Effects of Macro
Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange, American Economic Review 93,
38-62.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop, 2006, Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange
Rate Determination Puzzle?, American Economic Review 96, 552-576.
Benigno, Gianluca, 2004, Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Monetary Policy Rules, Journal of
Monetary Economics 51, 473-502.
Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno, 2006, Exchange Rate Determination under Interest Rate Rules,
LSE.
Campbell, John Y., 2001, Why Long Horizons? A Study of Power Against Persistent Alternatives, Journal
of Empirical Finance 5, 459-491.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert Shiller, 1987, Cointegration and Tests of Present-Value Models, Journal of
Political Economy 95, 1062-1088.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Kon S. Lai, 2004, Dissecting the PPP Puzzle: The Unconventional Roles of
Nominal Exchange Rates and Price Adjustment, Journal of International Economics 64, 135-150.
Choi, Chi-Young; Nelson Mark; and, Donggyu Sul, 2006, Unbiased Estimation of the Half-Life to PPP
Convergence in Panel Data, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 921-938.
Clarida, Richard, and Daniel Waldman, 2007, Is Bad News About Inflation Good News for the Exchange
Rate?, Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (NBER)
Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galí; and Mark Gertler, 1998, Monetary Rules in Practice: Some International
Evidence, European Economic Review 6, 1033-1067.
Clark, Todd E., and Kenneth D. West, 2006, Using Out-of-Sample Mean Squared Prediction Errors to Test
the Martingale Difference Hypothesis, Journal of Econometrics 135, 155-186.
Clark, Todd E., and Kenneth D. West, 2007, Approximately Normal Tests for Equal Predictive Accuracy in
Nested Models, Journal of Econometrics 138, 291-311.
Diebold, Francis X.; Javier Gardeazabal; and, Kamil Yilmaz, 1994, Cointegration and Exchange Rate
Dynamics, Journal of Finance 49, 727-735.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1976, Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal of Political Economy 84,
1161-1176.
Engel, Charles, and Jeffrey A. Frankel, 1984, Why Interest Rates React to Money Announcements: An
Answer from the Foreign Exchange Market, Journal of Monetary Economics 13, 31-39.

46

Engel, Charles, and James D. Hamilton, 1990, Long Swings in the Dollar: Are They in the Data and Do
Markets Know it?, American Economic Review 80, 689-713.
Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West, 2004, Accounting for Exchange Rate Variability in Present Value
Models when the Discount Factor is Near One, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings
94, 119-125.
_____, 2005, Exchange Rates and Fundamentals, Journal of Political Economy 113, 485-517.
_____, 2006, Taylor Rules and the Deutschemark-Dollar Real Exchange Rate, Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 38, 1175-1194.
Evans, Martin D.D., and Richard K. Lyons, 2002, Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy 110, 170-180.
Faust, Jon; John H. Rogers; and Jonathan Wright, Exchange Rate Forecasting: The Errors We’ve Really
Made, Journal of International Economics 60, 35-59.
Faust, Jon; John H. Rogers; Eric Swanson; and, Jonathan Wright, 2003, Identifying the Effects of Monetary
Policy Shocks on Exchange Rates using High-Frequency Data, Journal of the European
Economics Association 1, 1031-1057.
Faust, Jon; John H. Rogers; Shing-Yi B. Wang; and, Jonathan Wright, 2007, The High-Frequency
Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements, Journal of
Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose, 1995, Empirical Research on Nominal Exchange Rates,
Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3 (Elsevier).
Galí, Jordi, and Tommasso Monacelli, 2005, Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open
Economy, Review of Economic Studies 72, 707-734.
Groen, Jan J.J., 2005, Exchange Rate Predictability and Monetary Fundamentals in a Small Multi-Country
Panel, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37, 495-516.
Hardovelis, Gikas, 1988, Exchange Rates, Economic News, Exchange Rates and Interest Rates, Journal of
International Money and Finance 7, 23-35.
Imbs, Jean; Haroon Mumtaz; Morten O. Ravn; and, Hélène Rey, 2005, PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and
the Real Exchange Rate, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1-44.
Jung, Yongseung, 2007, Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomic Model Explain Exchange Rate
Fluctuations, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Mark, Nelson A., 2007, Changing Monetary Policy Rules, Learning, and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics,
University of Notre Dame.

47

_____, and Donggyu Sul, 2001, Nominal Exchange Rates and Monetary Fundamentals: Evidence from a
Small Post-Bretton Woods Sample, Journal of International Economics 53, 29-52.
_____, 2002, Asymptotic Power Advantages of Long-Horizon Regression Tests, University of Notre Dame.
Meese, Richard A., 1990, Currency Fluctuations in the post-Bretton Woods Era, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, 117-134.
Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983a, Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do
They Fit Out of Sample?, Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.
Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983b, The Out-of-Sample Failure of Empirical Exchange Rate
Models: Sampling Error or Misspecification, in Jacob A. Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and
International Macroeconomics (NBER).
Molodtsova, Tanya, and David Papell, 2007, Out-of-Sample Exchange Rate Predictability with Taylor Rule
Fundamentals, University of Houston.
Murray, Christian, and David Papell, 2002, The Purchasing Power Parity Persistence Paradigm, Journal of
International Economics 56, 1-19.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1984, Exchange Rate Dynamics with Sluggish Price Adjustment
under Alternative Price-Adjustment Rules, International Economic Review 25, 159-174.
_____, 2003, Risk and Exchange Rates, Economic Policy in the International Economy: Essays in Honor of
Assaf Razin (Cambridge).
Rapach, David E., and Mark E. Wohar, 2002, Testing the Monetary Model of Exchange Rate
Determination: New Evidence from a Century of Data, Journal of International Economics 58, 359385.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle, Journal of Economic Literature 34, 647-668.
Rossi, Barbara, 2005, Testing Long-Horizon Predictive Ability with High Persistence, and the Meese-Rogoff
Puzzle, International Economic Review 46, 61-92.
Sarno, Lucio, and Mark P. Taylor, 2002, The Economics of Exchange Rates (Cambridge).
Sul, Donggyu, 2006, Panel Unit Root Tests under Cross Section Dependence with Recursive Mean
Adjustment, University of Auckland.
Taylor, Mark P.; David A. Peel; and, Lucio Sarno, 2001, Nonlinear Mean-Reversion in Real Exchange
Rates: Toward a Solution To the Purchasing Power Parity Puzzles, International Economic Review
42, 1015-1042.
West, Kenneth D., 1988, On the Interpretation of Near Random Walk Behavior in GNP, American
Economic Review 78, 202-209.
48

Table 1
Granger-Causality Tests
Austria
i-i*
m-m*
m-m*- (y-y*)
p-p*
(y-y)

NA

Austria
i-i*
m-m*
m-m*- (y-y*)
p-p*
(y-y)

Australia

Belgium

*
***
*
**

**
**
***
***
*

Australia

Belgium

N/A
*

**
***

*

**
**

Canada

Denmark

Finland

H0: ∆s fails to cause ∆xo
NA
N/A

France

Germany

**

**

Greece

*
**
**
Canada

Denmark

Finland

*

*

France

Germany

Greece

**

**
**

**
**

*

**

*

H0: ∆xo fails to cause ∆s
**
N/A
N/A

*
*

Table 1
(continued)
Granger-Causality Tests
`
i-i*
m-m*
m-m*- (y-y*)
p-p*
(y-y)

i-i*
m-m*
m-m*- (y-y*)
p-p*
(y-y)

Gt.Britain

Italy

**

Japan
***

***

*

Gt.Britain

Italy

Japan

***
**
**
*
**

*

*

***
**
***

Korea

Netherlands Norway

Spain

Sweden

H0: ∆s fails to cause ∆xo
N/A
NA
N/A
**
***
***
Korea

**

*
Netherlands Norway

H0: ∆xo fails to cause ∆s
N/A
N/A
N/A
***
**
**
***
**
**

Switzerland

***
Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

**
**

**
**
**
*

*
***
**
**
**

Notes:
1. The data are quarterly, 1973:1-2005:4. In variables i*, m*, y*, and p*, the “*” denotes data from one of the eighteen countries listed in the headers to the
columns, while variables with no star refer to the U.S. Variable definitions: i and i* are Treasury bill rates; m and m* are the sum of money plus quasi-money, with
exceptions noted in the text; y and y* are industrial production; p and p* are the CPI; s is the end of quarter nominal exchange rate versus the U.S. dollar. All
variables except i and i* are measured in logarithms. In Euro area countries, post-1998 data on exchange rates were glued to the earlier data, with suitable
normalization. For further details see section 3.
2. We estimated bivariate error-correction models in ( ∆st , ∆xot )‫׳‬, where ∆st is the change in the (log) of the nominal exchange rate and x ot is one of the five
variables listed in the rows of each of the two panels. Each equation in the bivariate model included a constant, a lag of xot − st and four lags of ∆st and ∆xot .
3. The table reports the results of F-tests of the null of no Granger causality. The top panel reports tests of the null that the coefficients on all four lags of ∆st are
zero in the equation for ∆xot ; the bottom panel reports parallel tests for lags of ∆xot in the ∆st equation. Rejections are indicated at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1%
(***) levels.

Table 2
Variance Ratios
b
Australia

Austria

Belgium

Canada

Denmark

Finland

0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99

fundamental
p-p*
m-y-(m*-y*)
0.349
0.152
0.364
0.228
0.378
0.356
0.327
0.079
0.347
0.079
0.363
0.157
0.449
0.065
0.515
0.108
0.589
0.194
6.981
0.147
6.832
0.169
6.705
0.191
0.528
0.045
0.554
0.053
0.58
0.063
0.538
0.139
0.594
0.24
0.651
0.458

b
France

Germany

Greece

Gt.Britain

Italy

Japan

0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99

fundamental
m-y-(m*-y*)
p-p*
0.326
0.063
0.353
0.111
0.381
0.219
0.412
0.053
0.481
0.087
0.561
0.156
0.605
0.306
0.62
0.543
0.637
1.12
0.458
0.185
0.54
0.283
0.642
0.456
0.527
0.196
0.597
0.343
0.682
0.667
0.481
0.034
0.551
0.044
0.627
0.059

b
Korea

Netherlands

Norway

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99
0.9
0.95
0.99

fundamental
m-y-(m*-y*)
p-p*
0.549
0.151
0.611
0.205
0.678
0.28
0.252
0.154
0.272
0.156
0.293
0.158
0.302
0.112
0.283
0.165
0.268
0.251
0.559
0.206
0.627
0.366
0.701
0.737
0.433
0.098
0.44
0.134
0.45
0.186
0.431
0.047
0.442
0.078
0.453
0.14

Notes:
1. Data are described in notes to Table 1.
*
*
*
j
2. Let xt = mt − mt − ( y t − y t ) or xt = pt - pt , let b be one of the three discount factors listed in the Table, and let h Jt = (1 − b ) ∑ ∞
j = 0 b E ( xt + j |Ω Jt ) , where the

expectation is computed using a fourth order autoregression in ∆x t . The table reports estimates of var( hJt − hJt −1 ) / var( st − st ) . See the “Volatility” subsection in
section 3 of the paper for more details.

Table 3
Panel Unit Root Tests
H0: unit root in common factor
H0: unit roots in error correction
terms in all 18 countries

Monetary
t-stat p-value
-1.155 >0.10
n.a

PPP
t-stat p-value
-1.897 <.05
-4.713 <.001

Taylor rule
t-stat
p-value
-2.141 <.05
-6.356 <.001

Notes:
1. Data are described in notes to Table 1.
2. Let an “i” subscript denoting country, with the U.S. defined to be country 0 ( i = 0 ). In country i ( i ≠ 0 ) let x it be one of three measures of
fundamentals: x it = m0t − m it − ( y 0t − y it ) (monetary fundamentals); x it = p0t − pit (PPP fundamentals);

x it = 1.5(π 0t − π it ) + 0.1( y 0gt − y itg ) + 0.1(sit + pit − p0t ) + sit (Taylor rule fundamentals, where y g is the HP filtered output gap).
3. For any one of the measures of fundamentals defined in the previous note, let z it = x it − sit denote the corresponding error correction term.
4. The table report’s Sul’s (2006) panel unit root test. The procedure first tests whether one can reject a unit root in a common factor. If that
null is rejected, one performs a panel unit root test of the null that z it is I(1) for all eighteen countries. The regressions include a time trend
and individual country fixed effects.

Table 4a

Panel data error-correction forecast evaluation using monetary fundamentals
No Drift
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Gt.Britain
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Average

u(1)
1.027
1.000
1.007
1.174
1.011
1.003
1.005
0.988
1.010
1.004
1.013
0.998
0.996
0.991
1.005
1.037
0.992
0.985
1.014

cw
0.695
0.618
0.675
-0.952
0.093
0.684
0.229
1.515
2.343
0.326
0.671
0.754
0.878
1.289
0.255
0.461
1.109
1.935

Drift
u(16)
1.306
0.860
0.786
1.092
1.043
0.975
0.826
0.622
1.359
1.010
1.175
0.854
0.864
0.751
0.898
1.356
0.660
0.674
0.951

cw
0.675
1.437
1.912
1.604
0.796
0.883
1.603
2.450
1.578
0.747
0.620
1.430
0.596
2.144
1.604
0.761
2.217
2.768

U(1)
1.018
0.994
1.000
1.156
0.999
0.991
0.991
0.983
1.031
0.990
0.986
0.999
0.987
0.985
0.996
1.009
0.979
0.978
1.004

cw
0.226
1.170
1.271
-1.355
0.995
1.292
1.285
1.768
-0.983
1.328
1.523
1.186
1.441
1.532
1.164
0.942
2.319
2.023

u(16)
1.028
0.802
0.669
0.900
0.823
0.784
0.610
0.576
1.262
0.676
0.740
0.849
0.717
0.683
0.735
0.825
0.511
0.657
0.769

cw
0.906
3.118
3.168
1.665
2.012
1.462
4.311
3.585
-0.137
2.731
1.439
3.256
0.764
3.772
3.630
1.726
5.537
4.636

Notes:
1. Data are described in notes to Table 1.
2. For quarterly horizons k=1 and k=16, the panel regression sit + k − sit = β k z it + ε it + k was estimated. See notes to
Table 3 for definition of the error correction term z it for monetary (Tables 4a and 5a), PPP (Tables 4b and 5b) and
Taylor rule (Tables 4c and 5c) fundamentals. The regressions include a time effect and fixed effects.
3. The sample period for the dependent variable in the initial regression sample is 1973:2-1982:4 (k=1) or 1976:11982:4 (k=16). The regression estimates (including estimates of time and fixed effects) were used as described in
the text to predict the one quarter exchange rate change through 1983:1 or the 16 quarter change through 1986:4.
An observation is then added to the end of the sample, and the procedure is repeated. This recursive updating
scheme yields 92 k=1 predictions and prediction errors and 77 overlapping k=16 predictions and prediction errors.
4. The “u(1)” and “u(16)” columns report Theil U-statistics, presenting the ratio of the root mean squared prediction
error (RMSPE) from the procedure described in the previous note relative to the RMSPE from a random walk or
random walk with drift. Values less than one are in bold, and indicate that the panel error correction model had a
lower RMSPE than did the random walk. The drift parameter in the random walk with drift was computed recursively,
using the samples described in the previous note.
4. The “cw” columns present Clark and West (2006, 2007) statistics for the null of equal predictive accuracy. Values
greater than 1.282 are in bold, and indicate rejection at the 10% level using a one sided test.

Table 4b

Panel data error-correction forecast evaluation using PPP fundamentals
No Drift
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Gt.Britain
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

u(1)
0.996
0.998
1.004
1.011
1.006
1.001
1.010
0.999
0.998
1.006
1.025
0.992
0.985
1.015
1.000
1.036
1.002
0.995
1.004

cw(1)
1.025
0.814
0.358
0.430
-0.052
0.464
-0.261
0.921
2.318
0.420
0.449
1.380
1.948
0.529
0.468
0.069
0.422
1.214

Notes: See notes to Table 4a.

Drift
u(16)
0.870
0.617
0.708
0.863
0.887
0.775
0.896
0.652
1.221
1.063
1.313
0.736
0.808
0.754
0.898
1.401
0.737
0.576
0.876

cw
1.653
2.746
2.582
1.811
1.409
1.395
1.443
2.486
1.533
0.580
0.578
2.880
0.794
2.502
1.075
0.486
1.539
2.271

u(1)
0.987
0.991
0.997
0.995
0.995
0.990
0.996
0.994
1.019
0.992
0.998
0.992
0.975
1.010
0.991
1.007
0.989
0.987
0.995

cw
1.509
1.170
1.006
1.433
1.044
1.383
0.948
1.103
-0.395
1.050
0.746
1.136
2.632
0.642
1.211
0.455
1.657
1.387

u(16)
0.684
0.575
0.602
0.711
0.700
0.623
0.661
0.604
1.134
0.711
0.826
0.732
0.671
0.686
0.735
0.853
0.571
0.562
0.702

cw
5.579
3.590
4.028
4.258
3.120
2.635
3.703
2.797
0.372
1.574
1.103
4.557
1.148
2.949
2.050
1.354
3.127
2.158

Table 4c

Panel data forecast evaluation using Taylor-rule fundamentals

No Drift

Taylor
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Gt.Britain
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Average

u(1)
1.005
1.004
1.006
1.010
1.010
1.009
1.012
1.004
0.990
1.013
1.027
0.997
1.005
1.008
1.007
1.030
1.009
1.006
1.008

cw
0.627
0.039
-0.881
0.111
-0.967
-0.644
-0.606
0.084
2.445
-0.217
0.313
0.837
0.608
-0.239
-0.667
0.029
-0.127
0.388

Notes: See notes to Table 4a.

Drift
u(16)
1.047
0.911
1.051
1.120
1.235
1.137
1.290
0.937
1.175
1.345
1.549
0.856
1.176
0.976
1.103
1.682
1.159
0.832
1.143

cw
0.541
1.064
-0.189
0.187
-0.726
-0.253
-0.599
0.907
1.631
-0.308
-0.068
1.161
0.308
0.988
-0.026
-0.402
0.085
1.112

u(1)
0.996
0.998
0.999
0.994
0.999
0.997
0.999
0.999
1.010
0.999
1.000
0.998
0.995
1.002
0.998
1.001
0.996
0.999
0.999

cw
1.463
0.982
0.513
1.295
0.740
1.243
0.665
0.729
-1.819
0.615
0.129
0.721
1.491
-0.056
0.778
-0.246
1.440
0.906

u(16)
0.824
0.850
0.894
0.922
0.974
0.914
0.952
0.868
1.091
0.900
0.975
0.850
0.976
0.888
0.903
1.024
0.898
0.811
0.917

cw
1.061
1.460
1.958
0.741
0.435
0.846
0.509
1.225
-0.073
0.529
0.204
0.733
0.146
2.013
0.677
0.043
0.662
0.679

Table 5a

Single-equation error-correction forecast evaluation using monetary fundamentals

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Gt.Britain
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Average

u(1)
1.042
1.010
1.006
1.030
1.011
1.014
1.003
1.000
0.990
1.010
1.016
1.008
1.017
1.000
1.006
1.040
0.998
0.994
1.011

no drift
cw(1)
-0.307
-0.090
0.347
1.017
-0.301
-0.571
0.785
0.804
2.533
0.131
0.906
-0.344
1.057
0.773
0.427
0.387
0.819
1.206

Notes: See notes to Table 4a.

u(16)
1.777
1.290
1.895
1.509
1.431
1.548
1.083
1.136
1.669
2.029
1.287
1.282
1.187
0.949
1.536
1.974
1.641
1.056
1.460

cw(16)
0.657
0.654
1.931
0.455
1.328
0.869
2.326
2.071
1.482
0.748
1.054
0.305
0.489
1.530
1.604
1.373
1.876
1.202

u(1)
1.032
1.004
0.999
1.014
0.999
1.003
0.989
0.995
1.010
0.995
0.990
1.008
1.007
0.995
0.997
1.011
0.985
0.987
1.001

drift
cw(1)
-1.395
0.773
0.916
0.882
0.524
0.106
1.785
1.295
-0.973
0.960
1.402
0.120
1.377
1.293
0.856
0.065
1.806
1.675

u(16)
1.398
1.203
1.612
1.243
1.129
1.244
0.799
1.052
1.549
1.358
0.810
1.274
0.986
0.864
1.257
1.202
1.272
1.030
1.182

cw(16)
1.383
1.823
2.764
-0.082
2.368
1.161
4.107
2.989
0.091
2.064
1.526
1.771
0.335
2.605
3.085
2.170
4.005
2.760

Table 5b

Single-equation error-correction forecast evaluation using PPP fundamentals

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Gt.Britain
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Average

u(1)
1.021
1.002
1.006
1.011
1.009
1.009
1.013
1.002
0.992
1.013
1.036
1.003
0.979
1.012
1.007
1.037
1.020
1.000
1.010

no drift
cw(1)
-0.376
0.293
0.307
-0.439
-0.110
-0.306
0.122
0.561
2.787
0.213
-0.137
0.396
2.462
-0.038
0.183
0.011
0.539
1.095

Notes: See notes to Table 4a.

u(16)
1.270
0.968
1.565
1.162
1.251
0.923
1.496
1.361
1.824
1.361
1.708
1.044
0.883
1.194
1.389
1.735
1.987
0.782
1.328

cw(16)
0.487
2.512
2.431
0.623
1.857
1.278
2.099
2.634
1.036
0.693
0.782
0.964
1.006
2.660
1.424
0.798
2.158
2.356

u(1)
1.011
0.996
0.999
0.996
0.997
0.998
0.999
0.997
1.013
0.999
1.009
1.003
0.970
1.006
0.998
1.008
1.007
0.992
1.000

drift
cw(1)
-0.018
0.874
0.630
1.007
0.748
0.702
0.595
0.843
0.041
0.568
-0.745
-0.100
2.942
0.058
0.672
-1.139
0.669
1.154

u(16)
0.999
0.903
1.331
0.957
0.987
0.742
1.104
1.261
1.693
0.911
1.075
1.037
0.733
1.087
1.137
1.056
1.540
0.762
1.073

cw(16)
2.391
3.163
3.424
2.183
3.267
2.042
3.973
2.861
0.641
1.267
1.078
2.401
1.427
3.004
2.510
1.393
4.047
2.376

Table 5c

Single-equation error-correction forecast evaluation using Taylor-rule fundamentals

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Gt.Britain
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Average

u(1)
1.010
1.007
1.013
1.015
1.011
1.025
1.024
1.013
0.984
1.029
1.036
1.003
0.998
1.022
1.027
1.036
1.024
1.003
1.016

no drift
cw(1)
0.700
0.119
-0.147
-0.035
-0.738
-0.694
-0.033
-0.037
2.633
-1.313
-0.353
0.499
1.220
-0.358
-0.555
-0.389
0.019
0.633

Notes: See notes to Table 4a.

u(16)
1.004
0.679
0.845
1.145
1.200
1.032
1.268
0.779
1.187
1.502
1.688
0.790
1.200
1.416
1.004
1.889
0.874
0.619
1.118

cw(16)
0.742
2.671
2.578
0.275
0.223
0.594
1.004
2.398
1.658
-0.107
0.195
2.773
0.165
3.684
0.471
0.111
1.110
2.002

u(1)
1.001
1.001
1.005
1.000
1.000
1.014
1.011
1.008
1.004
1.015
1.009
1.004
0.989
1.016
1.018
1.007
1.011
0.996
1.006

drift
cw(1)
0.328
0.412
-0.117
0.278
0.235
-0.555
-0.160
-0.034
0.681
-1.375
-0.165
-0.980
1.460
-0.283
-0.858
-1.393
-0.377
0.926

u(16)
0.790
0.633
0.719
0.944
0.947
0.829
0.936
0.721
1.103
1.005
1.063
0.785
0.996
1.289
0.822
1.150
0.677
0.604
0.889

cw(16)
1.269
3.320
3.992
0.729
1.119
1.274
2.291
2.517
-0.138
0.318
0.201
3.833
0.042
4.366
1.165
0.189
2.143
1.589

Table 6

Summary of forecasting results
-------------------------- Panel ----------------------vs. random walk
vs. random walk w/drift
u(1)
u(16)
u(1)
u(16)

-------------------- Single equation -----------------vs. random walk
vs. random walk w/drift
u(1)
u(16)
u(1)
u(16)

6
11
1.014 0.951

13
16
1.004 0.769

3
1
1.011 1.460

10
4
1.001 1.182

PPP
No. of countries in which u()<1
Mean value of u()

7
14
1.004 0.876

15
17
0.995 0.702

2
4
1.010 1.328

11
8
1.000 1.073

Taylor rule
No. of countries in which u()<1
Mean value of u()

2
5
1.004 1.143

14
16
0.999 0.917

2
6
1.016 1.118

2
12
1.006 0.889

Monetary
No. of countries in which u()<1
Mean value of u()

Notes:
1. This table summarizes results presented for each of the 18 currencies in Tables 4a-4c (in columns headed “Panel”) and 5a-5c (in columns headed “Single equation”). See
notes to Table 4a for details.
2. The “u(1)” columns present results for one quarter ahead forecasts. The “u(16)” columns present results for 16 quarter ahead forecasts. When u(1)<1 or u(16)<1, the panel or
single equation forecast had lower root mean squared prediction error than did the random walk or random walk with drift model.

