                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TO SEGREGATE OR TO INTEGRATE:
                          EDUCATION POLITICS AND DEMOCRACY

                                           David de la Croix
                                           Matthias Doepke

                                         Working Paper 13319
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13319


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




We thank Sandy Black, Georges Casamatta, Jean Hindriks, Omer Moav, Fabien Moizeau, Vincent
Vandenberghe, and seminar participants at Louvain-la-Neuve, Rotterdam, the Stockholm School of
Economics, Toulouse, UCLA, and the SED Annual Meeting in Florence for their comments that helped
to substantially improve the paper. Simeon Alder and David Lagakos provided excellent research assistance.
David de la Croix acknowledges financial support from the Belgian French speaking community (grant
ARC 99/04-235) and the Belgian Federal Government (grant PAI P5/21). Matthias Doepke acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0217051) and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David de la Croix and Matthias Doepke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
To Segregate or to Integrate: Education Politics and Democracy
David de la Croix and Matthias Doepke
NBER Working Paper No. 13319
August 2007
JEL No. H42,H52,I22,O10

                                              ABSTRACT

The governments of nearly all countries are major providers of primary and secondary education to
their citizens. In some countries, however, public schools coexist with private schools, while in others
the government is the sole provider of education. In this study, we ask why different societies make
different choices regarding the mix of private and public schooling. We develop a theory which integrates
private education and fertility decisions with voting on public schooling expenditures. In a given political
environment, high income inequality leads to more private education, as rich people opt out of the
public system. More private education, in turn, results in an improved quality of public education,
because public spending can be concentrated on fewer students. Comparing across political systems,
we find that concentration of political power can lead to multiple equilibria in the determination of
public education spending. The main predictions of the theory are consistent with state-level and micro
data from the United States as well as cross-country evidence from the PISA study.

David de la Croix
IRES - Université catholique de Louvain
Place Montesquieu 3
B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
david.delacroix@uclouvain.be

Matthias Doepke
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
doepke@econ.ucla.edu
1 Introduction

Public schooling is one of the most pervasive social policies around the world
today. Starting with industrializing European nations in the nineteenth century,
nearly all countries have introduced compulsory schooling laws and public fund-
ing of education. However, despite the near universal involvement of the gov-
ernment, private and public funding of education continue to coexist. The share
of private education funding varies greatly across countries, from only 1.9 per-
cent of total spending in Norway, to 44.5 percent in Chile (1998, see Section 6).
Institutional arrangements concerning the funding of private schools also differ
across countries. Private schools can be partly supported by the government as
in France or New Zealand, or even entirely publicly funded as in Belgium, or rely
exclusively on private funding as in the United States (Toma 1996).

Recently, the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA),
which assesses the knowledge and skills of 15-year-old students in a cross-section
of countries, has sparked an intense debate on the relative merits of different edu-
cation systems. A central question in this debate is why education systems differ
so much across countries in the first place. Are there particular country char-
acteristics that explain the choice of an integrated education system instead of
a regime with segregation between public and private schools? Why is it that
countries that appear similar in their overall characteristics sometimes end up
with widely different education systems? What role does the distribution of po-
litical power in a country play for education politics?

The aim of this study is to provide a positive theory of education systems that can
be used to address these questions. We develop an analytically tractable frame-
work that integrates political determination of the quality of public schools with
private education and fertility decisions. Parents have the choice of sending their
children to tax-financed public schools or, alternatively, to opt out of the public
system and provide private education to their children. A key feature of our po-
litical economy setup is that it allows for bias in the political system, in the sense
that the weight of a certain group of voters in political decision making may be
larger or smaller that its relative size in the population. In particular, we contrast
outcomes under an even distribution of political power, such as in a represen-

                                          1
tative democracy, with outcomes when a political bias gives a disproportionate
share of power to the rich.

We find that when political power is evenly distributed, a unique political equi-
librium exists. Perhaps not surprisingly, the extent of public versus private fund-
ing depends on the income distribution. Parents decide to send their children to
a private school if they would like to endow their children with an education of
a much higher quality than what is provided by the public system. In a society
with little inequality, the preferred education level varies little in the population,
so that all parents use public schooling. For increasing levels of inequality, an
increasing share of richer people chooses private education for their children.1

In our model, the ultimate motive behind public education provision is redistri-
bution. At first sight, one might expect that the equilibrium tax rate should in-
crease with inequality, because a widening income distribution implies a greater
demand for redistribution. However, this demand effect is counteracted by an
opposing force: as inequality increases, more and more parents opt out of the
public system entirely, reducing the funding requirements for public schooling.
The latter effect turns out to dominate, so that the tax rate declines with inequal-
ity. This result provides a contrast to a literature where a greater degree of in-
equality motivates more redistribution through higher taxes (see Alesina and Ro-
drik 1994, Persson and Tabellini 1994, and in particular Gradstein and Justman
1997 in an application to education).

Bénabou (2000), among others, has pointed out that in the data, more unequal
countries tend to redistribute less. Our model provides a rationale for this em-
pirical finding. Bénabou (2000) also develops a model that is consistent with
this observation, albeit through a different mechanism. In his setup, political
participation increases with income. When inequality rises, the decisive voter is
richer and decides for less redistribution. The opting-out decision in our model
provides an alternative to Bénabou’s mechanism. There is, however, a crucial
difference between the two theories. In our model, an increase in inequality ac-
tually improves the welfare of a poor agent of a given income, even though total
tax revenue declines. This is possible because the quality of public schooling
   1 This
        echoes the result of Besley and Coate (1991). Assuming that quality is a normal good,
households who opt out of the public sector are those with higher incomes.


                                             2
improves: the number of students who use public schools declines faster with
inequality than overall tax revenue, implying that the funding level per student
increases. Thus, even though an increase in inequality reduces the total amount
of redistribution, the transfers to public-school parents become more targeted,
leaving the poor better off.

Another novel feature of our analysis concerns the efficiency properties of public
education. In our theory, fertility decisions are endogenous. Consistent with em-
pirical evidence, the theory predicts that poorer parents who use public schools
have more children than parents who choose costly private schools. By rais-
ing their fertility rate relative to what they choose if they had to pay for their
children’s education, the public-school parents impose a fiscal externality on all
taxpayers. This externality would not be present in a model with fixed fertility.

The results described so far, pertaining to democratic countries with an even dis-
tribution of political power, do not yet offer an explanation for why sometimes
countries with similar general characteristics end up with very different educa-
tion systems. This changes once we introduce bias into the political system. If
political power is concentrated among the rich, as in many dictatorships, multi-
ple equilibria with different education systems can arise. In particular, a given
population may choose either a high quality of public education with everyone
participating in the public system, or a low quality of public education with the
rich sending their children to private schools. The source of multiplicity is a com-
plementarity between the rich voters’ choice of whether to participate in public
education, and their preferred quality of public schools. Interestingly, this com-
plementarity works entirely through the political system. Previous authors have
emphasized peer effects as a source of strategic complementarities in education,
which we abstract from here.2

At first sight, the multiplicity-of-equilibria result may seem to suggest that coun-
tries with a biased political system can experience frequent and sudden shifts
in the makeup of their education systems. However, a more appropriate real-
world interpretation of this result is path dependence and persistence of educa-
   2 Variable political power also plays a role for the multiple steady-state result in Bénabou
(2000), although the mechanism is entirely different.



                                               3
tion regimes in such countries.3 The multiplicity result relies on the assumption
that voters commit to their fertility and schooling regime choices (i.e., public or
private) before the electorate determines the quality of public schooling. By com-
mitting to their choices, the voters create groups with specific interests for or
against public education that are fixed ex post. It is these fixed long-term choices
that give rise to self-fulfilling expectations regarding the quality of public school-
ing.

To assess the empirical content of the multiplicity result, one therefore needs to
consider the degree to which the households in a given country are locked into
particular fertility or schooling choices. Fertility clearly is an irreversible choice
that has to be made years before children enter a school. The reversibility of
the schooling choice, in contrast, may vary substantially across countries or re-
gions. If, for example, educational segregation is linked to residential segrega-
tion, switching from a private to a public school would also require moving to a
different neighborhood or city. This implies high switching costs that lock house-
holds into a particular choice for extended periods. In such a country, we would
expect the schooling regime to persist over time. If, on the other hand, public and
private schools were located right next to each other in the same neighborhoods,
switching costs would be less of an issue.

The main predictions of our theory are consistent with a set of stylized facts on
public and private schooling in the U.S. as well as in a cross section of countries.
For the U.S., we document that states with higher inequality have a larger share
of private schooling, less overall spending on public schooling, but a higher qual-
ity of public schooling. At the micro level, fertility is decreasing and the proba-
bility of using private schools is increasing in income. Moreover, the slope of
the income-fertility relationship is flatter in states with a higher quality of public
schooling. Similar findings are obtained in cross-country data. Using micro data
from the OECD PISA program, we confirm that in a large set of countries high-
income households are more likely to use private education, while their fertility
rates are lower. Comparing across countries, high inequality is associated with a
larger share of private schooling. Concerning the role of political power, we turn
  3 The  model presented here does not have an explicit dynamic structure; dynamics are dis-
cussed in the working paper version of this paper, de la Croix and Doepke (2003b).


                                             4
to the relationship between democracy and education funding. If we interpret
democracies as countries with an even distribution of political power, while non-
democracies are biased to the rich, our model implies that there is more scope
for variation in education systems in non-democracies than in democracies. In-
deed, using a cross section of 158 countries, we find that the variance of public
spending across countries is smaller for democracies than for non-democracies.

Our paper relates to different branches of the literature. A number of authors
have addressed the choice of public versus private schooling within a majority
voting framework (see Stiglitz 1974, Glomm and Ravikumar 1998, Epple and Ro-
mano 1996b, and Glomm and Patterson 2002). A recurring theme in this litera-
ture is the argument that if there are private alternatives to public schools, voters’
preferences may not be single-peaked, so that a majority voting equilibrium may
fail to exist. In contrast, we rely on probabilistic voting as the political mecha-
nism, which yields a fully tractable theory of education regimes in which voting
equilibria are guaranteed to exist. Moreover, our probabilistic voting setup is not
restricted to democracies, since we can analyze what happens if the political sys-
tem is biased to the rich. The second main departure from the existing literature
is that we endogenize fertility decisions, which leads to novel implications for
uniqueness and efficiency properties of equilibria.

Our model makes predictions for the link between inequality in a country and
the resulting education system and quality of education. A similar objective is
followed by Fernández and Rogerson (1995), who consider a model where ed-
ucation is discrete (zero or one), partially subsidized by the government, and
voters decide on the extent of the subsidy. Fernández and Rogerson emphasize
that in unequal societies, the poor may forgo education entirely. Since all voters
are taxed, in this case public education constitutes a transfer of resources from the
poor and the rich to the middle class, echoing the findings of Epple and Romano
(1996a). While these arguments are highly relevant for the case of post-secondary
education, at the primary and secondary level participation rates are high even
for poor children in most countries. Thus, at these levels the choices that we
model here (private versus public education and the quality of public education)
may be the more important margins.

A different branch of the literature takes the schooling regime (public or private)

                                          5
as given, and analyzes the economic implications of each regime. Glomm and
Ravikumar (1992) contrast the effects of public and private schooling systems on
growth and inequality. In a country with little inequality, a fiscal externality cre-
ated by public schooling leads to lower growth under public schooling than un-
der private schooling. In unequal societies, however, public schooling can dom-
inate, since more resources are directed to poor individuals with a high return
on education. Similar conclusions are derived by de la Croix and Doepke (2004)
in a framework which emphasizes the interdependence of fertility and education
decisions of parents. The model of Glomm and Ravikumar (1992) has been ex-
tended by Bénabou (1996) to allow for local interactions between agents, such as
neighborhood effects and knowledge spillovers. Our work advances over these
papers by endogenizing the choice of the schooling regime as a function of the
income distribution and the political system.

In the next section, we introduce our model and analyze the political equilibrium.
Section 3 describes how in a democratic country the choice of a schooling regime
and the quality of schooling depend on the income distribution. Section 4 gen-
eralizes the voting process to allow for unequal political power. We show that
multiple equilibria can arise in societies dominated by the rich. In Section 5 we
analyze alternative timing assumptions. In Section 6 we confront the testable im-
plications of the model with empirical evidence. Section 7 concludes. All proofs
are contained in the mathematical appendix.



2 The Model Economy

2.1 Preferences and technology

The model economy is populated by a continuum of households of measure one.
Households are differentiated by their human capital endowment x, where x is
the wage that a household can obtain in the labor market. People care about
consumption c, their number of children n, and their children’s education h. The




                                         6
utility function is given by:4

                                 ln(c) + γ [ln(n) + η ln(h)] .                                   (1)

Notice that parents care both about child quantity n and quality h. The parameter
γ ∈ R + is the overall weight attached to children. The parameter η ∈ (0, 1) is the
relative weight of quality.5 As we will see below, the tradeoff between quantity
and quality is affected by the human capital endowment of the parent and by the
schooling regime.

To attain human capital, children have to be educated by teachers. The wage
of teachers equals the average wage in the population, which is normalized to
one.6 Parents can choose from two different modes of education. First, there is a
public schooling system, which provides a uniform education s to every student.
Education in the public system is financed through an income tax v; apart from
the tax, there are no direct costs to the parents. The schooling quality s and the tax
rate v are determined through voting, to be described in more detail later. Parents
also have the possibility of opting out of the public system. In this case, parents
can freely choose the education quality e, but they have to pay the teacher out of
their own income. Since education e is measured in units of time of the average
teacher, the total cost of educating n children privately is given by ne. We assume
that education spending is tax deductible. While tax deductibility of education
expenditures varies across countries, deductibility simplifies the analysis because
it implies that taxation does not distort the choice between quantity and quality
of children.7 Apart from the education expenditure, raising one child also takes
fraction φ ∈ (0, 1) of an adult’s time. The budget constraint for an adult with
   4 The  logarithmic utility function is chosen for simplicity; any utility function representing
homothetic preferences over the bundle (c, n, h) would lead to the same results. Also, while we
focus on a static framework here, the working paper version of this paper extends the analysis to
a dynamic setting where today’s children are tomorrow’s adults.
   5 The parameter η cannot exceed 1 because the parents’ optimization problem would not have

a solution. More specifically, utility would approach infinity as parents choose arbitrarily high
levels of education and arbitrarily low levels of fertility. A similar condition can be found in Moav
(2005).
   6 The important assumption here is that the cost of education is fixed, i.e., all parents face the

same education cost regardless of their own wage. The level of the teacher’s wage is set to the
average wage for convenience.
   7 The same result would obtain if parents educated their own children (or at least had the

option to do so), because then the parent’s teaching efforts would reduce their taxable income.

                                                 7
wage x is given by:
                                 c = (1 − v) [x(1 − φn) − ne] .                          (2)

Education is thus either private, e, or public, s. Effective education can be ex-
pressed as the maximum of the two: h = max{e, s}. Of course, parents who
prefer public education will choose e = 0.

Substituting the budget constraint (2) into the utility function (1) allows rewriting
the utility of a given household as:

    u[x, v, n, e, s] = ln(1 − v) + ln(x(1 − φn) − ne) + γ ln n + γη ln max{e, s}.


The consumption good is produced by competitive firms using labor as the only
input. We assume that the aggregate production function is linear in effective
labor units. The production setup does not play an important role in our analysis;
the advantage of the linear production function is that the wage is fixed.



2.2 Timing of events and private choices

The level of public funding for education s is chosen by a vote among the adult
population. The voters’ preferences depend on their optimal fertility and edu-
cation choices (n and e), which are made before voting takes place. In making
these choices, agents have perfect foresight regarding the outcome of the vot-
ing process. This timing is motivated by the observation that public education
spending can be adjusted frequently, while fertility cannot. Similarly, the choice
between public versus private education entails substantial switching costs, es-
pecially when educational segregation is linked to residential segregation.8

At given expected policy variables v and s, the utility function u is concave in
n. Within each group, some agents may choose public schooling, in which case
their fertility rate is denoted ns , while others opt for private education; fertility
for those in private schools is denoted as ne . All parents planning to send their
  8 In   Section 5 we will explore the implications of alternative timing assumptions.




                                                  8
children to the public school choose the same fertility level:

                                                             γ
                      ns = arg max u[x, v, n, 0, s] =              .                (3)
                                  n                       φ(1 + γ)

Fertility is constant because the income and substitution effects exactly offset
each other. On the one hand, richer parents would prefer to have more children,
but on the other hand the opportunity cost of raising children is also higher.
The households planning to provide private schooling chose:

                                                           xγ
                    n = arg max u[x, v, n, e, s] =                  ,
                              n                     (1 + γ)(e + φx)
                                                     ηφx
                  e[x] = arg max u[x, v, n, e, s] =      .                          (4)
                              e                     1−η

Private spending on education depends positively on the wage x. Since the basic
cost of children is a time cost, having children is expensive for skilled parents. In
contrast, the cost of educating children is a resource cost, which is more afford-
able for skilled, high-income parents. Hence, they have a comparative advantage
in terms of raising educated children (as in Moav (2005)).
Notice that e is independent of the outcome of the voting process, implying that
the timing of choosing e does not affect the results (in contrast, we will see in
Section 5 that the timing of choosing between public and private schooling does
matter). Replacing the optimal value for e[x] in the fertility equation we find:

                                             γ(1 − η)
                                      ne =            .                             (5)
                                             φ(1 + γ)

Thus, conditional on choosing private schooling, fertility is independent of x as
well. ¿From equations (3) and (5) we see that parents choosing private education
have a lower fertility rate.

Lemma 1 (Constant parental spending on children)
For given s, v and x, parental spending on children (and therefore taxable income) does
                                                                              γ
not depend on the choice of private versus public schooling, and is equal to 1+γ x.

Lemma 1 implies that the tax base does not depend on the fraction of people
participating in public schooling. This property will be important for generating

                                              9
uniqueness of equilibrium. The lemma relies on three assumptions: homothetic
preferences, tax deductible education spending, and endogenous fertility. With
endogenous fertility, parents choosing private schools have fewer children, keep-
ing their total budget allocation to children in line with those choosing public
schools.9 This is a typical feature of endogenous fertility models.

A first result is that parents with high human capital are more demanding in
terms of expected public education quality, or, in other words, child quality is a
normal good:

Lemma 2 (Opting out decision)
There exist an income threshold:

                              1−η                                           1
                       x̃ =       E[s]                with: δ = (1 − η) η                        (6)
                              δφη

such that households strictly prefer private education if and only if x > x̃.

Here E[s] is expected quality of public schooling. An implication of the above
lemma is that if some people with income x choose the public regime, all people
with income x  < x will strictly prefer public schooling. Similarly, if at least some
people with income x opt out of public education and choose private education,
all households with income x  > x choose it as well.

We assume a uniform distribution of human capital over the interval [1 − σ, 1 +
σ]. Accordingly, the associated density function is given by g(x) = 0 for x < 1 − σ
and if x > 1 + σ, and g(x) = 1/(2σ) for 1 − σ ≤ x ≤ 1 + σ.10 We denote the
   9 With fixed fertility, the resources allocated to children would be xφn with public education
and xφn/(1 − η) with private education. However, even with fixed fertility a constant tax base
could be achieved through an endogenous labor supply setup.
  10 The uniform distribution of human capital is chosen for simplicity; other distributions would

lead to similar results. In particular, in the probabilistic voting model described below (unlike the
standard majority voting model) there is no special significance to the relative positions of median
and mean income.




                                                 10
fraction of children participating in the public education system as:
                             ⎧
                             ⎪
                             ⎪                                   x̃ < 1 − σ,
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                               0                       if
                             ⎨
                               x̃ − (1 − σ)
                          Ψ=                           if        1 − σ ≤ x̃ ≤ 1 + σ,                    (7)
                             ⎪
                             ⎪      2σ
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎩ 1                       if        x̃ > 1 + σ.


2.3 The political mechanism

The public education system operates under a balanced-budget rule:

         x̃
               ns s g[x] dx =
      0
                      x̃                                       ∞
                                     s
                          v (x(1 − φn )) g[x] dx +                   v (x(1 − φne ) − e[x]ne ) g[x] dx, (8)
                      0                                     x̃

with total spending on public education on the left-hand side and total revenues
on the right-hand side. After replacing fertility and education by their optimal
value, this constraint reduces to:

                                                            γ
                                                 v=Ψ          s.                                        (9)
                                                            φ

Since the level of schooling and taxes are linked through the budget constraint,
the policy choice is one-dimensional.

The level of public expenditures, and hence taxes, is chosen through probabilistic
voting. Assume that there are two political parties, p and q. Each one proposes a
policy s p and sq . The utility gain (or loss) of a voter with income x if party q wins
the election instead of p is u[x, vq , n, e, sq ] − u[x, v p , n, e, s p ]. Instead of assuming
that an adult votes for party q with probability one every time this difference
is positive (as in the median voter model), probabilistic voting theory supposes
that this vote is uncertain. More precisely, the probability that a person votes for
party q is given by

                               F (u[x, vq , n, e, sq ] − u[x, v p , n, e, s p ]) ,


                                                      11
where F is an increasing and differentiable cumulative distribution function. This
function captures the idea that voters care about an “ideology” variable in addi-
tion to the specific policy measure at hand, i.e., the quality of public schooling.
The presence of a concern for ideology, which is independent of the policy mea-
sure, makes the political choice less predictable (see Persson and Tabellini 2000
for different formalizations of this approach). The probability that a given voter
will vote for party q increases gradually as the party’s platform becomes more
attractive. Under standard majority voting, in contrast, the probability of getting
the vote jumps discretely from zero to one once party q offers a more attractive
platform that party p.

Since the vote share of each party varies continuously with the proposed policy
platform, probabilistic voting leads to smooth aggregation of all voters’ prefer-
ences, instead of depending solely on the preferences of the median voter. Party
                                                          ∞
q maximizes its expected vote share, which is given by 0 g[x]F(·)dx. Party p
acts symmetrically, and, in equilibrium, we have s = sq = s p . The maximiza-
tion program of each party implements the maximum of the following weighted
social welfare function:11
                           ∞
                              g[x] (F) (0) u[x, v, n, e, s]dx.
                             0

The weight (F) (0) captures the responsiveness of voters to the change in utility.
If there are different groups in the population that differ in their responsiveness
(their “ideological bias”), the distribution of political power becomes uneven.
In particular, a group that has little ideological bias cares relatively more about
economic policy. Such groups are therefore targeted by politicians and enjoy high
political power. In addition, political power may also depend on other features
of the political system such as voting rights. We will capture the political power
of each person by a single parameter θ[x]. This includes the extreme cases of
representative democracy with equal responsiveness, and dictatorship of the rich
(θ[x] = 0 for x below a certain threshold). Accordingly, the objective function
  11 Thisresult was first derived by Coughlin and Nitzan (1981). The same framework can also
be derived within the setup of lobbying models, see Bernheim and Whinston (1986).




                                            12
maximized by the probabilistic voting mechanism is given by:
                    x̃                                           ∞
                                  s
    Ω[s] ≡                u[x, v, n , 0, s]θ[x]g[x]dx +                u[x, v, ne , e[x], 0]θ[x]g[x]dx.   (10)
                 0                                            x̃

The maximization is subject to the government budget constraint (8).

We start by assuming that all individuals have the same political power, i.e.
θ[x] = 1, implying that the weight of a given group in the objective function
is simply given by its size. The role of this assumption will be further investi-
gated in Section 4. It can be checked that Ω[s] is strictly concave. Replacing x̃ by
2σΨ + 1 − σ into the objective, taking the first-order condition for a maximum,
and solving for s yields:
                                      ηφ
                                s=          ≡ s[Ψ].                             (11)
                                   1 + γηΨ
From this expression we can see that s is decreasing in the participation rate Ψ:
when more children participate in public schools, spending per child is reduced.
Looking at the corresponding tax rate,

                                                     ηγΨ
                                              v=           ,                                              (12)
                                                   1 + γηΨ

we observe that a rise in participation is followed by a less than proportional rise
in taxation. Since, by Lemma 1, the taxable income is unaffected by increased
participation, this translates into lower spending per child. To see the intuition
for this result, consider the consequences of increasing Ψ for a given s. In the
welfare function maximized by the political system, the increase in Ψ leads to
a proportional increase in the marginal benefit of increasing schooling s, since
more children benefit from public education. The marginal cost of taxation, in
contrast, increases more than proportionally, since the higher required taxes re-
duce consumption and increase marginal utilities. To equate marginal costs and
benefits, an increase in Ψ is therefore met by a reduction in s.




                                                    13
      0.04                                          0.04


      0.03                                          0.03
  s




                                                s
      0.02                                          0.02


      0.01                                          0.01



                  0.01    0.02   0.03    0.04              0.01   0.02    0.03    0.04
                           Es                                      Es


             Figure 1: The fixed point with σ = 0.5 (left) and σ = 0.8 (right)

2.4 The equilibrium

So far, we have taken the participation rate Ψ as given, and solved for the cor-
responding voting outcome concerning the quality of public schools. In equilib-
rium, the choice whether or not to participate in public schooling has to be opti-
mal. In the definition of equilibrium we will use an earlier result: the incentive to
use private schooling is increasing in income (Lemma 2). As a consequence, any
equilibrium is characterized by an income threshold x̃ such that people choose
public education below x̃ and private education above x̃. This leads to the fol-
lowing definition of an equilibrium:

Definition 1 (Equilibrium)
An equilibrium consists of an income threshold x̃ satisfying (6), a fertility rule n = ns
for x ≤ x̃ and n = ne for x > x̃, a private education decision e = 0 for x ≤ x̃ and
e = e[x] for x > x̃, and aggregate variables (Ψ, s, v) given by equations (7), (11) and
(12), such that the perfect foresight condition holds:

                                         E[s] = s.                                  (13)


Proposition 1 (Existence and Uniqueness of Equilibrium)
An equilibrium exists and is unique.

                                            14
To see the intuition for the result, notice that participation in public schooling is
a continuously increasing function of expected school quality through equations
(7) and (6). Actual school quality, in turn, is a continuous and decreasing function
of participation. Combining these results, we can construct a continuous and
decreasing mapping from expected to actual school quality. This mapping has a
unique fixed point, which characterizes the equilibrium.

The uniqueness result relies on endogenous fertility. If one assumes, to the con-
trary, that fertility is exogenous and constant, Lemma 1 no longer holds, and the
tax basis increases with participation Ψ. If the tax-basis effect is sufficiently pro-
nounced, the actual schooling level will no longer decrease in participation, and
the equilibrium mapping may fail to have a unique fixed point.

Figure 1 shows two numerical examples of the fixed point mapping. The chosen
parameters are: γ = 0.4, η = 0.55, φ = 0.075. The implied fertility levels are
ne = 1, ns = 2.22. In the left panel, σ = 0.5, and we have s = 0.034 and Ψ = 1 . In
the right panel, σ = 0.8, and we have s = 0.037 and Ψ = 0.96.



3 Comparing the Education Regimes

Depending on the coverage of the public education system, we have three cases
to consider.


                              Regime              Ψ

                              Fully Public        1

                              Segregation      ∈ (0, 1)

                              Fully Private       0

In the fully public regime, all children go to public school. Under segregation, the
most skilled parents send their children to private school, while others use public
schools. In the fully private regime, everybody attends private schools. We first
derive the conditions under which each education regime arises. The following
proposition summarizes the results.

                                         15
Proposition 2 (Occurrence of education regimes)
The fully private regime is not an equilibrium outcome.
Whether public schooling can arise in equilibrium depends on the preference parameters
γ and η. Let γ̂ = (1 − δ − η)/(δη).
If γ > γ̂, public education is not an equilibrium outcome and Ψ < 1/2 for any σ.
If γ < γ̂, the fully public regime prevails if and only if

                                              1−η
                                 σ ≤ σ̂ =             − 1.
                                            (1 + γη)δ

Otherwise, we have segregation with Ψ > 1/2.


Let us first explain why the fully private regime cannot be an equilibrium out-
come. When participation is very low (Ψ → 0), high quality public education
can be provided at very low tax levels. The quality of public schools is then
sufficiently high (s → ηφ) for the poorest parents to prefer public over private
education.

To see whether a fully public regime can arise, we have to look at the preferences
of the richest person. If this person has a high income relative to the average
(high σ), the preferred education quality is sufficiently larger than publicly pro-
vided schooling for private education to be optimal. The effect of inequality on
segregation is established in the next proposition. The fully public regime arises
only if the income distribution is sufficiently compressed, so that the preferred
education level varies little in the population. From now on we restrict attention
to the region of the parameter space where the fully public regime can occur for a
sufficiently compressed income distribution, and where at any time at least half
the population is in public schools.

Assumption 1 The model parameters satisfy:

                                              1−δ−η
                                   γ < γ̂ ≡         .
                                                δη




                                             16
As in nearly all countries participation in public schools far exceeds 50 percent,
this is the empirically relevant case.12

Proposition 3 (Inequality and segregation)              Under Assumption 1, an increase in
inequality leads to a lower share of public schooling, a higher quality of public schooling,
and lower taxes:
                                 ∂Ψ          ∂s        ∂v
                                      ≤ 0,       ≥ 0,     ≤ 0.
                                  ∂σ        ∂σ         ∂σ
The inequalities are strict if a positive fraction of parents already uses private schools.

Higher income inequality leads to lower participation in public schools and more
segregation (Ψ closer to 1/2) if the majority of the population is in public schools.
Intuitively, in this case an increase in inequality raises the income of the marginal
person (who was just indifferent between private and public schooling before
the increase in inequality). As a consequence, the preferred level of education
increases, and this person now strictly prefers private schooling. The lower par-
ticipation in public schooling after an increase in inequality also implies that the
tax rate goes down. Thus, despite the increased demand for redistribution, ev-
erybody is taxed less as more parents opt out of the public schooling system.

The preferences of households at the income threshold x̃ are linked to the rela-
tive quality of public versus private schooling. At the threshold, households are
indifferent between both types of schools. This implies that the quality they re-
ceive from public schools is lower than the one from private schools, since the
gap between the two has to compensate for higher costs of private education.
This result is consistent with the literature devoted to the estimation of the rela-
tive quality of private education, correcting for the effect of higher social class of
the pupils in the private sector. The majority of the results suggest that control-
ling for sample selectivity reduces the achievement advantage of private school
students over public school students, but does not eliminate it.13
  12 Put differently, using the calibrated parameter values η = 0.6 and φ = 0.075 from de la Croix
and Doepke (2003a), Assumption 1 can be read as a condition on fertility ns (see Equation (3)).
The condition imposes ns < 7.79 per person, which requires fertility per woman to be smaller
than 15.6 children.
  13 See Kingdon (1996) for India, Bedi and Garg (2000) for Indonesia, Alderman, Orazem, and Pa-

terno (2001) for Pakistan, Vandenberghe and Robin (2003) for Brazil and Neal (1997) for Catholic
U.S. schools. Some other studies find no difference between private and public schools perfor-
mances (see Goldhaber (1996)).

                                               17
Notice that if Assumption 1 is satisfied, the unique equilibrium in a economy
without inequality (σ = 0) is fully public schooling. The result may seem sur-
prising at first sight, because public schooling implies a fiscal externality. In an
equitable society, the social optimum would be pure private schooling. The rea-
son why public schooling arises nevertheless is linked to our timing assumptions.
If parents commit to a schooling choice before the schooling quality is set, a hold-
up problem arises. From an ex ante perspective, it would be socially optimal for
everybody to commit to using private schools. Ex post, however, if some parents
decide to go for public schools anyway, the political system will provide a qual-
ity of public schooling that makes this decision optimal after the fact. Thus, the
expectation that a certain public service will be provided creates a constituency
that ensures that the service will be provided in reality.



4 Political Power and Multiple Equilibria

In this section, we relax the earlier assumption that each member of the popula-
tion carries equal weight in the voting process. We will see that if political power
is concentrated among high-income individuals, multiple equilibria can arise.

As a particularly simple form of variable political power, we consider outcomes
with a minimum-income restriction for voting. There is now a threshold x̄ such
that only individuals with income x ≥ x̄ are allowed to vote.14 All individ-
uals above the threshold continue to carry equal weight in the voting process.
This formulation captures property restrictions on voting, which were common
in the early phases of many democracies. Similar cases of political exclusion
can also arise from literacy requirements, age restrictions on voting (given that
young people tend to be relatively poor), citizenship restrictions (assuming that
recent immigrants are poorer on average than the native population), and polit-
ical mechanisms other than voting (such as lobbying and bribery) that favor the
rich in either democracies on non-democracies.
  14 Similar
           results would obtain if individuals below the threshold had positive, but sufficiently
low weight in the political mechanism.




                                               18
The objective function of the political system is now given by:

  Ω[s] ≡
                    max{ x̄, x̃}                                   ∞
                                             s
                                    u[x, v, n , 0, s]g[x]dx +                      u[x, v, ne , e[x], 0]g[x]dx. (14)
                x̄                                                  max{ x̄, x̃}

Replacing x̃ by 2σΨ + 1 − σ into the objective, taking the first-order condition for
a maximum, and solving for s yields:

            x̄ − (1 − σ)                                   ηφ ((1 − σ) − x̄ + 2σΨ)
   If Ψ ≥                ,                   s=                                              .                 (15)
                 2σ                               Ψ (γη ((1 − σ) − x̄ + 2σΨ) + (1 + σ) − x̄)

                                x̄ − (1 − σ)
                                         If Ψ <
                                             ,   s = 0.
                                     2σ
Hence, with a biased political system corner solutions with a schooling quality
of zero may arise. The equilibrium schooling quality s satisfies:
                                     
                                                 ηφ (1 − σ − x̄ + 2σΨ)
                      s = max                                                   ,0 .                           (16)
                                         Ψ (1 + σ − x̄ + γη (1 − σ − x̄ + 2σΨ))

The corresponding tax rate is still given by (12). A few properties of (16) are of
interest here. First, we have s = 0 for Ψ ≤ x̄ − (1 − σ)/2σ. Second, we have:
                                         ⎧                                    ⎫
                                         ⎨            ηφ                      ⎬           ηφ
                          s = max                                        ,0        ≤           ,
                                         ⎩     (1+σ− x̄)Ψ
                                                             + γηΨ            ⎭        1 + γηΨ
                                             (1−σ− x̄+2σΨ)


where the right-hand side is the schooling level that arises with equal political
power as given by (11). Finally, for Ψ = 1 we have

                                                             ηφ
                                                    s=            ,
                                                           1 + γη

just as in the case with equal political power. In the new formulation with vari-
able voting power, the existence of equilibrium can still be proven. However, the
equilibrium is no longer necessarily unique. It is also no longer true that the fully
private regime never exists (as we showed in Proposition 2 for the democratic
case of an even distribution of political power). In fact, in the biased political


                                                           19
                             0.04


                             0.03




                         s
                             0.02


                             0.01



                                          0.01     0.02      0.03     0.04
                                                    Es


        Figure 2: The fixed point with multiple equilibria (σ = 0.5, x̄ = 0.7)

system pure private schooling is always an equilibrium outcome.

As soon as x̃ is smaller than x̄, i.e., all voters expect to send their children to
private schools, the chosen school quality is zero. Intuitively, these voters care
only about taxes, but not about the quality of public schools that they do not use.
As a consequence, private schooling becomes attractive to all parents.

To show that multiple equilibria can arise, we concentrate on the parameter space
where fully public schooling is the unique equilibrium when x̄ = 0. We establish
that in this case there are at least three equilibria for x̄ > 1 − σ.


Proposition 4 (Multiplicity of equilibria for x̄ > 1 − σ )
If x̄, γ, and σ satisfy the conditions

                                                                       1−η
              x̄ > 1 − σ,           γ < γ̂,      and      σ ≤ σ̂ =             − 1,
                                                                     (1 + γη)δ

there are at least three equilibria. One is a fully private regime, one a fully public regime,
and one features segregation.


In Figure 2 we take the same parameter values as in Figure 1 and we set σ = 0.5
and x̄ = 0.7, which implies that the bottom 20% have no political power. There


                                                 20
are now three fixed points: s = 0, s = 0.017, and s = 0.037, with participation
Ψ = 0, Ψ = 0.3, and Ψ = 1.

The possibility of multiple equilibria exists because we assume that people have
to decide on fertility and public versus private schooling before the vote on the
quality of public education takes place. If all decisions were taken simultane-
ously, the voting process would lead to the same outcome as the weighted social
planning problem, which is generically unique. Pre-commitment generates mul-
tiplicity in this setting, but not in the version with equal political weights, because
there is now a strategic complementarity between the education choices of skilled
people through the quality of public schools.15 When everybody with political
power uses private schools, an given individual does not want to switch to the
public system, since the quality of the public schooling is low. If, however, all
voters were to switch together to the public system, they would vote for a much
higher quality of public schools; in that case it would be rational to stay in the
public system. Here, the political bias towards the rich offsets the increased cost
of taxation resulting from higher participation in public schooling. Provided that
there is a strong concentration of political power, the model can account for the
fact that some countries with similar general characteristics choose very different
educational systems.16
The next proposition shows that despite the possibility of multiple equilibria, the
coverage of public schooling is never higher in societies dominated by the rich
than in democracies:

Proposition 5 (Coverage of public education as a function of x̄ )
   15 When actions are strategic complements, the utility of those taking the action depends posi-

tively on how many people take the action. Classic examples are Matsuyama (1991) for increasing
returns, Katz and Shapiro (1985) for network externalities, and Diamond and Dybvig (1983) for
bank runs.
   16 A number of authors have derived similar multiplicity results in other applications of voting

models. In Saint-Paul and Verdier (1997) there is majority voting on a capital income tax. If polit-
ical power is unequally distributed, and is biased in favor of households having better access to
world capital markets, expectations-driven multiple equilibria can arise. In a dynamic majority
voting framework, Hassler, Rodriguez Mora, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2003) assume that young
agents base their education decisions on expectations over future redistribution. Self-fulfilling
expectations can lead to either high or low redistribution equilibria. Finally, there are other polit-
ical economy models that do not have indeterminacy of equilibrium but display multiple steady
states (see for example Bénabou 2000 or Doepke and Zilibotti 2005). Initial conditions, as opposed
to self-fulfilling expectations, determine which steady state the economy approaches.

                                                 21
Let Ψ0 be the equilibrium coverage of public education for x̂ = x0 , and v0 the correspond-
ing tax rate. If Ψ1 and v1 are an equilibrium coverage and a tax rate for a x̂ = x1 > x0 ,
then we have

                                      Ψ1 ≤ Ψ0 ,
                                       s1 ≤ s0 ,
                                       v1 ≤ v0 .


In summary, if the rich wield more power than the poor, multiple equilibria may
arise. In any such equilibrium, the coverage and quality of and spending on pub-
lic education cannot be higher than in the outcome with equal political weights.
Fully private education systems are always possible.

While we have established the results of this section for the extreme case where
households with an income below x̄ do not wield any political power, the results
generalize to an environment where these households have some positive weight
in the political system, but lower than the weight of households with income
above x̄. In particular, it is easy to establish that, for any x̄, a fully private regime
exists if the weight of low-income people is sufficiently small. As before, if in this
case the unique equilibrium in the model with an even distribution of political
power is pure public schooling, at least three equilibria exist when the poor have
less political power.



5 Outcomes with Government Commitment

So far we have assumed that the level of government spending on education is
determined after private households have decided whether to send their children
to private or public schools. In this section we analyze an alternative timing as-
sumption, namely, the voters elect a government which pre-commits to a given
overall spending level on education, while households can make their schooling
choice conditional on this spending. Even though under each timing assump-
tion people have perfect foresight, we will see that timing makes an important
difference. For the following analysis, we return to the assumption of an even

                                            22
distribution of political power, i.e. x̄ = 0.

In the new timing, the government sets the tax rate at the beginning of the pe-
riod. Since the tax base is independent of the schooling choice, this is equivalent
to determining total spending on public education. After the tax is set, parents
choose fertility and public versus private education for their children. Public
schooling per child will then be simply given by the ratio of pre-committed to-
tal spending to the number of children in public schools. Since the government
has perfect foresight, the problem can be solved backwards by first determining
individual decisions as a function of policies, and then choosing policies taking
this dependency into account.

Since fertility choices conditional on schooling are not affected by taxes, fertility
rates will be as before determined by equations (3) and (5). Private education
spending is also unaffected by the new timing of decisions and is given by equa-
tion (4). The participation decision is determined by the threshold defined in
Lemma 2, which is now defined in terms of actual schooling quality s:

                                              1−η
                                    x̃[s] =       s                              (17)
                                              δφη

We also redefine the endogenous fraction of children participating in the public
education system as a function of actual quality:
                      ⎧
                      ⎪
                      ⎪                               x̃[s] < 1 − σ
                      ⎪
                      ⎪
                        0                       if
                      ⎨
                        x̃[s] − (1 − σ)
               Ψ[s] =                           if    1 − σ ≤ x̃[s] ≤ 1 + σ      (18)
                      ⎪
                      ⎪        2σ
                      ⎪
                      ⎪
                      ⎩ 1                       if    x̃[s] > 1 + σ

From Equation (9), the link between taxes and expenditures is given by:

                                                     γ
                                     v = Ψ[s]          s                         (19)
                                                     φ

The objective function modeling the voting process is the same as before, but Ψ




                                           23
and x̃ are now endogenous:
                                  x̃[s]                                         ∞
                                                    s
                  Ω[s] ≡                   u[x, v, n , 0, s]g[x]dx +                     u[x, v, ne , e[x], 0]g[x]dx.        (20)
                               0                                                 x̃[s]

The structure of the problem is similar to a standard Ramsey (1927) problem,
where the government chooses optimal taxes taking into account the reaction of
private agents. Once again three regimes are possible: fully public (Ψ[s] = 1),
segregation (1 > Ψ[s] > 0), and fully private (Ψ[s] = 0). In the segregation case,
the first-order condition for optimization is as follows:

                                                              ∞                        
          x̃[s]
                  ∂u ∂v ∂u                                              ∂u ∂v ∂u
                        +                   g[x]dx +                          +               g[x]dx
      0           ∂v ∂s   ∂s                                    x̃[s]   ∂v ∂s   ∂s
                                                                                                  ∞
                                                            x̃[s]
                                                                  ∂u ∂v ∂Ψ                                 ∂u ∂v ∂Ψ
                                                +                          g[x]dx +                                 g[x]dx = 0.
                                                        0         ∂v ∂Ψ ∂s                         x̃[s]   ∂v ∂Ψ ∂s

The first line of this optimality condition is the same as the one we get in the prob-
lem without commitment. The second line is a new term which arises from the
endogenous dependency of Ψ on s. This term is always negative. The new neg-
ative term implies that under government commitment, the optimal s is lower
than under no-commitment, as long as the solution for Ψ is interior. Intuitively,
the government now takes into account that a marginal increase in s increases
the number of families who use public schools. On the margin this lowers the
value of the objective function, since the marginal family is just indifferent be-
tween private and public schooling, but imposes a fiscal burden on the rest of the
population once it switches from private to public school.

In the fully private and public regimes, participation Ψ[s] is locally independent
of s, as long as the marginal family strictly prefers its current schooling choice.
The additional term is therefore zero, and hence the optimal schooling choice
of s does not depend on government commitment. The following proposition
summarizes the result.


Proposition 6 (Equilibrium with commitment)
An equilibrium with commitment exists. Public school quality is lower than or equal to
the level reached without commitment. The inequality is strict if participation Ψ satisfies:

                                                                        24
0 < Ψ < 1.


Existence is guaranteed because the objective function is continuous on a com-
pact set. The equilibrium is not guaranteed to be unique, however, because the
objective function is not globally concave. In particular, it has kinks at the values
of s corresponding to x̃[s] = 1 − σ and x̃[s] = 1 + σ. However, multiplicity occurs
only for knife-edge cases.

If we extend this model to concentrated political power as in Section 4, we no
longer get generic multiplicity of equilibria. Under the original timing, multi-
ple equilibria arose as self-fulfilling prophecies. With government commitment,
the government moves first and chooses the generically unique equilibrium that
maximizes the objective function.

To summarize, we see that the relative timing of the decisions taken by individual
households and the government has an important bearing on the positive impli-
cations of our theory. Which timing, then, should be considered to be the most
realistic? Clearly, there is no general answer to this question, as political decision
horizons can vary substantially from country to country. It is useful, however, to
consider as a benchmark the common case of a government that adjusts the ed-
ucation budget (which determines the quality of public schooling) at an annual
frequency. As far as fertility decisions are concerned, the realistic assumption
then is that households move before the government. Children generally enter
school at age six, so that at the very minimum, six years pass from the fertility
decision until schooling actually begins. It is hard to imagine that the govern-
ment commits to a schooling quality more than six years ahead of time, without
any possibility of later adjustments.

In contrast, matters are less clear-cut when it comes to the choice of an education
system (i.e., whether to send one’s child to public or private school). We have
already analyzed the case where parents make this choice before the government
decides on school quality. What would happen if households chose fertility be-
fore the vote on schooling quality, but could adjust their choice of public ver-
sus private schooling after the vote? As we will see, this framework in which
households make at least one decision before the government leads to similar
implications as our original timing where the government moves last.

                                         25
In this intermediate case, when households choose fertility, they do so under
perfect foresight regarding the future quality of schools. There will be an income
threshold x̄ below which people have large families (corresponding to the expec-
tation of public schooling). The objective of the voting process takes three differ-
ent forms depending on how the threshold for private education x̃[s] compares
to the threshold for small families x̄. For x̄ < x̃[s], it is given by:

                  x̄                                               x̃[s]
                                        s
  Ω[s] =                u[x, v, n , 0, s]g[x]dx +                            u[x, v, ne , 0, s]g[x]dx
               0                                                x̄
                                                                                             ∞
                                                                                        +        u[x, v, ne , e[x], 0]g[x]dx,
                                                                                                  x̃[s]


for x̄ = x̃[s], we have
                                    x̃[s]                                           ∞
                                                     s
           Ω[s] =                            u[x, v, n , 0, s]g[x]dx +                       u[x, v, ne , e[x], 0]g[x]dx,   (21)
                                 0                                                   x̃[s]


and for x̄ > x̃[s], we have:

                  x̃[s]                                               x̄
                                             s
  Ω[s] =                   u[x, v, n , 0, s]g[x]dx +                        u[x, v, ns , e[x], 0]g[x]dx
               0                                                      x̃[s]
                                                                                           ∞
                                                                                      +         u[x, v, ne , e[x], 0]g[x]dx.
                                                                                                  x̄

If x̄ = x̃[s], as in the previous case the first-order condition for optimality has
an additional term related to the marginal impact of s on x̃[s]. In equilibrium,
however, agents have perfect foresight, and x̄ = x̃[s] will hold. In this case,
consider the s that maximizes the objective function holding x̃[s] constant at x̄,
as in our original timing. In Equation (21), in a neighborhood around this s, it is
the case that the marginal effect of a change in s on x̃ is zero. The reason is that
agents below x̄ have chosen large families in expectation of using public schools,
whereas families above x̄ = x̃[s] have chosen small families in expectation of
private schooling. Families close to the threshold therefore strictly prefer their
expected schooling choice to the alternative. Thus for x̄ = x̃[s] which occurs in
equilibrium, the first-order condition is as in our original timing. If the solution




                                                                        26
is interior, this implies that the outcome has to be the same.17

To summarize, whether the model generates multiplicity of equilibria crucially
depends on the timing of private decisions relative to the determination of gov-
ernment policy. If parents make decisions that lock them into specific choices for
their children for a long time, whereas the government can adjust the quality of
public education more frequently, the possibility of multiple equilibria is present.
In the real world, the strength of these lock-in effects would depend on a number
of features that are not explicitly modeled in our theory. For example, in some
countries educational segregation is linked to residential segregation, i.e., there
are some districts where mostly rich people live who use private schools, whereas
poorer districts are served by public schools. In such an environment, a switch
in the type of schooling would also entail a switch of residence, and maybe even
a switch of jobs if the distances are sufficiently large. Clearly, in such an environ-
ment the lock-in into a particular schooling type would be much stronger than
in a country where private and public schools exist right next to each other, with
few hurdles to switching schools.



6 Empirical Evidence

Our theory makes predictions on how the quality and extent of private and pub-
lic schooling are determined at the aggregate level, and on how schooling and
fertility choices vary across households within a given political entity. In this sec-
tion, we compare these predictions to data. We start by focusing on state-level
variation in the extent and quality of public education in the United States. This
setting is well suited to examine the predictions of our theory for democratic
countries, as all U.S. states operate within the same overall political framework,
while exhibiting considerable variation in schooling policies as well as the distri-
bution of income. Moreover, we are able to link state-level evidence to household
data from the U.S. Census to assess the micro implications of our theory. We then
  17 Depending   on parameters, however, under the intermediate timing there can also be addi-
tional corner solutions. The original and intermediate timing lead to the same equilibria if the
lock-in effect through fertility is sufficiently strong. The strength of the lock-in effect, in turn,
depends on the fertility differential between parents with children in public and private schools.


                                                 27
extend the analysis to cross-country data, which allows us to probe the theory’s
predictions for non-democratic countries. Here we use data from the OECD and
the World Bank on public and private education spending, as well as micro data
from the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA).



6.1 Inequality, fertility, and schooling across U.S. states

Our model predicts that in a democracy, the choice of public versus private
schooling as well as the level of funding of public schooling are driven by income
inequality (see Proposition 3). In particular, a state with higher income inequal-
ity should exhibit a higher share of private schooling, lower overall spending on
public schooling, but higher public education spending per student. In addition,
the model predicts that a high-inequality state will have a relatively low fertility
rate, because parents who send their children to private school economize on fer-
tility. In this section, we examine whether these predictions hold up across U.S.
states.

We computed state-level measures of income inequality, average fertility, and the
share of private schooling from the 2000 U.S. Census.18 We correlate these vari-
ables with a number of measures of the spending on and the quality of public
schooling. In line with the setup of our theory, we focus on financial measures.19
As an overall spending measure, we use public education spending per capita
in each state (this corresponds to the tax rate v in the model). For the quality
of public education (corresponding to the variable s in the model), we consider
three alternative measures. “Total Current Expenditure per Student” is a mea-
sure of total spending for day-to-day operation of schools, which includes all
expenditures of public schools apart from debt repayments, capital outlays, and
programs outside of preschool to grade 12. One concern with this broad mea-
sure is that it includes some items that may not have a direct educational impact.
We therefore also use the variable “Total Instruction Expenditure per Student,”
  18 The   data is from the one-percent sample of the 2000 U.S. Census, made available at
www.ipums.org by Ruggles et al. (2004).
  19 There may also be differences in how efficiently a given amount of spending is converted

into “effective education,” but our theory makes no predictions in this dimension and assumes
that all states are at the efficiency frontier.


                                             28
Table 1: Correlation of Inequality and Share of Private Schooling with Fertility,
Education Spending, and the Quality of Public Schooling across U.S. States


                                                     Gini coefficient      Private school share
 Private school share                                   0.36 (2.65)
 Public spending per capita                            -0.45 (-3.51)            -0.08 (-0.58)
 Public spending per student                            0.26 (1.84)              0.55 (4.57)
 Public instruction spending per student                0.18 (1.23)              0.53 (4.34)
 Mean teacher salary in public schools                  0.25 (1.77)              0.61 (5.33)
 Average number of children                            -0.48 (-3.74)            -0.27 (-1.91)

t-Statistics in parentheses. “Gini Coefficient” is computed on 1999 household income by state
(data from 2000 U.S. Census). “Share in Private School” is the number of households with at least
half of their school-age children in private school as a fraction of the total number of households
with at least one child in school (data from 2000 U.S. Census). “Number of Children” is the
average number of children per household in the same data set, where children are counted only
if the head of household is their parent and if they are currently living in the household. Measures
of education spending and quality of education are defined in the text.


which only includes expenditures directly associated with student-teacher inter-
action such as teacher salaries and benefits, textbooks and other teaching sup-
plies, and purchased instructional services. Finally, as an alternative measure
of the quality of instruction we use “Mean Teacher Salary,” an estimate of the
average annual salary of teachers in public elementary and secondary schools.20

Table 1 shows how income inequality (i.e., the Gini coefficient on household in-
come by state) and the share of private schooling correlate with fertility and mea-
sures of education spending and quality across states. The correlations are in line
with the predictions of Proposition 3. In particular, the correlation between in-
equality and the share of private schooling is positive, whereas the correlation be-
tween inequality and per-capita spending on public education is negative. Taken
by themselves, these results might seem to suggest that more inequality leads
  20 The expenditure measures are from the National Center for Education Statistics, “Revenues
and Expenditures for Public Elementary and Secondary Education,” School Year 2000-2001. The
teacher salary data is provided by the National Education Association.


                                                29
to less redistribution in the sense of lower support for public education. How-
ever, this is not in fact the case when we consider the quality of public education
rather than overall spending. All three measures of the quality of public edu-
cation are positively correlated with inequality.21 This verifies the third part of
Proposition 3.

The surprising finding that the correlation coefficients of education spending per
capita and education spending per student are of opposite sign can be accounted
for by the effect of private schooling on the quality of public schooling. As in-
equality rises, more students use private schools, which makes it more affordable
to offer a high-quality education to those still in public schools. This effect can be
seen even more strongly when we correlate education quality with the share of
students in private school (second column of Table 1). For all three measures, the
correlation is positive and highly significant. Hence, the theoretical implication
that as the share of private schooling increases, the quality of the public school
should increase as well seems to be well supported in the U.S. data. The finding
has important implications for the relationship of inequality and redistribution.
If one looked only at aggregate spending, one might think that more inequality
leads to less redistribution, as posited by Bénabou (2000), among others. How-
ever, the per-person transfer to poorer households (i.e., the education quality
provided to households using public schools) does in fact go up. This is possible
because more inequality leads to more targeted transfers, as richer households
opt out of the public system.

The last row of Table 1 examines predictions for fertility rates. We find that states
with more inequality and a higher share of private schooling have a lower fertil-
ity rate. This is in accordance with our model: parents economize on the number
of children if the direct cost of education is high.
  21 Thecorrelation is significant at the 10 percent level for total expenditure per student as well
as mean teacher salary.




                                                30
6.2 Determinants of fertility and public versus private school-
          ing at the household level

We now examine the inner workings of our model more closely with the help
of micro data from the U.S. Census. Our aim is to establish whether the model
paints a realistic picture of the interaction between household income, private
choices on education and fertility, and the quality of public schooling. This will
be useful to assess whether our model indeed provides a plausible mechanism
for generating the observed macro correlations. We draw on data on household
income, family size (i.e., the household head’s own children living in the house-
hold), public versus private schooling (for school-age children), and a number of
demographic controls from the one-percent sample of the 2000 U.S. Census.

In the model, a household’s decisions on fertility and private versus public school-
ing depend on two variables: income and the quality of public schooling (see
Lemma 2 and the preceding discussion). In particular, richer households are pre-
dicted to be more likely to choose private schools and to have lower fertility rates.
The strength of the income effect depends on the quality of public schooling; for
example, if public schooling is of very high quality, even fairly rich households
will use public schools. To examine these predictions, Tables 2 and 3 show regres-
sions of family size and private schooling on household income and a number of
controls.22 We use an ordered logit specification for the fertility choice and a logit
specification for the private education choice. All regressions contain dummy
variables for the age of the household head as well as the state of residence (the
effect of further controls is discussed below).

The first column of each table presents results for regressions that only include
household income in addition to the standard controls. As predicted by the the-
ory, an increase in income is associated with a higher probability of using private
schooling as well as lower fertility.23 However, in this specification the relation-
  22 Inorder to be able to include households that report zero income, we add $10 to household
income before taking logs. The results are qualitatively the same if we shift up incomes by $100
or $500 instead.
  23 The positive effect of income on the probability of private schooling has also been docu-

mented by Cohen-Zada and Justman (2003) and Epple, Figlio, and Romano (2004); see also
Nechyba (2006). However, these studies no not consider fertility choices and the interaction of
the quality of public schooling across states with income effects.


                                              31
     Table 2: Estimation Results: Ordered Logit Regression of Number of Children on Income and Quality of Public
     Education


                                                                                  Measure of quality of public education
                                                                     Total expenditure       Instruction expenditure       Mean teacher
                                                                         per student                per student                salary




32
      Log household income                          -0.012 (-1.11)       -0.808 (3.15)             -0.685 (-3.08)           -0.688 (-1.09)
      Interaction income × quality                                       0.089 (3.15)               0.080 (3.07)            0.063 (1.07)


      Total income effect at average quality -0.012 (-1.11)             -0.013 (-1.27)             -0.013 (-1.26)           -0.013 (-1.13)

     t-Statistics in parentheses (standard errors are clustered by state). Data from 2000 U.S. Census. 453,296 observations (households with
     children). State and age of household dummies in all regressions.
     Table 3: Estimation Results: Logit Regression of Choice of Private Schooling on Income and Quality of Public Edu-
     cation


                                                                                     Measure of quality of public education
                                                                        Total expenditure        Instruction expenditure         Mean teacher
                                                                            per student                 per student                  salary
      Log household income                             0.542 (18.82)        3.815 (5.59)                 3.106 (5.80)             4.838 (2.52)




33
      Interaction income × quality                                         -0.367 (-4.83)               -0.304 (-4.84)           -0.402 (-2.22)


      Total income effect at average quality 0.542 (18.82)                  0.553 (29.34)               0.553 (27.67)            0.550 (22.81)

     t-Statistics in parentheses (standard errors are clustered by state). Data from 2000 U.S. Census. 325,913 observations (households with
     children in school). State and age of household dummies in all regressions. Choice of Private Schooling variable takes the value 1 if at least
     half of the school-age children in the household attend private schools.
ship between household income and fertility is not significant at conventional
levels. The remaining columns focus on the joint effect of household income
and the quality of public schooling in determining private choices. Each regres-
sion contains an additional interaction term of household income with one of our
three measures of the quality of public schooling. Notice that schooling quality is
measured at the state level, not the household level.24 In essence, we are still esti-
mating a micro relationship between household income and private choices, but
we allow the slope of this relationship to vary systematically across states with a
high and a low quality of public education. We find that in both regressions and
for all three measures of the quality of public schooling, the estimated coefficient
on the interaction term is of the opposite sign as the coefficient on income, which
implies that the effect of income on household choices diminishes as the quality
of public schooling goes up. When the interaction term is included, all parameter
estimates are highly significant, with the one exception of the fertility regression
using mean teacher salary as a quality measure.

The size of the interaction terms implies substantial variation in the steepness of
the income-fertility and income-private schooling relationships across states with
a low and high quality of public schooling. In the states with the highest quality
of public education, these relationships are essentially flat. This is exactly what
one should expect based on the theory: states with high-quality public schooling
are close to a fully public regime, i.e., most parents use public schools regardless
of income, and fertility varies little across income groups.

The regression results are robust with respect to a number of changes to the spec-
ification of the model. We have explored sensitivity to racial composition by es-
timating the regressions separately by race and by including race dummies, we
have checked urban/rural differences by including a metropolitan area dummy,
and we have run the regressions on restricted samples that limit the age range
of the included households. Generally, the sign and significance of the interac-
tion term in the two regressions is robust to these changes, as is the sign and
significance of the total income effect in the education equation. The sign of the
  24 The fact that schooling quality is a state-level variable also precludes using it in the regression

directly, because our regressions already contain state dummies. As a robustness test, we also
carried out regressions without state dummies and schooling quality as an included variable,
with overall similar results.


                                                  34
total income effect in the fertility regression turns out to be more sensitive. In
particular, for black and Hispanic households the total income effect is strongly
negative, whereas for white households it is positive. However, when we restrict
the sample to the ages 25–45, the total income effect is once again negative and
significant. This suggests that for older white people, the slope of the relation
between fertility and income can be reversed.25 However, even in the case of a
positive slope, the sign of the interaction term is still the same.


6.3 Inequality, fertility, and schooling across countries

We now turn to the determinants of education systems across countries. Com-
pared to our analysis of education in U.S. states, cross-country data pose addi-
tional difficulties. There are substantial differences in the level of development
and in unobserved variables such as the political system, religious values etc.
across countries which could have independent effects on the variables of inter-
est.26 Doing full justice to the arising empirical issues is beyond the scope of this
paper. As a consequence, we focus on documenting the fundamental correlations
and micro relationships implied by our theory.

The OECD provides internationally comparable data on the relative proportions
of public and private investment in education for the period 1985–1998. In most
countries, private sector expenditure is comprised mainly of household expen-
ditures on tuition and other fees. The exception is Germany, where nearly all
private expenditure is accounted for by contributions from the business sector
to the system of apprenticeship at the upper secondary level. For primary and
lower secondary education, there is little private funding in Germany. In 1998,
  25 To some extent, this finding could be due to the fact that in the Census, we only observe

children who still live in the household. If rich, white households have children relatively late
in life, they would appear to have unusually many children in their household at a time when
other parents’ children have already left to form their own households. This type of effect is not
picked up by a simple age dummy, but can be partially addressed by restricting the age range of
households included in the sample.
  26 The literature contains few empirical studies on the determinants of the mix between public

and private education across countries. One exception is James (1993), who regresses private
enrollments shares for 50 countries around 1980 on a number of determinants, and concludes that
cultural factors such as religious competition and linguistic heterogeneity play an important role.
However, the small number of observations compared to the number of explanatory variables
casts some doubt on the robustness of the results.

                                                35
                                                  45

                                                  40




                Share of private education 1998
                                                  35

                                                  30

                                                  25

                                                  20

                                                  15

                                                  10

                                                  5

                                                  0
                                                   20.0   30.0        40.0         50.0   60.0
                                                                 Gini circa 1970


            Figure 3: Inequality and education systems across countries

the data set contains information on a number of non-OECD countries (Israel,
Uruguay, Czech Republic, Turkey, Argentina, Indonesia, Chile, Peru, Philippines,
and Thailand). With observations on 31 countries, we can investigate whether
inequality is a good predictor of private funding. Computing the correlation
between the Gini coefficient for income inequality in 1970 (from Deininger and
Squire 1996) and the share of private funding in 1998, we find that the correlation
is positive and strong with a coefficient of 0.44 (t-stat=2.64).27 The correlation in-
creases to 0.55 (t-stat=3.55) if we consider only the primary and secondary levels
of education. Figure 3 presents the cross plot of the private share in primary and
secondary education with the Gini coefficient.

We next turn to micro data from the OECD Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA), which comprises data collected in the year 2000 on 15 year-
old students in the principal industrialized countries. It includes a student ques-
tionnaire collecting information about the student’s family and a school ques-
tionnaire that covers information on the extent of public funding and the pub-
lic or private administration of schools. We focus on four variables in the PISA
  27 We use the Gini coefficient in 1970 to address possible reverse causality from schooling to

inequality.

                                                                    36
database. The International Socioeconomic Index (ISEI) captures the attributes
of occupations that converts parents’ education into income. It was obtained by
mapping parents’ occupational codes onto an index of occupational status, de-
veloped by Ganzeboom, De Graaf, and Treiman (1992). This index provides a
rough measure of household income and human capital (unfortunately, house-
hold income itself is not contained in the data base). Using the index, students
are assigned to one of four social classes.28 The second student-specific variable
in our data set is the number of siblings. At the school level, our data set contains
information on the funding sources of schools and whether a school is publicly or
privately run. For school funding, our variable is the percentage of total funding
that stems from government sources, as opposed to fees paid by parents, bene-
factors, or other sources of income.

For each country, we have computed average school characteristics for the four
social classes. For each group, we report the average share of education spend-
ing covered by public sources (the subsidization rate), the share of students in
private schools, and the average fertility rate. The detailed results are provided
in Appendix B. Overall, the findings are once again consistent with the theory:
in the vast majority of cases, participation in private schooling increases and fer-
tility decreases with social status.

An interesting feature of the PISA data is that it covers countries that appear to be
characterized by different schooling regimes. In particular, a number of countries
come close to what could be described as a fully public regime. To investigate
the effects of having a fully public schooling regime, we define countries as fully
public if the difference in the subsidization rate between the highest and lowest
social class is less than five percent.29 The remaining countries are classified as
  28 Typical occupations in the lowest class (between 16 and 35 points on the ISEI scale) include
small-scale farmer, metalworker, mechanic, taxi or truck driver, and waiter/waitress. Between
35 and 53 index points, the most common occupations are bookkeeping, sales, small business
management, and nursing. As the required skills increase, so does the status of the occupation.
Between 54 and 70 points, typical occupations are marketing management, teaching, civil engi-
neering, and accounting. In the highest class (from 71 to 90 points), occupations include medicine,
university teaching, and law.
   29 This group includes Hungary, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland,

Latvia, The Netherlands, Norway, Russia and Sweden. Appendix B also provides the propor-
tion of students attending private schools. The school type is determined by the question “Is
your school a public or a private school.” Here public schools are those managed by a public


                                                37
being in the segregation regime. We also separately consider the five countries
with the highest difference in the public subsidization rate of the lowest and the
highest social class (Austria, Australia, Brazil, Mexico, and Spain). In this group,
the difference between the subsidization rate of schools attended by members of
the top and bottom social classes averages 25 percent.

Table 4 provides a number of statistics for the groups of countries with different
education regimes. Not surprisingly, in the fully public group the level of public
subsidization is particularly high with an average of 96 percent. These countries
are also characterized by low income inequality (average Gini: 24.7), and the
fertility differential between the bottom and top social classes is only 0.36.30 In
contrast, the group of countries in the segregation regime has an average Gini of
34.6 and a fertility differential of 0.47. The five countries with the highest level
of segregation also top the list in terms of inequality and differential fertility: the
average Gini coefficient is 44.6 in this group, and the fertility differential between
the bottom and top social classes amounts to 0.59. The last row of Table 4 presents
correlation coefficients between the Gini coefficient and the other variables across
all countries in the data set. As predicted by the theory, in countries with higher
income inequality average public funding is lower, the subsidization rate is more
sensitive to social class, and fertility differentials are larger.31



6.4 Public education spending and democracy

We now turn to the final implication of our theory, namely the effect of democ-
racy on education politics. Given that data on private spending on education
education authority, a government agency, or a governing board that is appointed either by the
government directly or elected by public franchise. While we could have used this variable to
define countries as fully public, for our purposes the public subsidization rate is a better indica-
tor of public versus private schooling than the school type, because “private school” can mean
different things in different countries. In Belgium, for example, most schools are nominally pri-
vate, yet are entirely publicly funded. Nevertheless, using the school type variable instead of the
school funding variable leads to similar results.
  30 In all the countries we find that the fertility of the lowest social class exceeds the fertility of

the highest social group. In a majority of countries, the relationship between fertility and social
status is monotonically decreasing; in some countries, it is U-shaped.
  31 One concern here is a reverse causality link whereby school segregation leads to more in-

equality. The problem is mitigated by the fact that we use Gini coefficients measured 20 years
before the observed schooling outcomes.

                                                  38
                           Table 4: Summary Statistics for Countries with Different Education Regimes


                                     Number of    Gini in     Share of      Funding difference     Fertility differential
                                     countries   the 1980s public funding between poor and rich   between poor and rich
     Fully public regime                11         24.7         0.96               0.00                    0.36




39
     Segregation regime                 18         34.6         0.81               0.14                    0.47
     Top 5 most segregated               5         44.6         0.69               0.25                    0.69


     Correlation with Gini                                   -0.58 (3.65)       0.76 (5.96)             0.53 (3.21)


      t-Statistics in parentheses.
is available for only a few countries, we focus on public spending on education
as a fraction of GDP. Here we have a sample of 158 countries covering the pe-
riod 1970-2002 (with some missing observations; data from World Bank Devel-
opment Indicators). We divide the sample into three groups, based on their level
of democracy. As a democracy indicator, we use the political-rights index from
the Freedom in the World Country Ratings. The index lies on a one-to-seven
scale, with one representing the highest degree of freedom. We assign the coun-
tries into three groups, where “free” countries have an index of one, “partially
free” have values from two to four, and “non-free” countries have values from
five to seven.

Table 5 displays the mean and variance of public spending on education for the
three groups of countries. The mean of spending is increasing with democracy,
whereas the variance is decreasing. Figure 4 presents a density estimation of the
entire distribution of public spending as a share of GDP for the three groups.
The density for partially free and non-free countries displays a lower mean and
a higher variance. Two-tailed tests of whether the differences are significant are
provided in Table 6. The mean in democratic (free) countries is significantly dif-
ferent from the one in the two other groups, and the variance in the non-free
countries is significantly higher than in the partially free-countries, which is it-
self higher than in the free group. These findings are in line with the predictions
of our theory for the case of an uneven distribution of political power (see Propo-
sitions 4 and 5). Clearly, our mechanism is not the only possible explanation for
the observed high variance in public educations pending in non-democracies,
but it is encouraging that the predictions of the model are in line with data along
this dimension as well.



7 Conclusions

The education of its citizens is one of main areas of government intervention in
every country in the world. At the same time, the government is generally not
the only provider of education; education systems often display a juxtaposition
of public and privately funded institutions. The degree of private involvement
in the provision of education varies a great deal over different countries, going

                                        40
 Table 5: Public Spending on Education in Democracies and Non-Democracies

                Democracy index                Observations     Mean        Variance
                      Free (= 1)                     1020       4.96          3.08
          Partially free (1 < x ≤ 4)                 836        4.11          7.07
             Non-free (4 < x ≤ 7)                    644        4.07          8.33



              0.25


                0.2


              0.15


                0.1


              0.05


                                2        4           6      8          10

             Legend: Free (solid line), partially free (dots), non-free (dashes).
             Note: Density estimation using the NonParametrix.m Package
             by Bernard Gress, 2004

       Figure 4: Density of public education spending (percent of GDP)



Table 6: Mean and Variance Tests for Public Education Spending in Democracies
and Non-Democracies

                          Mean difference test                  Variance ratio test
                        Partially free       Non-free       Partially free      Non-free
         Free            0.85 (0.00)         0.89 (0.00)      0.44 (0.00)      0.37 (0.00)
    Partially free                           0.03 (0.82)                       0.85 (0.03)


     p-values in parentheses.


                                                41
from fully public systems as in some European countries to segregated systems
as in parts of the United States. In this paper, we try to understand how countries
choose the mix of public and private education.

We first conclude that high inequality maps into a segregated education system.
In a segregated system, the quality of public schools is sufficiently low for rich
households to prefer paying for private schools to enhance the education of their
children. When inequality is low, on the other hand, the rich decide to send
their children to public schools, so that they avoid paying for education twice
(first through taxes, second through private schools). The prediction of a strong
relationship between inequality and the extent of public schooling is in line with
the empirical evidence. In both cross-country data and cross-state data in the
U.S., we find that public spending on education is negatively related to income
inequality.

Turning to the role of political power, we find that the quality and extent of pub-
lic schooling generally increases with the political weight of the poor. In addi-
tion, if the poor are given at least equal weight in the political system, there is a
unique equilibrium outcome. In societies that are politically dominated by the
rich, on the other hand, multiple equilibria may arise. The reason is that when
the rich are in charge, there is a complementarity between the number of rich
people participating in public schools and their quality. For given initial con-
ditions, such a country may either have a high-quality public schooling system
in which many or all of the rich participate, or a low-quality system with all
the rich using private schools. Despite the multiplicity, however, we find that
spending on public education is never higher in a society dominated by the rich
than in an otherwise identical economy where the poor have equal power. The
model therefore provides an explanation for the observation that non-democratic
countries spend on average a smaller fraction of GDP on public education than
democracies, whereas the variance of spending across countries is higher among
non-democracies.

While we have concentrated on cross-sectional evidence, another important ques-
tion for future research is why public education was first introduced in the nine-
teenth century during the second phase of the Industrial Revolution. Galor and
Moav (2006) argue that in this period capitalists started to have an interest in pub-

                                         42
lic education, because of complementarities between physical and human capital.
Therefore, technological change strengthening this complementarity may have
contributed to the introduction of public schooling. Galor, Moav, and Vollrath
(2006) extend this analysis by distinguishing different sources of wealth. If land
is less complementary to human capital than physical capital, a conflict of interest
arises between land-owners and capitalists. The outcome of this conflict depends
on the distribution of wealth and land-ownership.

In our model, public schooling always arises if political power is equally shared.
The theory therefore points to the expansion of voting rights in the nineteenth
century as a key explanation for the introduction of public schooling. This still
leaves open the question why voting rights were expanded in the first place. The
theory of Galor and Moav (2006) offers one potential explanation. Acemoglu and
Robinson (2000), however, point in a different direction: the rich shared power
in order to avoid the threat of a revolution. In either case, given that the poor
did gain political influence, in our model the introduction of public schooling
is a necessary consequence. Once public education is in place, the size of the
public system depends on the evolution of the income distribution. To this end,
the model points to the declining income inequality observed around the turn of
the century as a potential explanation for the large expansion of public education
that followed its initial introduction.




                                          43
References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend the
   Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1167–99.
Alderman, Harold, Peter F. Orazem, and Elizabeth M. Paterno. 2001. “School
   Quality, School Cost, and the Public/Private School Choices of Low-income
   Households in Pakistan.” Journal of Human Resources 36 (2): 304–326.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik. 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic
   Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (2): 465–90.
Bedi, Arjun S. and Ashish Garg. 2000. “The Effectiveness of Private versus
   Public Schools: The Case of Indonesia.” Journal of Development Economics 61
   (2): 463–494.
Bénabou, Roland. 1996. “Inequality and Growth.” NBER Macroeconomics An-
    nual, pp. 11–74.
     . 2000. “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract.”
   American Economic Review 90 (1): 96–129.
Bernheim, Douglas and Michael Whinston. 1986. “Menu Auctions, Resource
   Allocation, and Economic Influence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (1):
   1–31.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. 1991. “Public Provision of Private Goods
   and the Redistribution of Income.” American Economic Review 81 (4): 979–84.
Cohen-Zada, Danny and Moshe Justman. 2003. “The Political Economy of
  School Choice: Linking Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Urban Economics
  54 (2): 277–308.
Coughlin, Peter and Shmuel Nitzan. 1981. “Electoral Outcomes with Proba-
  bilistic Voting and Nash Social Welfare Maxima.” Journal of Public Economics
  15 (1): 113–21.
de la Croix, David and Matthias Doepke. 2003a. “Inequality and Growth: Why
   Differential Fertility Matters.” American Economic Review 93 (4): 1091–113.
      . 2003b. “To Segregate or to Integrate: Education Politics and Democ-
   racy.” UCLA Department of Economics Working Paper No. 831.
       . 2004. “Public versus Private Education when Differential Fertility Mat-
   ters.” Journal of Development Economics 73 (2): 607–29.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire. 1996. “Measuring Income Inequality: A New
   Database.” Development Discussion Paper No. 537, Harvard Institute for
   International Development.


                                      44
Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insur-
   ance, and Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91 (3): 401–19.
Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2005. “The Macroeconomics of Child
  Labor Regulation.” American Economic Review 95 (5): 1492–524.
Epple, Dennis and Richard E. Romano. 1996a. “Ends Against the Middle: Deter-
  mining Public Service Provision when there are Private Alternatives.” Jour-
  nal of Public Economics 62 (3): 297–325.
      . 1996b. “Public Provision of Private Goods.” Journal of Political Economy
   104 (1): 57–84.
Epple, Dennis, David Figlio, and Richard Romano. 2004. “Competition Between
  Private and Public Schools: Testing Stratification and Pricing Predictions.”
  Journal of Public Economics 88 (7): 1215–45.
Fernández, Raquel and Richard Rogerson. 1995. “On the Political Economy of
   Education Subsidies.” Review of Economic Studies 62 (2): 249–62.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2006. “Das Human-Kapital: A Theory of the
   Demise of the Class Structure.” Review of Economic Studies 73 (1): 85–117.
Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath. 2006. “Inequality in Land
   Ownership, the Emergence of Human Capital Promoting Institutions and
   the Great Divergence.” Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University.
Ganzeboom, Harry B.G., Paul M. De Graaf, and Donald J. Treiman. 1992. “A
  Standard International Socio-Economic Index of Occupational Status.” Social
  Science Research 21 (1): 1–56.
Glomm, Gerhard and Debra M. Patterson. 2002. “Endogenous Public Expendi-
   tures on Education.” Unpublished Manuscript, Indiana University.
Glomm, Gerhard and B. Ravikumar. 1992. “Public Versus Private Investment
   in Human Capital: Endogenous Growth and Income Inequality.” Journal of
   Political Economy 100 (4): 818–834.
      . 1998. “Opting Out of Publicly Provided Services: A Majority Voting
   Result.” Social Choice and Welfare 15 (2): 197–99.
Goldhaber, Dan D. 1996. “Public and Private High Schools: Is School Choice
   the Answer to the Productivity Problem?” Economics of Education Review 15
   (2): 93–109.
Gradstein, Mark and Moshe Justman. 1997. “Democratic Choice of an Educa-
   tion System: Implications for Growth and Income Distribution.” Journal of
   Economic Growth 2 (2): 169–83.
Hassler, John, Jose V. Rodriguez Mora, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti.
  2003. “The Survival of the Welfare State.” American Economic Review 93 (1):
  87–112.

                                       45
James, Estelle. 1993. “Why Do Different Countries Choose a Different Public-
   Private Mix of Educational Sevices?” Journal of Human Resources 28 (3): 571–
   592.
Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro. 1985. “Network Externalities, Competition,
   and Compatibility.” American Economic Review 75 (3): 424–440.
Kingdon, Geeta G. 1996. “The Quality and Efficiency of Private and Public
   Education: A Case-study of Urban India.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
   Statistics 58 (1): 55–80.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1991. “Increasing Returns, Industrialization, and Inde-
  terminacy of Equilibrium.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2): 617–50.
Moav, Omer. 2005. “Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty.” Economic
  Journal 115 (500): 88–110.
Neal, Derek. 1997. “The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational
  Achievement.” Journal of Labor Economics 15 (1): 98–123.
Nechyba, Thomas J. 2006. “Income and Peer Quality Sorting Public and Private
  Schools.” Chapter 22 of Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 2, edited
  by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 1994. “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?
   Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review 84 (3): 600–21.
      . 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy. Cambridge, Mas-
   sachusetts: MIT Press.
Ramsey, Frank P. 1927. “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation.” Economic
  Journal 37 (145): 47–61.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald
  Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2004.
  “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0.” [Machine-readable
  database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.
Saint-Paul, Gilles and Thierry Verdier. 1997. “Power, Distributive Conflicts and
   Multiple Growth Paths.” Journal of Economic Growth 2 (2): 155–168.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1974. “The Demand for Education in Public and Private
    School Systems.” Journal of Public Economics 3 (4): 349–85.
Toma, Eugenia F. 1996. “Public Funding and Private Schooling Across Coun-
  tries.” Journal of Law and Economics 39 (2): 121–48.
Vandenberghe, Vincent and Stéphane Robin. 2003. “Does Private Education
   Matter? Recent Evidence from International OECD Data.” Unpublished
   Manuscript, IRES, Université catholique de Louvain.



                                      46
A Technical Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1: From budget constraint (2) total spending on children is given
by xφn + ne. Substituting either n = ns and e = 0 or n = ne and e = ηφx/(1 − η)
yields that
                                             γ
                               xφn + ne =       x.
                                          1+γ
Taxable income therefore is
                                                      1
                               x(1 − φn) − ne =          x.
                                                     1+γ

                                                                                          
Proof of Lemma 2: We compute the level x such that a household with in-
come x is indifferent between public and private by solving u[x, v, ns , 0, [E](s)] =
u[x, v, ne , e, 0]:

                         1−η                                         1
                  x̃ =       [E](s)               with: δ = (1 − η) η .(6)
                         δφη

x̃ is bigger than zero and depends positively on [E](s). If x is greater (resp.
smaller) than x̃, u[x, v, ns , 0, [E](s)] is smaller (resp. greater) than u[x, v, ne , e, 0],
and the household prefers private (resp. public) education, which proves the
Lemma.                                                                                    
Proof of Proposition 1: The result follows from an application of the Brouwer
fixed point theorem. Given (11), the equilibrium expected schooling quality E[s]
and actual quality s lie in the interval:
                                                       
                                              ηφ
                                E[s], s ∈          , ηφ                     (22)
                                            1 + γη

We are now going to define a mapping Δ from E[s] into s which maps this interval
into itself. Since an equilibrium requires E[s] = s, a unique equilibrium exists if
the mapping has unique fixed point.
Given expected schooling quality E[s], according to Lemma 2 and equation (7)
the fraction of families participating in public education is given by:
                                     
                                         1−η          1−σ
                Ψ(E[s]) = max min              E[s] −       ,1 ,0 .
                                        2σδφη          2σ

This function is (weakly) increasing in E[s]; the higher the expected quality of
public education, the more parents are going to prefer using the public sector.

                                             47
We can now use (11) to map the expected education quality E[s] into the actual
education quality s that would result from the political system if fraction Ψ(E[s])
of families participated in the public system. This education quality s = Δ(E[s])
is given by:

                   ηφ                         ηφ
  Δ(E[s]) =                 =                                                      .   (23)
              1 + γηΨ(E[s])                   1−η
                              1 + γη max min 2σδφη E[s] −          1−σ
                                                                    2σ , 1       ,0

An equilibrium is characterized by a fixed point of Δ(E[s]), i.e., a schooling level
s that satisfies s = Δ(s), so that the schooling quality s that is expected by the par-
ents is identical to the one actually implemented in the political process. Given
(23), Δ is a continuous, weakly decreasing function mapping the closed interval
given in (22) into itself. The mapping therefore crosses the 45-degree line exactly
once, and a unique equilibrium exists.                                               
Proof of Proposition 2: We first show that the private regime is not an equilib-
rium outcome. In a reductio ad absurdum argument, we would start by assum-
ing the existence of such a case. We start from the optimal value of s given in
Equation (11). From this equation, we observe that as Ψ tends to zero, s tends
to ηφ. With this quality of public schooling, the equilibrium income threshold
(from Equation (6) is: x̃[ηφ] = (1 − η)/δ. For private education to be an equi-
librium, this threshold should be lower than or equal to lowest income 1 − σ.
Given the definition of δ = (1 − η)1/η , we have that δ < 1 − η which implies
x[ηφ] > 1 > 1 − σ. Hence, with a quality of public schools going to ηφ, it is
always optimal for the poorest person to chose public education. Therefore, the
private regime cannot arise in equilibrium.
If the public regime is an equilibrium, it has Ψ = 1 and s = ηφ/(1 + γη) (from
Equation (11)). For this to be an equilibrium, we need the richest person to send
his children to public school, which requires x̃[ηφ/(1 + γη)] ≥ 1 + σ. This condi-
tion can be written:
                                   1−η
                                           ≥ 1 + σ.
                                δ(1 + γη)
If γ ≥ γ̂ = (1 − δ − η)/(δη), the right hand side of the inequality is below 1, and
the inequality can never be satisfied. This condition links the taste for children γ
to the weight of education η independently of σ. If γ < γ̂, the above inequality
can be rewritten as a condition on σ, which in the condition of the Proposition.
It remains to show that γ < γ̂ ⇔ Ψ > 1/2. Ψ = 1/2 implies that the equilibrium
is segregated. We solve for the equilibrium value of Ψ, which is given by:
                              
      −γ δ η (1 − σ) − 2 δ σ + 8 γ δ η σ (1 − δ(1 − σ) − η) + (γ δ η(1 − σ) + 2 δ σ)2
Ψ=
                                         4γδησ


                                          48
There is only one value of γ for which this big expression is equal to 1/2, and it
is γ̂. Since Ψ is a continuous function of γ, and that we already know that it can
be equal to 1 for certain values of σ if γ < γ̂, we conclude that Ψ > 1/2 for γ < γ̂
and Ψ < 1/2 for γ > γ̂.                                                          
Proof of Proposition 3: In the interior regime (segregation), we have from (6)
and (7):
                                     1−η
                                      δφη s − (1 − σ)
                               Ψ=
                                             2σ
Taking the derivative with respect to s, we obtain
                                                 
                       2σ  − 2
                                 1−η
                                     s −  (1 − σ)           
                 ∂Ψ              δφη                  1 1
                     =                              =     −Ψ .
                 ∂σ                2σ                 σ 2

Hence,
                                              ∂Ψ      1
                        If Ψ ∈ (0, 1),           >0⇔Ψ< .                        (24)
                                              ∂σ      2
In the public regime,

                          Ψ = 1,         ⇒        ∂Ψ/∂σ = 0.                    (25)

Proposition 2 together with (12), (24) and (25) imply Proposition 3.               
Proof of Proposition 4: As in the proof of Proposition 1, we will proceed by
analyzing the mapping from expected schooling quality E[s] into actual quality
s. Given (16), a schooling quality of zero is now possible, so that E[s] and s lie in
the following interval:
                                  E[s], s ∈ [0, ηφ]                              (26)
We are now going to define a mapping Δ̄ from E[s] into s which maps this interval
into itself. Since an equilibrium requires E[s] = s, any equilibrium corresponds
to a fixed point of the mapping.
Given expected schooling quality E[s], according to Lemma 2 and equation (7)
the fraction of families participating in public education is given by:
                                     
                                         1−η          1−σ
                Ψ(E[s]) = max min              E[s] −       ,1 ,0 .     (27)
                                        2σδφη          2σ

This function is (weakly) increasing in E[s]; the higher the expected quality of
public education, the more parents are going to prefer using the public sector.
We can now use (16) to map the expected education quality E[s] into the actual
education quality s that would result from the political system if fraction Ψ(E[s])

                                             49
of families participated in the public system. This education quality s = Δ̄(E[s])
is given by:
                   
                                ηφ (1 − σ − x̄ + 2σΨ(E[s]))
    Δ̄(E[s]) = max                                                      , 0 . (28)
                     Ψ(E[s]) (γη (1 − σ − x̄ + 2σΨ(E[s])) + 1 + σ − x̄)

An equilibrium is characterized by a fixed point of Δ̄(E[s]), i.e., a schooling level
s that satisfies s = Δ̄(s), so that the schooling quality s that is expected by the par-
ents is identical to the one actually implemented in the political process. Given
Ψ(E[s]) and the properties of (16) stated in the text, Δ̄ is a continuous function
mapping the closed interval given in (26) into itself. Due to the Brouwer fixed
point theorem, at least one equilibrium exists. Also notice that Ψ = 0 is always
an equilibrium, since Δ̄(E[0]) = 0.
Now assume that conditions γ < γ̂ and σ < σ̂ are satisfied. We want to establish
that in this case pure public schooling Ψ = 1 is an equilibrium. In (28), the
schooling quality corresponding to Ψ = 1 is s = ηφ/(1 + γη). The first term
inside the minimization in (27) satisfies for this s:
      1−η      1−σ       1−η         1−σ
            s−     =             −
      2σδφη     2σ   2σδ(1 + γη)      2σ
                                                                
                             1           1−η            1−η
                   ≥                           − 2−
                          1−η
                     2 δ(1+γη) − 1     δ(1 + γη)      (1 + γη)δ
                                                
                          1          1−η
                   = 1−η                     − 1 = 1,
                             − 1  δ(1 + γη)
                     δ(1+γη)

where γ < γ̂ guarantees that the right-hand side of the first equation is positive,
and the inequality follows from σ ≤ σ̂. The public education education quality
s = ηφ/(1 + γη) is therefore mapped into Ψ(s) = 1, which, in turn, implies
Ψ(s) = s. Therefore, if pure public schooling is an equilibrium under an equal
division of political power, it is still an equilibrium with a voting threshold x̄ <
1 − σ. Since pure private schooling is always an equilibrium, we have at least
two equilibria in this case. Next, notice that the slope of Δ̄(s) is zero at s = 0,
since for sufficiently small s we still have Ψ = 0. Also, at s = ηφ/(1 + γη) the
slope of Δ̄(s) is zero as well, since given σ < σ̂ we have Ψ = 1 in a neighborhood
of s = ηφ/(1 + γη). Given that Δ̄(s) is continuous, it has to cross the 45-degree
line at least one more time in between those values, implying the existence of a
third equilibrium, which features segregation.                                     




                                          50
Proof of Proposition 5: We have previously established that:
                       ⎧                        ⎫
                       ⎨         ηφ             ⎬     ηφ
                  max                       , 0   ≤          ,
                       ⎩ (1+σ−x̄)Ψ + γηΨ ⎭ 1 + γηΨ
                           (1−σ− x̄+2σΨ)

where the left-hand side is the schooling level that arises for a given Ψ as a given
by (16), and the right-hand side is the level that arises with equal political power
as given by (11). Since the reverse mapping from a given schooling quality into
Ψ does not depend on the distribution of political power, this inequality implies
that the mappings Δ and Δ̄ defined in the proofs of Propositions 1 and 4 satisfy
Δ̄(s) ≤ Δ(s). Equilibria in the two environments corresponds to levels of s that
satisfy s = Δ̄(s) and s = Δ(s), respectively. It was established in the proof of
Proposition 1 that Δ(s) is weakly decreasing and crosses the 45-degree line only
once from above. Since Δ̄(s) ≤ Δ(s), it then follows that Δ̄ cannot cross the
45-degree line above the unique crossing point for Δ(s), so that we have s̄ ≤ s.
Finally, the relationship between s and v does not depend on the distribution
of political power, and taxes are monotonically increasing in s, so that we have
v̄ ≤ v.                                                                            




                                           51
B PISA Data: Education, Fertility, and Social Status

   Country          Social    Number of      Subsidization     Percent in      Fertility
                    status   observations        rate        private schools

   Australia        16-35        939             76.95            NA             3.30
                    36-53       1777             72.33            NA             3.05
                    54-70       1607             65.04            NA             2.94
                    71-90        542             58.77            NA             2.83

   Austria          16-35        874             95.52            4.46           2.81
                    36-53       2213             91.60           9.26            2.58
                    54-70        992             86.19           16.23           2.40
                    71-90        276             80.62           26.09           2.63

   Belgium          16-35       1558             89.21           68.87           3.01
                    36-53       2388             88.08           75.63           2.59
                    54-70       1573             85.46           81.25           2.66
                    71-90        516             84.76           83.33           2.75

   Brazil           16-35       1699             87.93            2.35           3.67
                    36-53       831              79.52           10.59           3.36
                    54-70       926              66.77           23.00           3.07
                    71-90       125              41.60           49.60           2.86

   Canada           16-35       6502             90.36            0.00           3.07
                    36-53       9536             89.94            0.00           2.84
                    54-70       9006             87.83            0.00           2.81
                    71-90       2302             85.12            0.00           2.86

   Czech Republic   16-35       1064             93.07            7.33           2.81
                    36-53       2741             94.06            6.20           2.48
                    54-70       1141             94.71            6.22           2.32
                    71-90        309             95.25            6.47           2.19

   Denmark          16-35        883             95.11           20.50           3.05
                    36-53       1445             94.75           23.18           2.81
                    54-70       1130             94.42           24.78           2.88
                    71-90        271             94.50           25.46           2.87

   Finland          16-35       1010             99.84            1.58           3.26
                    36-53       1911             99.85            3.30           2.94
                    54-70       1453             99.83            3.51           2.86
                    71-90        381             99.78            4.72           2.88

   France           16-35       1191             78.29           22.50           3.14
                    36-53       1443             75.57           21.83           2.62
                    54-70        929             73.36           20.67           2.61
                    71-90        268             69.29           26.12           2.89


                                            52
Country       Social    Number of     Subsidization     Percent in      Fertility
              status   observations       rate        private schools

Germany       16-35        887             97.89           2.03           2.77
              36-53       1970             97.84           3.40           2.46
              54-70       1105             96.56           6.52           2.38
              71-90        357             96.11           7.84           2.46

Greece        16-35       1278             85.63           1.10           2.68
              36-53       1447             87.02          2.07            2.44
              54-70       1074             82.60          4.38            2.31
              71-90        280             72.52          15.71           2.24

Hungary       16-35       1022             85.76           3.82           2.74
              36-53       2070             86.68           4.01           2.42
              54-70       1281             88.20           3.51           2.30
              71-90        261             90.18           6.13           2.38

Iceland       16-35        572             99.58           0.00           3.80
              36-53       1300             99.52           0.62           3.46
              54-70        926             99.10           1.30           3.37
              71-90        364             98.82           1.92           3.46

Ireland       16-35        990             94.68          50.71           3.94
              36-53       1463             91.43          63.98           3.52
              54-70       1040             87.83          72.21           3.33
              71-90        183             81.23          78.69           3.25

Italy         16-35       1391             79.47           2.16           2.45
              36-53       1995             74.50           5.81           2.30
              54-70        896             74.53           5.80           2.22
              71-90        281             71.17           6.05           2.34

Korea         16-35       1554             53.63          47.23           2.46
              36-53       1840             48.12          50.00           2.25
              54-70        803             46.47          49.69           2.18
              71-90         96             42.19          45.83           2.20

Mexico        16-35       1607             44.74           3.17           4.33
              36-53       1134             40.15          17.20           3.74
              54-70        619             34.52          33.60           3.39
              71-90        222             29.87          49.55           2.95

Netherlands   16-35        480             94.93          72.92           3.09
              36-53        739             94.59          77.00           2.80
              54-70        807             93.86          76.70           2.79
              71-90        153             94.85          71.90           2.86




                                      53
Country          Social    Number of      Subsidization     Percent in      Fertility
                 status   observations        rate        private schools

New Zealand      16-35       643              84.82            0.78           3.56
                 36-53       1275             81.16           3.61            3.20
                 54-70       1041             78.20           5.86            3.07
                 71-90       339              73.19           12.39           2.86

Norway           16-35       418              99.57            0.72           3.40
                 36-53       1737             99.71            0.63           2.98
                 54-70       1148             99.53            1.13           2.99
                 71-90       538              99.39            1.12           2.95

Poland           16-35       1052             94.78           0.38            3.07
                 36-53       1449             92.08           2.00            2.75
                 54-70       564              91.24            4.08           2.49
                 71-90       156              82.51           13.46           2.45

Portugal         16-35       1843             89.10            7.27           2.67
                 36-53       1501             86.67            6.46           2.33
                 54-70       747              83.58            8.17           2.23
                 71-90       278              77.73            7.55           2.28

Russia           16-35       1594             94.19            0.00           2.91
                 36-53       2742             93.38            0.00           2.71
                 54-70       1135             92.94            0.00           2.66
                 71-90       828              94.15            0.00           2.44

Spain            16-35       2078             90.92           24.01           2.60
                 36-53       2020             82.93           42.48           2.36
                 54-70       902              73.21           55.21           2.40
                 71-90       387              59.13           68.22           2.50

Switzerland      16-35       1290             98.28            2.56           2.93
                 36-53       2398             96.20           5.50            2.58
                 54-70       1351             93.73           8.44            2.54
                 71-90       582              89.72           13.40           2.68

United Kingdom   16-35       1858             98.24           0.65            3.44
                 36-53       3166             96.50           2.46            2.99
                 54-70       2276             89.99           8.92            2.82
                 71-90       856              84.93           14.02           2.82

United States    16-35        584             94.01            4.11           3.80
                 36-53        840             92.42            5.12           3.54
                 54-70        899             92.84            5.01           3.10
                 71-90        202             87.18            7.92           3.02




                                         54
