                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       GLOBALIZATION AND MONETARY CONTROL

                                         Michael Woodford

                                        Working Paper 13329
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13329


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




Prepared for the NBER conference on International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, Girona, Spain,
June 11-13, 2007. I would like to thank Pierpaolo Benigno, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, David Romer,
Argia Sbordone and Lars Svensson for helpful discussions and comments on earlier drafts, Luminita
Stevens for research assistance, and the (U.S.) National Science Foundation for research support through
a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Globalization and Monetary Control
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 13329
August 2007
JEL No. E31,E52,F41,F42

                                             ABSTRACT

It has recently become popular to argue that globalization has had or will soon have dramatic consequences
for the nature of the monetary transmission mechanism, and it is sometimes suggested that this could
threaten the ability of national central banks to control inflation within their borders, at least in the
absence of coordination of policy with other central banks. In this paper, I consider three possible
mechanisms through which it might be feared that globalization can undermine the ability of monetary
policy to control inflation: by making liquidity premia a function of "global liquidity" rather than the
supply of liquidity by a national central bank alone; by making real interest rates dependent on the
global balance between saving and investment rather than the balance in one country alone; or by making
inflationary pressure a function of "global slack" rather than a domestic output gap alone. These three
fears relate to potential changes in the form of the three structural equations of a basic model of the
monetary transmission mechanism: the LM equation, the IS equation, and the AS equation respectively.
I review the consequences of global integration of financial markets, final goods markets, and factor
markets for the form of each of these parts of the monetary transmission mechanism, and find that
globalization, even of a much more thorough sort than has yet occurred, is unlikely to weaken the
ability of national central banks to control the dynamics of inflation.

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
michael.woodford@columbia.edu
    Concern has recently been expressed in a variety of quarters that the problems
facing central banks may be substantially complicated by the increasing globalization
of goods markets, factor markets, and financial markets in recent years. Some of
the more alarmist views suggest that the very ability of national central banks to
materially influence the dynamics of inflation in their countries through monetary
policy actions may be undermined by globalization. According to such accounts,
the recently observed low and stable inflation in many parts of the world should
be attributed mainly to favorable (and likely transient) global developments rather
than to the sound policies of central banks in those parts of the world; and rather
than congratulating themselves on how skilled they have become at the conduct of
monetary stabilization policy, central bankers should instead live in dread of the day
when the implacable global market forces instead turn against them, making a return
of inflation all but inevitable.
    In this paper I consider a variety of reasons why globalization might be expected to
weaken the control of national central banks over inflation within their borders. These
correspond to three distinct aspects of the transmission mechanism for monetary
policy: the link between central-bank actions and overnight nominal interest rates
(in a conventional 3-equation model, the extent to which it is possible for central-bank
policy to shift the “LM curve”); the link between real interest rates and the balance
between saving and investment in the economy (described by the “IS curve”); and
the link between variations in domestic real activity and inflation (described by the
“AS curve”).
    On the one hand, it might be thought that in a globalized world, it is “global liq-
uidity” that should determine world interest rates rather than the supply of liquidity
by a single central bank (especially a small one); thus one might fear that a small
central bank will no longer have any instrument with which to shift the LM curve.
Alternatively, it might be thought that changes in the balance between investment
and saving in one country should matter little for the common world level of real
interest rates, so that the “IS curve” should become perfectly horizontal even if the
LM curve could be shifted. It might then be feared that loss of control over domestic
real interest rates would eliminate any leverage of domestic monetary policy over do-
mestic spending or inflation. Or as still another possibility, it might be thought that
inflation should cease to depend on economic slack in one country alone (especially a
small one), but rather upon “global slack”; in this case the AS curve would become
horizontal, implying that even if domestic monetary policy can be effectively used to


                                          1
control domestic aggregate demand, this might not allow any control over domestic
inflation.
     I take up each of these possibilities, by discussing the effects of openness (of goods
markets, of factor markets, and of financial markets) on each of these three parts of
a “new Keynesian” model of the monetary transmission mechanism. I first consider
each argument in the context of a canonical open-economy monetary model (following
the exposition by Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 2002), and show that openness need not
have any of the kinds of effects that I have just proposed. In each case, I also consider
possible variants of the standard model in which the effects of globalization might
be more extreme. These cases are not always intended to be regarded as especially
realistic, but are taken up in an effort to determine if there are conditions under
which the fear of globalization would be justified. Yet I find it difficult to construct
scenarios under which globalization would interfere in any substantial way with the
ability of domestic monetary policy to maintain control over the dynamics of domestic
inflation.
     It is true that, in a globalized economy, foreign developments will be among the
sources of economic disturbances to which it will be appropriate for a central bank to
respond, in order for it to achieve its stabilization goals. But there is little reason to
fear that the capacity of national central banks to stabilize domestic inflation, without
having to rely upon coordinated action with other central banks, will be weakened
by increasing openness of national economies. Thus it will continue to be appropri-
ate to hold national central banks responsible for domestic inflation outcomes, and
confidence regarding the future outlook for inflation remains justified in the case of
national central banks that have demonstrated vigilance in controlling inflation thus
far.


1     International Financial Integration and the Scope
      for National Monetary Policies
I shall first consider the implications of the international integration of financial mar-
kets for the monetary transmission mechanism. I consider this issue first because
there can be little doubt that financial markets are already, to an important extent,
global markets. The volume of cross-border financial claims of all sorts has grown


                                           2
explosively over the past quarter century, and real interest rates in different countries
have been observed to be more strongly correlated as well (Kose et al., 2006).
     It is sometimes argued that increased integration of international financial markets
should imply that interest rates in each country will come to be determined largely by
world conditions rather than domestic conditions. It is then feared that as a result,
domestic monetary policy will come to have little leverage over domestic interest
rates. Rogoff (2006, pp. 272-273) suggests that this is already occurring, and argues
that even large central banks like the Fed are able to affect financial markets as much
as they are only thanks to the fact that many other central banks tend to follow their
policy decisions. That is, Rogoff argues that even though “individual central banks’
monetary policies matter less in a globalized world,” this “does not imply that central
banks have less influence over real interest rates collectively.” To the extent that this
is true, it would seem to imply a substantial reduction in the ability of national central
banks to use domestic monetary policy as an instrument of stabilization policy. It
might be thought to present a strong argument for explicit agreements among central
banks for the coordination of policy, and perhaps even for global monetary union.
One might expect that especially in the case of a small country, that can have only a
correspondingly small effect on the global balance between investment and savings,
domestic monetary policy should cease to be useful for controlling aggregate domestic
expenditure or domestic inflation.
     In this section of the paper, I consider whether such inferences are valid, by analyz-
ing the connection between real interest rates and aggregate demand in a two-country
model with fully integrated international financial markets. Here I focus solely on the
way in which equilibrium real interest rates must be consistent with the relation that
exists between the economy’s time path of output on the one hand and the private
sector’s preferences over alternative time paths of consumption on the other — the
structural relations that correspond to the “IS curve” of a canonical closed-economy
model. I defer until the following section the question of how globalization might
affect the central bank’s ability to influence domestic interest rates owing to changes
in the demand for central-bank liabilities. For the moment, I shall take it for granted
that a central bank is able to shift the “LM curve,” and ask how that affects the
aggregate demand curve, i.e., the equilibrium relation between domestic inflation and
real expenditure.



                                           3
1.1     Interest-Rate Policy and Aggregate Demand in a Two-
        Country Model
I first consider the “aggregate demand block” of a canonical two-country new Keyne-
sian model, as expounded for example in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002) [hereafter
CGG].1 I consider first the case of complete international financial integration, so
that there is even complete international risk sharing. Moreover, following CGG, I
suppose that households in both countries consume the same basket of internationally
traded goods. This extreme case has the implication that there is clearly a single real
interest rate that is relevant to the intertemporal substitution decisions of households
in both countries — the intertemporal relative price of the composite consumption
good that is consumed in both countries. This allows me to consider the implications
of the equalization of real interest rates across borders in the case where the strongest
possible result of this kind obtains.
     Let us assume that each of two countries are made up of infinite-lived households,
and that each household (in either country) has identical preferences over intertem-
poral consumption streams. Specifically, following CGG, let us assume that each
household ranks consumption streams according to a utility function of the form2
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                          E0         β t u(Ct ),                                  (1.1)
                                               t=0

where 0 < β < 1 is a discount factor,
                                                             −1
                                                      C 1−σ
                                          u(C) =                                                  (1.2)
                                                      1 − σ −1
is the period utility flow from consumption, where σ > 0 is the constant intertem-
poral elasticity of substitution of consumer expenditure, and Ct is an index of the
household’s consumption of both domestically-produced and foreign-produced goods.
   1
     Models with a similar structure have been extensively used in the recent literature on the analysis
of monetary policy for open economies; see, e.g., Svensson (2000), Benigno and Benigno (2001, 2005,
2006), or Gali and Monacelli (2005).
   2
     Here I specify only the way in which utility depends on consumption expenditure. The disutility
of working and the liquidity services provided by money balances are assumed to contribute terms to
the utility function that are additively separable from the terms included in (1.1); these extensions
are discussed in sections 2 and 3.



                                                 4
CGG assume in particular that
                                          1−γ γ
                                    Ct = CHt CF t ,                                (1.3)

where CHt represents an index of the household’s purchases of goods produced in the
“home” country and CF t an index of purchases of goods produced in the “foreign”
country. Thus there is assumed to be a unit elasticity of substitution between the
two categories of goods, and 0 < γ < 1 indicates the expenditure share of the
foreign country’s goods in the consumption basket of households in either country.
By considering the determination of aggregate demand in country H in the limit as
γ approaches 1, we can consider the consequences of globalization for a country that
is small relative to world markets.
    It is important to note that here an H subscript refers to purchases of goods
produced in country H, by households in either country, and not purchases of goods
produced in one’s own country; thus a large value of γ means that country H supplies
most of the goods consumed worldwide, not that few imported goods are consumed
in either country. Regardless of the value of γ, the model describes a world with
full integration of goods markets, in the sense that an identical basket of goods (all
of which are traded on world markets) is consumed in both countries. I shall use
variables without stars to denote the purchases of the representative household in
country H, and the corresponding starred variables to denote the purchases of these
same goods by the representative household in country F . Because preferences are
                                                                       ∗1−γ ∗γ
the same in both countries, one has, for example, the relation Ct∗ = CHt    CF t .
    Given preferences (1.3), intratemporal optimization implies that households in the
home country allocate expenditure across domestic and foreign goods according to
the relations
                                 PHt CHt = (1 − γ)Pt Ct ,                          (1.4)
                                   PF t CF t = γPt Ct .                            (1.5)
Here PHt is an index of the prices charged in country H for domestic goods (specif-
ically, the price of a unit of the composite good the quantity of which is measured
by CHt , in units of currency H), PF t a corresponding index of the prices charged in
country H for foreign goods, and
                                             1−γ γ
                                  Pt = k −1 PHt PF t ,                             (1.6)


                                          5
where k ≡ (1 − γ)1−γ γ γ , is an index of the price of all consumer goods (including
imported goods). Corresponding relations (for example, PF∗ t CF∗ t = γPt∗ Ct∗ ) hold for
consumer expenditure in the foreign country, where the starred prices indicate price
indices for the same baskets of goods in country F (and in terms of the foreign
currency).
    The existence of complete financial markets implies the existence of a uniquely
defined stochastic discount factor Qt,T that defines the present value in period t (in
units of the domestic currency) of random income in period T > t (also in units of
the domestic currency). Optimal allocation of consumption expenditure over time
and across states then implies that
                                        µ        ¶−σ−1
                                            CT                    PT
                                    β                    = Qt,T                                (1.7)
                                            Ct                    Pt

for each possible state of the world at date T. Let it be the one-period riskless nominal
interest rate in terms of the domestic currency; given (1.7), consistency of this rate
with the stochastic discount factor (i.e., the absence of financial arbitrage opportuni-
ties) requires that                        "µ                   #
                                                    ¶−σ−1
                                              C t+1         Pt
                         (1 + it )−1 = βEt                        .                 (1.8)
                                               Ct          Pt+1
This is the key equilibrium relation between the short-term nominal interest rate
it controlled by the central bank of country H 3 and aggregate expenditure in that
country. The riskless one-period real rate of return rt in country H must satisfy a
corresponding relation
                                          "µ       ¶−σ−1 #
                                   −1         Ct+1
                          (1 + rt ) = βEt                  .                  (1.9)
                                               Ct

Finally, relations of exactly the same form relate the intertemporal consumption
allocation in the foreign country to asset prices there; equations corresponding to
(1.7), (1.8), and (1.9) each hold with each variable replaced by a corresponding starred
variable.
    The relations stated thus far would hold equally in the case of two closed-economy
models, one for each country. (In that case, of course, one would have to assume that
   3
     The means by which it is possible for the central bank to control this rate are discussed in the
following section.

                                                   6
both H goods and F goods are produced in each country.) CGG further assume that
each good is sold in a world market, and that the law of one price holds. Hence one
must have
                                             ∗
                                   PHt = Et PHt ,
                                      PF t = Et PF∗ t ,
and as a consequence
                                          Pt = Et Pt∗                               (1.10)
as well, where Et is the nominal exchange rate in period t. (Note that (1.10) depends
not only on the validity of the law of one price, but also on the existence of identical
consumption baskets in the two countries.) Similarly, complete international financial
integration (frictionless cross-border trade in all financial assets) implies the relation

                                                 Et ∗
                                     Qt,T =        Q                                (1.11)
                                                 ET t,T
between the stochastic discount factors (and hence asset prices) in the two countries.
   Conditions (1.10) and (1.11) together imply that

                                          PT        P∗
                                   Qt,T      = Q∗t,T T∗ ,                           (1.12)
                                          Pt        Pt

i.e., that the stochastic discount factors for real income streams must be identical in
the two countries, and hence that
                                         rt = rt∗ .                             (1.13)
Thus real interest rates must be equalized in the two countries. In (1.13) the equality
of short-term real rates is stated, but in fact, since the real stochastic discount factors
are identical, the entire real term structure must be identical in the two countries.
This is true regardless of the monetary policies pursued by the two national central
banks.
    However, this result does not depend on the hypothesis of complete international
financial integration. In fact, under the preference specification assumed by CGG,
an identical result would hold under the hypothesis of complete financial autarchy.
Let us suppose that there is a mass 1 − γ of households in country H and a mass
γ in country F , so that income per household is the same in both countries (when



                                             7
expressed in units of the same currency). Under the assumption of financial autarchy,
trade must be balanced each period, so that

                                                          ∗   ∗
                                  (1 − γ)PF t CF t = γEt PHt CHt .

Because expenditure is allocated to the two classes of goods in the shares indicated by
(1.4)–(1.5), and the corresponding relations for households in country F , this implies
that
                                   Pt Ct = Et Pt∗ Ct∗ .
It would then follow from (1.10) that Ct = Ct∗ each period. This in turn implies
(given (1.7) and the corresponding relation for country F ) that (1.12) must hold, and
hence that the term structure of real interest rates must be the same in each country.
    Thus we find that the same allocation of resources and system of asset prices
represents an equilibrium under either the assumption of costless cross-border trade
in financial assets or the assumption of no trade at all.4 Since these prices and
quantities achieve asset-price equalization with zero exchange of financial assets, it
follows that they would also represent an equilibrium under any assumption about
costs of asset trade or incompleteness of international financial markets.5 Hence in
this model, increased financial openness has no consequences whatsoever for asset-
price determination or aggregate demand under any monetary policies. Of course
this irrelevance result is a fairly special one; in particular, it is not exactly true
except in the case of preferences of the precise form (1.3), i.e., a unit elasticity of
substitution between domestic and foreign goods, and identical preferences in the
two countries. But the fact that complete irrelevance is possible (and does not even
require an “extreme” preference specification) indicates that the effects of financial
globalization need not be large.
    It is also important to note that real interest-rate equalization does not imply that
domestic monetary policy has no effect on domestic aggregate demand, even in the
case of a country that is small relative to global markets (country H in the case in
which γ is near 1). Let us derive the “aggregate demand block” of our two-country
model (a generalization of the “AD curve” of a static, single-country textbook model),
   4
     This equivalence in a model with a unit elasticity of substitution between home and foreign
goods was first pointed out by Cole and Obstfeld (1991).
   5
     Here I assume that we start from an initial condition with zero net cross-border financial claims,
as would necessarily be true in the case of financial autarchy.

                                                 8
by combining the equilibrium relations between interest rates, real activity and prices
implied by intertemporal optimization and goods market clearing (corresponding to
the “IS curve” of the textbook model) with those implied by the monetary policies
of the two central banks (corresponding to the “LM curve”).
    First, note that world demand for the composite world consumption good

                                         Ctw ≡ (1 − γ)Ct + γCt∗                                     (1.14)

must equal the supply of the composite world good, so that

                                              Ctw = k Yt1−γ Yt∗γ ,                                  (1.15)

where Yt and Yt∗ are per capita aggregate production of the domestic and foreign
composite goods respectively. Next, note that (1.12) together with (1.7) implies that
the consumption growth factor CT /Ct (for any state at any date T > t) is the same
for households in both countries. Hence world demand for the composite world good
must grow at that same rate as well, so that one must also have
                                   µ         ¶−σ−1
                                       CTw                        PT        P∗
                               β                     = Qt,T          = Q∗t,T T∗ .
                                       Ctw                        Pt        Pt
Substituting (1.15), we then have
                                                         µ        ¶σ−1 (1−γ) µ         ¶σ−1 γ
                           PT        P∗                      Yt                  Yt∗
                      Qt,T    = Q∗t,T T∗ = β                                                    .   (1.16)
                           Pt        Pt                      YT                  YT∗
      Given these stochastic discount factors, the two nominal interest rates must satisfy
                                     "µ      ¶σ−1 (1−γ) µ ∗ ¶σ−1 γ      #
                                         Y t              Y t       Pt
                   (1 + it )−1 = βEt                       ∗
                                                                                    (1.17)
                                        Yt+1             Yt+1      Pt+1

and                                          "µ          ¶σ−1 (1−γ) µ          ¶σ−1 γ         #
                                                   Yt                    Yt∗              Pt∗
                    (1 + i∗t )−1 = βEt                                    ∗                ∗
                                                                                                .   (1.18)
                                                  Yt+1                  Yt+1             Pt+1
Relations (1.17)–(1.18) are a pair of “IS equations” relating interest rates to output
(real aggregate demand for each of the two countries’ products) and to expected infla-
tion, generalizing the “intertemporal IS relation”6 of a closed-economy new Keynesian
model.
  6
      See, e.g., equation (1.1) of Woodford (2003, chap. 4).

                                                         9
   To complete the “aggregate demand block” of the model, we must adjoin to these
equations a pair of equations representing the monetary policies of the two central
banks. For example, monetary policy might be specified by a pair of “Taylor rules,”
                                              µ       ¶φπ
                                                 P            φ
                                1 + it = I¯t
                                                    t
                                                          Yt y ,                (1.19)
                                                Pt−1
                                              µ ∗ ¶φ∗π
                                                 Pt          ∗φ∗y
                               1 + i∗t = I¯t∗     ∗
                                                          Y t     ,             (1.20)
                                                Pt−1
where I¯t and I¯∗ are two state-dependent factors that may represent time-variation in
               t
the inflation target, a desire to respond to departures of output from a time-varying
measure of potential, a time-varying conception of the “neutral” rate of interest, or a
random control error in the implementation of the central bank’s interest-rate target,
among other possibilities. (For purposes of our analysis it matters only that the pro-
cesses {I¯t , I¯t∗ } be exogenously specified, rather than depending on the evolution of any
endogenous variables.) Then (1.17)–(1.20) represent a system of four equations per
period to determine the evolution of the four nominal variables {Pt , Pt∗ , it , i∗t } given
the evolution of the real quantities {Yt , Yt∗ }. They thus represent a two-country (and
dynamic) version of the “AD equation” of a textbook macro model. Together with a
model of aggregate supply (discussed in section 3), they allow one to understand the
endogenous determination of both output and inflation in the two countries.
    The question that we wish to address is, to what extent are the monetary policies
of the two countries — here represented in particular by the evolution over time of
the intercept terms I¯t and I¯t∗ — able to exert independent influence over aggregate
demand (and hence the general level of prices) in each country? To examine the
way in which the various endogenous variables are jointly determined, it is as usual
convenient to log-linearize the system of equilibrium relations, around some steady-
state equilibrium values of the variables. The steady state that we shall consider is
one in which there is a common steady-state level of output in each country, Yt =
Yt∗ = Ȳ > 0, and zero inflation in each country; it follows that in each country the
steady-state nominal interest rate is equal to it = i∗t = β −1 − 1 > 0. The monetary
policy specification is consistent with this if in the steady state, I¯ = β −1 Ȳ −φy and
I¯∗ = β −1 Ȳ −φy . The log-linear approximations to the two “IS equations” (1.17)–(1.18)
                    ∗



are given by
                                                           ∗
             (1 − γ)Ŷt + γ Ŷt∗ = Et [(1 − γ)Ŷt+1 + γ Ŷt+1 ] − σ(ı̂t − Et π t+1 ),   (1.21)

                                              10
                 (1 − γ)Ŷt + γ Ŷt∗ = Et [(1 − γ)Ŷt+1 + γ Ŷt+1
                                                               ∗
                                                                  ] − σ(ı̂∗t − Et π ∗t+1 ),     (1.22)
while the log-linear approximations to the two monetary policy rules (which here
replace the “LM equations” that would be appropriate if, as in many textbook ex-
positions, we were to specify monetary policy by a fixed money supply7 ) are given
by
                               ı̂t = ı̄t + φπ π t + φy Ŷt ,                (1.23)
                                        ı̂∗t = ı̄∗t + φ∗π π ∗t + φ∗y Ŷt∗ .                     (1.24)
Here I use the notation Ŷt ≡ log(Yt /Ȳ ), π t ≡ log(Pt /Pt−1 ), ı̂t ≡ log(1 + it /1 + ı̄),
ı̄t ≡ log(I¯t /I),
               ¯ and correspondingly for the starred variables.
     The system of equations (1.21)–(1.24) can be simplified by using (1.23)–(1.24)
to substitute for ı̂t and ı̂∗t in the other two equations. Under the assumption that
φπ , φ∗π > 0, the resulting system can be written in the form
    "      #       "           #       "      #       "          #        "      #
      πt             Et π t+1             Ŷt           Et Ŷt+1            ı̄t
              = A                − B0           + B1                 − A           . (1.25)
      π ∗t           Et π ∗t+1           Ŷt∗                 ∗
                                                        Et Ŷt+1            ı̄∗t

Here                                             "                   #
                                                     φ−1
                                                      π  0
                                         A≡              ∗−1
                                                                         ,
                                                      0 φπ
and B0 , B1 are two matrices of coefficients, all of which are positive in the case that
φy , φ∗y ≥ 0. In the case that φπ , φ∗π > 1 (as recommended by Taylor, 1999), we observe
that
                                          lim An = 0,
                                               n→∞

and the system (1.25) can be “solved forward” to yield a unique bounded solution for
the two inflation rates in the case of any bounded processes {Ŷt , Ŷt∗ , ı̄t , ı̄∗t }, given by
          "      #             "       #    ∞
                                                                 "                   #
             πt                    Ŷt     X                        E  Ŷ
                                                                     t t+j+1
               ∗
                     = −B0           ∗
                                         +     Aj (B1 − AB0 )             ∗
             πt                   Ŷt      j=0
                                                                    Et Ŷt+j+1
                                                ∞
                                                        "           #
                                               X          Et ı̄ t+j
                                           −       Aj+1                .                    (1.26)
                                               j=0
                                                          Et ı̄∗t+j
   7
       The addition of “LM equations” of this conventional sort to the model is discussed in section 2.




                                                     11
This generalizes the result obtained for a closed-economy model in the case of a Taylor
rule with φπ > 1.8
    The solution obtained for home-country inflation can be written in the form
                     ∞
                     X
                                                     ∗
                πt =   [ψ 1,j Et Ŷt+j + ψ 2,j Et Ŷt+j + ψ 3,j Et ı̄t+j + ψ 4,j Et ı̄∗t+j ].     (1.27)
                       j=0


The coefficients {ψ i,j } for successive horizons j are plotted (for each of the values
i = 1, 2, 3, 4) in the four panels of Figure 1. In these numerical illustrations, I assume
coefficients φπ = 2, φy = 1 for the Taylor rule in each country,9 a value σ = 6.37 for
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,10 and a period length of one quarter. The
coefficients of the solution are plotted for each of three possible values of γ: γ = 0,
the closed-economy limit; γ = 0.5, the case of two countries of equal size; and γ = 1,
the small-open-economy limit.
    The solution (1.26) can be viewed as describing a pair of dynamic “AD relations”
for the two open economies, in each of which there is a downward-sloping static
relation between the inflation rate and output, or aggregate real expenditure on that
country’s products. (The observation about the slope follows from the fact that the
elements of B0 are positive. In the numerical examples, it is illustrated by the negative
values for ψ 1,0 shown in the upper left panel of Figure 1.) Here we are especially
interested in the question of how changes in each country’s monetary policy affect
the location of the AD curve in that country, and hence the inflation rate that would
result in the case of a given level of real activity.
    Let us first consider the effect of the anticipated time path of the intercept {ı̄t }
on inflation in the home country, taking as given the magnitude of the response
   8
      See, e.g., equation (2.7) of Woodford (2003, chap. 2). The discussion there is of inflation
determination in a flexible-price model where {Ŷt } is exogenously given, but the same calculation
can be viewed as deriving a dynamic “AD relation” for a sticky-price model.
    9
      In the notation of the paper, where π t is a one-period inflation rate and ı̂t a one-period interest
rate, then the values used are actually φπ = 2, φy = 0.25. The values quoted in the text are
the equivalent coefficients of a Taylor rule written in terms of an annualized interest rate and an
annualized inflation rate, as in Taylor (1999), where a rule with these coefficients is argued to be
relatively similar to Fed policy under Alan Greenspan.
   10
      This is the value estimated for the US economy by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997). Here and
elsewhere, the parameter values used in the numerical illustrations are such that in the case of a
closed economy (the γ = 0 case in Figure 1), the model coincides with the baseline parameter values
used in the numerical analysis of the basic new Keynesian model in Woodford (2003, chap. 4).


                                                   12
                        Home output                           Foreign output
        0.2                                         0.3

         0                                          0.2

                                                    0.1
       −0.2
                                                     0
       −0.4
                                                   −0.1
       −0.6
                                                   −0.2
       −0.8                                        −0.3

        −1                                         −0.4
              0     2                 4   6               0   2            4             6


                        Home policy                           Foreign policy
        0.2                                         0.2

         0                                           0

       −0.2                                        −0.2

       −0.4                                        −0.4

       −0.6                                        −0.6
                                                                               γ = 0.0
       −0.8                                        −0.8                        γ = 0.5
                                                                               γ = 1.0
        −1                                          −1
              0     2                 4   6               0   2            4             6
                             j                                      j



Figure 1: Coefficients of the dynamic AD relation (1.27), for alternative degrees of
openness.

coefficients φπ , φy , and also leaving fixed the specification of monetary policy in the
other country. These effects are indicated by the coefficients {ψ 3,j } plotted in the
lower left panel of Figure 1. A first important observation is that it is possible to
shift the central-bank reaction function arbitrarily in one country, without violating
any requirement for the existence of equilibrium — thus no market forces prevent
a central bank from having an independent monetary policy, even in the case of
complete financial integration. (We see this from the fact that we have been able to
solve the system (1.25) under an arbitrary perturbation of the path {ı̄t } .)
    Moreover, tightening policy in the home country (increasing ı̄t , or being expected
to increase it in a later period) shifts the AD relation for that country, so as to
imply a lower inflation rate π t for any expected paths of real activity in the two
countries. (This is indicated by the negative coefficients in the lower left panel of the


                                              13
figure.) Thus it continues to be possible to use monetary policy to control nominal
expenditure and inflation, even in a fully globalized economy. Indeed, the coefficients
indicating the effect of current or expected future tightenings of policy on current
inflation are identical to those that would apply in the case of a closed economy,
and are independent of the size of the home economy relative to the world economy
(i.e., are independent of the value of γ). Thus even in the case of a very small open
economy, monetary policy does not cease to be effective for domestic inflation control
as a result of globalization.
     The solution (1.26) can also be used to examine the degree to which there are
monetary policy “spillovers” as a result of openness, at least to the extent that these
are thought to operate through effects of foreign monetary policy on aggregate de-
mand. While the system solution (1.26) might make it appear that inflation in each
country depends on the monetary policies of both, this is not true (for given paths
of output in the two countries). Because the matrix A is diagonal, the solution for
π t is independent of the expected path of {ı̄∗t+j }, and π ∗t is similarly independent of
the expected path of {ı̄t+j }. (This is shown by the zero coefficients at all horizons
in the lower right panel of Figure 1.) One can similarly show that the values of the
coefficients φ∗π , φ∗y affect only the solution for π ∗t , and not the solution for π t .
     The implication is that foreign monetary policy cannot affect inflation determi-
nation in the home country, except to the extent that this occurs through effects of
foreign monetary policy on foreign output. (In the case of completely flexible wages
and prices, so that monetary policy would have little effect on real activity, there
would be no possibility of “spillovers” from expansionary foreign monetary policy to
domestic inflation, assuming the home central bank follows a Taylor rule of the form
(1.19).) And even the cross-border effects that are possible when monetary policy
affects real activity are not necessarily of the kind often assumed in popular discus-
sions of the implications of “excess global liquidity”. To the extent that expansionary
monetary policy in the rest of the world makes foreign output temporarily high, the
equilibrium real rate of return consistent with a given path of output in the home
country is lowered (as indicated by (1.21)). This makes a given Taylor rule for the
home central bank more contractionary, as shown by the negative coefficient ψ 2,0
in the upper right panel of Figure 2: if one is to avoid disinflation and/or reduced
aggregate demand, it is necessary to lower ı̄t in accordance with the reduction in the



                                          14
equilibrium real rate of return associated with trend output.11
    It might seem surprising that an independent domestic monetary policy can exert
the same effect on domestic inflation as in a closed economy, despite the fact that
(at least in the case of a sufficiently small open economy) there is no possibility of a
non-negligible affect of domestic monetary policy on the common world real interest
rate. But this should not really be a surprise. It is commonly understood in the case
of closed-economy monetary models that even in the case of fully flexible wages and
prices — so that neither output nor equilibrium real interest rates can be affected by
monetary policy — it remains possible for monetary policy to determine the general
level of prices. This means that monetary policy can shift the AD relation even when
it cannot change the equilibrium real rate of interest.12 And the classic Mundell-
Fleming analysis concludes that monetary policy should be more effective, rather
than less, in the case of international capital mobility, even though this is assumed
to imply the existence of a common world interest rate; the fact that a monetary
expansion cannot lower interest rates simply ensures that all of the adjustment that
results in a larger quantity of money being voluntarily held must involve increases in
output or prices rather than lower interest rates. A similar conclusion obtains if the
change in monetary policy is modeled as a shift in an interest-rate reaction function
rather than a change in the money supply: both are simply reasons for the LM curve
to shift.


1.2     Exchange-Rate Determination
One way to understand how monetary policy continues to be effective even in the
globalized economy is by considering the consequences of domestic monetary policy
for the exchange rate, and the implications of exchange rate changes for inflation. A
log-linear approximation to (1.11) implies that any equilibrium (in which departures
from the steady state are sufficiently small) must satisfy the uncovered interest-rate
  11
     These remarks apply to the case in which expansionary foreign monetary policy makes foreign
output currently high relative to its expected future level. The anticipation of a foreign monetary
expansion in the future would instead be currently inflationary in the home country; for this would
imply that foreign output should be higher in the future than it is now, making the equilibrium real
rate of return higher rather than lower.
  12
     For an analysis of inflation determination in such a model when monetary policy is specified by
a Taylor rule, see Woodford (2003, chap. 2).



                                               15
parity condition,
                                            ı̂t − ı̂∗t = Et [et+1 − et ],                         (1.28)
where et ≡ log Et . The implications of this relation for the equilibrium exchange
rate are most easily derived in the case that we assume common reaction-function
coefficients for the two central banks (φ∗π = φπ , φ∗y = φy ), while allowing the intercepts
ı̄t , ı̄∗t to follow different paths. In this case the monetary policy specifications (1.19)–
(1.20) imply that

                         ı̂t − ı̂∗t = (ı̄t − ı̄∗t ) + φπ (zt − zt−1 ) + φy (Ŷt − Ŷt∗ ),         (1.29)

introducing the notation zt ≡ log(Pt /Pt∗ ) for the differential in the absolute level of
prices between the two countries. Then using the fact that (1.10) implies that zt = et
to substitute for zt in (1.29), and using this relation to substitute for the interest-rate
differential in (1.28), we obtain a difference equation of the form

                            Et ∆et+1 = (ı̄t − ı̄∗t ) + φπ ∆et + φy (Ŷt − Ŷt∗ )                  (1.30)

for the rate of exchange-rate depreciation.
    Under the assumption that φπ > 1, this has a unique bounded solution for the
depreciation rate,
                               ∞
                               X
                       ∆et =         φ−(j+1)
                                      π      [Et (ı̄∗t+j − ı̄t+j ) + φy Et (Ŷt+j
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                  − Ŷt+j )].     (1.31)
                               j=0

This shows how the exchange rate must depreciate as a result either of an increase
in the relative tightness of foreign monetary policy or of an increase in relative for-
eign output. The law of one price implies that changes in the exchange rate must
correspond directly to differences in the inflation rates of the two countries, so that13
                                 ∞
                                 X
         πt −   π ∗t   = ∆zt =         φ−(j+1)
                                        π      [Et (ı̄∗t+j − ı̄t+j ) + φy Et (Ŷt+j
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                    − Ŷt+j )].   (1.32)
                                 j=0

   Equation (1.32) shows how a change in the monetary policy of one central bank,
not perfectly matched by a corresponding change in the policy of the other central
  13
    This solution is consistent, of course, with (1.26), derived earlier under more general assump-
tions; in fact, it is simply the difference between the first and second lines of (1.26). The alternative
derivation is intended simply to provide additional insight into the economic mechanisms reflected
by this solution.

                                                       16
bank, must create a difference in the inflation rates of the two countries. The result
here only identifies the equilibrium inflation differential for a given output differential,
but in the case that φy = 0, the output differential is irrelevant, and the equation
directly tells us what the inflation differential must be. Moreover, the coefficients in
this relation do not involve γ. It follows that even the central bank of a very small
country must be able to substantially affect domestic inflation by changing its policy;
for it can change the inflation differential, and (at least in the case of a very small
country) this must not be because it changes the inflation rate in the rest of world
but not at home.
    The argument just given implies not only that the central bank must be able
to shift the aggregate demand curve, but more specifically that it must be able to
control the inflation rate, regardless of the nature of aggregate supply (for example,
no matter how sticky prices or wages may be). It is the flexibility of the prices of
imports in terms of the domestic currency in this model (implied by the assumption of
producer-currency pricing) that allows for such a strong conclusion. Indeed, Svensson
(2000) argues that achievement of a central bank’s CPI inflation target is possible
over a shorter horizon in the case that the economy is substantially open, under the
assumption (as in the CGG model) that there is relatively immediate pass-through
of exchange-rate changes to the prices of imported goods.14


1.3        Determination of the Domestic Price Index
In the above discussion, I have assumed that the central bank is interested in control-
ling the evolution of a broad consumer price index, including the prices of imported
consumer goods, and so have derived an “aggregate demand” relation that relates
this price index to the volume of real activity in an open economy. This assumption
is consistent with the kind of official inflation target that inflation-targeting central
banks in small open economies typically aim at. However, one might also be inter-
ested in the ability of monetary policy to control the rate of growth of a domestic
price index, in which one considers only the prices of goods produced in that country.
This is certainly of analytical interest, in isolating the various channels through which
monetary policy can affect inflation, even if one’s stabilization objective is assumed
  14
       Svensson calls this “the direct exchange-rate channel” for the transmission of monetary policy.




                                                 17
to involve only CPI inflation.15
    But it is also arguable that a central bank should concern itself with stabilization
of domestic prices rather than a consumer price index. Suppose, for example, that
one takes the goal of monetary policy to be to eliminate the distortions resulting from
nominal rigidities, by bringing about the allocation of resources that would occur in
the case of fully-flexible wages and prices. In a model of the kind considered by
CGG (with flexible wages and producer-currency pricing), this will be achieved if
the monetary policies of the two central banks bring about an equilibrium in which
the domestic price index is completely stabilized in each country. Import prices will
instead vary in response to (asymmetric) shocks to real “fundamentals”, in such an
equilibrium, since the relative prices of the goods produced in the two countries would
vary in the case of flexible wages and prices. Hence it might be deemed reasonable
to hold each central bank responsible for stabilizing the domestic price index in its
country, while allowing import prices to vary.
    Here I consider the effects of monetary policy on domestic inflation in a globalized
economy, in order to clarify that the effects on inflation discussed in the previous sec-
tion do not result purely from what Svensson calls the “direct exchange-rate channel.”
I show that one can also derive an aggregate-demand equation that relates the do-
mestic price index to domestic output, and indeed it might seem more reasonable to
call this “the aggregate demand curve”, since it is the product of these two quantities
that represents aggregate expenditure on domestic products.
    Under the preferences assumed above, consumer optimization implies a simple
connection between the equilibrium terms of trade and the composition of world
output. The law of one price implies that the relative price of home and foreign goods
is the same in both countries, and consequently (1.4)–(1.5) imply that households
choose the same ratio of foreign goods to home goods in both countries. Market-
clearing requires that this common ratio equal the relative supplies of the two types
of goods; hence the equilibrium terms of trade must satisfy16
                                                PF t  Yt
                                         St ≡        = ∗.                                     (1.33)
                                                PHt   Yt
  15
    See, for example, the discussion in Svensson (2000).
  16
    Note that Yt is output per capita in the home country, and similarly with Yt∗ ; hence the relative
supply of the two composite goods is equal to (1 − γ)Yt /γYt∗ .




                                                18
The definition of the consumption price index Pt then implies that
                                    PHt
                                        = kSt−γ = kYt−γ Yt∗γ ,                                 (1.34)
                                     Pt
                            PF t
                                 = kSt1−γ = kYt1−γ Yt∗γ−1 .                          (1.35)
                            Pt
    We now have a solution for equilibrium relative prices, given output in the two
countries. Combining this with our previous solution for consumer price inflation
given output, we can obtain a solution for domestic price inflation in each country,
given the two countries’ levels of output. If we define the domestic inflation rates
in each country as π Ht ≡ ∆ log PHt , π ∗F t ≡ ∆ log PF∗ t ,17 then relations (1.34)–(1.35)
imply that
                             π Ht = π t + γ(∆Ŷt∗ − ∆Ŷt ),                          (1.36)
                               π ∗F t = π ∗t + (1 − γ)(∆Ŷt − ∆Ŷt∗ ).                         (1.37)
If we then substitute the above solution (1.26) for the consumer price inflation rates
in these expressions, we obtain solutions for π Ht and π ∗F t as functions of the paths of
output in the two countries, and the two monetary policies, under the assumption that
monetary policy is described by two rules of the form (1.19)–(1.20). Our conclusions
about the magnitude of the effect on home country inflation of a change in home
country monetary policy remain exactly the same as before, since (as long as we are
controlling for the paths of output in the two countries) there is no additional effect
on the terms of trade.
    If, however, the central bank is concerned with stabilization of domestic inflation
rather than consumer price inflation, it may be of more interest to consider the
consequences of monetary policy rules that respond to domestic inflation rather than
to CPI inflation as assumed in (1.19)–(1.20). Suppose, then, that we replace (1.19)
by a policy of the form
                                           µ       ¶φπ
                                              P          φ
                              1 + it = I¯t
                                               Ht
                                                       Yt y ,                       (1.38)
                                             PHt−1
and similarly for the foreign central bank. In this case, we can no longer simply use
the solution (1.26) for the CPI inflation rates, but must instead repeat the derivation
using the alternative monetary policy rules.
  17
    CGG simply call the domestic inflation rates π t and π ∗t respectively; thus their notation encour-
ages an emphasis on domestic inflation stabilization.


                                                19
    Rewriting (1.21)–(1.22) in terms of domestic inflation rates, by using (1.36)–(1.37)
to substitute for the CPI inflation rates, we obtain

              (1 + θ)Ŷt − θŶt∗ = Et [(1 + θ)Ŷt+1 − θŶt+1
                                                          ∗
                                                             ] − σ(ı̂t − Et π Ht+1 ),         (1.39)

        (1 + θ∗ )Ŷt∗ − θ∗ Ŷt = Et [(1 + θ∗ )Ŷt+1
                                                 ∗
                                                    − θ∗ Ŷt+1 ] − σ(ı̂∗t − Et π ∗F t+1 ),    (1.40)
where
                            θ ≡ γ(σ − 1),             θ∗ ≡ (1 − γ)(σ − 1).
Combining these with the log-linearized central-bank reaction functions,

                                      ı̂t = ı̄t + φπ π Ht + φy Ŷt ,                          (1.41)

                                     ı̂∗t = ı̄∗t + φ∗π π ∗F t + φ∗y Ŷt∗ ,                    (1.42)
we then have a system of four equations per period to solve for the paths of {π Ht , π ∗F t , ı̂t , ı̂∗t },
given the paths of {Ŷt , Ŷt∗ , ı̄t , ı̄∗t }. Once one has a solution to these equations, the evo-
lution of the CPI inflation rates in the two countries is then given by equations
(1.36)–(1.37).
    The system of equations (1.39)–(1.42) can again be reduced to a pair of equations
for the two domestic inflation rates, and this system can again be written in the form
 "         #     "                   #            "      #        "          #      "      #
    π Ht            Et π Ht+1                        Ŷt            Et Ŷt+1           ı̄t
             = A                            − B̃0          + B̃1               − A           , (1.43)
    π ∗F t          Et π ∗F t+1                     Ŷt∗                  ∗
                                                                    Et Ŷt+1          ı̄∗t

where the matrix A is the same as in (1.25), but the matrices B̃0 , B̃1 are different.
Again the system has a unique bounded solution in the case that φπ , φ∗π > 1, and
again it is of the form (1.26), making the appropriate substitutions. Since the diagonal
elements of B̃0 are again necessarily positive, this solution again defines a downward-
sloping AD curve for each country; but now each AD curve relates the price index
for that country’s products to a corresponding index of the quantity sold of those
products. The AD relation for the home country can again be written in the form
(1.27), except that this is now an equation for domestic inflation rather than CPI
inflation; the numerical values of the coefficients (under the same parameter values
as before) are now shown in Figure 2.18
  18
    Note that while I again assume that φπ = 2, the coefficient has a different meaning, as it now
indicates the response to variations in domestic inflation only.


                                                   20
                        Home output                           Foreign output
                                                    2.5
         1                                           2
                                                    1.5
         0
                                                     1
                                                    0.5
        −1
                                                     0

        −2                                         −0.5
                                                    −1
        −3                                         −1.5
              0     2                 4   6               0   2            4             6


                        Home policy                           Foreign policy
        0.2                                         0.2

         0                                           0

       −0.2                                        −0.2

       −0.4                                        −0.4

       −0.6                                        −0.6
                                                                               γ = 0.0
       −0.8                                        −0.8                        γ = 0.5
                                                                               γ = 1.0
        −1                                          −1
              0     2                 4   6               0   2            4             6
                             j                                      j



Figure 2: Coefficients of the dynamic AD relation in terms of domestic inflation, for
alternative degrees of openness.

    We again find that there is scope for independent variation in the monetary policies
of the two central banks, and that either central bank can shift the AD curve for its
country (and hence the domestic inflation rate associated with given paths of real
activity in the two countries) by varying its policy. In fact, because the matrix A is
the same as in the previous section, we find exactly the same coefficients as before for
the quantitative effects of current or expected future changes in ı̄t+j on the domestic
rate of inflation. And once again, we find that any spillovers from foreign monetary
policy on aggregate demand in the home country must be due to the effects of foreign
monetary policy on foreign output. However, the sign and likely magnitude of any
spillovers are now more ambiguous, as negative terms have been added to the off-
diagonal elements of B̃0 and B̃1 that tend to reduce the size of these elements, and




                                              21
can even reverse their sign.19
    When we expressed the AD curve as a relation between Pt and Yt , the effect
of higher foreign output was clearly contractionary, because higher equilibrium con-
sumption of foreign output by domestic households implies a lower marginal utility
of income for any given level of domestic output (and hence domestic consumption
of domestic output), just as if there had been a reduction in domestic households’
impatience to consume. But now we must also take into account the fact that higher
foreign output implies an improvement of the home country’s terms of trade (for any
given level of home output), and hence a higher value of PHt relative to Pt ; this ad-
ditional effect tends to shift the AD curve in terms of PHt and Yt outward, offsetting
the other effect. In fact, if σ = 1 (the case of log utility of consumption), the two
effects exactly cancel, and both B̃0 and B̃1 are diagonal matrices. In this case, the
solution (1.26) implies that the location of the home-country AD curve depends only
on home monetary policy and the expected future path of home output (and likewise
for the foreign-country AD curve); thus there are no international monetary policy
spillovers in the AD block of the model.20
    This last result is a fairly special one. In fact, it is not obvious that σ = 1 should
be regarded as a realistic calibration of the model. While the assumption of log utility
of consumption is fairly common in real business-cycle models, it is important to note
that this is a specification of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of nondurable
consumer expenditure only, in a model in which investment spending is separately
modelled (and specified to be much more substitutable over time). In a model in
which all private expenditure is modelled as if it were consumer expenditure (i.e., we
abstract from any effects of private spending on the evolution of productive capacity),
more realistic conclusions are obtained if we specify preferences over the time path
of such “consumption” with an intertemporal elasticity of substitution well above
1.21 In this case, the terms-of-trade effect of higher foreign output is quantitatively
more important than the implied reduction of the marginal utility of income (which
  19
     For the parameter values used in the numerical example shown in Figure 2, the sign of the effect
of foreign monetary stimulus on home inflation is reversed, as shown in the upper right panel.
  20
     This result is obtained by CGG, who express the model structural relations entirely in terms of
domestic inflation. They find a similar decoupling of the structural equations for the two countries
in the aggregate-supply block of the model in the case that σ = 1, as discussed in section 3.
  21
     See Woodford (2003, pp. 242-243, 362-363) for further discussion of the proper interpretation
of this parameter in a basic new-Keynesian model of the monetary transmission mechanism.


                                               22
                        Home output                           Foreign output
                                                    0.5
        1.5
                                                     0
         1
                                                   −0.5
        0.5
                                                    −1
         0

       −0.5                                        −1.5

        −1                                          −2

       −1.5                                        −2.5
              0     2                 4   6               0   2            4             6


                        Home policy                           Foreign policy
        0.2                                         0.2

         0                                           0

       −0.2                                        −0.2

       −0.4                                        −0.4

       −0.6                                        −0.6
                                                                               γ = 0.0
       −0.8                                        −0.8                        γ = 0.5
                                                                               γ = 1.0
        −1                                          −1
              0     2                 4   6               0   2            4             6
                             j                                      j



Figure 3: Coefficients of the dynamic AD relation in terms of CPI inflation, when the
policy rule is (1.38).

is proportional to σ −1 ), so there will be a non-zero net effect on home aggregate
demand that is expansionary. (This is illustrated in the upper right panel of Figure
2.) Nonetheless, the fact that the two effects have opposite signs mean that we may
have less reason to expect such spillovers to be quantitatively significant if we are
concerned with an AD relation specified in terms of the domestic price index.
    It should also be recalled that even if σ = 1, while it is then possible to choose a
Taylor rule that should completely stabilize domestic inflation without requiring any
response to foreign variables, this does not mean that one can stabilize CPI inflation
without responding to foreign variables. Thus the “decoupling” of the aggregate
demand curves that occurs in this case would not really imply that a central bank
has no need to monitor foreign developments, except under a particular view of its
stabilization objectives.


                                              23
    We can also derive an AD relation between the consumer price index and domestic
output, as in section 1.1, even if we assume that monetary policy responds to domestic
inflation only. Equation (1.36) together with our solution of the form (1.27) for π Ht
allow us to derive a relation of the form
                 ∞
                 X
                                                     ∗
          πt =         [ψ 1,j Et Ŷt+j + ψ 2,j Et Ŷt+j + ψ 3,j Et ı̄t+j + ψ 4,j Et ı̄∗t+j ] − γ log St−1
                 j=0


for CPI inflation. (Here the lagged terms of trade matter for CPI inflation determina-
tion, contrary to what we found in equation (1.27) previously, because we now assume
that the domestic policy rule involves the lagged domestic price index, whereas the
CPI inflation rate is defined relative to the lagged consumer price index.) The coeffi-
cient ψ 2,0 is more negative than in the case of the solution for domestic inflation, by
an amount that is greater the more open is the economy, owing to the effect of higher
foreign output on the terms of trade. Figure 3 plots the coefficients for the same
numerical examples as in Figure 2; one observes that the sign of the coefficient ψ 2,0
is reversed. Thus one finds, once again, that (for these parameter values) stimulative
foreign monetary policy will have a contractionary effect on aggregate demand in the
home country; indeed, the effect is even stronger than in the model of section 1.1.


1.4       Consequences of Local-Currency Pricing
The argument given above for the ability of domestic monetary policy to control
the domestic inflation rate depends, as explained at the end of section 1.1, on a
supposition that exchange rate changes automatically imply changes in the prices
charged for the same goods in the two different countries. But it is often observed
that exchange rate changes are not immediately “passed through” to import prices
in this way. If imported goods instead have sticky prices in terms of the currency
of the country where they are sold — so that the law of one price need not hold, in
the short run — does the argument given for the effectiveness of monetary policy in
controlling domestic inflation still hold?
    To examine this question, I present a variant of the model of “local-currency
pricing” proposed by Betts and Devereux (2000), in which, however, price changes are
staggered after the fashion proposed by Calvo (just as in CGG).22 I shall assume the
 22
      The model is essentially a simplified version of the one presented in Benigno (2004).


                                                       24
same preferences as in CGG (and the previous section), so that once again households
in the two countries consume the same goods and have identical preferences.
    Certain equilibrium conditions of the CGG model, that did not depend on the law
of one price, continue to hold in the model with local-currency pricing. Intertemporal
optimization by households continues to imply that (1.8) must hold, and likewise the
corresponding equation for the starred variables. Log-linearizing these equilibrium
relations, we obtain
                             Ĉt = Et Ĉt+1 − σ(ı̂t − Et π t+1 ),
and a corresponding equation for the starred variables. Taking a weighted average
of this equation (multiplied by 1 − γ) and the corresponding equation for the starred
variables (multiplied by γ), we obtain the additional implication that

                               Ĉtw = Et Ĉt+1
                                           w
                                               − σ(ı̂w        w
                                                     t − Et π t+1 ),                         (1.44)

using the notation Ĉtw ≡ log(Ctw /k Ȳ ) = (1 − γ)Ĉt + γ Ĉt∗ , ı̂w                   ∗
                                                                    t ≡ (1 − γ)ı̂t + γı̂t , and
πw                 ∗
 t ≡ (1−γ)π t +γπ t . Moreover, clearing of the goods markets requires (to a first-order
approximation23 ) that
                                        Ĉtw = Ŷtw ,
where Ŷtw ≡ (1 − γ)Ŷt + γ Ŷt∗ . Using this to substitute for Ĉtw in (1.44), we obtain

                               Ŷtw = Et Ŷt+1
                                            w
                                               − σ(ı̂w        w
                                                     t − Et π t+1 ).                         (1.45)

    Note that (1.45) is just a weighted average of the two conditions (1.21)–(1.22)
derived for the model with producer-currency pricing (PCP). In fact, all of the impli-
cations of the system (1.21)–(1.22) are contained in the pair of conditions consisting
of (1.45) and the condition

                                   ı̂t − ı̂∗t = Et π t+1 − Et π ∗t+1                         (1.46)

obtained by subtracting (1.22) from (1.21). In order to complete our analysis of the
aggregate demand block of the model, we must find the relation corresponding to
(1.46) for the model with local-currency pricing (LCP).
  23
    Aggregate supply of the composite world good need not equal aggregate demand for it, if the
composition of the consumption bundles of households in the two countries are not identical. But
even in that case, the discrepancy is of second order in the amplitude of departures from the steady-
state allocation.

                                                25
    Another condition derived earlier that continues to hold in the LCP model is
(1.11), and again this implies the uncovered interest-parity relation (1.28) when log-
linearized. In the model with producer-currency pricing, the result that zt = et
together with (1.28) implies the condition (1.46). With local-currency pricing, in-
stead, (1.28) still holds, but zt need not equal et , so that this derivation is no longer
possible.
    The relation between the relative absolute price levels in the two countries and the
exchange rate will instead depend on what we assume about price adjustment. With
local-currency pricing, there are four different price-setting problems to consider: for
each of the two types of goods (goods produced in the home country and goods
produced in the foreign country), prices are set in terms of both the home currency
and the foreign currency. Each supplier chooses two prices, and the decisions are
independent, in the sense that the price charged in one currency does not constrain
the price that can be charged in the other.24 The two prices for any given good are
the prices charged to buyers in the two different countries; there is assumed to be no
opportunity for cross-border arbitrage by households. Producers can instead sell the
same goods in either country, so that a common marginal cost of supplying additional
goods is relevant to their pricing decision in each country. Here I furthermore assume
Calvo-style staggered price-setting (as in the model of CGG), and more specifically
that there is a common fraction 0 < α < 1 of prices of each of the four types that
remain fixed from one period to the next.25
    Under this form of price-setting (discussed further in section 3), the index of home
goods prices in units of the home currency (which are the prices charged for these
goods in the home country) evolves in accordance with a relation of the form

                        π Ht = ξ(µ + log M Ct − log PHt ) + βEt π Ht+1 ,                        (1.47)

where M Ct is the nominal marginal cost (in units of the home currency) of supplying
additional home goods (a geometric average across the different producers of home
goods), µ > 0 is the log of the desired markup of price over marginal cost (reflecting
  24
     Similar conclusions would obtain if we were to assume that the producers sell to separate retailers
in the two countries, each of which sets the retail price in its market. What is crucial is the
assumption that each retailer has a monopoly over sales of the good in a particular country.
  25
     It does not matter whether we assume that a given firm reconsiders its prices in both countries
at the same time, or at random dates that arrive independently in the two cases.


                                                26
the market power of the monopolistically competitive suppliers) and ξ > 0 is a coeffi-
cient (defined in section 3) that is smaller the less frequently prices are reconsidered.
The producers of home goods face a similar problem in choosing the prices that they
charge for their goods in the foreign country, and in this case the marginal cost of
supplying additional home goods in units of the foreign currency is M Ct /Et . As a
result, the evolution of π ∗Ht satisfies a corresponding equilibrium relation

                   π ∗Ht = ξ(µ + log M Ct − et − log PHt
                                                      ∗
                                                         ) + βEt π ∗Ht+1 .            (1.48)

   One then observes that subtraction of (1.48) from (1.47) implies that

                             ∆zHt = ξ(et − zHt ) + βEt ∆zHt+1 ,                       (1.49)

                       ∗
where zHt ≡ log(PHt /PHt ) is the differential price of home goods in the two countries.
This can alternatively be written as

                                  Et [A(L)zHt+1 ] + ξet = 0,

where
                              A(L) ≡ β − (1 + β + ξ)L + L2 .                          (1.50)
We can alternatively write

            A(L) = β(1 − µ1 L)(1 − µ2 L) = −µ−1                    −1
                                             1 (1 − µ1 L)(1 − βµ1 L )L,


where 0 < µ1 < 1 < µ2 are the two roots of the characteristic equation

                                        µ2 A(µ−1 ) = 0.

It follows that given a difference-stationary process for {et }, there is a unique difference-
stationary process for {zHt } consistent with (1.49), given by
                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                  zHt   = µ1 zHt−1 + (1 − µ1 )(1 − βµ1 )   (βµ1 )j Et et+j .          (1.51)
                                                          j=0

    Similar calculations are possible in the case of the prices set by the producers
of foreign goods in the two countries, as a result of which one concludes that the
differential price of foreign goods in the two countries, zF t ≡ log(PF t /PF∗ t ), satisfies
exactly the same difference equation (1.49). (While the marginal cost of producing

                                             27
foreign goods need not be the same as that of producing home goods, what matters
for this calculation is that the ratio of the marginal costs of supplying goods in the two
countries is in each case given by the exchange rate.) Hence zF t must also be given
by (1.51). It follows that zF t = zHt = zt at all times. The overall price differential
between the two countries, zt , therefore satisfies a difference equation of the form

                                 ∆zt = ξ(et − zt ) + βEt ∆zt+1 ,                              (1.52)

the solution to which is given by
                                                            ∞
                                                            X
                     zt = µ1 zt−1 + (1 − µ1 )(1 − βµ1 )           (βµ1 )j Et et+j .           (1.53)
                                                            j=0


    Equation (1.53) indicates that the path of zt (and hence of the inflation differential
between the two countries) is completely determined by the path of the exchange rate,
just as in the PCP model; this solution replaces the simpler relation zt = et that held
under the earlier assumption. Note that (1.53) implies that zt is a two-sided moving
average of past and expected future values of the log exchange rate. The moving
average smooths the exchange rate over a longer time window the closer is µ1 to 1, or
alternatively, the smaller is ξ (which is to say, the larger is α). In the limit as α → 0,
so that prices are completely flexible, the solution (1.53) reduces simply to zt = et .
    The complete aggregate-demand block26 of the model with local-currency pric-
ing then consists of equations (1.19)–(1.20) specifying the monetary policies of the
two central banks, and equations (1.28), (1.45), and (1.52) that result from private
optimization. Among these equilibrium conditions, all except the last also apply to
the model with producer-currency pricing. The PCP model replaces (1.52) with the
relation zt = et , which is just the limiting case of (1.52) when α → 0. Hence the
aggregate-demand relations of the PCP model correspond to the case α = 0 of the
  26
     It might not seem right to call equation (1.52) part of the “aggregate-demand block” of the
model, as it depends on one’s model of price-setting behavior, and on the value of the parameter
α. However, it is independent of the evolution of marginal cost, and so can be derived without
discussing the specification of the production technology, preferences regarding labor supply, or the
degree of integration of factor markets. It is also clear that (1.52) plays the same role in the LCP
model as the requirement that zt = et in the PCP model, and we did use that relation in deriving
the AD equations for the earlier model, despite the fact that it follows from an assumption about the
pricing of goods. Finally, we do clearly require (1.52) in order to be able to derive the AD relations
for the LCP model.

                                               28
aggregate-demand relations of the LCP model; under the PCP assumption, however,
unlike the LCP model, the aggregate-demand relations are the same regardless of the
degree of stickiness of prices.
    A pair of aggregate-demand relations parallel to (1.26) in the case of the PCP can
also be derived here. As long as the response coefficients of the policy rules satisfy
certain inequalities,27 it is possible to uniquely solve the system of equations consisting
of (1.19)–(1.20), (1.28), (1.45), and (1.52) for bounded processes {π t , π ∗t , ı̂t , ı̂∗t , et − zt },
given any bounded processes {Ŷt , Ŷt∗ , ı̄t , ı̄∗t }. (And once again the solution is purely
forward-looking, in the sense that each of the 5 endogenous variables depends only
on current and expected future values of the 4 forcing variables.) Again we find that
existence of equilibrium places no (local) restrictions on the way in which monetary
policy may be independently varied in the two countries, and again we find that
adjustment of monetary policy in one country alone can alter the path of inflation in
that country (for any given paths of real activity in the two countries).
    The effects of monetary policy on inflation (or on the location of the AD curve)
can be stated more explicitly in the special case in which φπ = φ∗π and φy = φ∗y . In
this case, (1.19)–(1.20) again imply (1.29), and this can again be used to substitute
for the interest-rate differential in (1.28), yielding

                         Et ∆et+1 = (ı̄t − ı̄∗t ) + φπ ∆zt + φy (Ŷt − Ŷt∗ ).                    (1.54)

However, we can no longer use the requirement that zt = et to transform (1.54) into
(1.30). Instead we must solve the system consisting of (1.52) and (1.54) for the paths
of et and zt .
    This pair of equations can be written in the form
          "           #     "                   #
               ∆zt                Et ∆zt+1
                        = A                       + a [ı̄∗t − ı̄t + φy (Ŷt∗ − Ŷt )],
              et − zt         Et (et+1 − zt+1 )

where                                                   "            #
                                                            ξ  1
                                  A ≡ (1 + φπ ξ)−1
                                                            1 −φπ
and a is the second column of A. One can show that A has both eigenvalues inside
the unit circle if and only if φπ > 1; under this assumption, there is a unique bounded
  27
     As in section 1.1, these involve only the inflation-response coefficient φπ , φ∗π , and once again it
is necessary for a unique solution that φπ , φ∗π > 1.

                                                 29
solution given by
              "               #         ∞
                    ∆zt                 X
                                    =           Aj a Et [ı̄∗t+j − ı̄t+j + φy (Ŷt+j
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                    − Ŷt+j )].     (1.55)
                   et − zt               j=0

    The first line of (1.55) generalizes our previous solution (1.32) for the inflation
differential;28 while it is algebraically more complex, we again obtain a solution for
the inflation differential as a function of the expected future paths of exactly the
same variables as before. Once again, we find that a change in monetary policy
in one country that is not matched by an equivalent change in the other country’s
policy necessarily changes the inflation differential between the two countries, for any
given paths of output in the two countries. Moreover, in the case that φy = 0, one
can determine the effect on the inflation differential independently of what one may
assume about aggregate supply. It is also noteworthy that while the size of the effect
of a change in monetary policy on the inflation differential depends on the degree of
inflation sensitivity (φπ ) of the central banks’ reaction functions and the degree of
price flexibility (ξ), it does not depend on the relative size of the countries (i.e., on
γ).
    We can complete the derivation of the AD relations for the two countries in this
symmetric case, by using (1.19)–(1.20) to substitute for the interest rates in (1.45),
yielding a difference equation for the world average inflation rate,
                         −1
                   πw            w      −1     w
                    t = φπ [Et π t+1 + σ Et Ŷt+1 − (σ
                                                       −1
                                                          + φy )Ŷtw − ı̄w
                                                                         t ].                       (1.56)

This relation can then be “solved forward” to yield29
                                        ∞
                                        X
 πw
  t    =   −φ−1
             π (σ
                  −1
                       + φy )Ŷtw   +         φ−(j+1)
                                               π      Et [(σ −1 − φ−1
                                                                   π (σ
                                                                        −1           w
                                                                           + φy ))Ŷt+j+1 − ı̄w
                                                                                              t+j ]. (1.57)
                                        j=0

Since both π t and π ∗t can be expressed as linear combinations of the world average
inflation rate π w
                 t and the inflation differential ∆zt , the pair of equations (1.55) and
(1.57) completely characterize the AD relations for the two countries.
    The AD relation for the home country can again be written in the form (1.27),
just as in the case of the PCP model. Figure 4 illustrates the numerical coefficients
  28
    Note that the first line of (1.55) reduces precisely to (1.32) in the limit as ξ → ∞.
  29
    The necessary and sufficient condition for a unique bounded solution is again that φπ > 1.
Under this assumption, the infinite sum is well-defined and bounded in the case of bounded forcing
processes.

                                                       30
                       Home output                                 Foreign output
         0.2

          0                                          0.2

                                                      0
        −0.2
                                                    −0.2
        −0.4
                                                    −0.4
        −0.6
                                                    −0.6
        −0.8                                        −0.8

         −1                                          −1
               0   2       4         6     8               0   2         4          6             8


                       Home policy                                 Foreign policy
         0.2
                                                     0.1
          0
                                                      0
        −0.2
                                                    −0.1
        −0.4                                        −0.2
                                                    −0.3
        −0.6
                                                    −0.4                                γ = 0.0
        −0.8                                                                            γ = 0.5
                                                    −0.5
                                                                                        γ = 1.0
         −1
               0   2       4         6     8               0   2         4          6             8
                           j                                             j



Figure 4: Coefficients of the dynamic AD relation (1.27) for the model with local-
currency pricing.

in the case of the same parameter values as before, and assuming in addition that
ξ = 0.04.30 Again the coefficients are shown for three different possible values of γ.
When γ = 0 (the closed-economy limit), the LCP model is indistinguishable from
the PCP model (as there are no import prices), but for γ > 0 the two models are no
longer equivalent.
    Note that in the limiting case of a very small country (the home country in the
case that γ → 1), domestic monetary policy is no longer able to have any influence
on the predicted path of π w
                           t given the expected evolution of world output. (Indeed, in
                      w
this limiting case, π t depends only on foreign output and foreign monetary policy.)
But even so, (1.55) implies that the sensitivity of the inflation differential to domestic
  30
   This value as well corresponds to the magnitude of this coefficient in the empirical model of
Rotemberg and Woodford (1997); see also Woodford (2003, chap. 5).



                                               31
monetary policy is exactly as great as it would be for a larger country. Hence domestic
inflation is still affected by domestic monetary policy, and to a non-trivial extent, as
is illustrated by the coefficients in the upper left panel of Figure 4.
     It is true that in the LCP model, the slow (and smoothed) pass-through of
exchange-rate changes to import prices reduces the size of the immediate effect on
domestic inflation of a transitory change in domestic monetary policy, relative to
what occurs in the PCP model. However, this does not mean that it is harder for
monetary policy to affect inflation than would be the case in a closed economy in
which prices are sticky for a similar length of time. While the coefficient ψ 1,0 be-
comes quite small in the small-open-economy case, the coefficients ψ 1,j indicating the
effects of anticipated future domestic monetary policy on current inflation no longer
die out quickly as the horizon j increases. This means that a persistent shift in the
central bank’s policy reaction function can have a substantial immediate effect. The
crucial difference is that in this model it becomes more important for interest rates
to be adjusted in a relatively inertial way in order to have a substantial impact on
aggregate demand.
     In fact, a sufficiently persistent shift in policy (that is understood by the private
sector) still affects inflation to the same extent as in the LCP model. For example, it
follows from (1.55) that a permanent unit increase in the intercept ı̄t (corresponding
to a reduction in the implicit domestic inflation target of size (φπ − 1)−1 ) lowers the
inflation differential immediately and permanently by the amount of the reduction in
the implicit inflation target, which is the same prediction as is implied by (1.32). In
the case that the home country is very small, this is also the size of the immediate,
permanent reduction in domestic inflation; thus the same size effect on inflation is
predicted as in the case of a closed economy.
     In the example shown in Figure 4, prices are relatively sticky,31 as shown by the
small value of ξ. This makes the equilibrium dynamics under the LCP model quite
different from those of the PCP model. In Figure 5, the coefficients of the dynamic AD
relation are instead computed under the assumption that ξ = 0.4, implying a short-
run aggregate-supply curve that is 10 times as steep. In this case, the difference with
  31
     By this I mean that the rate of adjustment of price indices to changing aggregate conditions
is relatively slow. This is not due solely to the value assumed for α, but also to the fact that
the parameter values used by Rotemberg and Woodford imply substantial “real rigidities.” See
Woodford (2003, chap. 3) for further discussion.



                                             32
                      Home output                                Foreign output
        0.2                                        0.4

         0

       −0.2

       −0.4                                       −0.2

       −0.6

       −0.8

        −1                                        −0.8
              0   2       4         6    8               0   2         4          6             8


                      Home policy                                Foreign policy
        0.2                                        0.2

         0

       −0.2                                         0

       −0.4

       −0.6                                       −0.2
                                                                                      γ = 0.0
       −0.8                                                                           γ = 0.5
                                                                                      γ = 1.0
        −1                                        −0.4
              0   2       4         6    8               0   2         4          6             8
                          j                                            j



Figure 5: Coefficients of the dynamic AD relation for the LCP model with ξ = 0.4.

Figure 1 is less dramatic. As the value of ξ is increased still further, the coefficients
for each of the values of γ all approach those shown in Figure 1.


2     “Global Liquidity” and the Instruments of
      Monetary Policy
Another way in which globalization is sometimes supposed to reduce the significance
of individual national monetary policies is by making the aggregate supply of “liq-
uidity” by the world’s central banks, rather than that supplied by a given country’s
central bank alone, the variable that determines the degree of stimulus to aggregate
demand (and hence inflationary pressure) in that country as well as abroad. Market
analysts in financial institutions have spoken a great deal recently of “global liquidity”
as a factor that has supposedly been responsible for asset-price booms worldwide, and

                                             33
it is often proposed that this factor can be measured by growth in some aggregate
of the money supplies in different currencies (e.g., Global Research, 2007), following
the lead of ECB researchers such as Sousa and Zaghini (2004, 2006) and Rüffer and
Stracca (2006). To the extent that such a view is correct in a globally integrated world
economy, one might expect that it should mean a reduced ability of national central
banks to control national inflation rates, especially in the case of small countries that
supply a correspondingly small proportion of “global liquidity.”
    As noted in the previous section, in an open economy there are channels through
which foreign monetary policy developments (among other foreign factors) will gen-
erally affect the level of domestic aggregate demand, for any given stance of domestic
monetary policy. It may even be the case, though it need not be, that the effect of
domestic interest-rate policy on domestic aggregate demand is smaller in the case of
a small open economy than it would be for a large economy (or a closed economy).
But as explained in the previous section, even in the case of full integration and the
limiting case of a very small economy, the effect of domestic monetary policy on do-
mestic demand does not become negligible, and thus the idea that only some global
aggregate of liquidity creation by central banks is relevant is clearly mistaken. More-
over, monetary stimulus abroad may contract demand for domestic output, owing to
the terms-of-trade effect of the depreciation of the foreign currency; in such a case,
while foreign monetary policy is relevant to domestic conditions, the sign of the effect
is the opposite of the one suggested by loose talk about “global liquidity.”
    The analysis in the previous section, however, took for granted the existence of an
instrument through which a central bank can control the level of short-term nominal
interest rates in terms of its currency, as long as the possibility exists of a savings-
investment equilibrium at a different level of interest rates; thus it was assumed that
policy can be represented by a Taylor rule, without asking how a central bank is able
to implement its operating target for the nominal interest rate. It is often supposed
that central-bank control over nominal interest rates depends on the central bank’s
role as a monopoly supplier of financial claims (“base money”) that are uniquely
liquid. Might integration of financial markets erode this monopoly power, so that the
liquidity premium associated with base money in any country comes to depend on
the global supply of liquid assets, rather than the supply by that country’s central
bank alone? And if so, would this mean that central banks (at least, small central
banks) would lose the capacity to control nominal interest rates within their borders?


                                         34
    In order to consider this possibility, I first discuss the instruments through which
a central bank’s operating target for a domestic short-term nominal interest rate can
be implemented in an open economy, relying upon a conventional model of money
demand, in which it is assumed that only the liabilities of a given country’s central
bank are useful for facilitating transactions (and so supply liquidity services) in that
country. I then consider the extent to which the conclusions would be changed if
globalization were to imply that the liquidity services provided by the liabilities of a
given central bank were available equally to households in all countries.


2.1     Money Demand and Monetary Policy Implementation in
        a Two-Country Model
We can introduce liquidity services from holdings of base money by supposing that
the utility of households in the home economy is of the form
                                     ∞
                                     X
                                E0         β t [u(Ct ) + w(Mt /Pt )],                       (2.1)
                                     t=0

where u(C) is again defined by (1.2)–(1.3), Mt indicates home-currency money bal-
ances, and
                                                −1
                                           m1−σm
                                w(m) ≡ λ
                                           1 − σ −1
                                                 m
for some σ m > 0. Because of the additive separability of the utility function between
consumption and liquidity services, the conclusions of section 1 are not changed by
the addition of the new term; this will only affect the demand for money balances
(not treated earlier).
    Base money is assumed to be a one-period liability of the central bank, that
promises a riskless nominal return (in units of the domestic currency) of im     t be-
                                      m
tween periods t and t + 1; the rate it is an administered rate (rather than market-
determined), and the choice of it is an additional potential instrument of policy for
the central bank. (Under some regimes, like that of the U.S. at present, im   t = 0 at
                                                                 32
all times; but this is a choice, rather than a logical necessity. ) The flow budget
  32
    See Woodford (2001) and Woodford (2003, chap. 1) for discussion of other countries where
interest is paid on central-bank balances, and where variation in the administered deposit rate in
accordance with changes in the central bank’s interest-rate target plays an important role in the
implementation of policy.

                                                 35
constraint of a household is then of the form33
             Pt Ct + Mt + Et [Qt,t+1 At+1 ] ≤ (1 + im
                                                    t−1 )Mt−1 + At + Pt Yt − Tt ,

where At denotes the state-contingent nominal value (in units of the home currency)
of the household’s portfolio of non-monetary financial claims carried into period t and
Tt represents net nominal tax collections by the home government. Here it is assumed
that (in order for there to exist no arbitrage opportunities) all non-monetary financial
assets are priced using the common stochastic discount factor Qt,t+1 (so that any
portfolio with state-contingent payoff At+1 in period t + 1 must cost Et [Qt,t+1 At+1 ]
in period t), while money is not because of its additional service flow. Under the
assumption of complete financial markets, we need not describe any specific non-
monetary financial assets, and can suppose that households directly choose the state-
contingent future payoffs that they prefer.34
    One can alternatively write the flow budget constraint in the form35
                     Pt Ct + ∆t Mt + Et [Qt,t+1 Wt+1 ] ≤ Wt + Pt Yt − Tt ,                      (2.2)
where Wt ≡ (1 + im  t−1 )Mt−1 + At is the total value of nominal financial wealth at the
beginning of period t, and
                                             it − im
                                                   t
                                       ∆t ≡
                                              1 + it
is the interest-rate differential between equally riskless, equally short-maturity non-
monetary nominal assets (assumed not to yield any “liquidity services”) and money.
(In the familiar textbook case of zero interest on money balances, ∆t is simply a
monotonic transformation of the nominal interest rate it .) It is evident from (2.2)
that the differential ∆t measures the opportunity cost of holding part of one’s wealth
in monetary form. Consequently household optimization requires that
                                         w0 (Mt /Pt )
                                                      = ∆t                                      (2.3)
                                           u0 (Ct )
  33
     See the text explaining equations (1.2)–(1.3) of Woodford (2003, chap. 2) for further discussion.
The flow budget constraint here is of exactly the same form as in a closed-economy model, as
purchases of foreign goods are included as part of the aggregate Ct and the prices of imported goods
are included as part of the price index Pt .
  34
     Our conclusions about money demand in this section do not depend on the assumption of
complete markets; the first-order condition (2.3) derived below for optimal money holdings would
also be obtained for an economy with no financial assets other than money and a one-period riskless
nominal claim earning the interest rate it .
  35
     Again, see the discussion of equation (1.7) in Woodford (2003, chap. 2) for explanation.

                                               36
each period.
   We can solve (2.3) for desired real money balances, obtaining
                                                                  σ /σ
                              Mt                    C m
                                 = L(Ct , ∆t ) ≡ λσm t σm .
                              Pt                     ∆t

Substituting (1.15), we obtain
                                                    (1−γ)σ m /σ    ∗γσ m /σ
                           Mt              Y                      Yt
                              = λσm k σm /σ t                                          (2.4)
                           Pt                             ∆σt m
as an open-economy generalization of the “LM equation” of a canonical closed-
economy model. Similar equations hold for the foreign country; in particular, we
obtain the equilibrium relation
                                                    (1−γ)σ m /σ    ∗γσ m /σ
                           Mt∗     σ m σ m /σ Yt                  Yt
                               = λ    k                                       ,        (2.5)
                           Pt∗                            ∆∗σ
                                                           t
                                                              m



where Mt∗ represents holdings of foreign-currency money balances per foreign house-
hold, and ∆∗t is the corresponding differential between the foreign-currency nominal
interest rate i∗t and the interest rate im∗  t paid by the foreign central bank.
    If we represent the monetary policy of each central bank by a path for the mone-
tary base (rather than a Taylor rule), as is often done in models of exchange-rate de-
termination, then the aggregate-demand block of the model (with producer-currency
pricing) consists of equations (1.17)–(1.18) and (2.4)–(2.5): two equations for each
country (an “IS equation” and an “LM equation”), that jointly suffice to deter-
mine the paths of {Pt , Pt∗ , it , i∗t } given paths for {Yt , Yt∗ } and the policy variables
{Mt , Mt∗ , im    m∗
             t , it }. Alternatively, if we suppose that policy is specified in each coun-
try by a Taylor rule, and adjustments of the monetary base (through open-market
purchases of securities) are simply used to implement the prescriptions of the Taylor
rule, then equations (1.17)–(1.18) and (1.19)–(1.20) determine the relations between
prices, interest rates, and real activity as before; but equations (2.4)–(2.5) must now
also hold, and determine the adjustments of the monetary base and/or the interest
paid on base money that are required in order to implement the policies.
    Local equilibrium determination can again be studied by log-linearizing equations
(2.4)–(2.5), yielding

                      log Mt − log Pt = η y Ŷt + η ∗y Ŷt∗ − η i (ı̂t − ı̂m
                                                                           t ),        (2.6)

                                               37
                       log Mt∗ − log Pt∗ = η y Ŷt + η ∗y Ŷt∗ − η i (ı̂∗t − ı̂m∗
                                                                               t ),            (2.7)
where                                                                   µ          ¶
                              σm                      σm                    1−∆¯
                 η y ≡ (1 − γ) ,            η ∗y   ≡γ    ,       ηi ≡        ¯         σm.
                               σ                       σ                     ∆
Here I have log-linearized around a zero-inflation steady state in which the rate of
interest on money is assumed to satisfy

                                         0 ≤ ı̄m < β −1 − 1,

as is necesssary for the existence of such a steady state;

                                      ¯ ≡ 1 − β(1 + ı̄m ) > 0
                                      ∆

is the implied steady-state interest differential; and

                                     ı̂m            m        m
                                       t ≡ log(1 + it /1 + ı̄ )


is defined analogously with the previous definition of ı̂t .36
    One observes that to this order of approximation, the allowance for two distinct
instruments of monetary policy (variations in the base and variations in the rate of
interest paid on the base) is redundant. This follows from the fact that it is only
the quantity log Mt − η i ı̂m
                            t that matters in equation (2.6). This means that any
policy aim that can be achieved by varying the interest rate paid on money can
alternatively be achieved through an appropriate adjustment of the monetary base.37
In the case of the very conventional assumption made here about the nature of the
demand for liquidity, no underestimation of the scope for an independent national
monetary policy results from stipulating that im  t = 0 at all times, as is typically
assumed in textbook treatments. One can then represent the monetary policies of
  36
     The method and notation follow the treatment of a closed-economy model in Woodford (2003,
chap. 2, sec. 3.3). Note that I have also chosen units (as is possible without loss of generality) in
which the steady-state level of real money balances is equal to 1 in each country, so that I can drop
the constant that would otherwise appear in each of the equations (2.6)–(2.7).
  37
     Of course, there could nonetheless be practical advantages to the use of one technique. For
example, calculating the interest-rate effect of a given size change in the rate of interest paid on
base money is much more straightforward than guessing the size of open-market operation required
to achieve the same effect, especially in the presence of disturbances to the money-demand relation,
not modeled in the simple treatment here.


                                                    38
the two countries simply in terms of the paths of the two countries’ monetary bases,
i.e., the supply of “liquidity” by the two central banks.
     We see that openness results in the “LM equations” of the two economies’ being
interrelated, just as was true (in general) of their “IS equations” in section 1. To
what extent does it make sense, though, to say that in a globalized economy, the
supply of “global liquidity” should be an important determinant of equilibrium in
each individual country? Suppose that we derive AD relations for each of the two
countries, taking as given the paths of money for the two countries. We can do this
by using each country’s IS relation to eliminate the nominal interest rate from its LM
relation. We obtain a difference equation for the price level of the form

   (1 + η i ) log Pt − η i Et log Pt+1 = log Mt − η i ı̂m               −1   w       −1     w
                                                        t − (η y + η i σ )Ŷt + η i σ Et Ŷt+1 ,

which can be solved forward to yield
           ∞
           X                                                               ∞
                                                                           X
                          j
log Pt =         (1−α)α       Et [log Mt+j −η i ı̂m                  −1   w
                                                  t+j ]−[(1−α)η y +ασ ]Ŷt −         (1−α)αj [η y −σ −1 ]Et Ŷt+j
                                                                                                               w

           j=0                                                                 j=1
                                                                              (2.8)
for the equilibrium domestic price level corresponding to any expected paths of do-
mestic and foreign output, where
                                          ηi
                                  α≡          < 1.
                                       1 + ηi
(A similar equation holds for the foreign price level.)
    We see that, conditioning on the paths of real activity in the two countries, the
price level in a given country depends only on current and expected future monetary
policy in that country alone, and not on “global liquidity” at all. (This is the same
conclusion as we reached in section 1, when monetary policy was instead specified by
a Taylor rule for each country.) Thus to the extent that monetary policy spillovers
exist between countries, they do not occur through the aggregate demand side of the
model, as the notion of “global liquidity” would suggest. And if we specify the supply
side of the model in such a way that output is unaffected by monetary policy (for
example, by assuming flexible wages and prices), it will follow that inflation in one
country will be completely independent of monetary policy in the other country, no
matter how small the country in question may be.
    If, instead, we assume the existence of nominal rigidities that allow monetary
policy to affect real activity, foreign monetary policy will affect inflation determination

                                                  39
in the home country (assuming again that home country monetary policy is specified
by a given path for the monetary base). However, the spillovers that exist will not
be of the sort suggested by the theory of “global liquidity.” We observe from (2.6)
that a change in the level of foreign economic activity will shift the home country
LM curve, for a given home money supply. But (since η ∗y > 0) expansionary policy
in the foreign country, which raises Y ∗ , will have the same effect as a contractionary
monetary shock in the home country. This is because higher foreign output increases
demand for the home currency, at any given level of domestic output. Such an effect
is the opposite of the effect that the “global liquidity” thesis would suggest.


2.2    Consequences of Currency Substitution
Some may suppose that the model presented above fails to find a role for “global
liquidity” because of the conventional assumption that households in a given country
obtain liquidity services only by holding the money issued by their own central bank
(on the ground that only this asset has a special role as a means of payment within
those borders). What if globalization also means global competition among media
for executing payments? There is little evidence that this is already an important
phenomenon at present, but one might conjecture that it could happen in the future
as a result of the same sorts of improvements in communications technology (and
relaxation of regulations) that have already led to great increases in the degree of
integration of financial markets. To the extent that this were to occur, would some
global liquidity aggregate, rather than the money supplied by the local central bank,
become a primary determinant of aggregate demand in all countries? And if so,
would this mean a loss of control over domestic inflation by central banks, unless
they arrange an appropriate world-wide coordination of their policies?
    To clarify ideas, I shall proceed directly to the most extreme hypothetical, of a
world in which each of the two central banks’ currencies supply liquidity services of
exactly the same kind to households in either country. Would only “global liquidity”
matter in that case? One possible case of this kind is that in which households in
each country have the same utility function,
                        ∞
                        X
                   E0         β t [u(Ct ) + δw(MHt /Pt ) + δ ∗ w(MF t /Pt∗ )],     (2.9)
                        t=0

for some weights δ, δ ∗ > 0, where w(m) is the same function as before. Here Ct is the

                                               40
household’s purchases of the world consumption aggregate, MHt is its holdings of the
home currency, and MF t its holdings of the foreign currency. (This notation applies to
the choices of a household in the home country. A foreign household has an identical
utility function, but its choice variables are starred.) The liquidity services obtained
from money balances depend on the purchasing power of those balances, in units of
the world good (which is what the household cares about purchasing). Because the
law of one price holds (in the PCP version of the model), the relevant measure of
real balances for households in either country is obtained by deflating home-currency
balances by Pt and deflating foreign-currency balances by Pt∗ .
    In this case, households in each country choose to hold positive balances of both
currencies, and the demand for the home currency by households in either country
is of the form (2.4), with λ replaced by the appropriate multiplicative factor. Total
world demand for the home currency will then equal supply if and only if
                                         ∗
              (1 − γ)Mt = (1 − γ)MHt + γMHt
                             = (1 − γ)δ σm L(Ct , ∆t )Pt + γδ σm L(Ct∗ , ∆t )Pt
                                                       (1−γ)σ m /σ    ∗γσ m /σ
                                           σ m σ /σ   Yt             Yt
                             = (1 − γ)λ̃     k  m
                                                                                 Pt ,
                                                             ∆σt m
                        −1
where λ̃ ≡ δλ/(1 − γ)σm . This is an equilibrium relation of exactly the same form
as (2.4), except that λ is replaced by λ̃. The two equations are identical, even in
                       −1
scale, if δ = (1 − γ)σm ; but even if not, they have the same form (2.6) when log-
linearized. The condition for supply of the foreign currency to equal world demand
for it similarly leads to an equilibrium condition of exactly the same form as (2.5).
Hence the form of the two “LM equations” is exactly the same in this variant of the
model, with exactly the same implications for the ability of a central bank to control
domestic aggregate demand through the instruments of monetary policy.
    Thus the fact that independent variation in the supply of one currency influences
the corresponding price level in the way indicated in (2.8) is not at all dependent on
assuming that the advantages flowing from holding a particular liquid asset are only
available in one country. The only assumption that is essential is the assumption that
the two currencies are not perfect substitutes as means of facilitating transactions in
either country. (Preferences (2.9) imply that the elasticity of substitution between
the two types of cash balances in the provision of liquidity services is only σ m .)
    A still more extreme assumption would be to suppose that the two kinds of money

                                             41
are instead perfect substitutes in liquidity provision. One might instead assume that
households in each country have preferences of the form
                           ∞
                           X
                      E0         β t [u(Ct ) + w(MHt /Pt + MF t /Pt∗ )],               (2.10)
                           t=0

where w(m) is the same function as before. In this case, one would no longer be
able to derive separate demand functions for the two currencies. All households will
instead choose to hold only the currency with the lower opportunity cost; if positive
quantities of both are supplied, equilibrium is only possible if

                                           ∆t = ∆∗t .                                  (2.11)

There will then be a well-behaved demand function for the sum of the two types of
real balances, and a corresponding equilibrium condition
                                                         (1−γ)σ m /σ    ∗γσ m /σ
                         Mt    M∗               Y                      Yt
                 (1 − γ)    + γ ∗t = λσm k σm /σ t                                 .   (2.12)
                         Pt    Pt                              ∆σt m

The pair of equilibrium conditions (2.11)–(2.12) would replace the conditions (2.4)–
(2.5) in the aggregate demand block of a model with perfect currency substitutability.
    In this case, it really would be true that only “global liquidity” matters for ag-
gregate demand determination; that is, the money supply of neither country would
matter, except through its contribution to aggregate global real balances, defined by
the left-hand side of (2.12). In the case of a small country, the monetary base of
which would make only a negligible contribution to global real balances, variations
in the monetary base would have essentially no effect on aggregate demand there or
elsewhere, and so would be irrelevant to domestic inflation determination.
    Nonetheless, it would not follow that a small country would be unable to use an
independent monetary policy to control domestic inflation. The reason is that in
this case the additional instrument of policy, the possibility of varying the interest
rate paid on money, would no longer be redundant. Condition (2.11), which can
alternatively be written
                                   1 + it    1 + imt
                                           =         ,
                                   1 + i∗t   1 + im∗
                                                  t

implies that the nominal interest-rate differential between the two countries (for non-
monetary riskless assets) must be directly determined by the differential between the

                                             42
interest rates paid on money by the two central banks. This means that independent
variation in the rate paid on money in a small country can influence aggregate nominal
expenditure in that country, whether or not it is accompanied by changes in the
monetary base. Thus in a world in which the liabilities of different central banks
came to be close substitutes for one another in facilitating transactions worldwide, it
would become essential to use variations in the (administratively determined) interest
yield on base money as the means through which central-bank operating targets for
domestic short-term nominal interest rates are implemented.38
    As a simple example of how inflation control would be possible using this instru-
ment, consider a small open economy (i.e., one for which γ is essentially equal to
1), so that monetary policy decisions of the small country can have no effect on the
evolution of foreign variables such as Pt∗ , Yt∗ , i∗t , or im∗
                                                             t . It follows from (2.12) that the
small country’s policy will be unable to affect the value of ∆t either. Nonetheless, the
small country’s central bank can set the interest rate im         t on the domestic monetary
base as it pleases. Suppose that it sets it in accordance with a reaction function of
the form
                                    ı̂m
                                      t = ı̄t + φπ π t ,

where ı̄t is an exogenous process with respect to the evolution of domestic variables,
but may depend on the evolution of foreign variables.
    Then subtracting (1.22) from (1.21), and using the log-linearized version of (2.11)
to replace the interest-rate differential ı̂t − ı̂∗t by ı̂m     m∗
                                                          t − ı̂t , we obtain the equilibrium
relation
                              ı̂m     m∗
                                t − ı̂t  = Et [π t+1 − π ∗t+1 ].
Substituting the reaction function for ı̂m
                                         t , we find that in equilibrium, the domestic
inflation process must satisfy

                            φπ π t = Et π t+1 + (ı̂m∗       ∗
                                                   t − Et π t+1 − ı̄t ).

  38
    This is already a crucial element in monetary policy implementation in countries with ”channel
systems” like Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, and their success indicates that it would remain
entirely feasible to conduct a national interest-rate policy without any ability to alter the spread
between the returns on non-monetary assets and base money. See discussion in Woodford, 2001, of
the related issue of monetary policy implementation in a world where central banks have to compete
with private suppliers of transactions media.




                                               43
In the case that φπ > 1, this has a unique bounded solution,
                                   ∞
                                   X
                            πt =         φ−(j+1)
                                          π      Et [ı̂m∗      ∗
                                                       t+j − π t+j+1 − ı̄t+j ].     (2.13)
                                   j=0

    This shows that variations in the rate of interest paid on the monetary base
can still be effectively used to control the domestic rate of inflation, even under the
assumption that the liabilities of different central banks are equally useful as sources of
liquidity in all parts of the world. It is true that in such a world, foreign developments
would matter for inflation determination in the small country, and the interest paid
on money would have to be adjusted so as to offset those developments, in order for
a stable inflation rate to be maintained in the small country. But even so, it is not
true that the central bank’s main problem would be offsetting the inflationary impact
of variations in “global liquidity”. One sees from (2.13) that what the central bank
actually needs to offset is variations in the real rate of return on money balances in
the rest of the world. Moreover, it is increases rather than decreases in the real return
on money elsewhere in the world that would be inflationary in the small country, if
not offset by a corresponding increase in the interest paid on money in the small
country.
    Of course, “dollarization” does imply reduced efficacy of domestic monetary policy
in a small open economy in one respect, if it means not only that the foreign currency
can be used a means of payment (and so supplies liquidity services), but also that
prices of domestic goods are quoted in, and sticky in, the foreign currency rather than
the domestic currency. In that case, it would remain true that domestic monetary
policy should be able to stabilize the purchasing power of the domestic currency,
but this would no longer imply an ability to eliminate the distortions due to price
stickiness in the domestic economy.39 Indeed, if few domestic goods continue to be
priced in terms of the domestic currency, then the stability or otherwise of the value
of that currency would cease to have any real consequences, and cease to have any
welfare consequences — so that domestic monetary policy would indeed be irrelevant.
But this is hardly an inevitable result of globalization, even under the assumption
that eventually multiple currencies might come to be widely accepted as means of
payment in a given location. When one observes prices being fixed in a currency other
than the local currency, this is typically because the purchasing power of the local
  39
       This has been stressed by David Romer, in a comment on an earlier draft.

                                                   44
currency is expected to be less stable than that of the foreign currency; a central bank
that stabilizes a domestic price index in terms of its own currency has little reason
to fear that domestic prices will cease to fixed in that currency, even if the costs of
transacting in foreign currencies are reduced.


3    “Global Slack” and Inflation Determination
Thus far I have discussed only the aggregate demand block of an open-economy
macroeconomic model, asking how monetary policy affects the equilibrium inflation
rate that would be associated with any given path for real activity. This has meant
leaving aside the question of the extent to which a given effect of national monetary
policy on the aggregate demand relation should result in a different rate of inflation
as opposed to a different level of real activity. If we are willing to assume that
the level of real activity in each country should be determined by factors such as
technology and preferences, quite independently of monetary policy in either country
(as real business cycle theories assert), then the analysis given above would already
offer a complete answer to the question of how monetary policy affects inflation in a
globalized economy. But in the presence of nominal rigidities this will not be true,
and we need to consider the “aggregate supply block” of the model as well in order
to determine the effects of monetary policy on either output or inflation.
    The question of how globalization should affect aggregate supply relations — the
connection that should exist between inflation and real activity as a result of the
way that the incentives that firms have to change their prices vary depending on the
degree of utilization of productive capacity — is of considerable interest in its own
right. It is sometimes argued that increased international trade in goods and services
should make inflation in any country more a function of “global slack” — the balance
that exists between worldwide productive capacity and world demand — than of
the balance between demand and capacity in that country alone. Economists at the
BIS in particular (Borio and Filardo, 2007) have argued that in a globalized economy,
domestic slack alone should matter less than global slack as a determinant of domestic
inflation, and have suggested that there is evidence that this is already true to some
extent. (See however Ihrig et al., 2007, for a contrary view of the empirical evidence.)
    To the extent that this thesis is correct, one might expect it to pose a threat
to central-bank control of domestic inflation, even granting our conclusions above

                                         45
about the continued influence of national monetary policy over aggregate demand.
In particular, one might suppose that even if domestic monetary policy can affect
aggregate demand for domestic output, if the domestic output gap ceases to be a
significant determinant of inflation, a national central bank will cease to have much
ability to influence the domestic inflation rate, which will instead depend primarily
on the international factors that determine “global slack.” Thus one might expect
national monetary policy to become ineffective in controlling inflation, especially in
the case of a small country that can contribute little to either world demand or
world productive capacity. Our conclusions above about the continued significance of
national monetary policy for aggregate demand would presumably then imply that
monetary policy should have an even greater effect on real activity in a globalized
economy — but this would be little comfort to those concerned about inflation risk.
    Indeed, under the “global slack” hypothesis, the efficacy of domestic monetary
policy in affecting the level of real activity, without any notable effect on domestic
inflation, might be expected to lead to monetary policies in each country with joint
consequences for global slack that are more inflationary than any country would like.
Even if one were to grant that central banks should still be able to control inflation,
one might fear that they will have less incentive to do so, if they perceive themselves to
face a flatter Phillips-curve tradeoff between domestic output expansion and domestic
inflation. (This is presumably the reason for the concern of Borio and Filardo that a
“more elastic” economy will encourage a loss of monetary discipline.)
    In this section, I consider the degree of concern that should be given to threats
of this kind, by analyzing the consequences of openness in goods and factor markets
for aggregate-supply relations in a model with nominal rigidities. I give particular
attention to the consequences of openness for the slope of the Phillips-curve tradeoff,
and also to the degree to which it is true that domestic inflation should be determined
by “global slack” as opposed to (or in addition to) a domestic output gap. I begin
by reviewing the answers to these questions in the canonical two-country model of
CGG, and then consider some variations on that model that might be expected to
increase the importance of “global slack”.




                                          46
3.1    Aggregate Supply in a Two-Country Model
A variety of arguments have been given for the view that world economic activity,
rather than domestic activity alone, should be important for inflation determination
in a globalized economy. Bernanke (2006) interprets the global slack hypothesis as
a simple observation that if domestic products are sold in global markets, global
income (rather than domestic income alone) will become an important determinant
of the demand for those products and hence of the incentives that domestic producers
have to raise their prices. Note that under this interpretation, it is still the domestic
output gap (the balance between the demand for domestic products and domestic
productive capacity) that determines domestic inflation, rather than any concept
of global slack; but global income affects domestic inflation insofar as it may be
an important determinant — perhaps even the main determinant — of domestic
aggregate demand.
    This mechanism is one that we have already considered in the analysis of aggregate
demand in section 1. In the model of consumer demand in a globalized economy
presented there, the demand for any given product does indeed depend on world
income rather than domestic income, since households in both countries are assumed
to allocated their expenditure across different goods in precisely the same proportions.
(This is obviously an extreme assumption, that gives the greatest possible weight to
the consideration raised by Bernanke.) But this obviously has no consequences for
the slope of the Phillips curve, and as already shown in the earlier discussion, it
does not imply any reduction in the effectiveness of domestic monetary policy in
controlling domestic inflation. The effects of monetary policy on domestic inflation
do not decline in the case that γ is made large, even though this means that nearly
all of the demand for domestic products is foreign demand.
    Another argument, that similarly does not depend on any denial of the link be-
tween the domestic output gap and domestic inflation (here understood to be the
rate of increase of the prices of domestically produced goods), is to observe that in
a globalized economy, a larger part of the consumption basket in the domestic econ-
omy will consist of imported goods. Even if domestic inflation depends solely on the
domestic output gap, a broader measure of CPI inflation will also depend on the rate
of growth of import prices. A naive argument might suggest that just as domestic
inflation depends on the domestic output gap, the rate of growth of the prices of


                                         47
foreign goods should depend on the foreign output gap (which would therefore also
matter for domestic CPI inflation, and would arguably be the main thing that should
matter in the case of a small country that consumes mainly foreign goods). This
would be incorrect, as it neglects the effects of exchange-rate changes. Nonetheless,
CPI inflation should depend on changes in the terms of trade in addition to the de-
terminants of domestic inflation, and the equilibrium terms of trade should depend
on foreign output (though not the foreign output gap).
    But the main argument of proponents of the global slack hypothesis seems to be
that in a globalized economy, the domestic output gap ceases to be the sole deter-
minant of the incentive that domestic firms have to raise their prices. There are a
variety of reasons why the simple relation between real marginal cost (more precisely,
the ratio of the marginal cost of domestic production to the price of domestic prod-
ucts) — and hence the incentive of domestic firms to change their prices — and the
domestic output gap that holds in a closed-economy model will generally not hold
in an open-economy model. Even in the simple model of CGG, where the only vari-
able factor is labor and there is no international mobility of labor, real wage demands
should not depend solely on domestic production. This is because of the way in which
the representative household’s marginal utility of income (in units of domestic goods)
depends both on the quantity consumed of foreign as well as domestic goods and on
the terms of trade. These factors result in the presence, in general, of foreign-output
terms in the domestic aggregate-supply equation of a canonical two-country model.
    Here I present a basic model which essentially recapitulates the results of CGG,
before turning to an alternative model that incorporates an additional reason for
world economic activity to matter. The demand side of the model is the one already
explained in section 1.1. The home economy consists of a continuum (of length 1 − γ)
of households, indexed by h. Each of these seeks to maximize40
                                      ∞
                                      X
                                 E0         β t [u(Ct ) − v(Ht ; H̄t )],                      (3.1)
                                      t=0

where the utility from consumption u(C) is again defined by (1.2)–(1.3), Ht is hours
worked, H̄t is an exogenous preference shock,41 and the disutility of working is as-
  40
     Here I again abstract from the liquidity services that may be provided by money balances, as
in section 1. Adding additional terms to the utility function, as in (2.1), would make no difference
for the issues addressed in this section.
  41
     The preference shock H̄t is introduced in order to allow for a country-specific labor-supply

                                                  48
sumed to be of the form                                        µ          ¶1+ν
                                               1                     H
                                   v(H; H̄) =
                                              1+ν                    H̄
for some ν ≥ 0. For now I shall assume, like CGG, that firms hire labor only from
households in their own country.
    Assuming for simplicity a competitive spot market for labor, the preferences (3.1)
imply that in each period, the labor supply of each household is given by
                                                µ                    ¶ν −1
                                                      Wt
                                    Ht = H̄t               −1                  ,                 (3.2)
                                                    Pt Ctσ

where Wt is home country nominal wage. We can alternatively invert this relation to
write the real wage as a function of per capita labor demand, obtaining
                                              µ ¶ν
                                Wt       σ −1  Ht
                                     = Ct            .                        (3.3)
                                 Pt            H̄t

    In each country, there is assumed to be a continuum of length 1 of differentiated
goods produced; thus CHt is a Dixit-Stiglitz (CES) aggregate of the quantities con-
sumed of the continuum of goods produced in the home country (and similarly for
CF t ). It follows as usual that optimal allocation of expenditure across goods implies
a per capita demand for each good given by
                                                    µ                ¶−θ
                                                            pt (i)
                                      yt (i) = Yt                          ,                     (3.4)
                                                            PHt

where Yt is the per capita demand for the composite home good (as in section 1),
pt (i) is the price of individual home good i, PHt is the Dixit-Stiglitz index of home
goods prices                             Z              1
                                       1−θ
                                      PHt  ≡                pt (i)1−θ di                         (3.5)
                                                    0

shock. CGG allow for one, but in their model it is interpreted as exogenous variation in a “wage
markup,” due to variation in the elasticity of substitution between the different types of labor sup-
plied by monopolistically competitive households, rather than a preference shock. The assumption
of a preference shock here is more conventional, and in addition the assumption here of perfect
substitutability of the labor supplied by different households facilitates the discussion of the conse-
quences of globalization of the labor market, in the next section. The difference between the two
types of labor-supply shocks would be important in an analysis of optimal stabilization policy, but
that is not the concern of this paper.


                                                49
already introduced in section 1, and θ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution among
these goods.
    Let us suppose further that the producer of each differentiated good i has a
production function of the form

                                          yt (i) = At ht (i)1/φ ,                        (3.6)

where At is a productivity factor common to all of the firms in the same country,
ht (i) is the labor input hired by firm i, and φ ≥ 1. Here I generalize the specification
of CGG to allow for the possibility of diminishing returns to the labor input; the case
φ > 1 can be interpreted as a technology with constant returns to scale in capital and
labor, but with the capital stock of each firm fixed, as discussed in Woodford (2003,
chap. 3). It follows that the labor demanded by each firm will equal
                                  µ        ¶φ µ ¶φ µ          ¶−θφ
                                    yt (i)      Yt     pt (i)
                         ht (i) =            =
                                     At         At     PHt
using the demand curve (3.4) to express the firm’s sales as a function of its price.
Similarly, the aggregate demand for labor in the home country will equal
                                Z 1            µ ¶φ
                                                Yt
                           Ht =     ht (i)di =       δt,                       (3.7)
                                  0             At
where                                     Z           µ            ¶−θφ
                                                  1
                                                          pt (i)
                                   δt ≡                                   di ≥ 1
                                              0           PHt
is a measure of the dispersion of home goods prices (achieving its minimum value of
1 if and only if all home goods have identical prices).
    The producer of each differentiated good is assumed to adjust the price of the
goods only at random intervals, as in the model of staggered pricing introduced by
Calvo (1983). Let us suppose that a fraction 0 < α < 1 of the producers leave the
prices of their goods unchanged each period; those that revise their prices in period
t each choose a new price pt (i) to maximize
                         ∞
                         X
                    Et          αT −t Qt,T [pt (i)yT (i) − C(yT (i); WT , AT )],
                         T =t

where                                                                 µ             ¶φ
                                                                           yt (i)
                                 Ct (yt (i); Wt , At ) ≡ Wt
                                                                            At

                                                          50
is the (nominal) cost of producing quantity yt (i), subject to the constraint that the
firm’s sales will be given by (3.4) in each period. (Here the firm treats the evolution
of the variables {Yt , Pt , Wt } as independent of its own pricing decision, because it is
small compared to the overall markets for domestic goods and labor.) The optimal
price pt (i) that is chosen then satisfies a first-order condition of the form
                             ∞
                             X
                        Et          αT −t Qt,T yT (i)[pt (i) − µ̃M CT (i)] = 0,              (3.8)
                             T =t

where M Ct (i) is the (nominal) marginal cost of production by firm i in period t, and
µ̃ ≡ θ/(θ − 1) > 1 is each firm’s desired markup of price over marginal cost. Thus
the price that is chosen is µ̃ times a weighted average of the marginal cost that is
anticipated at each of the future dates at which the currently chosen price may still
apply.
    Finally, substitution of (3.3) for the wage in the cost function, and (3.7) for the
demand for labor in the resulting expression, allows us to derive an expression of the
form                                           µ       ¶ω
                                                 yt (i) p
                               M Ct (i) = M Ct                                    (3.9)
                                                  Yt
for the marginal cost of production of firm i, where
                                                             −1
                                                 Ytω Ctσ
                                       M Ct = φPt 1+ω ν δ νt                                (3.10)
                                                 At H̄t

is a geometric average of the marginal costs of all home firms, and I define the new
coefficients42
                       ω ≡ (1 + ν)φ − 1 ≥ ω p ≡ φ − 1 ≥ 0.
    In the case of a closed-economy model, one would furthermore equate Ct with Yt ,
so that (3.10) would imply an elasticity of average real marginal cost with respect to
output of ω + σ −1 , as in Woodford (2003, chap. 3). In the open-economy model of
  42
    Here the notation follows Woodford (2003, chap. 3), where these coefficients are defined in the
case of more general utility and production functions. The first inequality is strict unless ν = 0
(no increasing marginal disutility of work), and the second inequality is strict unless φ = 1 (no
diminishing returns to labor).




                                                  51
CGG, instead, Ct must equal the right-hand side of (1.15).43 Using this relation to
substitute for Ct in (3.10), one obtains the alternative expression
                                                         ω+σ −1 (1−γ)      −1 γ
                                           σ −1        Yt           Yt∗σ
                            M Ct = φk             Pt                              δ νt .
                                                             A1+ω
                                                              t   H̄tν
(Note that this reduces to the closed-economy marginal-cost function in the case that
γ = 0.) We can instead write marginal cost purely as a function of domestic goods
prices and real variables by using (1.34) to substitute for Pt in the above expression,
yielding
                                        ω+σ −1 +γ(1−σ −1 ) ∗γ(σ −1 −1)
                             φ        Yt                  Yt
                  M Ct = 1−σ−1 PHt                 1+ω ν               δ νt .    (3.11)
                           k                    At H̄t
    Substituting (3.9) for M Ct (i) in (3.8), and using (3.4) to substitute for the relative
output of firm i, one obtains an alternative expression for the first-order condition
for optimal price-setting,
                         ∞
                         X                              †(1+ω p θ)                ω θ
                    Et          αT −t Qt,T YT PHT
                                               θ
                                                  [pt                − µ̃M CT PHTp ] = 0.        (3.12)
                         T =t

Here I have introduced the notation p†t for the optimal price chosen by a firm that
reconsiders its price at date t (instead called pt (i) in (3.8)), as we see that the condition
is the same for all firms i that reconsider their prices at that date, and we may assume
that they all choose the same price. It then follows from the definition (3.5) that the
domestic price index evolves according to a law of motion
                                   1−θ     1−θ
                                  PHt  = αPHt−1 + (1 − α)pt †(1−θ) ,                             (3.13)

and similarly from the definition of δ t that the price-dispersion measure evolves ac-
cording to a law of motion
                                                     Ã       !−θφ 
                      µ       ¶θφ                          †
                         PHt       αδ t−1 + (1 − α)      pt       .
                 δt =                                                           (3.14)
                        PHt−1                           PHt−1

  43
    Here I assume that Ct = Ct∗ = Ctw . It has already been shown in section 1.1 that the ratio
Ct /Ct∗ must be constant over time, as the growth rate of consumption must always be the same in
both countries. If one assumes an appropriate initial wealth distribution (i.e., zero initial net foreign
assets for each country), the constant ratio is equal to 1, so that one must have Ct = Ct∗ = Ctw .
Even without this assumption, Ct would always be a fixed proportion of Ctw , so that the asserted
conclusion about the marginal cost function would still hold, up to a multiplicative constant.

                                                       52
    We can further reduce the set of endogenous variables referred to in these equations
if we replace Qt,T in (3.12) by
                                 µ        ¶σ−1 +γ(1−σ−1 ) µ         ¶γ(σ−1 −1)
                                     Yt                       Yt∗                PHt
                      Qt,T = β                                                       .       (3.15)
                                     YT                       YT∗                PHT

This follows from (1.16), using (1.34) to substitute for the consumer price indices.
    The aggregate-supply block of equations for the home economy then consists of
the equations (3.11)–(3.14).44 These equations jointly determine the paths of the
domestic variables {M Ct , p†t , PHt , δ t } consistent with optimal price-setting by each of
the domestic firms, given assumed paths for the levels of real activity {Yt , Yt∗ } and
initial conditions PH,−1 , δ −1 . The implied path of the consumer price index is then
given by
                                    Pt = k −1 PHt Ytγ Yt∗−γ ,                          (3.16)
which is implied by (1.34). Alternatively, we may think of the aggregate-supply
relations as determining the paths of the variables {Yt , M Ct , p†t , δ t } for given paths of
{PHt } (or {Pt }) and foreign real activity.
    Here I have written the aggregate-supply equations for the home country; but a
set of equations of the same form applies to the foreign country. For example, (3.10)
also holds when all variables (both endogenous and exogenous) are replaced by the
corresponding starred variables.45 Substitutions similar to the ones above then lead
to
                                     ∗ω+σ −1 +(1−γ)(1−σ −1 ) (1−γ)(σ −1 −1)
                           φ     ∗ Yt                       Yt
                    ∗
               M Ct = 1−σ−1 PF t                  ∗1+ω ∗ν                    δ ∗ν
                                                                               t         (3.17)
                        k                        At    H̄t
as a relation corresponding to (3.11) for producers in the foreign country. Equations
corresponding to (3.12)–(3.14) for the foreign country are similarly straightforward to
derive.46 The complete set of eight equations (four for each country) constitutes the
“aggregate supply block” of the two-country model. These equations determine the
evolution of domestic prices (and hence the indices PHt and PF∗ t ) in both countries,
and hence the consumer price indices Pt and Pt∗ as well, given the paths of real activity
in both countries. Alternatively, they can be viewed as determining the evolution of
  44
      Here it should be understood that Qt,T has been substituted out in (3.12), using (3.15).
  45
      Here I allow the technology shock and labor supply shock to be different in the two countries.
   46
      In each case, one obtains the corresponding equation for the foreign country by adding stars to
all variables, replacing Hs by F s, and replacing γ by 1 − γ in each place where it occurs.


                                                  53
real activity in both countries given the paths of the general level of prices (specified
by either a domestic price index or a consumer price index) in both countries.
    We observe that even in this model with full integration of goods markets (not
only are all final goods traded, but the same consumption basket is consumed in all
parts of the world), foreign variables do not affect the aggregate-supply relations for a
given country, except in one respect. This is the relation (3.11) between real activity
and the marginal cost of domestic production. Marginal cost depends on foreign
production as well as domestic production because the wage demanded by domestic
households depends not only on the marginal disutility of labor (which depends only
on domestic production, under the present assumption of no international trade in
factors of production), but also on the marginal utility of additional income (in units of
the domestic currency). The marginal utility of domestic-currency income depends on
foreign variables for two reasons. For a given level of domestic production (and hence
of consumption of home-produced goods), a higher level of foreign output will mean
a higher level of consumption of foreign goods, hence a higher level of consumption of
the world composite good, and a lower marginal utility of consumption, or marginal
utility of income in units of the world composite good. At the same time, a higher
level of foreign output will mean an appreciation of the home country’s terms of trade,
and hence a higher marginal of utility of income in units of domestic goods relative
to the marginal utility of income in units of the world good.
    Since the two effects have opposite signs, there is a tendency of them to cancel
one another. In fact, in the case that σ = 1 exactly (log utility of consumption),
the two effects completely cancel, and we observe that (3.11) does not involve any
foreign variables. (Similarly, in this case (3.17) does not involve any home-country
variables.) In this case, the aggregate-supply tradeoff between PHt and Yt takes
exactly the same form as in a closed economy: no foreign variables shift this tradeoff,
and the slope of the tradeoff (as well as its sensitivity to domestic shocks or to shifts
in expectations) is independent of the degree of openness γ, since the value of γ affects
none of the equations in the aggregate-supply block in this case. Since we have noted
in section 1.2 that in this case the aggregate-demand relation between PHt and Yt is
also unaffected by foreign variables, or by the economy’s degree of openness (as long
as domestic monetary policy is of the form (1.41)), it follows that in this special case,
we obtain a complete theory of the determination of domestic inflation, output and



                                          54
interest rates that is independent of the economy’s degree of openness.47
    In general, of course, the two effects need not cancel altogether. The most empiri-
cally realistic case, however, is that in which σ > 1, as discussed in section 1.2. In this
case, the terms-of-trade effect is stronger than the marginal-utility-of-consumption ef-
fect, and on net, an increase in foreign output reduces the marginal cost of domestic
production. While this makes foreign economic activity relevant to the determination
of (supply-side) inflationary pressures in the home country, the sign of the effect is
not the one predicted by the “global slack” thesis. Not only is it not only world
activity that matters for domestic inflationary pressure, but foreign activity has an
effect with the opposite sign of the effect of domestic activity. And rather than im-
plying a reduced slope of the aggregate-supply curve as a consequence of increased
openness, this channel implies that greater openness should increase the slope of the
aggregate-supply relation between domestic inflation and domestic output.
    In order to see directly the implications of the above equations for the aggregate-
supply relation, it is useful to log-linearize them, as with the aggregate-demand block
of the model in section 1. Following CGG (and the literature on the closed-economy
“new Keynesian Phillips curve”), I shall log-linearize them around an allocation with
zero inflation and zero price dispersion in both countries, as well as constant pref-
erences and technology (identical in the two countries). As in the closed-economy
model,48 log-linearization of (3.12) and (3.13) leads to the equation49

                        π Ht = ξ(µ + log M Ct − log PHt ) + βEt π Ht+1                        (3.18)

for the evolution of the domestic price index, where µ ≡ log µ̃ and

                                        (1 − α)(1 − αβ)
                                   ξ≡                   > 0.
                                           α(1 + ω p θ)
  47
      Benigno and Benigno (2005) generalize this result to the case in which the elasticity of sub-
stitution between home and foreign goods in the preferences of households is not necessarily equal
to 1, as assumed here and in CGG. In their more general model, domestic inflation and output
are determined independently of foreign variables in the case that the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution σ is equal to the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods.
   48
      See Woodford (2003, chap. 3) for details of the derivation.
   49
      Note that this is just the equation (1.47) already anticipated in section 1.3. The derivation of
this equation is the same in the case of a model with local-currency pricing, though the relation
between marginal cost and output is different.



                                               55
       Substituting (3.11) for M Ct in (3.18), we obtain

                          π Ht = κH Ŷt + κF Ŷt∗ + βEt π Ht+1 − ξωqt                        (3.19)

as an open-economy generalization of the new Keynesian Phillips curve. Here Ŷt and
Ŷt∗ are log deviations from a steady-state level of output as in section 1, and the
steady-state output level Ȳ is now defined by the relation50
                                                          −1
                                            −1       k 1−σ
                                   Ȳ ω+σ        =          A1+ω H̄ ν ,
                                                        φµ̃
where A, H̄ are the common steady-state values of the technology and preference
factors in the two countries. The exogenous disturbance term qt indicates the per-
centage change in domestic output that is required to maintain the marginal disutility
of supplying output at its steady-state level;51 it is defined as

                                     ωqt ≡ (1 + ω)at + ν h̄t ,

where at ≡ log(At /A), h̄t ≡ log(H̄t /H̄). Note that in this simple model (without
government purchases or variation in impatience to consume, for example), qt is
also proportional to the log deviation of the equilibrium level of output in a closed-
economy model with flexible wages and prices, or the “natural rate” of output defined
in Woodford (2003, chap. 4); it follows from the formulas given there that in the
present model,
                                     ωqt = κŶtn ,
where κ ≡ ξ(ω + σ −1 ) is the slope of the closed-economy AS curve. Finally, it follows
directly from (3.11) that the two output elasticities in the open-economy AS relation
are given by
                            κH = ξ[ω + σ −1 + γ(1 − σ −1 )],
                                      κF = −ξγ(1 − σ −1 ).
       For the foreign country, we similarly obtain

                          π ∗F t = κ∗H Ŷt + κ∗F Ŷt∗ + βEt π ∗F t+1 − ξωqt∗ ,               (3.20)
  50
     One can easily show that Yt = Yt∗ = Ȳ is the condition under which one will have both
µ̃M Ct = PHt and µ̃M Ct∗ = PF∗ t , as is required for a steady state with zero inflation in both
countries.
  51
     Here again I follow the notation used in Woodford (2003, chap. 4) for the closed-economy model.

                                                     56
where
                                      κ∗H = −ξ(1 − γ)(1 − σ −1 ),
                                κ∗F = ξ[ω + σ −1 + (1 − γ)(1 − σ −1 )],
and qt∗ is the corresponding compound of the foreign technology and preference shocks.
Equations (3.19)–(3.20) then represent the aggregate supply block of the log-linearized
model. Together, they suffice to determine the paths of {π Ht , π ∗F t } given the paths of
{Yt , Yt∗ }, or vice versa. The CPI inflation rates are also determined if we adjoin the
relations

         π t = π Ht + γ(∆Ŷt − ∆Ŷt∗ ),            π ∗t = π ∗F t + (1 − γ)(∆Ŷt∗ − ∆Ŷt )             (3.21)

implied by (3.16) and the corresponding relation for the foreign index.
    In the case that the monetary policies of the two central banks are given by equa-
tions of the form (1.19)–(1.20), then, as shown in section 1.1, the log-linearized AD
block of the model consists of equations (1.21)–(1.24). If we combine these with the
log-linearized AS block consisting of equations (3.19)–(3.21), we have a system of 8
equations per period to determine the 8 endogenous variables {π t , π Ht , Ŷt , ı̂t , π ∗t , π ∗F t , Ŷt∗ , ı̂∗t }
each period. In the case that the response coefficients of the two policy rules satisfy
certain inequalities, this system has a determinate equilibrium, and when it does, we
are able to solve for each of the 8 endogenous variables as a function of current and
expected future values of the forcing variables {ı̄t , ı̄∗t , qt , qt∗ }, and the lagged relative
          r                ∗ 52
output Ŷt−1  ≡ Ŷt−1 − Ŷt−1 . For example, the solution for equilibrium consumer price
inflation in the home country will be of the form
             ∞
             X
        πt =   [ψ 1,j Et ı̄t+j + ψ 2,j Et ı̄∗t+j + ψ 3,j Et Ŷt+j
                                                               n                n∗
                                                                  + ψ 4,j Et Ŷt+j          r
                                                                                   ] + δ Ŷt−1 .      (3.22)
               j=0

    To what extent do our results imply that globalization should be expected to
change the nature of the aggregate-supply relation in each country? One should note
first of all that, once again, financial globalization has no effect whatsoever in this
model. As discussed in section 1, under the preferences assumed here, the equilibrium
relation between consumption in each country (and each country’s stochastic discount
factor) and the world pattern of production is the same whether we assume financial
  52
     Note that this is the only lagged state variable that appears in any of the 8 structural equations;
it appears in (3.21).

                                                    57
                          Home policy                                   Foreign policy
          0.5                                           0.5


         0.25                                          0.25


            0                                            0


        −0.25                                         −0.25


         −0.5                                          −0.5
                0    5        10          15   20             0    5          10           15             20


                         Home potential                                Foreign potential
         0.05                                          0.05


            0                                            0


        −0.05                                         −0.05


         −0.1                                          −0.1
                                                                                                γ = 0.0
                                                                                                γ = 0.5
        −0.15                                         −0.15                                     γ = 1.0

                0    5        10          15   20             0    5          10           15             20
                               j                                               j



Figure 6: Coefficients of the solution (3.22) for inflation, for alternative degrees of
openness.

autarchy, complete international risk sharing, or any kind of incomplete markets or
costly international trade in financial assets. Hence the derivation of the aggregate-
supply relations above is unaffected by which of these we assume.53
  53
    This contrasts with the result of Razin and Yuen (2002). These authors do not assume the
same preferences as are assumed here (they instead assume the same elasticity of substitution θ > 1
between home and foreign goods as exists among individual home goods or among individual foreign
goods), but this is not the main reason for the differing conclusion. Razin and Yuen note that under
financial autarchy, consumption each period must fluctuate with domestic income, and assume as
a consequence that Ĉt = Ŷt , whereas Ĉt = Ĉt∗ (as here) in the case of financial integration. They
therefore conclude that domestic consumption (and correspondingly the marginal utility of income
of domestic households) will be less sensitive to variations in domestic output in the case of financial
integration, making domestic real wage demands less sensitive to domestic output in that case, and
hence the slope of the Phillips curve smaller. But their argument neglects the effect of terms of
trade changes, which vary with the relative output of the two countries in such a way as to make the



                                                58
    What about the effects of an increase in the degree of integration of goods markets,
here modeled by an increase in γ? Figure 6 illustrates the numerical values of the four
sequences of coefficients {ψ k,j } in (3.22) in the case of policy rules for each country in
which φπ = 2, φy = 1, as also assumed in Figure 1, with values for the other structural
parameters again taken from the closed-economy model of Rotemberg and Woodford
(1997).54 Once again the figure compares the solutions obtained for three different
values of γ. We observe that even in the case of completely integrated goods markets
and financial markets, individual national monetary policies still have a substantial
effect on the rate of CPI inflation in that country. Indeed, the upper left panel of
Figure 6 shows that the immediate effect on inflation of a relatively transitory shift
in monetary policy is (at least in the calibrated example) even larger in the case of a
highly open economy than in the case of an otherwise similar closed economy. Hence
whatever other validity there may be to the “global slack” thesis, openness does not
reduce the ability of a central bank to influence the local rate of inflation.


3.2     Global Economic Activity and Inflation
Nonetheless, our results above do show that the aggregate supply block of our model,
like the aggregate demand block, is affected by the degree of openness of the econ-
omy. Equations (3.19) and (3.20) each indicate that in general the other country’s
level of economic activity is relevant to the determination of a given country’s do-
mestic inflation rate. To what extent do they support the view that “global slack”
becomes an important determinant of inflation in each country as a result of economic
integration?
    It is true that for analytical purposes, it may be convenient to solve a model of this
kind by first solving for the implied dynamics of “global” endogenous variables, and
then solving for national departures from the world averages taking the solution for
number of units of the consumption basket that can be purchased with the income from domestic
production vary less than does domestic output. In the case of a unit elasticity of substitution
between home and foreign goods, as assumed here, the terms of trade effect completely eliminates
any difference between the effects of variations in Yt on consumption in the two countries, even
under financial autarchy. Under the preferences assumed by Razin and Yuen, the terms of trade
effect would be smaller, but will still reduce the degree to which financial integration affects the
slope of the Phillips curve, relative to what they find.
   54
      In addition to the parameter values used in the numerical illustrations above, I now also assume
that κ = 0.0236.

                                               59
the world averages as given. Note that (3.21) implies that the world average inflation
rate π w
       t (defined as in (1.44)) can also be written as a world average of domestic
inflation rates,
                              πw                     ∗
                                t = (1 − γ)π Ht + γπ F t .

It then follows that we can take a weighted average of (3.19) and (3.20) and obtain

                                πw        w     nw         w
                                 t = κ(Ŷt − Ŷt ) + βEt π t+1                             (3.23)

as a “global Phillips curve” relation. Here Ŷtw is the world average level of output
(defined as in (1.45)), and Ŷtnw is a corresponding average of the closed-economy
“natural rates of output” for the two economies.
    Thus one can argue that “global inflation” is determined by a “global output
gap” in this model. In the case that the Taylor-rule coefficients are the same in both
countries, the aggregate-demand block of the model also allows us to derive relation
(1.56) between world inflation and world output, that does not involve any nation-
specific variables. Equations (1.56) and (3.23) then jointly determine the evolution of
the world variables {π w       w                                                w     nw 55
                        t , Ŷt } given the paths of the world disturbances {ı̄t , Ŷt }.
    In the case of identical Taylor-rule coefficients in the two countries, it is also pos-
sible to solve independently for the evolution of the inflation differential ∆zt between
the two countries. From (3.21) it follows that

                              ∆zt = π Ht − π ∗F t + (∆Yt − ∆Yt∗ ).

Then subtracting (3.20) from (3.19) yields a relation of the form
                                                        ∗
                  ∆zt = βEt ∆zt+1 − Et [C(L)(Ŷt+1 − Ŷt+1 )] − ξω(qt − qt∗ )              (3.24)

between the evolution of the inflation differential and the evolution of the output
differential, where

                       C(L) ≡ L2 − (1 + β + κ + ξ(1 − σ −1 ))L + β.

       These two variables are also linked by the demand-side equilibrium relation

                        Et ∆zt+1 = (ı̄t − ı̄∗t ) + φπ ∆zt + φy (Ŷt − Ŷt∗ ),              (3.25)
  55
     This pair of equations has a determinate solution if and only if the Taylor-rule coefficients
satisfy the “Taylor Principle” (Woodford, 2003, Prop. 4.3), just as in a closed-economy model. The
solutions obtained for the evolution of world inflation and world output are also exactly the same
functions of the world disturbances as in the closed-economy model.

                                               60
                        Home policy                                     Foreign policy
         0.3                                             0.3


        0.15                                            0.15


          0                                               0


       −0.15                                           −0.15


        −0.3                                            −0.3
               0   5        10          15       20            0   5          10           15              20


                       Home potential                                  Foreign potential

        0.02                                            0.02


          0                                               0


       −0.02                                           −0.02


                                                                                                world
       −0.04                                           −0.04
                                                                                                relative

               0   5        10          15       20            0   5          10           15              20
                             j                                                 j



Figure 7: Decomposition of the solution for home-country inflation into solutions for
world inflation and relative inflation, shown for the case γ = 0.5.

which follows from (1.30), when we recall that et = zt in this model. Conditions
(3.24)–(3.25) form a system of two equations per period to solve for the evolution of
the inflation differential and the output differential, given the paths of the exogenous
disturbance {qt − qt∗ } and the policy differential {ı̄t − ı̄∗t }. Combining the solution for
world inflation with the solution for the inflation differential then yields a solution
for inflation in either country; for example,

                                             πt = πw
                                                   t + γ∆zt .                                                   (3.26)

    Figure 7 illustrates the character of the solution for these two components of in-
flation, in the case of the same parameter values as are assumed in Figure 6. The
two lines in each panel indicate the way in which world inflation and relative inflation
respectively depend on the current and expected future values of the four forcing
variables. To be precise, each panel decomposes the response of CPI inflation to

                                                  61
one of the forcing variables shown in Figure 6 for the case γ = 0.5 into two parts,
corresponding to the two terms in (3.26): the effect of the forcing variable on world
inflation (the solid line in each panel) and the effect on γ times relative inflation (the
dash-dotted line). (If we were to compute a similar decomposition of the inflation
responses for any other values of γ than 0.5, the two components would be propor-
tional to those shown in Figure 7, but scaled by factors that depend on γ.) Note that
world inflation is affected to precisely the same extent by the forcing variables for
each of the countries, while relative inflation is affected by the two countries’ forcing
variables to the same extent but with the opposite sign.
    While this approach to expressing the solution of the complete model has some
convenient features, one should not conclude that the “global output gap” is accord-
ingly a crucial determinant of inflation in each country. Our observation about the
possibility of writing a “global Phillips curve” relation (3.23) would be equally true
in the case of complete autarchy, given our assumption of identical parameter values
for the two countries (and our use of a log-linear approximation). This might be a
useful observation if one were interested in modeling the average world rate of infla-
tion rather than inflation in a single country, but it would not imply any necessity or
even convenience of using the concept of the “global output gap” to explain inflation
in one country.
    Even in the case of two open economies, in the case that σ = 1, we observe that
κF = κ∗H = 0, so that the aggregate-supply relation connects domestic inflation in
either country with economic activity in that country alone, as noted by CGG. As
shown in section 1.2, the aggregate-demand relations for each economy also connect
domestic inflation with domestic output alone in that case, if we assume that mon-
etary policy in each country responds only to the domestic inflation rate. In this
case, it is possible to solve equations (1.39), (1.41) and (3.19) for the evolution of the
domestic endogenous variables {π Ht , Ŷt } given the paths of the domestic endogenous
variables {ı̄t , Ŷtn }, without any reference to either disturbances or policy in the foreign
country. The solution obtained is the same as the one that would be obtained by solv-
ing for world average inflation and the inflation differential and summing them; but
the latter, more roundabout method conceals the fact that foreign variables actually
play no role in determining domestic inflation.
    In the more realistic case in which σ > 1 and monetary policy responds to con-
sumer price inflation rather than to domestic inflation alone, the structural equations


                                            62
for the two countries no longer perfectly decouple. Nonetheless, it remains the case
that the mere fact that “global slack” determines the evolution of world inflation
through (3.23) does not mean that it will be the main determinant of inflation in in-
dividual countries. The upper two panels of Figure 7 (which relate to a case in which
σ > 1 and monetary policy in each country responds to CPI inflation) show that the
effects of each country’s monetary policy on relative inflation swamp the effects on
world inflation, that are mediated by changes in the world output gap Ŷtw − Ŷtnw .
Hence the global slack thesis is quite misleading as a guide to understanding the
effects of monetary policy on an open economy.
    Moreover, in the case in which σ > 1, we observe that κF is negative, and thus
opposite in sign to κH , contrary to what the “global slack” thesis would suggest.56
Moreover, κH is larger than the value (κ = ξ(ω + σ −1 ) that would be obtained in
the case of a closed economy, and by more so the greater the degree of openness.
We similarly find that κ∗H < 0 and that κ∗F is larger than the closed-economy value.
Hence the supposition on the basis of the global slack thesis that the Phillips-curve
tradeoff between domestic inflation and domestic real activity should be flatter in a
more open economy is not born out.
    In the previous paragraph I have considered only the nature of the Phillips-curve
tradeoff between domestic inflation and domestic activity. If instead we are interested
in the relation between CPI inflation and domestic output, then foreign activity affects
this relationship even in the case that σ = 1, owing to its consequences for the terms
of trade. However, the effects of foreign activity on the domestic aggregate-supply
relation are again not of the kind suggested by the global slack thesis. The aggregate-
supply curve in this case is of the form

                                log Pt = (κH + γ)Ŷt + (κF − γ)Ŷt∗ ,

neglecting the terms corresponding to lagged values, disturbances, and expectations.
In this case we have a further reason for openness to increase the (positive) slope of
the AS curve (i.e., the sensitivity to domestic output), and also for openness to make
the effects of foreign output on domestic inflation more negative, namely, the way in
which both domestic and foreign output affect the terms of trade. Thus to the extent
that this model represents the effects of increased international integration of goods
 56
      The effect of foreign output is in fact found often to be negative by Ihrig et al. (2007).



                                                  63
markets, there is no reason whatsoever to expect that globalization should reduce the
sensitivity of domestic inflation to domestic activity.
    The global slack thesis is misleading in another respect as well. It suggests that
inflationary pressure at home should depend not just on foreign economy, but on
foreign activity relative to potential. This suggests that domestic monetary policy
may need to be conditioned on changes in foreign potential output. This is one
of the main reasons why Dallas Fed President Richard Fisher (2006) argues that
globalized markets will make the conduct of monetary policy more difficult. “How
can we calculate an ’output gap’,” he asks, “without knowing the present capacity
of, say, the Chinese and Indian economies? How can we fashion a Phillips curve
without imputing the behavioral patterns of foreign labor pools?” But according to
the model developed above, the Phillips curve for an open economy does not involve
foreign potential output or foreign labor supply behavior; the exogenous disturbance
term qt involves only domestic technology and preferences regarding labor supply.57
    In fact, foreign developments affect domestic inflation in this model solely through
their effects on the terms of trade. The aggregate-supply relation (3.19) can alterna-
tively be written in the form
                        π Ht = κ(Ŷt − Ŷtn ) − κF log St + βEt π Ht+1 ,                    (3.27)
where κ is the closed-economy Phillips-curve slope, Ŷtn is the closed-economy “nat-
ural rate of output” (i.e., the equilibrium level of output in a closed-economy model
with flexible prices, which depends only on domestic technology and preferences),
and St indicates the terms of trade. The domestic aggregate-demand block (con-
sisting of equations (1.39) and (1.41)) can similarly be written entirely in terms of
domestic variables and the terms of trade; hence one can solve for the equilibrium
paths {π Ht , Ŷt } purely as a function of domestic real fundamentals, domestic mone-
tary policy, and the path of the terms of trade.58 The implied path of CPI inflation,
  57
     This is somewhat hidden in the way that the national AS relations are written in Benigno and
Benigno (2005). Domestic inflation is written as being determined by a domestic output gap and a
terms-of-trade gap, with the “natural” levels of both domestic output and the terms of trade being
functions in turn of both qt and qt∗ . Nonetheless, the domestic aggregate-supply equation actually
involves only qt and not qt∗ , as written here. Benigno and Benigno choose to write the AS relation
in terms of their more complicated “gap” variables because of the role of those variables in their
expression for the welfare-based stabilization objective; writing the AS equations in terms of the
same variables facilitates their characterization of optimal policy.
  58
     Even the terms of trade are only relevant to the extent that σ is not equal to 1.

                                              64
given a path for domestic inflation, also depends only on the terms of trade. Thus
while it is true that a policy aimed at stabilizing domestic inflation, CPI inflation,
and/or domestic economic activity will need in general to monitor developments with
regard to the terms of trade, it will not require a judgment about foreign potential
output, except to the extent that views about foreign fundamentals may help one to
form a more accurate forecast of the future evolution of the terms of trade. Thus the
information requirements for using a Phillips-curve model in the conduct of policy in
an open economy are not as daunting as Fisher makes them sound.
    Of course, the fact that foreign potential output does not enter the home country’s
AS relation does not make it irrelevant to equilibrium determination in the home
country, as shown by the lower right panel of Figure 6. This is because foreign
potential output certainly does matter for the foreign AS relation, and hence for the
determination of foreign output, inflation, and interest rates, which variables affect
the home-economy AD and AS relations. Nonetheless, while Figure 6 indicates that
variations in the foreign natural rate of output are of considerable consequence (when
γ is large), if one wishes to attribute inflation variations in the home economy to their
various ultimate causes, it does not imply that a policymaker in the home country
must concern herself with the estimation of foreign potential. In order to correctly
understand the structural tradeoffs facing the home economy, it suffices that one be
able to forecast the evolution of foreign output, inflation and interest rates; this is
especially true in the case of a small economy, that cannot expect its own decisions
to have any great effect on the determination of output, inflation or interest rates
elsewhere.


3.3    Consequences of Global Factor Markets
The previous section shows that there is no role for “global slack” as a determinant of
supply-side inflationary pressure, in an open-economy model where both final goods
markets and financial markets are fully integrated, but factor markets are still nation-
specific (or perhaps even more segmented). Proponents of the global slack thesis,
however, are perhaps concerned with the consequences of global trade in factors
of production as well. This could mean international integration of labor markets
(as emphasized by those who assert that globalization has recently held down real
wage demands in countries like the US), or alternatively that internationally traded


                                         65
commodities or imported intermediate goods are important inputs in the domestic
production technology, along with labor.
    Since both the hypothesis of a global labor market and that of globally traded
inputs of other kinds have similar consequences for the way the aggregate-supply
relation will come to depend on domestic and foreign real activity, I shall here treat
explicitly only the case of a global labor market. I shall also proceed immediately
to the extreme case that is most favorable to the global slack thesis. This is the
case in which there is only a single kind of homogeneous labor used in production
in either country, and a competitive global market for the sale of that labor, so that
households in one country can equally easily sell labor to firms in either country. I
shall furthermore assume in this section that φ = 1, so that there is no additional fixed
(and hence immobile) factor of production, and the marginal cost of production (in
units of the world good) will depend only on the price of labor in the global market.
In such a case, the marginal cost of production is necessarily identical worldwide,
regardless of the relative levels of economic activity in the two countries.
    The existence of a single global market for labor requires that
                                                Wt  W∗
                                                   = ∗t ,                                           (3.28)
                                                Pt  Pt
so that there is a common world price of labor in units of the world good. Labor
supply in each country is still given by a function of the form (3.2), where the real
wage is the common world real wage, and the labor employed in each country is still
given by (3.7). Hence clearing of the world labor market requires that
                                         µ               ¶ν −1
                                               Wt                            Yt        Y∗
              [(1 − γ)H̄t +   γ H̄t∗ ]              −1           = (1 − γ)      δ t + γ t∗ δ ∗t .   (3.29)
                                             Pt Ctσ                          At        At
(Here I have used (3.28) and the fact that Ct = Ct∗ to simplify the left-hand side
expression for the world demand for labor.) Equations (3.28)–(3.29) replace the two
labor-market clearing conditions (one for each country) in the model with national
labor markets that are obtained for each country by equating the right-hand sides of
(3.2) and (3.7).
    Equation (3.29) can be solved for the world real wage as a function of real activity
in the two countries. (Recall that one can use (1.15) to substitute for Ct .) Dividing
the real wage by the productivity factor At (because we are now assuming a linear
production function), we obtain the common marginal cost of production for each

                                                    66
firm in the home country. One can again write marginal cost purely as a function of
domestic goods prices and real variables by using (1.34) to substitute for Pt , yielding
                                                           "                         Y∗        #ν
                   1             γ+(1−γ)σ −1 ∗γ(σ −1 −1)
                                                               (1 − γ) AYtt δ t + γ At∗ δ ∗t
    M Ct =                 PHt Yt           Yt                                         t
                                                                                                    .   (3.30)
              k 1−σ−1 At                                         (1 − γ)H̄t + γ H̄t∗

This condition replaces (3.11) in the case of national labor markets.
   The corresponding equation for the marginal cost of production in the foreign
country is given by
                                                    "         Yt         Yt∗ ∗ #ν
               1                  −1
                           (1−γ)(σ −1) ∗(1−γ)+γσ −1   (1 − γ) A
                                                                 δ t + γ    δ
                                                                         A∗t t
  M Ct∗ = 1−σ−1 ∗ PF∗ t Yt
                                                               t
                                      Yt                                          . (3.31)
           k      At                                    (1 − γ)H̄t + γ H̄t∗

Note that even when we assume that there is a single world price for the unique
factor of production (and a linear production function), it does not follow that real
marginal cost must be the same in the two countries, if we measure real marginal cost
in units of the composite domestic good (which is the concept of real marginal cost
that measures the incentive for domestic price increases). Instead, M Ct∗ /PF∗ t differs
from M Ct /PHt , not only because of the (exogenous) productivity differential between
the two countries, but also because of the terms of trade. The latter factor depends on
the relative output of the two countries, and so can be affected by national monetary
policies.
    Log-linearizing (3.30) and substituting into (3.18), we obtain an open-economy
new-Keynesian Phillips curve for the home economy, given by

         π Ht = κ(Ŷtw − Ŷtnw ) + ξγ(Ŷt − Ŷt∗ ) + βEt π Ht+1 − ξγ(at − a∗t ).                        (3.32)

The corresponding aggregate-supply relation for the foreign economy is given by

   π ∗F t = κ(Ŷtw − Ŷtnw ) − ξ(1 − γ)(Ŷt − Ŷt∗ ) + βEt π ∗F t+1 + ξ(1 − γ)(at − a∗t ).              (3.33)

Here Ŷtw is the same measure of world average output as in (3.23).
    Here we find a role for the “global output gap” in determining the evolution
of domestic inflation in each country. Nonetheless, even in this most extreme case
— when the marginal cost of production in either country depends solely on the
common world price of a globally traded factor (apart from an exogenous country-
specific productivity factor) — it does not follow that domestic monetary policy can

                                               67
                          Home policy                                 Foreign policy
          0.5                                          0.5


         0.25                                         0.25


           0                                            0


        −0.25                                        −0.25


         −0.5                                         −0.5
                0    5        10          15   20            0   5          10           15             20


                         Home potential                              Foreign potential
         0.05                                         0.05


           0                                            0


        −0.05                                        −0.05


         −0.1                                         −0.1
                                                                                              γ = 0.0
                                                                                              γ = 0.5
        −0.15                                        −0.15                                    γ = 1.0

                0    5        10          15   20            0   5          10           15             20
                               j                                             j



Figure 8: Coefficients of the solution (3.22) for inflation, with a global labor market.

exert no influence over the dynamics of domestic inflation, even in the case of a very
small country.
    One observes that in the model with a global labor market, the equilibrium so-
lution for home-country inflation is again of the form (3.22). Figure 8 plots the
coefficients of this solution, in the same format as in Figure 6, for an economy that
is parameterized in the same way as in the earlier figure, except that there is now
assumed to be a global labor market.59 Figure 8 is quite similar to Figure 6; the
existence of a global market for all factors of production does not to any notable
extent diminish the effect of domestic monetary policy on home-country inflation.
    Once again, the key to understanding the effects of domestic monetary policy on
  59
    The same value of κ is assumed as in Figures 6 and 7, even though, if we were instead to fix the
assumed parameters of the utility function, the assumption here that φ = 1 would imply a different
value of κ than the one in the Rotemberg-Woodford model, which involves diminishing returns to
labor.


                                                68
inflation in a small open economy is provided by a consideration of the relations that
determine relative inflation. If we subtract (3.33) from (3.32), we obtain

                                                      ∗
                ∆zt = βEt ∆zt+1 − Et [A(L)(Ŷt+1 − Ŷt+1 )] − ξ(at − a∗t ),           (3.34)

where A(L) is again the lag polynomial defined in (1.50). Note that this relation
does not require the inflation differential to be zero, or even to evolve exogenously
in a way determined purely by the evolution of the productivity differential. It also
allows for variations in the inflation differential to the extent that there are variations
in the relative output of the two countries (owing to a terms-of-trade effect), and the
relative output levels depend on the monetary policies of the two countries. In the
case that the Taylor-rule coefficients are the same in both countries, equation (3.25)
again applies, and equations (3.25) and (3.34) form a system of two equations per
period to solve for the evolution of the inflation differential and the output differential,
given the paths of the productivity differential {at − a∗t } and the policy differential
{ı̄t − ı̄∗t }.
     In the case of a very small country, monetary policy in the home country can
have no noticeable effect on the world average inflation rate. But because domestic
monetary policy can still affect the inflation differential, it can still affect the domestic
inflation rate. (Note that none of the coefficients in either (3.25) or (3.34) depend
on γ, so the effects of policy on the inflation differential obtained by solving these
equations remains of the same size even if γ approaches 1.) Figure 9 shows how
this effect accounts for the results plotted in Figure 8, by decomposing the effects
shown in Figure 8 for the case γ = 0.5 into effects on world inflation and on relative
inflation respectively, using the same format as in Figure 7. Even in the case that
γ = 0.5, we observe that the effects of the national monetary policies on relative
inflation dominate the effects on world inflation (at least at the short horizons where
the effects of policy are largest); since the component of the total effect that results
from the effect on relative inflation grows in proportion to γ, the result would be even
more dramatic in the case of a larger value of γ (i.e., a smaller open economy).
     Nor is it necessarily true, even in the extreme case considered in this section, that
global integration of markets reduces the slope of the Phillips-curve tradeoff between
domestic inflation and domestic output. One observes that in (3.32), the elasticity of
domestic inflation with respect to domestic output is equal to κ̃H ≡ κ(1−γ)+ξγ. This
is smaller than the elasticity κH obtained for the open-economy model with national

                                           69
                          Home policy                                  Foreign policy
          0.3                                          0.3


         0.15                                         0.15


            0                                            0


        −0.15                                        −0.15


         −0.3                                         −0.3
                0    5        10          15   20            0    5          10           15              20


                         Home potential                               Foreign potential

         0.02                                         0.02


            0                                            0


        −0.02                                        −0.02


                                                                                               world
        −0.04                                        −0.04
                                                                                               relative

                0    5        10          15   20            0    5          10           15              20
                               j                                              j



Figure 9: Decomposition of the solution for home-country inflation into solutions for
world inflation and relative inflation, in the case of a global labor market.

factor markets (for the same value of γ and all other parameters). However, it is not
necessarily smaller than the Phillips-curve slope κ that would obtain in the case of a
closed economy. One finds that κ̃H < κ if and only if ν + σ −1 > 1, which need not
be true. For example, it is not true under the calibration adopted by Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997) for the US economy (where ν + σ −1 = 0.3). I have already argued
that it is realistic to assume that σ −1 < 1; thus one will have κ̃H > κ for any small
enough value of ν, which is to say, in the case of sufficiently elastic labor supply.60
  60
      In a closed-economy model like that of Rotemberg and Woodford, ν +σ −1 measures the elasticity
of the real wage with respect to an increase in output that is due to a purely monetary disturbance,
i.e., that is not associated with a change in either preferences or technology. Thus if real wages rise
less than in proportion to output, one may conclude that ν + σ −1 < 1. Typical estimates suggest
that this is realistic; for example, the VAR study of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996)
indicates a real wage response about one-fourth the size of the output response.



                                                70
    Thus even in the extreme case of a world market for all factors of production,
common interpretations of the “global slack” thesis would be valid to only a rather
limited extent. While foreign economic activity affects the Phillips-curve tradeoff
between domestic inflation and domestic activity in such a model, the sign of the effect
of foreign output on domestic inflation can easily be negative, the opposite of what
the global slack thesis would suggest. (Note that κ̃F = γ(κ − ξ) < 0 if ω + σ −1 < 1.)
Similarly, even if global integration means integration of factor markets as well as
final goods markets and financial markets, the slope of the Phillips-curve tradeoff can
easily be increased by integration rather than being decreased. And certainly global
integration of markets does not imply that domestic inflationary pressure ceases to
depend on domestic economic activity, so that it ceases to be possible for domestic
monetary policy to influence the evolution of domestic inflation. Even in this most
extreme case, it remains possible to use monetary policy to stabilize inflation, and
this can be done by a national central bank, of even a small country, without requiring
coordination with other central banks.


4    Conclusion
All of the arguments made above reach a similar conclusion: it is difficult to think
of plausible economic mechanisms through which globalization should impair in any
substantial way the ability of central banks to control domestic inflation through na-
tional monetary policy. I have considered the consequences of potential increases in
international integration of three distinct types — financial integration (including in-
ternational risk-sharing), goods market integration (including reduction in the share
of home goods in a country’s consumption basket), and factor market integration
— and I have considered the implications of these changes for three distinct links
in the transmission mechanism for monetary policy: the relation between interest
rates and the intertemporal allocation of expenditure, the means by which central
bank actions affect money-market interest rates, and the Phillips-curve relation be-
tween real activity and inflation. It has proven difficult to think of cases under which
increased openness should lead either to a reduced effect of domestic monetary pol-
icy on domestic aggregate demand, or to any substantial reduction of the effects of
domestic economic activity on domestic inflation, even when I have considered rela-
tively extreme theoretical possibilities, that go far beyond the degree of international

                                         71
integration that has yet been observed on any of these dimensions.
    This does not mean that the degree of openness of an economy is no significance for
the conduct of monetary policy. As shown above, changes in the degree of goods mar-
ket integration, represented by variation in the coefficient γ of preferences, affect the
quantitative specification of both the aggregate-demand and aggregate-supply blocks
of the simple models of the monetary transmission mechanism considered here; and
there would additional quantitative effects of other types of potential changes that
have not been taken up here.61 Furthermore, openness, to the degree that it is signifi-
cant, forces central bankers to confront a variety of practical issues that would not be
present in the case of a closed economy, such as the question whether to stabilize an
index of domestic prices only, or an index of the prices of all goods consumed in the
domestic economy. And to the extent that the degree of international integration is
thought to be changing especially rapidly at present or in the near future, this makes
the issue of change over time in the correct quantitative specification of the structural
models used in a central bank a more pressing one to consider.
    Nonetheless, globalization, even if expected to be rapid, does not seem to justify
quite the degree of alarm that some commentators would urge upon central banks.
When Richard Fisher declares that “the old models simply no longer apply in our
globalized, interconnected and expanded economy,” one might imagine that a radical
reconceptualization of the determinants of inflation is needed, but I see no reason
to expect this. Increased international trade in financial assets, consumer goods and
factors of production should lead to quantitative changes in the magnitudes of various
key response elasticities relevant to the transmission mechanism for monetary policy,
but should not require fundamental reconsideration of the framework of monetary
policy analysis. For example, it does not seem that notions such as “global liquidity”
or “global slack” are particularly helpful in thinking about the main determinants of
inflation, even in the case of a very highly integrated world economy.
  61
    For example, the theoretical analysis in this paper deals only with the case in which consumption
baskets are identical in all parts of the world, which represents an extreme assumption of integration
in one respect; in the case of “home bias” in countries’ consumption baskets, the structural relations
would be somewhat different. I have also considered only the case of a unit elasticity of substitution
between home and foreign goods, in which case financial integration has no consequences for either
the aggregate demand or aggregate supply block of the model; but with an elasticity of substitution
not exactly equal to one, there would be some quantitative effects (though no radical qualitative
changes) of alternative degrees of international financial integration.


                                               72
    Above all, there is little reason to expect that globalization should eliminate, or
even substantially weaken, the influence of domestic monetary policy over domestic
inflation. Whatever the pace of globalization and however great its eventual extent
may be, it should remain possible for a central bank with a consistent strategy di-
rected to the achievement of a clearly formulated inflation target to achieve that
goal, without any need for coordination of policy with other central banks. Hence
it remains appropriate for central banks to be assigned responsibility for stabilizing
a suitably chosen index of domestic prices, despite continuing changes in the real
economy, whether domestic or foreign in origin.




                                        73
References
 [1] Benigno, Gianluca, “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Monetary Policy
     Rules,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51: 473-502 (2004).

 [2] Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno, “Monetary Policy Rules and the
     Exchange Rate,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 2807, May 2001.

 [3] Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno, “Implementing International Mone-
     tary Cooperation Through Inflation Targeting,” manuscript, London School of
     Economics, October 2005.

 [4] Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno, “Designing Targeting Rules for In-
     ternational Monetary Policy Cooperation,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53:
     473-506 (2006).

 [5] Bernanke, Ben S., “Globalization and Monetary Policy,” speech at the Fourth
     Economic Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford,
     California, March 2, 2007.

 [6] Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, “Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model
     of Pricing-to-Market,” Journal of International Economics 50: 215-244 (2000).

 [7] Borio, Claudio, and Andrew Filardo, “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-
     Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” working
     paper, Bank for International Settlements, March 2007.

 [8] Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Jour-
     nal of Monetary Economics 12: 383-398 (1983).

 [9] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans, “The Effects of
     Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics 78: 16-34 (1996).

[10] Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld, “Commodity Trade and International
     Risk Sharing: How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary
     Economics 28: 3-24 (1991).



                                      74
[11] Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “A Simple Framework for Inter-
     national Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 879-904
     (2002).

[12] Fisher, Richard W., “Coping with Globalization’s Impact on Monetary Pol-
     icy,” panel discussion, Allied Social Science Association meetings, Boston, Mas-
     sachusetts, January 6, 2006.

[13] Gali, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
     Volatility in a Small Open Economy,” Review of Economic Studies 72: 707-734
     (2005).

[14] Global Research, “Rolling in Money,” Friday Notes, UniCredit/HVB, March 2,
     2007.

[15] Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaime Marquez, “Some
     Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” working paper,
     Federal Reserve Board, April 2007.

[16] Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, “Financial
     Globalization: A Reappraisal,” IMF Working Paper no. 06/189, August 2006.

[17] Razin, Assaf, and Chi-Wa Yuen, “The ’New Keynesian’ Phillips Curve: Closed
     Economy versus Open Economy,” Economics Letters 75: 1-9 (2002).

[18] Rogoff, Kenneth S., “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy,” in Monetary
     Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, Federal Reserve
     Bank of Kansas City, 2006.

[19] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, “An Optimization-Based Econo-
     metric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual 12: 297-346 (1997).

[20] Rüffer, Rasmus, and Livio Stracca, “What is Global Excess Liquidity, and Does
     it Matter?” ECB Working Paper no. 696, November 2006.

[21] Sousa, Joao Miguel, and Andrea Zaghini, “Monetary Policy Shocks in the Euro
     Area and Global Liquidity Spillovers,” ECB Working Paper no. 309, February
     2004.

                                       75
[22] Sousa, Joao Miguel, and Andrea Zaghini, “Global Monetary Policy Shocks in
     the G5: A SVAR Approach,” CFS Working Paper no. 2006/30, December 2006.

[23] Svensson, Lars E.O., “Open-Economy Inflation Targeting,” Journal of Interna-
     tional Economics 50: 155-183 (2000).

[24] Taylor, John B., “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in J.B. Tay-
     lor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

[25] Woodford, Michael, “Monetary Policy in the Information Economy,” in Eco-
     nomic Policy for the Information Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
     City, 2001.

[26] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                       76
