NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RACE AND CHARITABLE CHURCH ACTIVITY
Daniel M. Hungerman
Working Paper 13323
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13323

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

Thanks to Avner Ben-Ner, Eli Berman, Charles Clotfelter, Daniel Chen, William Evans, Jonathan
Gruber, Jason Hwang, Laurence Iannaccone, Gregory Krohn, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, David Matsa, Rachel
McCleary, Steve Pischke, James Poterba, Alessandro Tarozzi, Jacob Vigdor, and numerous conference
and seminar participants for comments. Special thanks to Mark Chaves and Nancy Martin for help
with the NCS data, and to representatives of denominations 1 and 2. This research was supported by
the Program on Philanthropy and the Nonprofit Sector of the Social Science Research Council, the
Louisville Institute, the Metanexus Institute, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. Email
the author at dhungerm@nd.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Daniel M. Hungerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Race and Charitable Church Activity
Daniel M. Hungerman
NBER Working Paper No. 13323
August 2007
JEL No. H41,J15,Z12
ABSTRACT
The availability of public funding for charitable church activity has increased dramatically in the past
decade. A key dispute over this increased availability is whether congregations' propensity to provide
charitable services depends upon the racial composition of the community served. This paper uses
three different congregation-level datasets to investigate how race affects charitable church activity.
In all three datasets there is evidence that all-white congregations become less charitably active as
the share of black residents in the local community grows. This response is found only when looking
at charitable activities, not when looking at other types of church activity. Additionally, all-white
congregations favorably disposed towards receiving government funding do not respond differently
to black residents than do congregations which are not all-white.
Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
439 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu

Introduction
Faith-based organizations provide social services for over 70 million Americans annually
(Johnson, Tompkins, and Webb, 2002). Of the more than 350,000 congregations in the country, over 85
percent support some type of social service activity (Solomon, 2003). Biddle (1992) estimates that each
year congregations spend 24 billion dollars on philanthropic activities.
These actions have gained new relevance for policy makers as the availability of public funding
for charitable church activity has dramatically increased in the past decade. Starting with the “charitable
choice” provision of the 1996 welfare reform law and continuing with the creation of Centers for FaithBased and Community Initiatives located in eleven different federal agencies, policy makers have
instituted a “devolution” of federal funds intended to provide community services. In 2005, more than
2.1 billion dollars in government grants were awarded to religious organizations by federal agencies
(Office of the Press Secretary, 2006). 1
Some observers fear that this policy trend will encourage racial discrimination by congregations
(Leonard, 2002). As Bartkowski and Regis (2003) write, “Congregational definitions of legitimate
[social] problems that members care about are, in actuality, influenced by various considerations—among
them, racialized perceptions of welfare recipients.” Past studies by economists have postulated, but not
substantiated, that churchgoers warrant special consideration as individuals whose actions are sensitive to
community demographics (for example, Alesina and La Ferrara, 2000; and Gruber, 2005).
Alternately, some policy makers have championed faith-based organizations because they are not
likely to display sensitivity to community demographics when providing services. As President Bush
stated in a speech in 2002, “Faith-based charities work daily miracles because…above all, they recognize
the dignity of every citizen and the possibilities of every life” (Office of the Press Secretary, 2002). John
DiIulio, the former director of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives, argued
for charitable choice by saying, “government at all levels blatantly denies the equal protection of the laws
to low income, urban African American and Latino children and families who depend disproportionately
1

See Cnaan and Boddie (2002) for an overview of the charitable choice provision and related research.

1

on faith-based organizations for both basic life necessities and the delivery of specific social welfare
benefits” (DiIulio, 2002). There is also (non-economic) research consistent with this view (e.g., Johnson,
1977; and Billiet, 1995).
The goal of this paper is to see whether congregations are affected by the racial composition of
the local community when deciding whether and how much charitable activity to provide. Exploring this
relationship is not only valuable because it addresses a key policy debate, but also because it contributes
to existing economic work on diversity and redistribution. Much prior work on socioeconomic conditions
and tastes for redistribution relies on hypothetical questions asked to respondents in the General Social
Survey or in Gallop Polls (examples include Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005a; Luttmer, 2001; and Fong,
2001).

This paper examines how a community’s racial composition affects actual charitable

expenditures. Studying actual charitable activities will be valuable if individuals’ stated preferences are
different from their actual preferences or if stated preferences are sensitive to the wording of a question
(as is the case in Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005a).
To investigate the effect of race on charitable church activity, we compare how racially
homogeneous congregations respond to the community’s racial composition relative to other
congregations. Several factors support this approach. First, members of homogeneous congregations
have ostensibly taken race into account when selecting a congregation to attend; consequently, these
congregations may be especially likely to display sensitivity to a community’s racial composition when
providing charitable services. Second, comparing one type of congregation’s response to race to the
response of other congregations offers some of the empirical robustness of a standard difference-indifference estimator. Our identification will come from comparing the difference between homogeneous
congregations in (for example) highly black communities to homogeneous congregations in other
communities and seeing if this difference is similar to the one observed for non-homogeneous
congregations. This greatly decreases the likelihood that unobserved phenomena correlated with race will
drive our results, although we will spend considerable time addressing that concern. Third, homogeneous

2

congregations are important because they make up a large share (about 25 percent, in the nationallyrepresentative data used here) of all congregations.
Three different datasets of charitable church activity are used. 2 The first two datasets contain
information on the churches belonging to two predominantly white, Protestant denominations. Both
denominations are among the largest in the country. One dataset is a cross-section and the other is a
panel. The third dataset is the National Congregations Study (NCS), a multi-faith, nationally
representative survey of congregations taken in 1998.
The only finding consistent across all three datasets is that congregations composed entirely of
white members become less charitably active, relative to other congregations, as the share of black
residents in the local community grows. This difference in response to share black is economically
significant. If the share of black residents in the local community increased by 10 percentage points, the
average all-white church in denomination 1 would be expected to decrease per-member spending on
charitable activity by about 6 percent, while other congregations in denomination 1 would on average
decrease spending by less than 1 percent. Further, the results indicate that if the share black in the
community increases by one standard deviation, the probability of a congregation participating in a local
charitable activity would fall by about one fifth if the congregation were all white, and would slightly
increase otherwise. We do not find consistent evidence of a unique response by all-white congregations
to any racial group except blacks.
Despite the difference-in-difference approach, one might be concerned that unobserved
phenomena correlated with race drive the results.

For instance, all-white churches in diverse

neighborhoods may have poorer members or fewer resources than other churches. A number of tests
suggest that the results are robust to this sort of concern. We find a differential response to black
residents by all-white congregations only when looking at charitable activities, not when looking at other
types of church activity. In fact, there is some evidence that all-white churches spend more on non-

2

While this paper will focus mostly on churches, other types of congregations (i.e., non-Christian) will be
considered as well. Thus it is with some abuse that the general term “charitable church activity” is used.

3

charitable activities as the share of black residents grows, consistent with a story where all-white churches
in black communities are not poorer than other churches but substitute out of charitable spending and into
other types of church spending. Additionally, the result is robust to using both monetary and nonmonetary measures of charitable activity, controlling for congregation-member income, using community
fixed effects, using either the county or the census-tract to represent the local community, and
instrumenting for share black using lagged values of share black. Results from the NCS dataset indicate
that all-white congregations favorably disposed towards receiving government funding do not respond
differently to black residents than do congregations which are not all-white.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section two sets out the empirical approach;
section three describes and presents findings using the denominational datasets; section four describes and
presents findings using the NCS dataset, and section five concludes.

2. Empirical Approach
A growing body of economic research documents that in many situations individuals display
“group preferences,” whereby one’s tastes for public goods, collective activities, and redistribution are
sensitive to the local community's demographic composition. Examples include Glaeser (2005), Alesina
and La Ferrara (2002 and 2000), Vigdor (2004 and 2001), Luttmer (2001), Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly
(1999), and Poterba (1997). See Alesina and La Ferrara (2005b) for a review.
This research has suggested but not verified that congregation members may warrant
consideration as individuals likely to display group preferences. Alesina, Baqir, and Hoxby (2000) find
evidence suggesting that “observed differences in preferences among denominations may be largely the
result of ethnic differences,” and Gruber (2005) uses a community’s ethnic makeup to instrument for
religiosity. Alesina and La Ferrera (2000) find that church participation is very sensitive to a community’s
racial composition. Luttmer (2001) postulates that religion may affect individuals’ preferences for income
redistribution.

4

However, some research suggests that churchgoers and other individuals may not discriminate
based on race when interacting with others. Work by Levitt (2004) and Antonovics, Arcidiacono, and
Walsh (2005) finds little evidence of race-based discrimination in a high-stakes game show. Research
outside of economics has used survey data to argue that religious participation decreases prejudice among
Catholic churchgoers (Billiet, 1995) and young Mormons (Jacobson, 1998).
As mentioned earlier, work on tastes for redistribution and community socioeconomic conditions
has relied to some extent on responses given in Gallop Polls and the General Social Survey. While these
studies are valuable, they may not accurately reflect the actions taken by individuals if individuals give
mendacious responses, or if variations in the wording of a question generate different answers. The focus
here will be on the actual charitable spending rather than on stated preferences.
Other studies, including Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999) and Poterba (1997) provide a link
between ethnic or racial fragmentation and community outcomes such as per-capita citywide public debt.
But as Vigdor (2004) argues, interpretation of these studies “is frequently hampered by the complexity of
the aggregation mechanism linking individual preferences to [the] community-level outcomes.” Here the
focus is not on “community-level outcomes” but on the actions taken by members of particular
congregations.
To investigate the role of race in affecting charitable church activity, the empirical model
compares how homogeneous congregations respond to race relative to other congregations when
providing charitable services. With this in mind, let y represent a measure of a congregation’s charitable
activity such as the log of congregational charitable expenditures or a dummy variable equaling unity if a
congregation participates in a local charitable activity. Ideally we would estimate:

y = α + ∑ δ j race j + γ H + ∑ δ jH ( H * race j ) +β X + ε ,
j

j

(1)

where racej is the share of local community residents that are race j, H is a dummy for whether a
congregation is homogeneous (composed entirely of members of one race), X is a vector of
congregational and community characteristics, and ε is exogenous noise. We could think of this as

5

holding for congregation i in community k at time t; the subscripts have been suppressed. One might
consider interacting all of the covariates with the homogeneity dummy, not just the racial covariates; this
H
specification will be considered. The coefficients δ j capture the difference between homogeneous

congregations’ response to racial groups in the community and other congregations’ response.
A certain racial group must be omitted; this complicates the comparison of coefficients between
homogeneous congregations and other congregations. For example, if we omitted Hispanics and then
H
H
estimated (1), the interacted coefficient on share black would be (δ Black − δ Hispanic ) . It is impossible to

say whether this coefficient is driven by a differential response of homogeneous congregations to blacks
or to the omitted group. However, estimating (1) with all but one racial group omitted does yield a
meaningful comparison. For example, if we estimate (1) including only the black racial group the
H
H
interacted coefficient is (δ Black − δ Non Black ) , which is readily interpretable. We consequently estimate

y = α + δ j race j + γ H + δ jH ( H * race j ) + β X + ε ,

(2)

for each racial group j.
H
While specification (2) has the advantage of providing a meaningful interpretation of δ j , one

issue with this specification is that it assumes that a congregation responds in the same fashion to all of
the omitted groups. The results of this paper are robust to specifications which allow heterogeneous
responses to multiple groups at once. This is discussed more below.
Additionally, one might be concerned that the racial composition of the community is correlated
with unobserved phenomena that simultaneously affect charitable church activity. As explained before,
one advantage of (2) is that this approach will be robust to unobserved phenomena that affect all
congregations in the same fashion. We will also address this concern using instrumental variables and a
number of robustness tests.
One might suspect that congregations have a great deal of control over who receives their
charitable services. Homogeneous congregations that do not want to support certain groups in the

6

community may be able to selectively direct charitable services to community members of a specific race.
If so, then congregations might actively provide services regardless of the relative size of their target
demographic in the community and this would bias the results towards zero.

3. Analysis of Denominational Datasets
3.a Description of the Data
In this section we will estimate equation (2) using church-level data from two denominations; the
datasets were obtained directly from the denominations themselves. Both denominations are Protestant,
predominantly white, and are among the largest and most widespread denominations in the country. The
dataset for denomination 1 contains a cross section of every church in the denomination in the year 2000.
The dataset for denomination 2 is a panel with every church in the denomination in the years 1990 and
2000. Racial data are available for churches in both datasets. Denomination 2 is larger but suffers from a
missing values problem. Otherwise, the two datasets are similar.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for both denominations. Because of the small number of
homogeneous churches that are not all-white, we will focus on comparing all-white churches to other
churches; the summary statistics here are separated by whether or not a church is all-white.3 The measure
of charitable church activity used with these datasets is per-member spending on local charitable activity;
the mean of this variable is somewhat different between denominations but this is not surprising given
that the variable is not precisely the same in both cases (definitions are given in the appendix). For
denomination 2, which covers multiple years, charitable spending is adjusted for inflation (2000 is the
base year). In both cases, some church spending that is not strictly local charitable spending may be
included in our measure of charitable spending (for example, spending on a local church picnic). Such
spending may be unresponsive to community demographics and this would probably bias our coefficients
towards zero.
3

For denomination 1, only 68 churches are all-Asian and only 20 churches are all-Hispanic; for denomination 2 the
figures are 51and 26, respectively. There are only 149 all-black churches in denomination 1; there are 516 in
denomination 2.

7

Looking at the other church variables, the denominations are similar in terms of size and racial
makeup, and in both cases all-white churches are smaller than other churches. We will control for white,
black and Asian/Pacific Islander churchgoers; the (relatively small) number of churchgoers belonging to
other races will form the excluded group. Both denominations have a large share of all-white churches
and even the non all-white churches are mostly white. The church mortality variable (equal to the number
of member deaths in the past year over the total number of members) is similar for each denomination.
This mortality variable will be used to proxy for a congregation’s age, as in Hungerman (2005). The ratio
of church individuals involved in church school membership to adult members is also included for each
denomination.
The rest of the variables in the table capture relevant community characteristics. We use the
county as our measure of the church’s community (we use census-tracts in the next section). 4 Most of our
data on the church’s community come from the decennial Census. Average per-capita income is taken
from the Regional Economic Information System (REIS) provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
and the annual unemployment rate is taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Population density will
control for churches in urban areas. The differences in the demographic and economic variables generally
suggest that all-white churches are in less urban areas than other churches.
The 2000 Census allowed respondents to designate themselves as members of multiple racial
groups. Separate from any racial affiliation, respondents in both 1990 and 2000 could also identify
themselves as “Spanish/Hispanic/Latino.” In both denominational datasets, and in contrast to the Census,
Hispanic was included as an option for racial designation. To make the census data comparable to the
denomination data, we construct our community racial profiles as follows: any respondent who identified
himself or herself as Spanish/Hispanic/Latino will be considered Hispanic. Among respondents who are

4

Whether the county or the census tract is most ideal for measuring the area served by a church is unclear. For
example, Eisinger (2002) reports enormous variation in the scope of food assistance programs, the great majority of
which are faith-based. Data from the NCS show that congregations frequently pull members from a reasonably
wide area with many members living further than a 10 minute walk away from the congregation but most living
within a 30 minute drive. However, the scope of some charitable activities may be limited. All this suggests results
from both measures of community will be valuable.

8

not Hispanic, those responding as white alone are designated as white; the same for blacks. Asians and
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders are grouped together. 5

Respondents identifying themselves as

members of a race not listed in the census form, American Indian/Alaskan Natives, and non-Hispanic
respondents naming multiple races are classified together as Other race.

This gives us the racial

categories Asian/Pacific Islander, black, Hispanic, white and Other. 6
As mentioned at the bottom of table 1, about 3,500 churches in denomination 1 do not report their
spending and race data and are dropped. The problem is worse for denomination 2, with over 30,000
observations not reporting these variables.

(A comparison of churches with missing data to other

churches is briefly given under table 1.) Three churches, two in denomination 1 and one in denomination
2, report very large spending or membership values 7 ; these churches were dropped from the sample.
However, the basic results are unchanged if these observations are included. Also, some complications in
county FIPS coding involving REIS data for counties in Virginia and Alaska led to a relatively small
number of churches being dropped from the data. Given that the missing values problem is dramatically
worse in the second dataset, similar findings across the two datasets may help alleviate concerns about the
effects these omissions have on the estimates.
3.b Results
Table 2 reports regression estimates on charitable church activity comparing the response of allwhite churches to race relative to the response of other churches. The dependent variable is church permember spending on local charitable activities, logged. All residuals are clustered by county and control
for heteroskedasticity. All denomination 1 regressions include dummies for each church’s jurisdiction; 8

5

For conciseness we will refer to the Asian, Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander group as simply the Asian group.
Admittedly, race is an arbitrary construct. For each denomination the church race data come from a congregational
respondent (such as a pastor or church secretary) whose responses may be subjective and affected by (for instance)
informational constraints. In what follows we rely on census responses on race being conceptually similar to those
of the denominational and the NCS respondents providing the congregation data.
7
The large membership value is about 5,000 and the per-member spending values go from $2,000 to over $30,000
8
The term “jurisdiction” here refers here to the region covered by the local church governing body. It is roughly
analogous to a Catholic diocese.
6

9

the panel regressions use county and year dummies. 9 Only the racial coefficients are shown in table 2.
Additional coefficients for the covariates in columns 1 and 3 are given in appendix table A1; for brevity
we do not discuss them except to say that they generally accord to our expectations. The R-squareds are
reasonable for regressions on religious activity (Iannaccone, 1998).
The first column presents the baseline regression for denomination 1 on share black in the county.
The uninteracted variable on share black is not significant, but the interacted variable is, suggesting that
as the share of black residents increases all-white churches spend less per member on charitable activities.
Given the semilog specification and that share black is measured on a 0-1 scale, one could interpret the
coefficient as follows: if the share of black residents in the local community increased by 10 percentage
points, the average all-white church in denomination 1 would be expected to decrease per-member
spending on charitable activity by about 6 percent, while other congregations in denomination 1 would
only be expected to decrease spending by 1 percent; the difference between the two responses is
statistically significant.
Column 2 presents the same regression for denomination 2 without county fixed effects, and
column 3 presents the same regression with fixed effects added in. The uninteracted share black in the
county goes from positive and marginally significant to negative and insignificant once county fixed
effects are added; however, the interacted coefficient is similarly sized and still significant at the one
percent level. This suggests that the share of black residents in the county is positively correlated with
unobserved county characteristics that lead to higher charitable church activity, but that these
characteristics affect all-white churches and other churches similarly. All-white churches in denomination
2 also spend significantly less per member on charitable activity than do other denomination 2 churches.
Do all-white churches show differential preferences to any other racial group? The remainder of
the columns repeat the basic regression using the share of white, Hispanic, and Asian residents. All-white
churches in denomination 2 are more responsive to whites in the community than are other churches.

9

Using church dummies causes all the coefficients to be estimated imprecisetly, which is not surprising given slow
changes in church racial makeup over time.

10

This is not the case for denomination 1 churches. This could be the result of our inability to control for
community fixed effects with denomination 1, or could indicate that denomination 1 views different nonwhite racial groups in different ways, or it could simply reflect denominational idiosyncrasies.
Columns 6 and 7 consider all-white churches’ response to Hispanics. Column 6 indicates that
all-white denomination 1 churches respond much more positively to Hispanics than do other
denomination 1 churches. This denomination had recently adopted a strategy to increase outreach to
Hispanics, so this finding may reflect homogeneous churches in denomination 1 trying to (selectively)
diversify. 10 Moreover, this finding is not consistent across both datasets. While denomination 2 churches
are in general less active in highly-Hispanic communities, all-white churches in this denomination do not
respond to Hispanics differently than do other denomination 2 churches.
The last two columns of table 2 look at the share of Asians the community. Denomination 1 has a
marginally significant and negative coefficient for the uninteracted share Asian coefficient, but for both
denominations the interacted coefficient is insignificant.

Looking at both the interacted and non-

interacted terms, there is no result consistent across both datasets—except that all-white churches
decrease charitable activity as the share of black residents in the community increases.
As mentioned in the previous section, the specification in table 2 allows straightforward
interpretation but assumes that congregations respond the same way to all omitted groups. As shown in
the appendix (table A2, columns 1 and 2), repeating these regressions with multiple racial groups at once
yields strikingly similar coefficients. The results are not being driven by constraining churches to respond
to all omitted residents in the same fashion. 11
In sum, the only result consistent across denominations is that all-white churches become less
charitably active as the share of black residents in the community increases. There is no finding for nonhomogeneous churches that is seen in both cases, and there is no other racial group to which all-white
10

However, we tested the robustness of our findings to log-log and linear-linear specifications; under these latter
specifications the interacted coefficient on Hispanic was no longer significant.
11
The similarity of the coefficients in the appendix to table 2 is likely driven by the fact that white residents make
up the dominant share of omitted residents in most table 2 regressions. But it should be clear that the coefficients in
the appendix have a different (and less straightforward) interpretation than those in table 2.

11

churches in both denominations respond differentially. The next subsection will focus on testing the
robustness of the finding on white churches and black residents.
3.c All-White Churches and Black Residents: Robustness Tests
One might be concerned that all-white churches in highly-black communities are unobservably
different from other all-white churches and that this difference is not found when comparing non-allwhite churches in black communities to other non-all-white churches. For example, suppose that there is
an all-white church in an initially white community. As blacks begin to move into the community,
suppose that there is “white flight,” where the richest whites leave the community to live elsewhere.
Suppose also that whites are willing to pay a premium to live with other whites. After white flight the
church in the community is still all-white, but it is composed of the poorest whites—those who did not
relocate. Because of the housing market premium paid by whites, the whites who did not flee are also
poorer than the new black residents in the community. If a church’s charitable activity is determined by
the wealth of its members, this all-white church will be less charitably active than other white churches,
and less active even than other churches in black communities. This would give us the result in table 2
regardless of whether the churchgoers in these all-white churches take race into account when providing
charitable services.
One potential solution to this problem would be to instrument for share black. It is difficult to
find an instrument that clearly satisfies the exclusion restriction. The instrument used in Alesina, Baqir
and Easterly’s (1999) well-known paper on ethnic divisions is lagged demographic characteristics. The
results from instrumenting for current share black with share black lagged by 10 years are in the first two
columns of table 3; they are close to the OLS results.
These 2SLS results may not address the “white flight” scenario described previously in that
lagged black residency could be correlated with historic episodes of white flight, and the effects of these
historic episodes could persist across time. However, there are a number of ways to test the robustness of
the result. Under the “white flight” scenario and others like it, all-white churches in black communities
are poorer than other churches and therefore are less charitably active. One way to address this scenario

12

is to control for the wealth of churchgoers. While there is no measure for church member wealth
available for denomination 2, data on church member donations are available for denomination 1. Church
donations and church member income have been shown to be strongly related (Iannaconne, 1998).
Column 3 of table 3 reports the results for denomination 1 controlling for logged per-member donations.
While donations are clearly significant, implying almost unit-elasticity between giving and spending, the
interacted coefficient on share black is now slightly larger than before and the standard error is slightly
smaller. This suggests that differences in churchgoer income are not driving the result.
A second test of the white-flight scenario involves looking at church expenditures on noncharitable activities, such as expenditures on day-to-day operating expenses and church upkeep. In the
white flight scenario all-white churches in all-black neighborhoods are poorer than other churches and
would likely spend less on all types of activities. Columns 4 and 5 of table 3, however, show that these
churches do not spend less on church operating expenses. In fact, the interacted coefficient for both
denominations is positive and for denomination 2 it is significant at the one percent level. This is
consistent with a story where all-white churches in black communities are not poorer than other churches,
but substitute out of charitable spending and into other types of church spending.
One might be concerned that all-white churches are located in different communities than other
churches, and this difference is driving the results. Columns 6 and 7 of table 3 repeat the standard
regression but limit the sample only to churches located in counties that house both an all-white church
and a church that is not all-white.

For each denomination the result is close to the baseline results in

table 2.
The final two columns of table 3 present results from the standard regression interacting all the
covariates, including the area fixed effects, for each denomination. (Given that the area fixed effects are
interacted with the all-white dummy, the all-white dummy itself becomes essentially meaningless and is
not reported.)

For denomination 1 the interacted coefficient is closer to zero in value and is not

significant. For denomination 2 the coefficient is larger in absolute value than before and is still 95
percent significant. In both cases interacting the area fixed effects raises some near-multicollinearity

13

concerns; regressing the interacted share black variable on all other covariates yields an R-squared of 0.96
for denomination 1 and 0.99 for denomination 2. Repeating the regression without interacting the area
fixed effects gives a coefficient for denomination 2 of -0.8855 with a standard error of 0.3414, which is
much closer to before and significant at the one percent level. The coefficient for denomination 1 is still
insignificant in this case, however (these results are not reported in table 3 to save space).
One may wonder whether the relationship between all-white churches and blacks is being driven
by rural churches, or churches in the south. The main regressions in table 2 were repeated with churches
in southern states (defined as the states of the confederacy) omitted; this did not change the results. 12 The
regressions were also repeated omitting churches in counties whose population density ranked in the
bottom quartile, and again this did not change the result. The results are also robust to including an
interaction of share black and density. For both denominations the results are qualitatively similar when
weighted by membership or when estimated using log-log or linear models. These regressions are all
omitted for brevity.
To summarize, results using these two denominational datasets suggest that churches do respond
to race when providing charitable services, and in particular churchgoers who attend all-white churches
respond negatively to the presence of blacks in the community relative to other churchgoers. This is the
only consistent result in the data. This response is found only when looking at charitable activities, not
when looking at other types of church activity. The result is robust to different specifications, is found in
both datasets, and is robust to controlling for member wealth, area fixed effects, and to instrumenting for
share black. Estimated coefficients are similar even when all covariates are interacted with an all-white
dummy, but are less precise than before for denomination 1. The following section investigates whether
this result is found in the National Congregations Study as well.

4. Analysis of Congregations from the NCS

12

Although in this case the standard errors for denomination 1, which has a relatively larger share or churches in the
south, increased somewhat.

14

4.a Description of the Data
In this section we use data from the National Congregations Study (NCS) to estimate equation
(2).

This study was made available by the American Religion Data Archive.

It is a nationally

representative sample of American congregations, providing data on 1,236 congregations across the
country from numerous religious traditions. The NCS data were collected mostly by phone interviews
with congregational pastors, staff or leaders; three-quarters of NCS interviews were with clergy.
Congregations were selected using responses from the 1998 General Social Survey. Respondents in the
GSS who attended religious services at least once a year were asked to give the name and location of their
congregation; in this fashion a random sample of congregations across the nation was generated. 13
The advantages of the NCS dataset are that it includes congregations from multiple faiths and
denominations, it contains a rich body of information for each congregation, and it allows for a study of
non-pecuniary charitable church activity. The disadvantages of the NCS are its smaller size and the fact
that the NCS data do not precisely identify where a congregation is located. However, the parties
responsible for maintaining the NCS data have linked congregations to some of the census-tract variables
from the 1990 Census and we were able to obtain these variables for use here; we also have learned that
there are 1,036 unique census tracts and 41 states represented in the data. The NCS data come from 1998.
While the 2000 Census variables would be better than the 1990 Census variables, the demographic
information should not be too different.
Table 4 presents summary statistics for the NCS data.

The NCS reports racial data on

congregations by asking what percent of regular adult participants in the congregation are white and nonHispanic, black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, and Asian or Pacific Islander. Respondents are
also asked, “Of the regular adult participants in your congregation, are there any other ethnic groups?” but
no percent for other groups is given. We use these answers to create the categories Asian/Pacific

13

Further details on these data can be found in Chaves (1998) and Chaves, Konieczny, Byerlein, and Barman
(1999).

15

Islander, black, Hispanic, and white. 14

Homogeneous congregations make up about a fourth of all

congregations, but, all-white congregations make up the majority of racially homogeneous congregations
and the summary statistics are broken down by all-white congregations and other congregations. For a
small number of congregations the percent of all racial groups is reported as zero and respondents
indicated that there are no additional racial groups in the congregation; these congregations are dropped.
There are also missing data for various other regressors; the number of usable congregations for most of
the regressions is 1,020. This may affect whether the sample is truly nationally representative, but results
will nevertheless be informative. 15 As shown in table 4, there are fewer all-white congregations and the
non-all-white congregations are less white in the NCS than in the denominational datasets.
The dependent variable for NCS regressions will be a binary variable equaling unity if a
congregation participates in local charitable activities and zero otherwise. NCS respondents were asked,
“Has your congregation participated in or supported social service, community development, or
neighborhood organizing projects of any sort within the past 12 months?” Respondents then named all
relevant projects and each project was coded into various pre-determined categories. For example, a
congregation participating in a program to provide clothes for the homeless would be marked as
participating in a program focused on clothing, and also marked as participating in a program to help the
homeless. Our dependent variable equals unity if a congregation was marked as participating in any
category that is likely to be both local and charitable in nature.
There is some subjectivity involved in selecting the categories most likely to involve local
charitable work. We therefore identified two different sets of categories; the first set is smaller and
includes only the categories most likely to involve local charitable work, and the second set is larger and
includes any category which might feasibly be related to charitable work. We run our regressions using

14

The percent of all racial groups in the congregation added up sometimes exceeds 100. The best response to this
problem is not clear. Given that the totals are generally very close to 100, the percent estimates are not re-weighted
in any way. One should interpret the congregational data as estimates and thus subject to some misreporting.
15
Chaves (1999) explains that the congregations can be weighted in different ways to make the data representative
either for the population of congregational attendees or the population of congregations. Given that we will be
estimating Probit regressions on a subsample of the data, we do not weight the data in any way.

16

both sets of categories to define charitable activity. The appendix reports the set of categories used in
each definition. Aside from the categories used in the two definitions of charitable activity, there are a
few other categories that are not likely to represent local charitable activities (for example, recreational
programs and programs undertaken to help international causes). We will use these other activities in a
robustness test. Table 4 shows that a majority of all congregations are likely to participate in charitable
activities, but all-white congregations are slightly less likely to do so than other congregations.
The NCS data also capture numerous congregational attributes including information on
congregation members’ income, education, sex, age, and political and theological conservatism. As
before, all-white congregations tend to be smaller and are more likely to be in rural locations.
Congregation members in all-white congregations are slightly less educated, older, and more conservative
(politically and theologically) than other congregations and are less likely to have discussed politics
during worship.
4.b Results from Estimates using the NCS Data
The focus with the NCS dataset will again be on all-white congregations. 16 Table 5 presents the
basic results for all-white congregations in the NCS dataset. As before we suppress the non-racial
covariates to save space; other coefficients for the first regression in table 5 can be found in table A2.
The estimates shown are the marginal effects from a Probit regression.
The first column in table 5 uses the more specific definition of charitable activity. The coefficient
on the interacted term is very negative and significant. It roughly suggests that if the share black in the
community increases by one-standard deviation (0.25 for the regression sample), the probability of a
congregation participating in a local charitable activity would fall by about one fifth if the congregation
were all white, and would slightly increase otherwise. The uninteracted share-black coefficient and the
all-white dummy are both insignificant. The second column repeats the regression using the more general
definition of charitable activity. The interacted coefficient is less negative than before and is marginally
significant.
16

This is not surprising, given that this definition includes programs which may not be

There are only 49 all-black, 2 all-Asian, and 3 all-Hispanic congregations in the regression sample.

17

charitable in nature (such as a holiday program sponsored by the congregation) or local (such as a
program to feed the hungry, which could be international in focus). 17
The next three columns repeat the standard regression looking at other racial groups. The
dependent variable is the more specific definition of charitable church activity. The only significant
finding is that all-white congregations may be slightly more active in highly Hispanic communities. This
result was also found for denomination 1 in the previous section, although there the finding was sensitive
to the use of the semilog specification and may have been partly influenced by denominational
idiosyncrasies.
The use of census tracts instead of counties creates much more variation in the racial composition
of the community than in the denominational datasets; one might be concerned that outlier values are
driving the result. Ideally we would repeat the regression using county-level data; but as mentioned
before it is not possible to match the NCS data up to county covariates. Instead, columns 6 and 7 repeat
the regressions on share black, but for both all-white and not-all-white congregations observations whose
communities’ share black is in the 95th percentile or above are removed. (The results are very similar if
only the 99th percentile is removed). The interacted coefficients in columns 6 and 7 are now more
negative than before and the result is significant at the five percent level using either the specific or the
general definition of charitable activity. This suggests that the increased volatility gained from using
census-tract measures of share black weakens the precision of the estimates, which is intuitive if
congregations generally have a conception of the local community that is larger than the local census
tract.
The last two columns of table 5 repeat the robustness test for Hispanic communities (again, these
results are very similar to those obtained by only eliminating the 99th percentile of Hispanic
communities). Now the interacted coefficient is insignificant. This suggests that our earlier finding on
all-white congregations in Hispanic communities was sensitive to the inclusion of a few congregations in

17

Estimating linear probability models yields similar results. For a discussion of interacted effects in linear and
nonlinear models see Ai and Norton (2003).

18

highly Hispanic areas; perhaps this is because highly Hispanic areas are more “needy” than other areas
and our community regressors do not adequately control for this.
As noted before, this specification assumes that congregations respond to all omitted races in the
same way. Appendix table A2 shows that, as was the case with the denominational datasets, the estimates
here are clearly not being driven by this assumption. We now focus on testing the robustness of the result
on white congregations and black residents.
4.c All-White Congregations and Share Black: Extensions with the NCS Dataset
To check the robustness of the previous results, the first column of table 6 repeats the standard
regression on share black but this time the dependent variable equals unity if a congregation participated
in a program which is not likely to be local or charitable in nature; a list of the programs used is given
beneath table 6. The non-interacted share black coefficient is marginally significant, but the interacted
coefficient is now positive and insignificant. Regarding international programs, recreational programs
and other non-charitable activities, we cannot reject the hypothesis that all-white congregations respond to
the share black in the same way as other congregations. 18
The regressions in columns 2 and 3 interact all covariates with the all-white dummy. Four
observations had to be dropped because they became perfect predictors after including interactions for the
denominational and regional dummies.

(Rerunning the regression without interactions for the

denominational and regional dummies does not change the results.) The interacted coefficient is large,
negative, and significant for both definitions of charitable activity.
The NCS survey asked congregational informants whether their congregation was receiving
public funds, and if not whether their congregation “would apply for government money to support [the
congregation’s] human services programs if it was available.” It will be interesting to see if all-white
congregations receiving or inclined towards receiving public money respond to blacks differently than do
other congregations.

18

The results in column 1 are similar if only international programs are used.

19

The two last columns of table 6 present a triple interaction regression, where the interactions are
(a) a dummy for whether a congregation receives or is favorably inclined towards receiving public
funding, (b) a dummy for whether or not a congregation is all white, and (c) the share of black residents in
the congregation’s census tract. There are a number of missing values for whether a congregation is
favorably inclined towards receiving public funding and we eliminate congregations who “don’t know” if
they are favorably inclined or not, making the sample size slightly smaller than before. 19
In both columns the simple interaction between all-white congregations and share black is
negative and significant, and in both cases the triple interaction term is large, positive, and marginally
significant. For both regressions a Wald test that the sum of (a) the triple interaction coefficient and (b)
the coefficient on the interaction between share black and the all-white dummy equals zero cannot be
rejected. This suggests that all-white congregations favorably disposed towards receiving government
funding for the provision of charitable services do not respond differently to black residents than do
congregations which are not all-white. This result is somewhat tempered by the small number of all-white
churches receiving or inclined to receive public funds (45) but it is worth emphasizing that despite the
somewhat small sample size the triple interaction term is measured with at least some precision in both
regressions; the Wald tests are not simply driven by large standard errors.

5. Conclusions
This paper provides evidence that an important type of congregation—the all-white
congregation—is affected by the racial composition of the community when deciding whether and how
much charitable activity to provide. Relative to other congregations, all-white congregations become less
charitably active as the share of black residents in the community grows. We find this result in three
different datasets of charitable church activity; it is the only result consistent across the three datasets.
This response is found only when looking at charitable activities, not when looking at other types of

19

Of the 913 congregations used in the regression, 132 are all-white, 450 are favorably inclined to receive public
funds, and 45 are both all-white and favorably inclined to receive public funds.

20

church activity. The result is robust to using different measures of the community, using monetary and
non-monetary measures of charitable activity, controlling for congregation member income, controlling
for community fixed effects, and using an instrumental variables specification.
This finding has a number of implications. First, the present analysis has focused on race, but it
may be the case that congregations take other demographic characteristics into account as well. This is an
area for future research.

Additionally, the small number of homogeneous churches in the data that are

not all-white limits our ability to say how they respond to race. Future research should consider this
issue. Future research is also needed to explore the cause of our findings here—whether they are driven
by what Alesina and La Ferrara (2000) call race-based “aversion” on the part of all-white churches, by
not-all-white churches having especially favorable responses to blacks in a community, by technological
considerations, or by some other factor.
Additionally, Hungerman (2005, 2007) and Gruber and Hungerman (2007) find historic evidence
of substitutability between charitable church activity and government activity.

It is possible that

individuals with group preferences would respond to increased community diversity by devolving funds
out of the public arena, where categorical qualifications for transfer programs are race-blind, to
congregations, which may be able to offer transfers more selectively. This would be consistent with the
findings of previous economic research. However, if congregations do target charity towards specific
groups in a community this would lead to underestimates of the effect of race in the present setting for
reasons discussed in section two.
Finally, this paper uses a panel to study the effects of community composition on collective
actions. Although the main results here are not sensitive to the inclusion of community fixed effects, this
is not generalizable to previous work on group preferences. Rather, the robustness of our results is likely
a result of the difference-in-difference approach. Future research in this area should not neglect the role
of fixed community characteristics in the empirical analysis.

21

References
Ai, C. and E. Norton (2003) “Interactions Terms in Logit and Probit Models,” Economics Letters, 80,
123-129.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and W. Easterly (1999) “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November, 1243-1284.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and C. Hoxby (2000) “Political Jurisdiction in Heterogeneous Communities,”
NBER Working Paper 7859.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and C. Hoxby (2004) “Political Jurisdiction in Heterogeneous Communities,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 348-396.
Alesina, A. and La Ferrara, E. (2005a) “Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of Opportunities,”
Journal of Public Economics, 89, 897-931.
Alesina, A. and La Ferrara, E. (2005b) “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance” Journal of
Economic Literature, 43, 762-800.
Alesina, A., and La Ferrara, E. (2002) “Who Trusts Others?” Journal of Public Economics, 85, 207-234.
Alesina, A., and La Ferrara, E. (2000) “Participation in Heterogeneous Communities,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, August, 847-904.
Antonovics, A., P. Arcidiacono, and R. Walsh (2005) “Games and Discrimination: Lessons from the
Weakest Link,” Journal of Human Resources, 40, 918-947.
Bartkowski, J., and H. Regis (2003) Charitable Choices. New York University Press.
Biddle, Jeff (1992) “Religious Organizations,” in Charles T. Clotfelter (ed.), Who Benefits from the
Nonprofit Sector? University of Chicago Press.
Billiet, J. (1995) “Church Involvement, Individualism, and Ethnic Prejudice among Flemish Roman
Catholics: New Evidence of a Moderating Effect,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion,
34, 224-233
Chaves, M., M. Konieczny, K. Beyerlein, and E. Barman (1999) “The National Congregations Study:
Background, Methods, and Selected Results,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 38,
458-476.
Chaves, M. (1999) “Religious Congregations and Welfare Reform: Who Will take Advantage of
‘Charitable Choice’?,” American Sociological Review, 64, 836-846.
Chaves, M. (1998) National Congregations Study. Data file and codebook. Tucson, Arizona: University
of Arizona, Department of Sociology.
Cnaan, R., and S. Boddie (2002) “Charitable Choice and Faith-Based Welfare: A Call for Social Work,”
Social Work, 47(3), 224-235.
DiIulio, Jr., John J. (2002) “The New Civil Rights Struggle,” The Wall Street Journal, June 20.
Eisinger, P. (2002) “Organizational Capacity and Organizational Effectiveness Among Street-Level Food
Assistance Programs,” Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 31, 115-130.
Fong, Christina (2001) “Social Preferences, Self-Interest, and the Demand for Redistribution,” Journal of
Public Economics, 82, 224-246.
Glaeser, E. (2005) “The Political Economy of Hatred,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 45-86.
Gruber, J. (2005) “Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and Outcomes: Is Religion Good
for You?” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(1) Article 5.
Gruber, J. and D. Hungerman (2007) “Faith-Based Charity and Crowd Out during the Great Depression,”
Journal of Public Economics, 91, 1043-1069.
Hungerman, D. (2005) “Are Church and State Substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 Welfare Reform,”
Journal of Public Economics, 89, 2245-2267.
Hungerman, D. (2007) “Diversity and Crowd-out: A Theory of Cold-Glow Giving.” Working Paper
Iannaccone, L. (1998) “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic Literature, 36,
1465-1495.
Jacobsen, C. “Religiosity and Prejudice: An Update and Denominational Analysis,” Review of Religious
Research, 39, 264-272.

22

Johnson, B., R. Tompkins and D. Webb, (2002) “Objective Hope. Assessing the Effectiveness of FaithBased Organizations: A Review of the Literature,” Center for Research on Religion and Urban
Civil Society.
Johnson, D. (1977) “Religious Commitment, Social Distance, and Authoritarianism,” Review of Religious
Research, 18, 99-113.
Leonard, M. (2002) “Some Target Bias in Faith Initiative Bill,” Boston Globe, September 25.
Levitt, S. (2004) “Testing Theories of Discrimination: Evidence from Weakest Link” The Journal of Law
and Economics, 47, 431-452.
Luttmer, E. (2001) “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution,” Journal of Political Economy, 109,
500-528.
Office of the Press Secretary (2006) “Fact Sheet: Compassion in Action: Producing Real results for
Americans Most in Need” White House Press Release, March 9.
Office of the Press Secretary (2002) “President Bush Implements Key Elements of his Faith-Based
Initiative” White House Press Release of President Bush’s December 12 speech.
Poterba, J. (1997) “Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public Education,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 16(1), 48-66.
Solomon, L. (2003) In God We Trust? Faith-based Organizations and the Quest to Solve America’s
Social Ills. Lexington Books.
Vigdor, J. (2001) “Interpreting Ethnic Fragmentation Effects,” Economics Letters, 75, 271-276.
Vigdor, J. (2004) “Community Composition and Collective Action: Analyzing Initial Mail Response to
the 2000 Census,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 303-312.

23

Appendix: Definitions of Charitable Church Activity
Denomination #1 All money paid by local church for local mission programs, approved community projects, and
to local ecumenical agencies.
Denomination #2 Monies paid directly by the local church to local benevolence or community organizations, or to
non-denominational organizations outside of the local church.
National Congregations Study: Respondents in the NCS data were asked the question, “Has your congregation
participated in or supported social service, community development, or neighborhood organizing projects of any sort
within the past 12 months? Please don't include projects that use or rent space in your building but have no other
connection to your congregation.” Respondents then named all relevant projects and each project was coded into a
number of pre-determined categories.
For our specific measure of charitable church activity, we identified the categories most likely to relate to local
charitable church activity, and created a new variable equal to unity if a congregation was marked as participating in
a program in any of these categories. The categories are (# congregations in each category in parentheses):
-Giving cash to the needy (120)
-Programs focused on physical health needs (112)
-Programs for home building, repair, or maintenance, Habitat for Humanity Projects, day sheltering programs (400)
-Programs directed at the homeless or transients (200)
-Programs directed at immigrants, migrants, or refugees, including English-as-a-Second-Language classes (26)
-Programs whose purpose is to help people obtain jobs (33)
-Programs whose purpose is specifically to train people in work skills or job-seeking skills (15)
-Tutoring or mentoring for children or youth (38)
-Programs mentioning helping the needy or the poor in an unspecified way (99)
-Programs focused on those in prisons or in trouble with the law, or with their families (59)
-Programs focused on clothing or blankets, including rummage sales (214)
-Programs explicitly providing only short-term, emergency, or temporary assistance (641)
-Programs specifically directed at the physically or mentally ill or injured, or at relatives of the ill or injured (153)
-Programs described as "community service" without further elaboration (25)
-Programs targeting substance abusers (44)
-Programs providing furniture, household items, and money for rent or utilities (61)

There are 648 charitably active congregations by this definition.
For our general measure of charitable activity, a church is defined as charitably active if it participates in a program
in any of the above categories or in any of the following categories (# congregations in each category in
parentheses):
-Programs whose main purpose is to visit people (33)
-Programs focused on social justice or political activity (43)
-An activity that explicitly occurs seasonally, at holidays, or annually (110)
-Programs explicitly mentioning volunteering, not including Habitat for Humanity projects (55)
-Programs focused on crime prevention, crime victims, or police and fire departments (23)
-Programs specifically focused on children, youth, or young adults as beneficiaries (320)
-Programs explicitly focused on addressing long-term needs or involving substantial face-to-face contact between
service providers and the needy (211)
-Clean highways and/or parks (37)
-Programs for victims of rape or domestic violence (86)
-Programs mentioning a general purpose social service agency such as St. Vincent De Paul, Catholic Social Services,
Lutheran Social Services, United Way, Red Cross, etc.(105)
-Programs explicitly mentioning giving or loaning money to individuals or organizations (257)
-Programs with educational purposes, not including religious education and mentoring (131)
-Programs directed specifically toward senior citizens (121)
-Programs focused on issues of race or ethnicity (50)
-Programs for family-related issues (48)
-Programs focused on feeding the hungry (600)

There are 743 charitably active congregations by this definition.

24

Table 1
Summary Statistics for Denominational Datasets
Denomination 1
All-White Churches
Mean
41.62
[119.40]

Denomination 1
All other Churches
Mean
62.94
[156.78]

Denomination 2
All-White Churches
Mean
16.41
[106.10]

Denomination 2
All other Churches
Mean
25.50
[241.36]

Share church members white

1
[0]

0.85
[0]

1
[0]

0.81
[0.36]

Share church members black

0
[0]

0.07
[0.23]

0
[0]

0.14
[0.34]

Share church members Asian

0
[0]

0.04
[0.18]

0
[0]

0.03
[0.15]

Number of members in church

140
[204]

350
[450]

202
[272]

470
[625]

Church mortality rate

0.02
[0.02]

0.02
[0.02]

0.02
[0.02]

0.02
[0.02]

Ratio of individuals in church
education programs to members
Share of county black

0.49
[0.30]

0.49
[0.29]

0.50
[0.74]

0.72
[5.95]

0.09
[0.13]

0.13
[0.14]

0.11
[0.15]

0.13
[0.15]

Share of county Hispanic

0.04
[0.06]

0.10
[0.13]

0.03
[0.05]

0.09
[0.13]

Share of county white

0.85
[0.15]

0.71
[0.20]

0.84
[0.16]

0.74
[0.19]

Share of county Asian

0.01
[0.01]

0.03
[0.04]

0.01
[0.01]

0.02
[0.04]

Share of county under 18

0.25
[0.02]

0.25
[0.03]

0.25
[0.03]

0.26
[0.03]

Share of county 50-64

0.16
[0.02]

0.15
[0.02]

0.15
[0.02]

0.14
[0.02]

Share of county 65-84

0.13
[0.03]

0.11
[0.03]

0.13
[0.03]

0.11
[0.03]

Share of county 85 and over

0.02
[0.01]

0.02
[0.01]

0.02
[0.01]

0.01
[0.01]

Share of county immigrant

0.02
[0.02]

0.05
[0.06]

0.01
[0.02]

0.04
[0.05]

County population density

333.28
[829]

1583
[4847]

226
[588]

987
[2734]

County unemployment rate

4.50
[1.99]

4.04
[1.92]

5.21
[2.36]

4.72
[2.29]

County average personal income

24557
[5271]

29730
[8986]

22314
[4882]

26557
[7425]

Variable
Per-member charitable spending

Share of county HHs headed by a
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.12
[0.03]
[0.04]
[0.04]
[0.04]
single female
Total observations
3014
4660
21099
11921
Means are unweighted, standard deviations in brackets. Data on income are taken from the REIS, data on unemployment are
from the BLS, other county data are from the decennial Census. Data from denomination 2 are for years 1990 and 2000;
church spending and income in these data are adjusted for inflation. There are 1,924 counties in the regressions for
denomination 1 and 2,640 counties for denomination 2. About 2,400 churches in denomination 1 do not report charitable
spending by members; an additional 1,000 churches do not report racial data and these churches are not included. In
denomination 2, 19,000 observations do not report charitable spending and an additional 16,000 do not report race data; the
statistics here do not include any of these observations. In both cases omitted churches are smaller, have lower mortality
rates, and are slightly less white than the included churches, but their county summary statistics are similar to those shown

Table 2
Basic Results from Denomination Datasets: All-White Churches versus Other Churches
Share County Black
Share County Black*All-White Dummy

(1)
-0.0993
[0.3203]
-0.5082*
[0.2224]

(2)
(3)
0.3509
-0.212
[0.2173]
[1.0968]
-0.4554** -0.4207**
[0.1489]
[0.1466]

Share County White
Share County White*All-White Dummy

(4)

(5)

0.2408
[0.3275]
0.0514
[0.1968]

2.0498*
[0.7958]
0.2982*
[0.1312]

Share County Hispanic
Share County Hispanic*All White Dummy
Share County Asian
Share County Asian*All-White Dummy
All-White Church Dummy

-0.0681
[0.0439]
1
Yes
No
Yes
7674
0.17

-0.0627*
[0.0262]
2
Yes
Yes
No
33020
0.09

-0.0305
[0.0270]
2
Yes
Yes
Yes
33020
0.23

-0.1627
[0.1653]
1
Yes
No
Yes
7674
0.17

(6)

(7)

-0.1025
[0.3641]
0.9003*
[0.4484]

-3.0322**
[1.1381]
0.0485
[0.2914]

(8)

(9)

-1.4214*
-3.8814
[0.7098]
[2.7472]
-0.3911
-0.7008
[1.8540]
[1.1573]
-0.3216** -0.1611** -0.0789** -0.1163** -0.0682**
[0.1091]
[0.0410]
[0.0252]
[0.0432]
[0.0264]
2
1
2
1
2
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
33020
7674
33020
7674
33020
0.23
0.17
0.23
0.17
0.23

Denomination
Church & Community Covariates?
Year Fixed Effects?
Area Fixed Effects?
Observations
R-squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
The dependent variable is congregational per-member spending on local benevolent activities, logged. Robust standard errors in brackets. All standard errors are
clustered by county. Denomination 1 is a cross section of churches in 2000; denomination 2 is a panel of churches in 1990 and 2000. Area fixed effects correspond
to church jurisdictions for denomination 1 and counties for denomination 2 (see text).

Table 3
All-White Churches and Black Residents: Robustness Tests
a

Share County Black
Share County Black*All-White Dummy
All-White Church Dummy
Log of Church Contributions per Member

IV Regressions
(1)
(2)
-0.182
-0.4153
[0.3485]
[1.5678]
-0.5086*
-0.5287**
[0.2249]
[0.1490]
-0.068
-0.0569*
[0.0440]
[0.0268]

W/Donations
(3)
-0.304
[0.3120]
-0.5412**
[0.2089]
-0.021
[0.0418]
0.9276**
[0.0484]
1
Yes
No
7664
0.24

b

Operating Expenses
(4)
(5)
0.136
-1.1185*
[0.1684]
[0.4426]
0.1696
0.4654**
[0.1196]
[0.0874]
-0.1420** -0.1397**
[0.0206]
[0.0139]

Counties with Both
Types of Churchc
(6)
(7)
-0.2807
-0.1348
[0.4316]
[1.1629]
-0.4286
-0.4038**
[0.2621]
[0.1464]
-0.0699
-0.0288
[0.0514]
[0.0270]

All Interactionsd
(8)
(9)
-0.324
2.6679
[0.3873]
[1.6211]
-0.2029
-4.5336*
[0.6715]
[2.0867]

Denomination
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Church & Community Covariates?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All coefficients interacted w/all-White Dummy?
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Observations
7674
33020
5444
32199
5871
30652
7674
33020
R-squared
0.29
0.39
0.17
0.23
0.2
0.28
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
The dependent variable is congregational per-member spending on local benevolent activities, except columns 4 and 5. Robust standard errors in brackets. All standard errors
are clustered by county. All regressions include all community and church covariates as well as area fixed effects where area fixed effects correspond to church jurisdictions for
denomination 1 and counties for denomination 2.
a
Regressions are second stages of 2SLS regressions using lagged share black and lagged share black interacted with an all-white dummy as instruments.
b

For these regressions the dependent variable is congregational per-member spending on operating expenses. Operating expenses include expenses on salaries, printing,
postage, utilities, and insurance. For denomination 2 they are adjusted for inflation. The result in column 3 is not driven by the change in sample size; the basic results from table
2 are preserved when the regressions are rerun with the smaller sample.

c

Regressions are limited to counties having both an all-white church and a not-all-white church.

d

These regressions interact the all-white church dummy variable with all covariates, including area fixed effects.

Table 4
Summary Statistics For NCS Dataset
Variable
Share of congregation white
Share of congregation black
Share of congregation Asian
Share of congregation Hispanic
Charitably Active Dummy-general definition
Charitably Active Dummy-specific definition
Number of Participating Adults
Cong's ratio of children and teens to adults
Number of official committees in congregation
Share of congregation adults w/incomes <25k
Share of congregation adults w/incomes >100k
Share of congregation new in past year
Share of congregation new to US in past year
Share of congregation Female
Share of congregation over 60
Share of congregation w/4-year degree
Share of congregation w/out H.S. degree
Share of congregation living w/in 10 minute walk
Share of congregation under 35
Dummy for cong. discussing political activity in
worship in past year
Dummy for cong. participating in worship w/a
cong. of a different racial/ethnic makeup in past
Dummy for cong. experiencing conflict
Dummy for urban congregation
Dummy for rural congregation
Dummy for theologically conservative cong.
Dummy for politically conservative cong.
Share census-tract under 18 (1990)
Census-tract unemployment rate (1990)
Share of census-tract black (1990)
Share of census-tract Hispanic (1990)
Share of census-tract white (1990)
Share of census-tract Asian (1990)
Census tract avg. personal income (1990)
Share census tract poor (1990)

All-White Congregations
Mean
Std. Dev.
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.59
0.49
0.54
0.50
158
187
0.41
0.26
6.32
7.27

Other Congregations
Mean
Std. Dev.
0.71
0.38
0.17
0.34
0.03
0.09
0.07
0.16
0.75
0.43
0.69
0.46
779
1394
0.41
0.45
10.23
18.03

0.27
0.06
0.14
0.01
0.57
0.35
0.24
0.11
0.17
0.26

0.28
0.13
0.13
0.05
0.14
0.20
0.24
0.17
0.19
0.15

0.22
0.10
0.14
0.02
0.56
0.27
0.35
0.09
0.19
0.30

0.22
0.14
0.13
0.08
0.16
0.18
0.28
0.14
0.23
0.17

0.26

0.44

0.40

0.49

0.25

0.43

0.33

0.47

0.22
0.21
0.61
0.68
0.72

0.42
0.41
0.49
0.47
0.45

0.28
0.68
0.18
0.50
0.52

0.45
0.47
0.38
0.50
0.50

0.26
0.04
0.07
0.03
0.10
0.18
0.02
0.05
0.87
0.19
0.01
0.01
11720
3673
0.15
0.09
Total all-White congs: 148

0.25
0.07
0.07
0.05
0.15
0.25
0.08
0.15
0.74
0.29
0.02
0.05
15031
8287
0.14
0.12
Total other congs: 872

Means are unweighted.
Share variables for congregation are the share of regular adult participants in the congregation.

Table 5
NCS Regressions

Share Census tract Black
Share tract Black*All-White Dummy

On Share
Black
(1)
0.0728
[0.1131]
-0.7197*
[0.2880]

On Share
Black
(2)
0.0675
[0.1016]
-0.3229
[0.2159]

Share tract Hispanic

On Share
Hispanic
(3)

On Share
Asian
(4)

-0.2005
[0.1655]
2.6494*
[1.2828]

Share Hispanic*All-White Dummy
Share tract Asian

Black
Black
Hispanic
Hispanic
No Outliersa No Outliers No Outliers No Outliers
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.1196
0.0778
[0.1428]
[0.1291]
-1.0687*
-1.0502*
[0.4821]
[0.4270]
-0.2418
-0.3304
[0.2880]
[0.2626]
1.5699
2.6711
[2.8124]
[2.4295]

0.1998
[0.4121]
2.85
[3.6394]

Share Asian*All-White Dummy
Share tract White
Share tract White*All-White Dummy
All-White Congregation Dummy

On Share
White
(5)

0.0275
[0.0540]
Specific
Yes
Yes
1020

0.0098
[0.0483]
General
Yes
Yes
1020

-0.0865
[0.0580]
Specific
Yes
Yes
1020

-0.0534
[0.0574]
Specific
Yes
Yes
1020

0.0198
[0.1093]
0.4031
[0.2510]
-0.4138
[0.2292]
Specific
Yes
Yes
1020

0.0392
[0.0550]
Specific
Yes
Yes
970

0.0377
[0.0481]
General
Yes
Yes
970

-0.0709
[0.0636]
Specific
Yes
Yes
970

-0.0647
[0.0587]
General
Yes
Yes
970

Definition of charitable activity
Congregational & Community Covariates?
Region and Denomination Dummies?
Observations
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Standard errors in brackets
Results are marginal effects of a Probit regression where the dependent variable equals unity if congregation supports any local charitable project.
a
The "No Outliers" regressions eliminate, for both all-white and other congregations, observations whose share black in the community is in the 95th percentile or above.
The results are very similar if only the 99th percentile is eliminated.

Table 6
NCS Regressions: Extensions

Share Census tract Black
Share tract Black*All-White Dummy
All-White Congregation Dummy
Favorably Inclined to Government Funding Dummy
Favorably Inclined Dummy*All White Dummy
Favorably Inclined*Share Black
Triple Difference

Noncharitable
Activities
Regressiona All Interactions All Interactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.1958
0.028
0.0247
[0.1063]
[0.1141]
[0.0853]
0.1065
-1.0241
-0.88
[0.2499]
[0.5825]
[0.5263]
-0.0312
-0.8843**
-0.9947**
[0.0502]
[0.1104]
[0.0117]

Triple
Difference
Regression
(4)
0.124
[0.1689]
-1.1540**
[0.4387]
0.0343
[0.0696]
0.0881
[0.0459]
-0.0082
[0.1140]
-0.0346
[0.1634]
0.9002
[0.6124]
Specific
Yes
Yes
No
913

Triple
Difference
Regression
(5)
0.1508
[0.1526]
-0.7297*
[0.3120]
0.0122
[0.0612]
0.0598
[0.0421]
0.018
[0.0966]
-0.0741
[0.1474]
0.9927
[0.5222]
General
Yes
Yes
No
913

Definition of charitable activity
Noncharitable
Specific
General
Congregational & Community Covariates?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Region and Denomination Dummies?
Yes
Yes
Yes
All coefficients interacted with all-white Dummy?
No
Yes
Yes
Observations
1020
1016
1016
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Standard errors in brackets
Results are marginal effects of a Probit regression where the dependent variable equals unity if congregation supports any local charitable project.
a
The dependent variable in column 1 is set to unity if a congregation participated in any of the following activities: Programs explicitly
mentioning beneficiaries outside the United States, including "Crop Walk"; Recreational programs; Disaster relief programs; Programs
specifically directed at either females in particular or males in particular; and Programs with explicit religious content.

Appendix Table A1
Additional Results from Basic Denominational Regressions
Variable
Share county black
All-white dummy*share county black
Dummy for all-white church
Share of church white
Share of church black
Share of church Asian
Log of number of members in church†
Church mortality rate
Ratio of individuals in church
education programs to members
Share of county under 18
Share of county 50-64
Share of county 65-84
Share of county 85 and over
Share of county immigrant
County population density
County population density, logged
County unemployment rate
County average personal income (1000s)

-0.0993
-0.212
[0.3203]
[1.0968]
-0.5082* -0.4207**
[0.2224]
[0.1466]
-0.0681
-0.0305
[0.0439]
[0.0270]
0.3452
0.157
[0.1770]
[0.1556]
0.1954
-0.3161*
[0.2063]
[0.1546]
0.7099** 0.9946**
[0.1956]
[0.1788]
10.6480* 0.2184**
[4.6081]
[0.0173]
2.5894** 3.0283**
[0.7047]
[0.7137]
0.4967** 0.0281**
[0.0582]
[0.0064]
-5.3705** -6.1479**
[0.8108]
[1.5165]
0.0501
-1.7231
[1.5196]
[2.0339]
1.0955
-2.7053
[1.4041]
[1.7959]
-13.4030* -8.0799
[6.1053]
[8.4527]
0.83
-0.4752
[0.5729]
[1.1449]
-0.0084
-0.0001
[0.00554] [0.0001]
0.0391
0.2374
[0.0226]
[0.1710]
0.0224
-0.0034
[0.0132]
[0.0097]
0.0122
0.0038
[0.0377]
[0.0085]
3.4592**
5.9224*
[1.3261]
[2.5076]
1
2
7674
33020
0.17
0.23

Share of county HHs headed by a
single female
Denomination
Observations
R-squared
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
These are the estimates for the regressions presented in table 2, columns 1 and 3, respectively.
The dependent variable is congregational per-member spending on local benevolent activities,
logged. Robust standard errors in brackets. All standard errors are clustered by county.
Denomination 1 is a cross section of churches in 2000; denomination 2 is a panel of churches in
1990 and 2000. Area fixed effects correspond to church jurisdictions for denomination 1 and
counties for denomination 2.
†

A fifth-order polynomial for logged members is included in all regressions.

Appendix Table A2
Fully Interacted Models
Denomination 1
-0.1231
[0.3798]

Denomination 2
-0.7572
[1.1357]

NCS Dataset
0.0434
[0.1200]

Share County Black*All-White Dummy

-0.4480*
[0.2251]

-0.4040**
[0.1475]

-0.6617*
[0.2881]

Share County Hispanic

-0.3591
[0.4571]

-3.2764**
[1.1670]

-0.1994
[0.1749]

Share County Hispanic*All White Dummy

0.9128*
[0.4501]

-0.0442
[0.3089]

2.4348
[1.2643]

Share County Asian

-1.4976
[0.7833]

-3.9114
[2.4016]

0.2677
[0.4235]

Share County Asian*All-White Dummy

-1.3294
[1.8462]

-0.8725
[1.2245]

-0.0931
[4.0008]

Share County Other Race

-0.0793
[0.5336]

-2.913
[2.0458]

-0.3224
[0.9184]

Share County Other Race*All-White Dummy

0.9915
[0.6486]

0.9609
[0.6612]

-2.6424
[5.4511]

All-White Church Dummy

-0.1211*
[0.0533]

-0.0326
[0.0342]

-0.0117
[0.0700]

Share County Black

Observations
7674
33020
1020
R-squared
0.18
0.23
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
White residents make up the omitted racial group in each regression. The category Other race is comprised of individuals
identifying themselves as members of a race not listed in the census form, American Indian/Alaskan Natives, and non-Hispanic
respondents naming multiple races.
The first two columns repeat the least-squares regressions shown in table 2, except that now a full set of racial groups are
included at once. The dependent variable is congregational per-member spending on local benevolent activities, logged. These
columns include church & community covariates and area fixed effects, and column 2 includes year fixed effects. Robust
standard errors in brackets, clustered by county.
The last column repeats the basic Probit regressions on the NCS shown in table 5, with a full set of racial groups included at
once. The dependent variable is a dummy variable equaling unity if a congregation supports any local charitable project (the
specific definition). The regression includes congregational and community covariates, as well as region and denominational
dummies. Standard errors in brackets.

Appendix Table A3
Full Results from Basic NCS Regression

Share Census-tract black
Share tract black*All-white dummy
Dummy for all white congregation
Share of congregation White
Share of congregation black
Share of congregation Asian
Share of congregation Hispanic
Share of congregation new in past year
Share of congregation new to US in past year
Share of congregation female
Share of congregation over 60
Share of congregation w/4-year degree
Share of congregation w/out H.S. degree
Share of congregation living w/in 10 minute walk
Share of congregation under 35
Number of adult participants in cong., logged

0.0728
[0.1131]
-0.7197*
[0.2880]
0.0275
[0.0540]
-0.0005
[0.0009]
-0.0008
[0.0010]
-0.0004
[0.0021]
-0.0008
[0.0014]
0.00002
[0.0013]
-0.0001
[0.0022]
0.0009
[0.0011]
0.0037**
[0.0010]
0.0013
[0.0007]
-0.0021
[0.0012]
0.0003
[0.0008]
0.0015
[0.0010]
0.0953**
[0.0173]

Dummy for cong. worshipping w/a cong of a
different racial/ethnic makeup in past year
Dummy for cong. discussing political activity in
worship in past year
Cong's ratio of children and teens to adults
Number of official committees in congregation
Dummy for cong. experiencing conflict
Share of congregation adults w/incomes <25k
Share of congregation adults w/incomes >100k
Dummy for urban congregation
Dummy for rural congregation
Dummy for theologically conservative cong.
Dummy for politically conservative cong.
Share census-tract under 18 (1990)
Census-tract unemployment rate (1990)
Census tract avg. personal income, 1000s (1990)
Share census tract poor (1990)
Definition of Charitable Activity
Observations

0.0750*
[0.0334]
0.0766*
[0.0329]
0.0616
[0.0430]
0.0005
[0.0010]
-0.0212
[0.0358]
-0.0009
[0.0008]
-0.0023
[0.0013]
-0.0477
[0.0489]
0.0273
[0.0534]
-0.0119
[0.0395]
-0.0677
[0.0390]
-0.7514*
[0.3143]
-0.3717
[0.6255]
0.0026
[0.0036]
0.1672
[0.2534]
Specific
1020

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Both columns report coefficients from the same regression; these are the full estimates from the regression presented in column 1 of table
5. Results are marginal effects of a Probit regression where the dependent variable equals unity if congregation supports any local
charitable project using the more specific definition given in the Appendix. Standard errors in brackets. Results include denominational
and regional dummy variables.

