                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INNOVATION, FIRM DYNAMICS, AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE

                                          Andrew Atkeson
                                           Ariel Burstein

                                        Working Paper 13326
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13326


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jonathan Eaton, Kei-Mu Yi, Marc Melitz, Natalia Ramondo, Esteban
Rossi-Hansberg, Nancy Stokey, and seminar participants in various places for very useful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Andrew Atkeson and Ariel Burstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Innovation, firm dynamics, and international trade
Andrew Atkeson and Ariel Burstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13326
August 2007
JEL No. F1,L11,L16,O3

                                               ABSTRACT

We present a general equilibrium model of the decisions of firms to innovate and to engage in international
trade. We use the model to analyze the impact of a reduction in international trade costs on firms' process
and product innovative activity. We first show analytically that if all firms export with equal intensity,
then a reduction in international trade costs has no impact at all, in steady-state, on firms' investments
in process innovation. We then show that if only a subset of firms export, a decline in marginal trade
costs raises process innovation in exporting firms relative to that of non-exporting firms. This reallocation
of process innovation reinforces existing patterns of comparative advantage, and leads to an amplified
response of trade volumes and output over time. In a quantitative version of the model, we show that
the increase in process innovation is largely offset by a decline in product innovation. We find that,
even if process innovation is very elastic and leads to a large dynamic response of trade, output, consumption,
and the firm size distribution, the dynamic welfare gains are very similar to those in a model with inelastic
process innovation.

Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net

Ariel Burstein
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu
1. Introduction

Over the past several decades, there has been a striking growth in the share of international
trade in output, both for the US economy and for the world as a whole. How has this
expansion of opportunities for international trade changed firms’ incentives to engage in
innovative activities?
   In this paper, we present a simple general equilibrium model of the decisions of firms to
innovate and to participate in international trade. Motivated by the observation that there
is large heterogeneity in export behavior across firms even within narrowly defined sectors,
recent research in international trade has modeled comparative advantage as an attribute of
the firm (see, for example, Melitz 2003 and Bernard, Jensen, Eaton, and Kortum 2003). In
these models, each firm has a stock of some firm specific factor that determines its current
profit opportunities. Examples of this firm specific factor include productivity, managerial
skill, product quality, or brand name. Our model includes two forms of innovation: innova-
tion to increase the stock of this firm specific factor in an existing firm — process innovation,
and innovation to create new firms with a new initial stock of the firm specific factor —
product innovation. We use the model to study the dynamic gains from trade that arise as
process and product innovation respond to a decline in the costs of international trade.
   We start our analysis of the impact of a reduction in the costs of international trade
on innovation with a stark analytical result. We show in our model that if all firms export
(so the fixed costs of international trade are zero) then, in general equilibrium, a decrease
in the marginal costs of international trade has no impact at all, in steady-state, on firms’
process innovation decisions and hence no impact on aggregate productivity and output over
an above the impact of this trade cost reduction on the volume of trade and production in
a version of the model that abstracts from process innovation.
   The intuition for this result in our model is as follows. If all firms export, a reduction
in the marginal costs of international trade changes the profit opportunities of all firms by
the same proportion. The returns to process innovation are proportional to firm profits, so
a reduction in the marginal costs of international trade also changes the returns to process
innovation by the same proportion for all firms. In general equilibrium with free entry, the
expected profits of starting a new firm and the cost of innovative inputs must rise by the same
amount to ensure that there are zero profits to product innovation. Because the reduction
in trade costs aﬀects the opportunities of all firms proportionally, this free entry condition


                                               2
implies that the ratio of the returns to process innovation to the cost of innovative inputs
remains unchanged for all firms. Hence, the equilibrium process innovation decisions are left
unchanged.
   This result implies that when all firms export, our model has steady-state implications for
the impact of changes in marginal trade costs on product innovation closely related to several
existing results in the literature building on the work of Krugman (1980) and Grossman and
Helpman (1991). The models in this literature typically abstract from process innovation
within ongoing firms and focus instead only on product innovation measured in terms of the
introduction of new goods. Our result also echoes the findings of Eaton and Kortum (2001).
They find the same result that changes in the costs of international trade have no impact
on innovative eﬀort in a model of quality ladders embedded in a multi-country Ricardian
model of international trade, with a research sector that produces new ideas randomly across
goods. Our result diﬀers from theirs in that in our model, process innovation is directed
toward reducing the firm’s marginal cost of producing a specific product and firms do not
compete over technological leadership in producing any particular product.
   Our analytical result that changes in the costs of trade have no impact on firm level
process innovation holds only if all firms have equal exposure to opportunities for interna-
tional trade. In the data, however, firms vary greatly in their participation in international
trade – exports are highly concentrated among large firms. Here we build on the insight of
Melitz (2003) and add to our model a fixed cost of trade at the firm level so that only the
more productive (and hence larger) firms choose to export. In this case, a reduction in the
marginal costs of trade leads in general equilibrium to an increase in profits of exporting firms
relative to the profits of firms that do not export. We show analytically in our model that a
reduction in marginal trade costs leads in equilibrium to an increase in process innovation in
exporting firms relative to that in firms that do not export. Hence, over time, this reduction
in trade costs leads to an amplification of the initial reallocation eﬀects of a decrease in
trade costs – exporting firms grow over time and increase their exports while firms that do
not export shrink. In other words, this reallocation of process innovation amplifies existing
patterns of comparative advantage and amplifies the response of trade and output over time.
   We then develop a quantitative version of our model and show that it reproduces many
salient features of the U.S. data on firm dynamics and export behavior. We use this model
to assess the impact of a reduction in the costs of international trade on firms’ innovative



                                               3
activity and the associated dynamic gains from trade. One challenge we face in making
our model quantitative is to infer how elastic process innovation eﬀort is to changes in the
incentives to innovate. If investments in process innovation are highly inelastic, then the
dynamic responses of exports, output, consumption and the firm size distribution do not
vary substantially from those of a model that abstracts from endogenous process innovation.
In contrast, if process innovation is highly elastic, then these dynamic responses can be
quite large. We examine our model’s implications for a wide range of this process innovation
elasticity parameter.
       We find two main results. Our first result is that in response to a decline in marginal
trade costs, the increase in process innovation is largely oﬀset by a decline in product inno-
vation, and these changes in innovation are larger the more elastic is process innovation.1
This result follows from the free entry condition governing the creation of new firms. In
equilibrium, prices and entry have to adjust following a decline in international trade costs
so as to leave the value of starting a new firm equal to the entry cost. To the extent that
a decline in international trade cost increases process innovation and hence productivity in
large exporting firms, it drives up wages and drives down the value of entrants, which tend
to be small non-exporting firms. Hence, entry falls to restore the free entry condition.
       Our second result is that consideration of elastic process innovation does not substantially
alter the dynamic welfare implications of a reduction in international trade costs. We find
that, even when elastic process innovation leads to very large steady state changes in export
volumes, output, consumption, and substantial changes in the firm size distribution, the dy-
namic welfare gains from trade are only slightly higher than the gains achieved with inelastic
process innovation. This finding follows because process innovation is an investment – the
long-run productivity gains that result from increased innovation require an investment of
current resources – and, in our model, the output gains from this investment come only
slowly. We show in particular that the transition in our economy from one steady-state to
another takes a lot of time.
       Our model is closely related to several papers in the literature. If we assume that firms’
process innovation choices are inelastic, then our model is a variant of Hopenhayn’s (1992)
model in which firms’ experience exogenous random shocks to their productivity. In this case,
   1
    Baldwin and Robert Nicoud (2007) present a related result, but our finding diﬀers from theirs in that
we find that changes in process and product innovation largely oﬀset: the decline in product innovation is
larger the more elastic is the response of process innovation.



                                                    4
our model is specifically an open economy version of the model of firm dynamics in Luttmer
(2006) and hence is quite similar to Irarrazabal and Opromolla (2006). Our inclusion of fixed
and marginal costs of exporting also follows Melitz (2003) and Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and
Kortum (2003), among many others. We study such a version of our model as a benchmark
to show that it can reproduce many of the same features of the US data on firm dynamics,
the firm size distribution, and export decisions studied in these papers.2 One of the most
important of these features is Gibrat’s Law – the observation that, at least for large firms,
firm growth is independent of firm size.
       Our model of firms’ process innovation follows Griliches’ (1979) knowledge capital model
of firm productivity, and the work of Ericson and Pakes (1995). The assumption that the
fruits of innovative activity are stochastic in our model means it can account for simultaneous
growth and decline, and entry and exit of firms in steady-state.3 Our model is also related
to Bustos (2005), who provides empirical support (using firm level data from Argentina) for
a model of trade and heterogeneous firms in which exporters choose to pay a one-time fixed
cost to upgrade their technology. It is also related to the work of Costantini and Melitz
(2007), that studies how the dynamics of trade liberalizations shapes the pace of one-time
technology upgrading and productivity improvements across firms.
       Our paper complements the work of Klette and Kortum (2004) and Lentz and Mortensen
(2006) in constructing a model of innovation that abstracts from strategic interactions across
firms and is also consistent with data on firm dynamics. While their framework is a quality
ladders model a la Grossman and Helpman (1991) where firms engage in undirected inno-
vation and their dynamics are governed by creative destruction, ours is a model in which
monopolistically competitive firms engage in product innovation and process innovation to
shape the stochastic process of their production cost.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model and Section 3 charac-
terizes the equilibrium. Section 4 describes the analytic result that if all firms export then
a change in trade costs has no eﬀect on the firms’ process innovation decisions and char-
acterizes the impact of a change in trade costs on product innovation. Section 5 examines
analytically the reallocation of process innovation that occurs in response to a change in
trade costs when not all firms export. Section 6 discusses the implications for firm growth.
   2
     In related work, Alessandria and Choi (2007) study the welfare gains of trade in a dynamic version of
Melitz’ model that abstracts from process innovation.
   3
     Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2006) estimate a Griliches’ knowledge capital model in which innovative
investments within the firm also lead to stochastic productivity improvements.


                                                    5
Section 7 presents the quantitative model and describes how we calibrate the model to match
salient features of the US data on firm dynamics and export behavior. Section 8 presents
the model’s quantitative implications for the response of innovation, output, consumption,
and welfare to a decline in trade costs, both across steady states and along the transition.
Section 9 concludes. An Appendix includes the characterization of equilibrium, proofs, and
solution methods.

2. The Model

Time is discrete and labelled t = 0, 1, 2, . . . . There are two countries: home and foreign. Vari-
ables pertaining to the foreign country are denoted with a star. Households in each country
are endowed with L units of time. Production in each country is structured as follows. There
is a single final nontraded good that can be consumed or used in innovative activities, a con-
tinuum of diﬀerentiated intermediate goods that are produced and can be internationally
traded subject to a fixed and a variable trade cost, and a nontraded intermediate good that
we call the research good. This research good is produced using a combination of final output
and labor, and is used to pay the costs associated with both process and product innova-
tion, as well as the fixed costs of exporting. The productivities of the firms producing the
diﬀerentiated intermediate goods are determined endogenously through equilibrium process
innovation, and the measure of diﬀerentiated intermediate goods produced in each country
is determined endogenously through product innovation. To simplify the presentation of the
analytical results in the paper, the benchmark model abstracts from fixed operating costs
(that give rise to endogenous exit), and time varying fixed export costs (to account for the
extent of firm switching between exporting and non-exporting status). These considerations
are introduced in the quantitative model in Section 7.
                                                                       P∞
   Households in the home country have preferences of the form           t=0   β t log(Ct ), where Ct
is the consumption of the home final good at date t. Households in the foreign country have
preferences of the same form over consumption of the foreign final good Ct∗ . Each household
in the home country faces an intertemporal budget constraint of the form
                                  X
                                  ∞
                                         Qt (Pt Ct − Wt L) ≤ W̄ ,                              (2.1)
                                   t=0

where Qt are intertemporal prices, Wt is the wage in the home country, Pt is the price of the
home final good, Ct is the household’s consumption, and W̄ is the initial stock of assets held

                                                  6
by the household. Households in the foreign country face similar budget constraints with
the same intertemporal prices Qt and wages, prices, and assets all labelled with stars.
   Intermediate goods are diﬀerentiated products each produced by heterogeneous firms in-
dexed by z, which indicates their productivity. A firm in the home country with productivity
index z has productivity equal to exp(z)1/(ρ−1) and produces output yt (z) with labor lt (z)
according to the CRS production technology

                                       yt (z) = exp(z)1/(ρ−1) lt (z).                              (2.2)

We rescale firm productivity using the exponent 1/ (ρ − 1) so that, as explained below, labor
and profits are proportional to exp (z).
   The output of this firm can be used in the production of the home final good, with the
quantity of this domestic absorption denoted at (z). Alternatively, some of this output can
be exported to the foreign country to be used in the production of the foreign final good.
International trade is subject to both fixed and iceberg type costs of exporting. The fixed,
per-period cost of exporting in terms of the research good is denoted by nx . The iceberg type
marginal cost of exporting is denominated in terms of the intermediate good being exported.
The firm must export Da∗t (z) units of output, with D ≥ 1, to have a∗t (z) units of output
arrive in the foreign country for use in the production of the foreign final good.
   Let xt (z) ∈ {0, 1} be an indicator of the export decision of home firms with productivity
index z (it is 1 if the firm exports and 0 otherwise). Then, feasibility requires that

                                   at (z) + xt (z)Da∗t (z) = yt (z) ,                              (2.3)

and that xt (z) nx units of the research good be used to pay fixed costs of exporting.
   A firm in the foreign country with productivity index z has the same production tech-
nology, with output denoted yt∗ (z), labor lt∗ (z), and domestic absorption b∗t (z). Exports to
the home country, bt (z), are subject to both fixed and marginal costs and hence feasibility
requires that x∗t (z)Dbt (z) + b∗t (z) = yt∗ (z), and that x∗t (z) nx units of the foreign research
good be used to pay the fixed costs of exporting.
   The home final good is produced from home and foreign intermediate goods with a
constant returns production technology of the form
                     ∙Z                            Z                                ¸ρ/(ρ−1)
                               1−1/ρ                                 1−1/ρ
              Yt =        at (z)       dMt (z) +       x∗t (z)bt   (z)       dMt∗ (z)          ,   (2.4)


                                                       7
where Mt (z) is the measure of operating firms in the home country with productivity less
than or equal to z, and Mt∗ (z) the corresponding measure in the foreign country. Production
of the final good in the foreign country is defined analogously. It will be useful below to
distinguish between the total measure of operating firms given by Nt = Mt (∞), and the
distribution of z across operating firms which has a cumulative distribution function given
by Mt (z)/Nt .
   The final good in the home country is produced by competitive firms that choose output
Yt and inputs at (z) and bt (z) subject to (2.4) to maximize profits taking prices Pt , pat (z),
pbt (z), export decisions xt (z), x∗t (z), and measures of operating intermediate goods firms Mt
and Mt∗ as given. Standard arguments give that equilibrium prices must satisfy
                   ∙Z                    Z                        ¸1/(1−ρ)
                              1−ρ            ∗          1−ρ   ∗
              Pt =     pat (z) dMt (z) + xt (z)pbt (z) dMt (z)             ,                      (2.5)

and quantities                µ         ¶−ρ              µ         ¶−ρ
                     at (z)     pat (z)         bt (z)     pbt (z)
                            =               and        =               .                          (2.6)
                      Yt          Pt              Yt         Pt
Analogous equations hold for prices and quantities in the foreign country.
   The research good in the home country is produced with a constant returns to scale
production technology F that uses Xt units of the home final good and Lmt units of labor to
produce Ymt units of the research good according to Ymt = F (Xt , Lmt ). As is standard, the
equilibrium price of the home research good, denoted by Wmt , is given as a function of the
price of the home final good Pt and the home wage Wt , by the unit cost function associated
with the production function F. We write this cost function Wmt = Wm (Pt , Wt ). Likewise,
                                ∗
in the foreign country we have Ymt = F (Xt∗ , L∗mt ) and Wmt
                                                          ∗
                                                             = Wm (Pt∗ , Wt∗ ).
   Intermediate goods firms in each country are monopolistically competitive. A home firm
with productivity exp(z)1/(ρ−1) faces a static profit maximization problem of choosing labor
input lt (z), prices pat (z), p∗at (z), quantities at (z), a∗t (z), and whether or not to export xt (z),
to maximize current period profits taking as given wages for workers Wt , the price of the
home research good Wmt , and prices and output of the final good in both countries Pt , Pt∗ ,
Yt , and Yt∗ . This problem is written

                     Πt (z) =            max                 pa a + xp∗a a∗ − Wt l − Wmt xnx      (2.7)
                                y,l,pa ,p∗a ,a,a∗ ,x∈{0,1}

subject to (2.2), (2.3), and the demand functions
                                 µ ¶−ρ             µ ∗ ¶−ρ
                                  pa            ∗   pa
                            a=          Yt and a =         Yt∗ .                                  (2.8)
                                  Pt                Pt∗

                                                              8
   Productivity at the firm level evolves over time depending both on idiosyncratic produc-
tivity shocks hitting the firm and on the level of investment in productivity improvements
undertaken within the firm. We model the evolution of firm productivity as follows. At the
beginning of each period t, every existing firm has probability δ of exiting exogenously, and
corresponding probability 1 − δ of surviving to produce. A surviving firm with current pro-
ductivity exp(z)1/(ρ−1) , and that invests H (z, p) = h exp (z) c (p) units of the research good
in improving its productivity in the current period t, has probability p of having productivity
exp(z + s)1/(ρ−1) and probability 1 − p of having productivity exp(z − s)1/(ρ−1) in the next
period t + 1. We assume that c (p) is increasing and convex in p, and h is a positive constant.
In the next sections, we show that this form of H (z, p) allows us to obtain analytical results
for process innovation.
   With this evolution of firm productivity, the expected discounted present value of profits
for the firm satisfies the Bellman equation
                                                Qt+1
 Vt (z) = max Πt (z) − Wmt H (z, p) + (1 − δ)        [pVt+1 (z + s) + (1 − p)Vt+1 (z − s)] . (2.9)
         p∈[0,1]                                 Qt
Let pt (z) denote the optimal choice of investment in improving productivity in the problem
(2.9). We refer to pt (z) as the process innovation decision of the firm. Note that if the
time period is small, our binomial productivity process approximates a geometric Brownian
motion in continuous time (as in Luttmer 2006) in which the firm controls the drift of this
process through investments of the research good.
   New firms (or new products) are created with investments of the research good. Invest-
ment of ne units of the research good in period t yield a new firm in period t + 1 with initial
productivity exp(z)1/(1−ρ) drawn from a distribution over z given by G. New firms are not
subject to exogenous exit in their entering period. In any period in which there is entry of
new firms, free entry requires that
                                                    Z
                                          Qt+1
                                 Wmt ne =               Vt+1 (z)dG.                        (2.10)
                                           Qt
Let Met denote the measure of new firms entering in period t, that start producing in period
t + 1. The analogous Bellman equation holds for the foreign firms as well. We refer to Met as
the product innovation decision as this is the mechanism through which new diﬀerentiated
products are produced.
   Feasibility requires that for the final good

                                         Ct + Xt = Yt                                      (2.11)

                                                9
in the home country and the analogous constraint holds in the foreign country. The feasibility
constraint on labor in the home country is given by
                                Z
                                  lt (z)dMt (z) + Lmt = L ,                                                          (2.12)

and likewise in the foreign country. The feasibility constraint on the research good in the
home country is
                                  Z
                      Met ne +        [xt (z) nx + H (z, pt (z))] dMt (z) = F (Xt , Lmt ) ,                          (2.13)

and likewise in the foreign country.
    The evolution of Mt (z) over time is determined by the exogenous probability of exit
δ, the decisions of operating firms to invest in their productivity pt (z), and the measure of
entering firms in period t−1, Met−1 . The measure of operating firms in the home country with
productivity less than or equal to z 0 , denoted by Mt+1 (z 0 ), is equal to the sum of three inflows:
new firms founded in period t, firms continuing from period t that draw positive productivity
shocks (and hence had productivities lower than z 0 − s in period t), and firms continuing
from period t that draw negative productivity shocks (and hence had productivities below
z 0 + s in period t). We write this as follows:
                                            Z   z 0 −s                             Z   z 0 +s
           0          0
 Mt+1 (z ) = G(z )Met + (1 − δ)                          pt (z)dMt (z) + (1 − δ)                (1 − pt (z))dMt (z) . (2.14)
                                            −∞                                     −∞

The evolution of Mt∗ (z) for foreign firms is defined analogously.
    We assume that the households in each country own those firms that initially exist at
date 0. Thus we require that the initial assets of the households in both countries adds up
to the total value of these firms
                                                Z                       Z
                                        ∗
                             W̄ + W̄ =              V0 (z)dM0 (z) +         V0∗ (z)dM0∗ (z) .                        (2.15)

    An equilibrium in this economy is a collection of sequences of prices and wages {Qt , Pt , Pt∗ ,
Wt , Wt∗ , Wmt , Wmt
                  ∗
                     , pat (z), p∗at (z), pbt (z), p∗bt (z)} a collection of sequences of quantities {Yt , Yt∗ ,
Ct , Ct∗ , Xt , Xt∗ , Lmt , L∗mt , at (z), a∗t (z), bt (z), b∗t (z), lt (z), lt∗ (z)} initial assets W̄ , W̄ ∗ , and a col-
lection of sequences of firm value functions and profit, export, and investment decisions
{Vt (z), Vt∗ (z), Vto (z), Vto∗ (z), Πt (z), Π∗t (z), xt (z), x∗t (z), pt (z), p∗t (z)} together with measures of
operating and entering firms {Mt (z), Met , Mt∗ (z), Met∗ } such that household in each country
are maximizing their utility subject to their budget constraints, intermediate goods firms

                                                                10
in each country are maximizing within period profits, final goods firms in each country are
also maximizing profits, all of the feasibility constraints are satisfied, and the measures of
operating firms evolve as described above.
       A steady-state of our model is an equilibrium in which all of the variables are constant.4
In what follows, we omit time subscripts when discussing steady-states.
       In some sections of the paper we focus our attention on equilibria that are symmetric
in the following sense. First, we assume that the distribution of initial assets is such that
expenditure is equal across countries at date 0 and hence in every period. Second, we assume
that each country starts with the same distribution of operating firms by productivity and
hence, because prices and wages are equal across countries, continue to have the same dis-
tribution of operating firms by productivity in each subsequent period. In such a symmetric
equilibrium, we have Yt = Yt∗ , Pt = Pt∗ , and Wt /Pt = Wt∗ /Pt∗ .

3. Characterizing Equilibrium

We start with an analysis of the static profit maximization problem (2.7) for an operating firm
in the home country. All firms choose a constant markup over marginal cost, so equilibrium
prices are given by
                                 ρ       Wt               ∗          ρ      DWt
                   pat (z) =                       , and pat (z) =                     .             (3.1)
                               ρ − 1 exp(z)1/(ρ−1)                 ρ − 1 exp(z)1/(ρ−1)
       The production employment of home firms is given by
                             µ     ¶ρ
                               ρ−1 £                                     ¤
                    lt (z) =          (Pt )ρ Yt + xt (z) (Pt∗ )ρ Yt∗ D1−ρ exp(z).                    (3.2)
                               ρWt

Note that (3.2) implies that there is a simple relationship between the productivity index
exp (z) and firm size measured as workers employed in production of output for domestic con-
sumption. In contrast, there is no relationship between productivity in the model, measured
as exp(z)1/(ρ−1) and standard measures of labor productivity. This is because the average
productivity of workers in the firm (measured as sales per worker) is given by ρWt /(ρ − 1),
and hence is constant across firms. Diﬀerences in productivity across firms in the model,
measured by exp(z)1/(ρ−1) , are manifest in measures of firm size and not in measures of labor
   4
    Since firms in our model grow endogenously through process innovation, there are parameter values for
our model in which a steady-state does not exist. Under such parameter values, the equilibrium has no entry
and a vanishing set of firms growing endogenously. We focus in the remainder of the paper on cases with
positive steady-state entry.


                                                     11
productivity.5 Hence, firms’ innovation decisions, pt (z), together with the stochastic shocks
to firm productivity and firms’ decisions to export determine the dynamics of firm size and
the long run distribution of firms by size in our economy.
       Home firms have variable profits Πdt exp(z) on their home sales, with

                                                (Wt )1−ρ (Pt )ρ Yt
                                        Πdt =                      ,                                  (3.3)
                                                 ρρ (ρ − 1)1−ρ

and variable profits Πxt exp(z) on their foreign sales, with

                                             (Wt )1−ρ (Pt∗ )ρ Yt∗ 1−ρ
                                     Πxt =                       D .                                  (3.4)
                                               ρρ (ρ − 1)1−ρ
Therefore, there is a cutoﬀ firm productivity index z̄xt such that firms with productivity index
below z̄xt do not export and those with productivity index above z̄xt do export. Hence, we
have that firms’ static profits are given by

                        Πt (z) = Πdt exp (z) + max (Πxt exp (z) − Wmt nx , 0) .                       (3.5)

       The decision of a firm to invest research goods in improving productivity, if interior, must
satisfy the first order condition
                           ∂                     Qt+1
                     Wmt      H (z, p) = (1 − δ)      [Vt+1 (z + s) − Vt+1 (z − s)] .                 (3.6)
                           ∂p                     Qt
This first order condition must satisfy the obvious inequality if the optimal choice of pt (z) is
equal to either 0 or 1. We discuss the implications of this first order condition (3.6) for the
impact of changes in the costs of trade on process innovation in the next several sections.
       In Appendix 1, we describe the aggregate equilibrium conditions of the model.

4. Trade and innovation when all firms export

In this section we show that in an economy with no fixed costs of international trade, once and
for all changes in the marginal costs of trade have no impact at all on the incentives of firms
in steady-state to engage in process innovation. This result holds in general equilibrium
because, in an economy in which every firm exports, the increased incentives to innovate
   5
    Our model gives this stark result because intermediate goods producing firms choose a constant markup
of price over marginal cost. Note that the presence of fixed costs of production, if counted as workers, can
only generate diﬀerences in value-added per worker for small firms. Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum
(2003) develop a model in which the markup that firms charge rises with size and hence measured labor
productivity rises with firm size.

                                                    12
resulting from the increase in profits that come from a reduction in marginal trade costs are
exactly oﬀset by an increase in the cost of the research good necessary for innovation. This
oﬀsetting change in the cost of the research good is required by the zero-profit condition
associated with product innovation. As a result, the optimal process innovation decision of
all firms is unchanged. We also discuss the impact of changes in the marginal cost of trade
on product innovation in the steady-state of our model.
       We state our main result in the following proposition
       Proposition 1: Consider two diﬀerent world economies, each consisting of two countries
as described above, with no fixed costs of trade (nx = 0). Let the marginal cost of trade
be D ≥ 1 in the first world economy and D0 6= D in the second world economy. Then, the
process innovation decisions of firms in a steady-state in both economies are identical in that
p(z) = p0 (z) for all productivities z.
       Proof: First observe that if all firms export, then from (3.3) and (3.4), variable profits of
home firms are directly proportional to exp(z) in that Π(z) = Π exp(z), where Π = Πd + Πx .
The analogous result is also true for firms in the foreign country. In a steady-state, all
equilibrium prices and value functions are constant and the interest rate is constant at 1/β.
Hence, if we impose steady-state and divide the firms’ Bellman equation given in (2.9) by
the steady-state price of the research good Wm , we can re-write this Bellman equation as

                         Π
        w(z) = max          exp(z) − H (z, p) + (1 − δ)β [pw(z + s) + (1 − p)w(z − s)] .                (4.1)
                 p∈[0,1] Wm


Standard arguments give that this Bellman equation has a unique solution w(z) correspond-
ing to any fixed value of Π/Wm . In addition, the solution w(z) is strictly increasing in
Π/Wm . We can regard the optimal choice of p(z) implied by this Bellman equation as the
optimal process innovation decision corresponding to a fixed ratio Π/Wm of variable profits
to innovation costs.6
       Similarly, if we impose steady-state and divide the zero-profit condition (2.10) by the
steady-state price of the research good Wm , we can rewrite this condition as
                                            Z
                                     ne = β w(z)dG .                                                    (4.2)

   6
     To ensure that this value function w (z) is well defined, we need that for all p ∈ [0, 1], either (i)
β (1 − δ) [p exp (s) + (1 − p) exp (−s)] < 1 or (ii) Π/Wm − c (p) < 0. The first condition requires that the
expected growth of firm profits is less than the interest rate. If this is not satisfied, the second condition
requires that the static profits of choosing such a high growth rate be negative.


                                                     13
We see from this scaled version of the free entry condition that the ratio of the discounted
expected value of profits from starting a new firm to the price of the research good must
be fixed at ne in any equilibrium in which there is entry. In a steady-state, the ratio of the
discounted expected value of profits from starting a new firm to the price of the research
good is strictly increasing in Π/Wm . Thus, since there is entry in a steady-state, there is
a unique value of Π/Wm consistent with equilibrium. The equilibrium process innovation
decisions of home firms in steady-state are thus independent of the parameter D. Clearly,
the analogous results hold for foreign firms. Q.E.D.
   Our proof of Proposition 1 relies on our assumption that all innovation activities use the
same research good. If diﬀerent inputs were required for product and process innovation,
then a change in trade costs might aﬀect the relative price of the inputs into these activities
and thus aﬀect equilibrium process innovation. Our proof of Proposition 1 also relies on our
steady-state assumption. In a transition to steady-state following a change in trade costs,
the interest rate and the ratio Πt /Wmt can vary over time and hence process innovation
decisions can also vary. Note, however, that this result does not depend on the functional
form for H (z, p). Note also that our proposition also holds if countries are asymmetric in
terms of all the parameters of the model including the marginal trade costs D and D∗ –
changes in any one country’s marginal trade cost leaves process innovation unchanged in the
steady-state.
   What is critical for our result here is that changes in model parameters, such as the
marginal cost of trade, change equilibrium variable profits in a manner that is weakly
separable with firm productivity (as indexed by z) – that is, these changes aﬀect prof-
its Π(z) = Π exp(z) only by changing the scalar Π. Because of this weak separability in firm
productivity, when the cost Wm of the research good adjusts to ensure that the zero-profit
condition for product innovation holds, the ratio of the returns to process innovation to the
cost of the research good, as measured by pw(z + s) + (1 − p)w(z − s), is left unchanged
for all z and hence the equilibrium process innovation decisions are left unchanged. Given
this intuition, it is clear that in our model firm level process innovation decisions are also
unaﬀected if a country moves from autarky to free trade, or by changes in tariﬀs or tax rates
on firm profits, revenues, or factor use that alter the variable profit function in the same
weakly separable manner with z.
   This logic implies that Proposition 1 would also hold in a two-sector model in which



                                              14
the aggregate outputs of each sector are imperfect substitutes and firms face separate entry
condition of the form (4.2). Specifically, assume that firms in each sector face no fixed cost of
trade but face diﬀerent marginal costs of trade across the two sectors. Consider the impact
in steady state of a reduction in marginal trade costs in one of the two sectors. A simple
extension of the proof of Proposition 1 implies that in steady state, process innovation in the
two sectors does not vary with the parameter D. Here, we can think of (4.1) as the Bellman
equation for firms in each sector, with one Π for each sector. Using the same logic as before,
in steady state the ratio Π/Wm in each sector remains unchanged.
   Our result in Proposition 1 that, in the absence of fixed costs of trade, a reduction in the
marginal cost of trade has no impact on steady-state equilibrium process innovation implies
that adjustment comes entirely through changes in relative prices and product innovation.
Hence, in the absence of fixed costs of exporting, our model has steady-state implications for
the impact of changes in marginal trade costs on product innovation closely related to several
existing results in the literature on the interaction of trade and innovation, building on the
work of Grossman and Helpman (1989, 91), Romer (1986, 90), Rivera-Batiz and Romer
(1991 a, b), Coe and Helpman (1995) and others. Our result implies that our model has the
same qualitative implications for product innovation in the steady-state as versions of these
other models in which the process for productivity in ongoing firms is fixed exogenously.
   Many of these previous papers considered the impact of changes in the marginal costs of
trade on product innovation in the presence of spillovers. One can introduce similar spillovers
from aggregate cumulative process and product innovation to the costs of product innova-
tion in our model in a straightforward way that preserves our result in Proposition 1. To
be concrete, consider versions of our model in which the productivity of the technology for
producing the research good is given by AF (X, Lm ) where A is some measure of aggregate,
cumulated innovation. Examples of such spillovers include the stock of domestically produced
                R
varieties (A = dM(z)), or some weighted average of the stock of domestically produced and
                     ¡     R            R      ¢
imported varieties A = dM(z) + µ dM ∗ (z) , or the aggregate productivity of domestic
       ¡      R                     ¢
firms A = exp(z)1/(ρ−1) dM(z) , or a similarly weighted average of the aggregate produc-
                                      ¡   R                         R                     ¢
tivities of domestic and foreign firms A = exp(z)1/(ρ−1) dM(z) + µ exp(z)1/(ρ−1) dM ∗ (z) .
Clearly, our Proposition 1 can easily be extended to cover each of these examples because
the specific form of the technology for producing the research good did not enter into our
proof.



                                               15
   We finish this section with a characterization of the impact of changes in the marginal
costs of trade on product innovation. For tractability, we focus our attention on equilibria
that are symmetric, as defined in Section 3. We also assume, for the remaining of the paper,
that the production function for the research good takes the form:

                                   F (X, Lm ) = X 1−λ Lλm .                               (4.3)

Here λ is the share of labor in the production of the research good. Note that if we set λ = 0,
then our model has endogenous growth stemming from product innovation.
   We now state our second proposition that describes a condition on the model parameters
under which a decline in marginal trade costs leads to an increase in product innovation
across steady states.
   Proposition 2: Consider two diﬀerent world economies, each consisting of two symmetric
countries as described above, with no fixed costs of trade (nx = 0 for all firms). Let the
marginal cost of trade be D ≥ 1 in the first world economy and D0 < D in the second world
economy. If λ = 1, then the measure of entering firms in a steady state is equal in the two
world economies. If λ < 1, then the measure of entering firms in the second world economy
is larger than that in the first world economy (Me0 > Me ) if and only if ρ + λ > 2.
   Proof: See Appendix 2.
   The proof uses the following logic. We know from Proposition 1 that the ratio of profits
to the price of the research good, Π/Wm , must remain unchanged across the two world
economies. Product innovation responds to ensure that this is the case. The precise response
depends on the parameters λ and ρ. Start with the case in which λ = 1. In this case,
Wm = W . Since, holding the number of firms fixed, W changes one for one with Π when
D falls, there is no need for product innovation to respond since Π/Wm remains unchanged.
When λ < 1, Wm = W λ – we choose P as the numeraire. Hence, holding the number of
firms fixed, Π/Wm rises when D falls. Changes in product innovation restore the equilibrium.
Whether this requires an increase or decrease in product innovation is determined by the
elasticity of demand ρ relative to λ.
   In the next two sections, we examine the response of process and product innovation to
a decline in marginal trade costs when not all firms export, due to the presence of positive
fixed export costs. We first present analytical results in a symmetric steady state. We then
present numerical results in a calibrated version of our model.


                                              16
5. Trade and innovation when not all firms export

In this section we present analytical results on the response of process innovation to a re-
duction in the costs of international trade when not all firms export. To obtain these results
we focus on a symmetric steady state (see characterization in Appendix 1). We obtain our
results in two steps. We first solve for the impact of a reduction in trade costs on the profits
of firms that export and firms that do not export. We then solve for the impact of these
changes in profits on process innovation decisions.
   In our model with a fixed cost of exporting, not all firms export, and hence, a change
in international trade costs in equilibrium reallocates variable profits from non-exporters to
exporters in a manner similar to that described in Melitz (2003). To solve for this equilibrium
reallocation of variable profits, we use the analog to the Bellman equation (4.1) describing
the value of an existing firm together with the free-entry condition (4.2). With a fixed cost
of exporting, the Bellman equation for w (z) is now given by:

                                          ©                           ª
            w(z) = max Πd /Wm exp(z) + max Πd /Wm D1−ρ exp(z) − nx , 0                     (5.1)
                       p∈[0,1]

                       −h exp (z) c (p) + (1 − δ)β [pw(z + s) + (1 − p)w(z − s)] .

Here, the first term denotes static variable profits from the firm’s domestic operations, and
the second term denotes the profits from exporting (with symmetric countries Πx = Πd D1−ρ ).
The free entry condition (4.2) is unchanged. Clearly, this value function w(z) is decreasing
in both D and nx , and increasing in Πd /Wm .
   We use this Bellman equation (5.1) and free-entry condition (4.2) to determine the im-
pact of changes in trade costs on variable profits in equilibrium. Consider first the impact
of a decline in the marginal cost of trade, D, on variable profits (rescaled by the cost of the
research good) Πd /Wm . Since this raises D1−ρ , Πd /Wm has to fall in equilibrium to restore
                                              Πd
the free entry condition. Note as well that   Wm
                                                 D1−ρ   must rise if the free entry condition is
to be satisfied. Hence, for firms that do not switch export status, the profits of exporters —
proportional to Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ), must rise relative to the profits of non exporters. Like-
wise, now consider the impact of a decline in the fixed cost of exporting nx on variable profits
Πd /Wm . Because w(z) is decreasing in nx , such a reduction in this fixed trade cost must lead
to a reduction in variable profits Πd /Wm to restore the free entry condition. This implies
that the variable profits of all firms that do not switch export status must fall proportionally.


                                               17
In both cases, the export threshold falls so that some firms that previously did not export
now start to export.
   Note that the magnitude of the decline in Πd /Wm in response to a decline in international
trade costs is determined in large part by the distribution G of productivities of newly
entering firms. Consider a decline in marginal trade costs D. If newly created firms tend to
be small non-exporters, then free entry requires that the discounted expected value of profits
of these firms remain roughly constant. In this case, Πd /Wm remains roughly constant and
the profits of for large exporting firms, Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) rises by roughly the change in
(1 + D1−ρ ). In contrast, if newly created firms tend to be large exporting firms, then free
entry requires that Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) remains roughly constant, and Πd /Wm falls.
   We now examine the impact of these equilibrium changes in variable profits on the level
of process innovation. To do so, we solve for the process innovation decisions p(z) in (5.1) as
a function of variable profits Πd /Wm and the other parameters of the model. The Bellman
equation (5.1) is a standard problem of valuing the profits of the firm together with an
option: the option to start exporting. We use our functional form for the process innovation
cost function H(z, p) = h exp(z)c(p) to obtain the following lemma, proved in the appendix,
regarding the shape of the value function w(z) and the process innovation decision p(z).
   Lemma 1: The value function w(z) that solves (5.1) has the form w(z) = A(z) exp(z)
with limz→∞ A(z) = Ax and limz→−∞ A(z) = Ad , and the optimal p(z) has limz→∞ p(z) = p̄x
and limz→−∞ p(z) = p̄d where Ad and p̄d solve

                                           Πd /Wm − hc(p̄d )
                       Ad =                                                  ,                (5.2)
                              1 − (1 − δ)β [p̄d exp(s) + (1 − p̄d ) exp(−s)]

                           hc0 (p̄d ) = (1 − δ)βAd [exp(s) − exp(−s)] ,                       (5.3)

and Ax and p̄x solve these two equations with the term Πd /Wm in (5.2) replaced with
Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) . These solutions have Ax > Ad and p̄x > p̄d . Moreover, Ad , Ax and p̄d
and p̄x are increasing in Πd /Wm , while Ax and p̄x are decreasing in D.
   Proof: See Appendix 3.
   This lemma implies that for very small firms, the process innovation decision p(z) is con-
stant at p̄d . These firms do not export and all grow at the constant rate [p̄d exp(s) + (1 − p̄d ) exp(−s)]
in expectation. Likewise, for very large firms, the process innovation decision p(z) is constant
at p̄x . These firms do export and all grow at the constant rate [p̄x exp(s) + (1 − p̄x ) exp(−s)]
in expectation. The intuition for how Ai and p̄i change with changes in profits is then

                                                 18
straightforward. If variable profits Πd /Wm exp(z) or Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) exp(z) rise, this
raises the spread between the value of a firm that successfully innovates to z + s relative to
the same firm that fails to innovate and falls to z − s. This increased spread in profits raises
the incentives to engage in process innovation.
   Note that the responsiveness of very large and very small firms’ process innovation deci-
sions p̄x and p̄d to changes in variable profits and marginal trade costs is determined by the
curvature of the innovation cost function as indexed by c00 (p)/c0 (p). In particular, because
the process innovation choice is optimal, ∂Ai /∂ p̄i = 0, and hence the change in steady state
process innovation with a change in profits is given by

              c0 (pd ) d (Πd /Wm )                    c0 (px )      d (Πd (1 + D1−ρ ) /Wm )
     dp̄d =                                and dp̄x =                                          .   (5.4)
              c00 (p̄d ) Πd /Wm − hc(p̄d )            c00 (p̄x ) Πd (1 + D1−ρ ) /Wm − hc(p̄x )

If c00 (·)/c0 (·) is very large, then process innovation decisions and firm growth rates are not
very responsive to changes in profits, while if this curvature is small, then innovation decisions
and firm growth rates are very responsive to changes in profits. By a similar argument, this
curvature of the innovation cost function c00 (·)/c0 (·) also controls the diﬀerence in the process
innovation decisions and implied growth rates of very large firms (p̄x ) and very small firms
(p̄d ) in a steady-state.
   With this lemma, we have the following results regarding the impact of changes in trade
costs on the process innovation decisions of very large firms (exporters) and very small firms
(non-exporters). A reduction in the marginal costs of trade D leads to a reduction in the
process innovation of very small firms and an increase in the process innovation of very large
firms relative to very small firms. This result follows directly from the fact that a reduction
in the marginal costs of trade reduces Πd /Wm and increases Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) relative to
Πd /Wm . The extent of reallocation of process innovation from non-exporters to exporters
depends in part on the size distribution of newly created firms. If newly created firms are
small, then Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) increases and process innovation in very large firms rises in
absolute terms while Πd /Wm remains roughly constant leaving process innovation in small
firms roughly unchanged. Conversely, if newly created firms are large exporting firms, then
profits Πd /Wm (1 + D1−ρ ) and process innovation in these firms remains roughly unchanged,
while for small firms profits and process innovation falls.
   In contrast, a reduction in the fixed costs of trade, by lowering the equilibrium level of
variable profits Πd /Wm , leads to a reduction in process innovation in both very large and


                                                    19
very small firms (note that these firms do not switch export status). Similar arguments give
that a decline in the entry cost ne results in a decline in process innovation for both very
large and very small firms.
      We have shown analytical results for the impact of a reduction in the costs of international
trade on process innovation in a symmetric steady state when not all firms export. In our
quantitative work, we are interested in the implications of a reduction in trade costs for
product innovation and for the transition dynamics of trade and output and for welfare. To
work out these implications, we solve the model numerically. We also use our quantitative
model below to examine the implications of a reduction in trade costs in an asymmetric
two-country world economy.

6. Implications for Firm Growth

Recall that in our model, each firms’ domestic employment, sales, and variable profits are
all directly proportional to exp(z). Thus, our model of process innovation within firms has
sharp implications for patterns of firm growth. Specifically, since a firm with current size
determined by exp(z) has an expected growth rate conditional on survival of exp(s)p(z) +
exp(−s)(1 − p(z)), the relationship between firm size and firm growth implied by our model
is given by the equilibrium process innovation decisions p(z). We discuss this relationship
between process innovation and firm growth in this section.
      The observation known as Gibrat’s Law – that firm growth rates are independent of
firm size, at least for large enough firms – is a robust empirical finding.7 Following Luttmer
(2006), we can show that if all firms were to exogenously choose a constant value of p(z) = p̄
for process innovation, then our model would reproduce Gibrat’s Law. In proving Lemma
1, we showed that in our model very large firms endogenously choose a constant value of
p(z) = p̄x , so it is straightforward to show that our model replicates Gibrat’s Law, at least
for large firms.
      This finding that our model can replicate Gibrat’s Law depends on our parametric as-
sumption that the process innovation cost function has the form H(z, p) = h exp(z)c(p). In
Lemma 1, in proving that process innovation is constant for very large firms, we use the
assumption that the costs of innovation scale with firm size (through exp(z)) in the same
way as do the incentives to innovate. Specifically, dividing both sides of (3.6) by the price of
  7
      For references on Gibrat’s law, see Sutton (1997) and Caves (1998).


                                                     20
the research good Wmt gives that in steady-state, the first order condition governing process
innovation is given by
                         ∂
                            H (z, p) = (1 − δ)β [w(z + s) − w(z − s)]                      (6.1)
                         ∂p
With our parametric assumption on H, since w(z) = Ax exp(z) for large firms, this optimality
condition reduces to (5.3) with constant p(z) = p̄x .
   We refer to the term (w(z + s) − w(z − s)) / exp(z) in (6.1) as the scaled incentive to
innovate as it is directly proportional to the ratio of the returns to increasing the probability
of advancing the productivity index from z to z + s to the scaling cost exp (z) of doing
so for a firm with current productivity index z. The results in Lemma 1 imply that in a
symmetric steady-state, the scaled incentive to innovate is given by Ad (exp(s) − exp(−s))
for very small firms and Ax (exp(s) − exp(−s)) for very large firms.
   Our model fails to reproduce Gibrat’s Law for large firms if we chose a common alternative
scaling assumption for the innovation investment cost function. In particular, assume that
the costs of innovation scale with the productivity rather than the size of the firm so that
H(z, p) = h exp(z)1/(ρ−1) c(p). This scaling assumption follows naturally if one assumes that
productivity of the firm exp (z)1/(ρ−1) is modeled as a capital stock to be accumulated within
the firm as in the Griliches knowledge capital model (see, for example, Griliches and Klette
2000). This assumption, however, implies that firm growth is increasing in firm size. This is
because the profits that provide the incentive to innovate are directly proportional to firm
size, exp(z). But, with this alternative innovation cost function, the cost of innovation grows
more slowly than firm size as long as the elasticity of demand ρ > 2. Hence, this alternative
specification of innovation investment costs cannot be consistent with Gibrat’s Law over a
wide range of firm sizes for suﬃciently high demand elasticities.
   Our model also fails to reproduce Gibrat’s Law over the full range of firm sizes because, as
we showed in Lemma 1, very large firms export and hence have a higher incentive to engage in
process innovation relative to their domestic employment (which is proportional to exp(z))
than very small firms. In particular, in Lemma 1, we showed that the constant process
innovation decision for large firms p̄x is larger than the constant process innovation for very
small firms p̄d . Our model can generate the same constant process innovation decision for
very small and very large firms if we assume that process innovation costs scale with total
employment within the firm rather than with exp(z). With this assumption, in a symmetric
steady-state process innovation costs would have the form H(z, p) = h exp(z)c(p) for very

                                               21
small firms and H(z, p) = h exp(z)c(p) (1 + D1−ρ ) for very large firms. We show below in
our quantitative section that with this assumption, there is very little reallocation of process
innovation in response to a decline in the marginal costs of trade.
   As we have discussed, our model implies diﬀerent process innovation decisions and hence
diﬀerent growth rates for very small and very large firms, as well as a reallocation of process
innovation, and hence firm growth rates, from small non-exporting firms to large exporting
firms, in response to a decline in the marginal costs of trade. From (5.4), we see that in
a symmetric steady-state, the magnitude of these eﬀects on the process innovation decision
depends in an important way on the curvature of the innovation cost function as measured
by c00 (p)/c0 (p). In our quantitative work below, we assume that this cost function has the
form exp(bp) so that this curvature is indexed by the parameter b. If this parameter b is high
(low), so that this curvature is high (low), then from (5.4) we have that the steady-state
diﬀerences in growth rates of very small and very large firms as well as the reallocation of
process innovation across firms in response to a change in trade costs are quantitatively small
(large).
   In our quantitative work, we consider alternative values of b ranging from very large
(b = 3000) in which the process innovation decisions of firms are highly inelastic and hence
eﬀectively constant as in the model of Luttmer (2006) to lower values of b (b = 30 and
b = 10), in which process innovation decisions are elastic and vary substantially across firms
in diﬀerent size classes in steady-state, and in which the change in the steady-state firm size
distribution following a change in trade costs is quite large.

7. Quantitative Analysis

We now present a quantitative version of our model that is consistent with many features
of the data on firm size dynamics (both in terms of employment and export status), and
the firm size distribution in the U.S. economy. We then use that model to examine the
quantitative impact of a change in the costs of international trade on output and the volume
of trade in both the short and the long run, as well as on the product and process innovative
activity of individual firms. We also use the model to compute the welfare implications of
this reallocation of innovative activities.
   Our quantitative model extends the model described above in two ways. First, we assume
that production requires nf units of the research good during each period t as a fixed cost


                                              22
of production. This fixed cost is denominated in terms of the research good, and gives rise
to endogenous exit. In particular, only firms with a productivity index z above a certain
threshold (that can change over time) decide to operate every period, while those with
productivity index below this threshold choose to exit and receive a value of zero. We find
below that consideration of endogenous exit has a significant eﬀect on the process innovation
decisions of small firms. This arises from the option to exit. Given that the value of exit is
independent of z, the scaled incentive to innovate is smaller for these firms relative to others
that have high values of z and hence are far from exiting.
       Second, we assume that the fixed cost of exporting is random and i.i.d. over time for each
firm. Each period, the firm draws a random fixed cost of exporting nx from a distribution
Gx that is lognormal with mean n̄x and variance σ 2nx (σ nx = 0, corresponds to a constant
fixed cost of exporting). This model generates heterogeneity in export behavior for firms
with equal z but diﬀerent fixed cost of exporting. The variable xt (z) ∈ [0, 1] now indicates
the fraction of home firms with productivity index z that export any output at all at time
t. With σ nx > 0, so that the fixed costs of exporting are random, firms switch status from
exporting to not exporting and vice-versa more frequently the larger is σ nx. We use data
on the fraction of employment in firms that switch status from exporting to not exporting,
and vice versa, in our calibration. Further details of the extended model are provided in
Appendix 1. It is straightforward to see that Propositions 1 and 2 presented in Section 4
also hold in this extended model.
       Calibration
       We now discuss how the model is parameterized to reproduce a number of salient features
of U.S. data on firms dynamics, the firm size distribution, and international trade. We choose
time periods equal to two months so there are six time periods per year.8 We parameterize
the distribution G of productivity draws of entrants to be normal so that for entering firms,
z ∼ N(0, σ e ). We parameterize the distribution of fixed costs of exporting so that log (nx ) ∼
N(log (n̄x ) − σ 2nx /2, σ nx ) – the mean of nx is n̄x .
       The parameters of the model that we must choose then are the steady-state interest
rate given by 1/β, the total number of workers L, the parameters governing the variance of
employment growth for surviving firms s, the exogenous exit rate of firms δ, the fixed costs
   8
     As we reduce the period length, we keep the entry period of new firms at one year. Otherwise, the
allocations would change significantly as the cost of waiting for a new draw (and hence the entry threshold
z̄ ) would decline.



                                                    23
of operation nf and entry ne , the parameters of the innovation cost function h and b, the
parameter of the distribution of initial productivity draws for firms σe , the parameters of
the distribution of fixed costs of exporting n̄x and σ nx , and the export intensity of exporting
firms D1−ρ /(1 + D1−ρ ). We also need to choose the elasticity of substitution ρ, and the share
of labor in the production of research goods λ. In our model, the distribution of employment
across firms in a symmetric steady-state depends on the elasticity parameter ρ only through
the trade intensity for firms that do export given by D1−ρ /(1 + D1−ρ ). Since our calibration
procedure is based on employment data, we choose the trade intensity D1−ρ /(1 + D1−ρ ) as a
parameter, and hence our steady-state calibration is invariant to the choice of ρ. For similar
reasons, our steady-state calibration is also invariant to the choice of λ.
       We now describe how all parameters are chosen. We set β so that the steady-state interest
rate (annualized) is 5%. We normalize L = 1. Now consider the parameters shaping the law
of motion of firm productivity z (s, δ, ne , nf , σ e , n̄x , σ nx , D1−ρ , h and b). We choose s so
that the standard deviation of the growth rate of employment of large firms in the model
is 25% on an annualized basis. This figure is in the range of those for US publicly-traded
firms reported in Davis et. al. (2006).9 We choose the exogenous death rate δ so that the
model’s annual employment-weighted death rate of large firms is 0.55%, consistent with the
corresponding one for large firms in the US data.10 Note that in our model, over the course
of one year, large firms do not choose to exit endogenously because they have productivity
far away from the threshold productivity for exit. Hence δ determines the annual exit rate
of these firms directly. We normalize ne = 1, and set nf = 0.1.11
       Corresponding to each value of b (3000, 30 and 10), we choose the parameters σe , n̄x , σ nx ,
D1−ρ , and h to match the following five observations. First, the fraction of employment by
entering firms of size under 500 is 90% of all employment in entering firms.12 Note that firm
sizes in terms of number of employees in the model are simply a normalization. We choose
this normalization so that the median firm in the employment-based size distribution is of
size 500. In other words, 50% of total employment in the model is accounted for by firms
   9
     We abstract from the trend in employment growth rate volatility discussed in Davis et. al. (2006) and
pick a number that roughly matches the average for the period 1980-2001.
  10
     This is the 1997-2002 average employment-based failure rate of US firms larger than 500 employees,
computed using data reported by the Statistics of U.S. Businesses and Nonemployer Statistics.
  11
     The statistics that we report are invariant to proportional changes in all three fixed costs and h.
  12
     This fraction is the 1999-2003 average calculated using US firms birth data, computed using data reported
by the Statistics of U.S. Businesses and Nonemployer Statistics.




                                                     24
of size under 500.13 Second, the fraction of total employment accounted for by exporting
firms is 40%, and third, the fraction of exports in gross output is 7.5%.14 We abstract from
variation in trade costs across sectors. Fourth, we match patterns of firms switching from
exporters to non-exporters, and vice-versa, over time. We simulate the steady state of the
model for seven years to compare the model’s predictions with those in the US between
1993 and 2000 reported in Bernard et. al. (2005). The employment-based switching rate is
defined as the average of the year seven employment of non-exporters that become exporters,
and the year-one employment of exporters that become non-exporters, as a fraction of total
exporter’s employment. Using the data in Bernard et. al. (2005) we compute this seven
year switching rate in US data to be 12%.
       For the fifth observation, we match the shape of the right tail of the firm size distribution
in the U.S. Specifically, consider representing the right tail of the distribution of employment
across firms in the U.S. data with a function that maps the logarithm of the number of
employees log(l) into the logarithm of the fraction of total employment employed in firms
with this employment or larger. We plot this function in Panel B, Figure 1, for firms of size 5
to 10000. If the distribution of employment across firms actually was Pareto, this functions
would be a straight line. As is evident in this figure, this function is close to linear, with
the slope becoming steeper for larger firms. In calibrating the model with inelastic process
innovation (fixed p for all firms) we set the model parameters so that the model matches the
slope coeﬃcient for firms within a certain size range. This calibration procedure is similar
to that used by Luttmer (2006). Concretely, we target a slope coeﬃcient of −0.2 for firms
ranging between 1000 and 5000 employees, as in Panel B, Figure 1. The calibrated model
then implies a value of p̄x for large firms from (5.2) and (5.3). As we lower b, we adjust the
model parameters to keep p̄x constant and thus keep the dynamics of large firms unchanged.
       Table 1 summarizes the observations used in the calibration, as well as the resulting
parameter values, for each level of b. Recall that by calibrating the model to data on firm
size, we did not need to take a stand on the values of ρ and λ. The aggregate implications
of changes in trade costs are, however, aﬀected by the values of ρ and λ. In our benchmark
  13
     This is the size of the median firm in the US firm employment-based size distribution on average in the
period 1999-2003, as reported by the Statistics of U.S. Businesses and Nonemployer Statistics.
  14
     Bernard et. al. (2005) report that the fraction of total US empoyment (excluding a few sectors such as
agriculture, education, and public services) accounted for by exporters is 36.3% in 1993 and 39.4% in 2000.
The average of exports and imports to gross output for the comparable set of sectors is roughly 7.5% in the
U.S. in 2000. The steady state of our model abstracts from trends in trade costs that would lead to changes
in trade volumes over time.


                                                    25
parameterization we set ρ = 5, and λ = 0.5.15
       We now discuss some steady state implications of our calibrated model. We start with
the parametrization that assumes inelastic process innovation. We then discuss how some of
these additional implications of the model change as we decrease the curvature parameter b
on the innovation cost function, and hence increase the elasticity of process innovation.
       Steady state implications: Inelastic process innovation
       The benchmark calibration with high b (b = 3000) gives p(z) = p̄ constant for all z (see
Panel A in Figure 1). Panel C of Figures 1 displays the one-year growth rate of continuing
firms as a function of the log of firm size. In it, we observe that for small firms, the model
generates growth rates for continuing firms that are decreasing in size. This is consistent
with Gibrat’s law: small surviving firms grow faster than large firms due to selection, and
among larger firms growth is unrelated to size.16
       Panel B of Figure 1 shows that the employment-based size distribution implied by the
model resembles that in the U.S. for firms ranging between 5 and 10000 employees (recall
that our calibration procedure targets the slope in the data for firms between 1000 and 5000
employees).17
       We also assess the benchmark model’s implications for the size distribution and growth
dynamics of exporters, in relation to the data reported in Bernard et. al. (2005). Panel D in
Figure 1 displays the exporters’ employment size distribution of the model and the US data
in 2000. The size distribution generated by the model is only slightly more concentrated
than that in the data. This suggests that the concentration of exporters is not that striking
in light of the concentration of firms in the overall economy.18
  15
     Our choice of ρ = 5 roughly coincides with the average elasticity of substitution for US imports of
diﬀerentiated 4-digit goods estimated in Broda and Weinstein (2006) for the period 1990-2001. Due to the
scarcity of information on the value of λ, we perform sensitivity analysis for a wide range of λ between 0.25
and 0.95.
  16
     Note that selection only operates for very small firms. Extending the model to allow for cross-firm
variation in fixed costs would generate a smoothly decreasing conditional growth schedule.
  17
     Note that if the size distribution were Pareto, then the slope of the right tail distribution based on
the number of firms (this function maps firm employment into the logarithm of the fraction of firms with
this or higher employment) would be equal to the slope of the employment-based right tail coeﬃcient plus
one. Both the data and the model show a size distribution that departs from a Pareto distribution in the
sense that the slope of the employment-based size distribution is steeper than that of the firm-based size
distribution. The distribution of entrants G plays the key role in the model in shaping this departure from
a Pareto distribution.
  18
     Bernard et. al. (2005) report that the exporters’ concentration of export values is significantly more
concentrated than that of employment. This suggest that large exporters also have a higher trade intensity.
Our model abstracts from these considerations.



                                                     26
   Steady state implications: Elastic process innovation
   We now re-calibrate our model using lower values for the innovation cost curvature, b.
Specifically, we consider b = 30, and b = 10. The resulting parameter values are presented
in columns 2 and 3 of Table 1.
   In Panel A of Figures 2 and 3 we plot the innovation intensity p (z) and the fraction
of exporting firms x(z) for operating firms z. As we lower b, firms that export (those
with x (z) > 0) choose a higher investment in innovation than non-exporters (those with
x (z) = 0).
   Panel C of Figures 2 and 3 again displays the one-year growth rate of continuing firms as a
function of the log of firm size. Recall that in the model with inelastic process innovation (b =
3000), consistent with Gibrat’s law, the growth rate is positive for small firms due to selection,
and is roughly zero for larger firms. As we lower b, the slope of the conditional growth rate
schedule is the result of a tension between selection (negative slope) and increasing innovation
intensity (positive slope). Panel C in Figures 2 and 3 shows that the second force strengthens
as we lower b. Under b = 30, conditional growth rates become increasing in size, but these
diﬀerences in growth rates across sizes are still quite small. Under b = 10, the second force is
very strong, leading to growth rates of large firms that are over 10 percentage points higher
than the growth rates of small firms. Very low levels of b thus deliver a clear violation of
Gibrat’s law.
   Panel B in Figures 2 and 3 compares the employment-based size distribution produced
by the model with US data. As we lower b, our calibration procedure of fixing p̄x implies
that the slope of the firm size distribution for large firms remains in line with the data. But
the model generates a divergence from the data for smaller firms. In particular, a lower
innovation intensity for small firms and non-exporters shows up as a flatter slope of the
distribution for these firms relative to large firms. We quantify this change in the slope of
the firm size distribution as the ratio of the employment-based slope coeﬃcient for firms of
size 100 − 1000 to that of firms of size 5000 − 10, 000. This ratio is equal to 0.74 under
b = 3000, 0.86 under b = 30, and 1.38 under b = 10. This flattening of the slope of the
distribution under b = 10 is counterfactual relative to US data (see Panel B).
   As a further check on our model, we also consider our model’s implications for variation
in process innovation intensity with firm size for diﬀerent values of the parameter b. We find
that our model implies that there is at most a very small systematic relationship between


                                               27
research intensity and firm size for large firms even when b = 10. Specifically, consider the
slope coeﬃcient of a regression of the logarithm of each firms’ innovative investment (as
measured by H(z, p)) on its size as measured by sales. When we run this regression in
our model using only firms of size larger than 500 (these firms account for 50% of total
employment), this coeﬃcient ranges from 1.004 when b = 30 to 1.06 when b = 10. These
results are roughly consistent with the data surveyed in Cohen (1995) and Cohen and Klepper
(1996). Thus it does not appear that direct data on research intensity across firms of diﬀerent
sizes is that useful for disciplining the choice of the parameter b in our model. Diﬀerences
in research intensity across firms do appear if smaller firms are included in this regression.
In particular, if all firms of size larger than 5 are included, the regression coeﬃcient ranges
from 1.03 when b = 30 to 1.54 when b = 10. However, it is diﬃcult to compare our model
to the data in this case because data on the research intensity of smaller firms are typically
not available.
          Overall, we see that our model, in steady state, reproduces quantitatively many salient
features of the US data on firm dynamics and export behavior if the curvature parameter b
is suﬃciently high so that process innovation decisions are not too elastic.

8. Aggregate implications of a decline in marginal trade costs

We now study the aggregate implications of a trade liberalization, defined as a reduction in
marginal trade costs D leading to an increase in the trade intensity of firms that export. We
choose to lower D so that the export intensity of exporters, D1−ρ / (1 + D1−ρ ), increases by
a factor of 1.15. Using this procedure, the resulting change in steady state exports/GDP is
invariant to the elasticity parameter ρ.19 Results are reported in Tables 2, 3 and in Figure
4.
          To understand the aggregate implications of a change in trade costs, we can express
aggregate output in a symmetric equilibrium as the product of an average productivity index
z̃t , the measure of operating firms Nt , and production employment L − Lmt (see Appendix)

                                 Yt = (z̃t )1/(ρ−1) (Nt )1/(ρ−1) (L − Lmt ) .                   (8.1)

Here z̃t is the average productivity index exp (z) (1 + x (z) D1−ρ ) across operating firms,
evaluated using the distribution Mt (z) /Nt .
     19
    In our benchmark calibration, the initial export intensity of exporters is 18.75%. With ρ = 5, our
experiment amounts to reducing D from 1.44 to 1.38.

                                                     28
   A reduction in marginal trade costs D has two static eﬀects on output both of which
aﬀect average productivity z̃t : one by improving the technology of shipping goods abroad,
and the other by changing firms’ exit and export decisions xt (z). It also has two dynamic
eﬀects on output: one by changing firms’ process innovation decisions pt (z) – which shape
the distribution Mt (z) /Nt over which the average productivity index z̃t is calculated – and
the other by changing the level of product innovation – which changes Nt .
   Steady State
   Consider the model with inelastic process innovation (b = 3000). In Row 1, Column 1
of Table 2, we see that steady state exports/GDP increases by a factor of 1.22 (from 7.5%
to 9.1%). This is larger than the change in export intensity of firms, for two reasons. First,
exporters are larger than non-exporters, so a change in their export intensity has a more
than proportional impact on exports/GDP. Second, the reduction in trade costs induces
more firms to pay the fixed cost of exporting.
   Now consider the model with elastic process innovation (b = 30 and b = 10). The results
are reported in Row 1, Columns 2 and 3 of Table 2. Now exports/GDP increases by a factor
of 1.4 when b = 30 (from 7.5% to 10.5%), and 2.71 when b = 10 (from 7.5% to 20.1%). The
model with elastic process innovation amplifies the impact of the reduction in the trade costs
on trade volumes because those firms that export increase their investments in process inno-
vation and those that do not export decrease their investments in process innovation. These
shifts in process innovation, by shifting the distribution of firm productivities Mt (z) /Nt ,
imply that the average productivity index across firms z̃ increases by a factor of 1.02 when
b = 3000, 1.14 when b = 30, and 9.1 when b = 10.
   Consider now the implications of this reallocation of process innovative activity on the
steady state distribution of firm size. When process innovation is inelastic, the distribution
of firm sizes changes very little. For example, if we consider the concentration of production
as measured by the fraction of employment in firms with greater than 5000 employees, this
rises from 32.4% to 33.1% when process innovation is inelastic. In contrast, this measure
of concentration rises from 32% to 39% when b = 30, and from 27% to 91% when b = 10.
Hence, our model predicts that there are substantial changes in the size distribution of firms
in those cases in which there are also substantial long-run changes in the response of trade
to a reduction in marginal trade costs. These changes in the firm size distribution might
be used to discipline the choice of b. In particular, very low values of b lead to implausibly


                                             29
large shifts in the firm size distribution in response to a relatively small increase in export
intensity.
   The impact of a decline in marginal trade costs on product innovation are very diﬀerent
from those discussed in Section 4 when all firms export. Recall from Proposition 2 that if
ρ + λ > 2, then the measure of firms increases when all firms export. In contrast, when
not all firms export, the measure of firms falls. Row 5 of Table 2 reports that the measure
of firms falls by a factor 0.99 when b = 3000, 0.88 when b = 30, and 0.11 when b = 10.
To understand this change in the measure of firms, we can write an expression for variable
profits from the firm’s domestic operations Πd /Wm (see Appendix) as:

                           Πd /Wm = κ̄ (z̃N)(2−ρ−λ)/(ρ−1) (L − Lm ) ,                      (8.2)

where κ̄ is a constant determined by ρ and λ. A decline in marginal trade costs leads to a
small decrease in Πd /Wm to satisfy the free-entry condition, and also leads to a large increase
in average productivity z̃ (as discussed in Section 5). This small decline in Πd /Wm and large
increase in z̃ are determined from the Bellman equation (5.1) and the free entry condition
(4.2). Production employment L − Lm increases only slightly, so (8.2) requires that N must
fall substantially to oﬀset the large increase in z̃ when process innovation is elastic. Hence, a
reduction in the marginal costs of trade results, in equilibrium, in a reallocation of innovative
activity into innovation within ongoing firms and away from the creation of new firms.
   Row 2 of Table 2 reports the steady state increase in final output Y resulting from the
decline in trade costs. The increase in output is 0.09% when b = 3000, 0.32% when b = 30,
and 1.94% when b = 10. Hence, elastic process innovation also magnifies the output increase
from a decline in variable trade costs. Using (8.1), we can break this change in final output
into an increase in average productivity z̃ that is partly oﬀset by a decline in the measure of
operating firms N (both of which get larger as we lower b), and a small change in production
employment (L − Lm falls slightly when b = 3000 and increases slightly when b = 10).
   Finally, Row 3 of Table 2 displays the increase in final consumption in response to a
decline in trade costs. Consumption increases by a factor of 1.001 when b = 3000, 1.005
when b = 30, and 1.033 when b = 10. The change in consumption diﬀers from the change
in output due to the reallocation of resources between production of research and final
consumption.




                                               30
   Transition dynamics
   Figure 4 displays the path of exports/GDP (Panel A) and consumption (Panel B) in
the transition to the new steady state, for each value of b. While the transition is almost
immediate in the economy with inelastic process innovation, it takes many years when process
innovation is elastic. The change in the innovation intensity of exporters increases their
expected growth, but this higher growth takes time to materialize as higher levels of exports.
In the transition, the distribution of firm level productivities Mt (z) /Nt slowly shifts, leading
to a gradual increase in the export share and consumption.
   The model with elastic process innovation is capable of producing substantial diﬀerences
in the short- and long-run response of trade volumes to a trade liberalization. The contem-
poraneous increase in exports/GDP as a fraction of the overall increase across steady states,
reported in Row 7, Columns 1-3 of Table 2, is 99% under b = 3000, 54% under b = 30, and
14% under b = 10.
   Welfare
   We compute welfare as the equivalent variation in consumption that keeps the represen-
tative household indiﬀerent between the economy with high and low trade costs, taking into
account the transition dynamics. Row 8 of Table 2 reports the welfare gains from a reduction
in the marginal cost of trade. In our benchmark model with b = 3000, the welfare gains are
0.36%. These welfare gains correspond to the welfare gains one would find in a calibrated
version of Melitz’ (2003) model.
   We do not take a stand on whether these welfare gains are large or small. Instead, we
focus on the question of how consideration of elastic process innovation aﬀects these welfare
gains. We have seen that elastic process innovation has a large impact on our model’s
implications for trade costs on trade volumes, output, and consumption. In contrast, we see
in Row 8 of Table 2 that the welfare gains are only slightly higher when we consider elastic
process innovation.
   Consideration of elastic process innovation does not substantially alter the welfare impli-
cations of a reduction in international marginal trade costs, for two reasons. First, investing
in process innovation is costly in that resources are drawn out of alternative activities. Sec-
ond, the productivity gains from this investment come only slowly.
   Sensitivity Analysis
   Table 3 reports some sensitivity analysis with respect to key parameters of the model.

                                               31
For comparison, Columns 1-3 reports the results for our benchmark model (also reported in
Table 2).
   We first consider a calibration of the model with a higher initial share of exports in GDP
(15% instead of 7.5%) to see if greater exposure to trade aﬀects our results. These results
are presented in columns 4-6 of Table 3. As in our benchmark experiments, we reduce D so
that the export intensity of exporters rises by a factor of 1.15. The welfare gains are roughly
double than those under our benchmark calibration, but as in our benchmark model, the
variation in welfare gains across levels of b is still small in comparison to the change in trade
volumes, output, and consumption.
   Next, we report results for a lower elasticity of substitution (ρ = 2 instead of ρ = 5) –
columns 7-9 of Table 3. Recall that the elasticity parameter ρ does not aﬀect our model’s
implications for the change steady-state process innovation in response to a given change in
firms’ steady-state export intensity D1−ρ / (1 + D1−ρ ) . Output gains are larger the lower is
ρ (i.e.: from (8.1), a given change in aggregate productivity index z̃ translates into a larger
change in final output), and these translate into welfare gains that are 4 to 5 times larger.
Even though the diﬀerences in welfare gains across values of b are higher (1.6% for b = 3000
and 2.2% for b = 10), these diﬀerences across values of b are small relative to the diﬀerences
in the change in steady state consumption across values of b.
   We now report results when new firms are larger, and hence more likely to be exporters –
columns 10-12 of Table 3. As we discussed in Section 5, the size distribution of newly entering
firms aﬀects our model’s implications for the impact of a reduction in marginal trade costs on
the absolute levels of process innovation in small and large firms. We change the parameters
of our benchmark model so that the fraction of employment by entering firms of size under
500 is 72% of employment in entering firms instead of 90% in our benchmark calibration –
this requires increasing the variance σ e of productivities of entering firms. In rows 4 and
5 of Table 3, we see that there is a smaller reallocation of process innovation as measured
by the increase in average productivity z̃, and a smaller reduction in product innovation
as measured by the number of firms. To understand the smaller response of process and
product innovation recall that, as discussed above, free entry requires that Πd /Wm must fall
by more when entering firms are more likely to export. As a result, profits of exporters rise
by less and hence so does their process innovation. This eﬀect is what generates a smaller
increase in average productivity. From (8.2), we then get the smaller decline in the number



                                               32
of firms. Note that the results for welfare are largely unchanged relative to those in our
benchmark parameterization.
   We then consider the role of the share of labor in the production of research goods
(λ = 0.25 and λ = 0.95) – columns 13-18 of Table 3. This parameter is known to aﬀect
the change in product innovation in response to a given change in firm profits. Note that,
for low levels of b, the decline in the measure of firms is slightly larger under λ = 0.25.
This is because the value of entering firms (which tend to be small non-exporters) falls
substantially for low b, so labor is reallocated from research to production and final goods
are reallocated from research to consumption. This results stands in contrast to the model
with full export participation, in which the increase in the measure of firms is decreasing in λ
(e.g.: the number of firms is constant under λ = 1). Note, however, that quantitatively these
diﬀerences are small. In particular, the steady state changes in consumption and welfare do
not vary substantially with λ.
   We then consider a version of our model in which process innovation costs H(z, p) scale
up with export intensity – columns 19-21 of Table 3. That is, H(z, p) = h exp(z) exp (bp)
for non-exporters and H(z, p) = h exp(z) exp (bp) (1 + D1−ρ ) for exporters. As we discussed
in Section 6, under this specification, the growth rate diﬀerences between exporters and large
non-exporters in a steady state are small even for a low value of b. The aggregate results in
columns 19-21 of Table 3 reveal that this alternative specification generates a reduction in
the impact of the decline in trade costs on trade volumes and consumption relative to our
benchmark model in which process innovation costs scale with exp (z). This is because, for
exporters, the scaled-incentives to innovate fall relative to the cost of innovation, so they cut
their level of process innovation.
   Finally, we consider a version of the model in which exporters grow faster than non-
exporters due to the presence of externalities and spillovers from export activities – columns
22-24 of Table 3. We refer to this model as ‘learning-by-exporting’. In this model, diﬀer-
ences in growth across firms are assumed rather than being the outcome of firms’ optimal
choice of innovation investment. Moreover, process innovation costs do not appear in the
resource constraint (2.13). We use this case to demonstrate that our assumption that firms’
investments in process innovation are costly are critical in generating our results for welfare.
We set the growth rate of exporters and non-exporters at the steady state levels p̄d and p̄x
that we solved for in the Lemma of Section 5 (both before and after the reduction in trade



                                               33
costs). We consider the same experiment of increasing the trade intensity of exporters by a
factor of 1.15. The increase in steady state consumption and welfare is significantly larger
in the model with ‘learning-by-exporting’. For example, if we assume that exporters and
non-exporters grow at the rates of the benchmark model under b = 10, consumption and
welfare increase by 12% and 2.2%, respectively (they increase by 3.2% and 0.4% , respec-
tively, in the model with process innovation). When firms ‘learn-by-exporting’, increases
in their growth rates do not take up research goods, so employment and final good can be
reallocated towards production and final consumption, respectively. It is only in this case
that the welfare gains from a reduction in marginal trade costs vary substantially depending
on the assumptions regarding the impact of exporting on firm growth.
   We conclude from this sensitivity analysis that, even when reallocation in process inno-
vation leads to very large steady state changes in export volumes, output, consumption, and
substantial changes in the firm size distribution, the dynamic gains of trade are not much
larger than those in a model with inelastic process innovation. The dynamic gains can be
substantial when firms ‘learn-by-exporting’ without requiring research resources, particularly
when this learning eﬀect is large.
   Other experiments
   We now examine the response of our model economy to three additional aggregate ex-
periments. First, we re-examine the response to a decline in marginal trade costs under the
optimal allocations of our model. Second, we consider a reduction in marginal trade costs in
an asymmetric two country world economy (i.e.: small open economy). Third, we consider
a reduction in the fixed costs of exporting.
   Optimal allocations
   We examine process an product innovation in the planning problem that maximizes
welfare in the two countries. The equilibrium allocations are potentially suboptimal due to
the presence of markups in the prices set by the intermediate good producing firms, which
can distort product innovation. It is straightforward to show that, if λ = 1, the allocations
of the planning problem coincide with the equilibrium allocations both in and out of steady
state. If λ < 1, then the measure of firms and the level of consumption are higher in the
planning problem because the monopoly distortion alters the value of entry relative to the
cost of entry.
   In our benchmark parameterization with λ = 0.5, changes in the allocations and welfare


                                               34
gains from reducing the level of marginal trade costs as discussed above are very similar in
the planning problem and equilibrium allocations. The welfare gains in the planning problem
are 0.37% with b = 3000, 0.4% with b = 30, and 0.44% with b = 10.
   Small open economy
   We now consider a version of our model with asymmetric countries. In particular we
assume that the home country is very small relative to the foreign country, and aggregate
variables in the foreign country are held constant. In particular, we assume that home firms
face a foreign demand a∗t (z) = p∗at (z)−ρ , where we normalize Yt∗ = Pt∗ = 1. We abstract from
considerations of product variety for imported goods by assuming the presence of a single
imported intermediate good that is available to the home country at a price equal to D∗ ,
where D can diﬀer from D∗ . We also abstract from dynamic considerations in the current
account by assuming trade balance every period.
   We consider a reduction in marginal trade costs such that, when b = 3000, exports/GDP
in the home country increases by the same factor of 1.22 as in the symmetric two-country
model (implying also very similar output and welfare gains). For lower levels of b, for the
same change in D, GDP rises in the home country relative to the rest of the world, and the
exporter’s export intensity increases by less than in the symmetric model. This implies that
the reallocation of profits and process innovation from non-exporters to exporters is smaller
compared to the symmetric two-country world. Across steady states, exports/GDP rises by
a factor of 0.27 if b = 30 and by a factor of 1.34 if b = 10 (it increases by a factor of 1.4 and
2.71, respectively, in the symmetric economy). Taking into account the transition dynamics,
the welfare gains are still very similar for values of b ranging between 3000 and 10.
   Reduction in fixed costs of exporting
   We also consider the aggregate implications of a reduction in the average fixed cost of
exporting, n̄x . We choose the decline in n̄x so that the increase in exports/GDP on impact
roughly matches the one from reducing D in the benchmark experiments discussed above
(i.e. a factor of 1.22) This requires lowering nx by roughly 60%.
   The decline in n̄x leads to an increase in export participation, and new exporters increase
their level of process innovation investment. This increase in innovation activities by new
exporters is partly oﬀset by a decline in process innovation by continuing exporters and
non-exporters as discussed in Section 5.
   Overall, this reallocation of process innovation activities leads to an increase in the frac-


                                               35
tion of research goods used in process innovation. Thus, the model with elastic process
innovation amplifies the impact of the reduction in the fixed trade costs on trade volumes.
Comparing across steady states, exports/GDP increases by a factor of 1.22 under b = 3000,
1.28 under b = 30, and 1.37 under b = 10. However, taking into account transition dynam-
ics, the equivalent variation in consumption is very similar in the model with inelastic and
elastic process innovation. These welfare gains are also very close to those obtained from a
reduction in marginal trade costs.

9. Concluding remarks

In this paper we build a model of the impact of international trade on firms’ process and
product innovation decisions. We show that the extent of firm’s export participation has
an important influence on the impact of changes in trade costs on process and product
innovation. We show in a quantitative version of our model that, in response to a decline
in international trade costs, changes in process and product innovation largely oﬀset. We
also find that the dynamic welfare gains from trade when process innovation is elastic are
not substantially larger than those gains when it is not. This is true despite the fact that
elastic process innovation leads to very large dynamic responses of exports and the firm size
distribution.
   Our model has abstracted from three important considerations. First, we have assumed
constant elasticity of demand. This assumption implies that changes in trade cost have no
impact on firms’ markups and that there is no strategic interaction in firms’ aﬀecting process
innovation decisions. Ericson and Pakes (1995), and Aghion et. al. (2003) consider models
of process innovation with strategic interactions.
   Second, in making our model quantitative, we have assumed that all firms are single-
product firms. In doing so, we have abstracted from the eﬀects that a reduction in trade
costs might have on product innovation by incumbent firms. Consideration of process and
product innovation in models with multi-product firms would be an important extension of
this paper (see Klette and Kortum 2004, Luttmer 2007, and Bernard, Redding and Schott
2007 for models of multi-product firms).
   Finally, we have also abstracted from spillover eﬀects that might lead to endogenous
growth. Since we have found that a decline in trade costs can lead to a substantial reallocation
of process and product innovation, a model with spillovers favoring one type of innovation


                                              36
over the other might predict larger welfare gains when process innovation is elastic.

References

 [1] Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt and John Vickers (2003) “Competi-
    tion, Imitation and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation” Review of Economic Studies
    68: 467-492.

 [2] Alessandria, George and Horag Choi (2007) “Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter
    Dynamics, and the Eﬀects of Trade Liberalization” working paper, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Philadelphia

 [3] Baldwin, Richard and Frederic Robert-Nicoud (2007) “Trade and growth with heteroge-
    nous firms” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming

 [4] Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum (2003)
    “Plants and Productivity in International Trade” American Economic Review, Septem-
    ber, pp. 1268-1290

 [5] Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter Schott (2005) “Importers, Exporters
    and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods” in T. Dunne,
    J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts (eds.), Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro
    Data (University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).

 [6] Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott (2007) “Multi-Product Firms
    and Trade Liberalization ” mimeo.

 [7] Broda, Christian and David Weinstein (2006) “Globalization and the Gains from Vari-
    ety” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 121.

 [8] Bustos, Paula (2005) “The Impact of Trade on Technology and Skill Upgrading: Evi-
    dence from Argentina” mimeo

 [9] Caves, Richard (1998) “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
    Mobility of Firms” Journal of Economic Literature 36: 1947:82

[10] Coe, David and Elhanan Helpman (1995) “International R&D spillovers” European
    Economic Review, vol. 39(5), pages 859-887

                                             37
[11] Cohen, Wesley (1995) “Empirical Studies in Innovative Activity”in Handbook of the
    Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, edited by Paul Stoneman, Oxford:
    Blackwell

[12] Cohen, Wesley and Steven Klepper (1996) “A Reprise of Size and R&D” Economic
    Journal, vol. 106(437), pages 925-51, July

[13] Costantini, James and Marc Melitz (2007) “The Dynamics of Firm Level Adjustment
    to Trade Liberalization” mimeo

[14] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2006) “Volatility
    and Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms”
    NBER WP #12354

[15] Doraszelski, Ulrich and Jordi Jaumandreu (2006) “R&D and Productivity: Estimating
    Production Functions when Productivity is Endogenous” mimeo

[16] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2001) “Technology, Trade, and Growth: A Uni-
    fied Framework” European Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 45(4-6), 742-
    755.

[17] Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes (1995) “Markov Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Frame-
    work for Empirical Work” Review of Economic Studies 62: 53-82

[18] Griliches, Zvi (1979) “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development
    to Productivity Growth” Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 10(1), pages 92-116, Spring.

[19] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1989) “Product Development and International
    Trade” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 6.

[20] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1991) “Innovation and Growth in the Global
    Economy” Cambridge: MIT Press

[21] Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium”
    Econometrica 60: 1127-50

[22] Irarrazabal, Alfonso and Luca David Opromolla (2006) “Hysteresis in Export Market”
    mimeo


                                            38
[23] Klette, Jakob and Samuel Kortum (2004) “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation”
    Journal of Political Economy, 112(5), 986-1018.

[24] Krugman, Paul (1980) “Scale Economies, Product Diﬀerentiation, and the Patterns of
    Trade” American Economic Review 70: 950-59.

[25] Luttmer, Erzo (2006) “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[26] Luttmer, Erzo (2007) “New Goods and the Size Distribution of Firms” Working Paper
    649, Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank.

[27] Melitz, Marc (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggre-
    gate Industry Productivity” Econometrica 71: 1695-1721

[28] Rivera-Batiz, Luis and Romer, Paul (1991a) “International trade with endogenous tech-
    nological change” European Economic Review, vol. 35(4), pages 971-1001

[29] Rivera-Batiz, Luis and Romer, Paul M (1991b) “Economic Integration and Endogenous
    Growth” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 106(2), pages 531-55

[30] Romer, Paul (1986) “Increasing Returns and Long-run Growth” Journal of Political
    Economy, vol. 94(5), pages 1002-37

[31] Romer, Paul (1990) “Endogenous Technological Change” Journal of Political Economy,
    vol. 98(5), pages 71-102

[32] Sutton, John (1997) “Gibrat’s Legacy” Journal of Economic Literature 35: 40-59




                                            39
10. Appendices
10.1. Appendix 1: Equilibrium Characterization

We first describe the modifications to the model in Section 2 with the two extensions intro-
duced in Section 6. Next, we state the aggregate equilibrium conditions of the model. Then,
we specialize the equilibrium conditions to the symmetric case. Finally, we specialize these
conditions to a steady state, and sketch an algorithm to solve for allocations and prices.
   Extending the basic model of Section 2
   We first introduce random exporting costs and fixed operating costs into the basic model
of Section 2.
    Let ξ t (z, nx ) ∈ {0, 1} be an indicator of the export decision of home firms with productiv-
                                                                                    R
ity z and fixed cost nx (it is 1 if the firm exports and 0 otherwise). Let xt (z) = ξ t (z, nx )dGx
be the fraction of home firms with productivity index z that export any output at all. Define
ξ ∗t , x∗t in the same manner. Then feasibility in production for intermediate good z in the
home country requires that
                                             at (z) + xt (z)Da∗t (z) = yt (z)
                    R
and that nf +           ξ t (z, nx )nx dGx units of the research good be used to pay fixed costs of
operation and exporting.
    Static profits, exclusive of fixed costs of production, are given by
                                       Z                      Z           Z
                                                    ∗ ∗
Πt (z) =         ∗
                   max
                     ∗
                                pa a + ξ(nx )dGx pa a − Wt l(nx )dGx − Wmt ξ(nx )nx dGx
         l(nx ),pa ,pa ,a,a ,ξ(nx )∈[0,1]
                                                                                                (10.1)
subject to
                                                                            1
                                            a + ξ(nx )Da∗ = exp(z) ρ−1 l(nx )

and demand functions
                                            µ        ¶−ρ                µ         ¶−ρ
                                                pa                  ∗       p∗a
                                     a=                    Yt and a =                   Yt∗ .
                                                Pt                          Pt∗
Note that it is not necessary to index prices pa , p∗a or quantities a and a∗ by nx . Clearly the
optimal choices of these variables does not depend of the level of the fixed cost of exports.
   The expected discounted present value of profits satisfies the Bellman equation

                                                 Vt (z) = max [0, Vto (z)]                      (10.2)



                                                               40
where

                  Vto (z) = max Πt (z) − Wmt nf − Wmt h exp (z) c (p) +                       (10.3)
                               p∈[0,1]
                                         Qt+1
                               (1 − δ)        [pVt+1 (z + s) + (1 − p)Vt+1 (z − s)] .
                                          Qt

Note here that Vt0 (z) is the value of choosing to operate the firm in period t. The firm exits if
this value falls below zero. Since Vt0 (z) is strictly increasing in z, it is clear that at each date
t, the decision of firms to operate (10.2) follows a cutoﬀ rule with firms with productivity
above a cutoﬀ z̄t choosing to operate and firms with productivity below that cutoﬀ exiting.
Note that if nf = 0, then Vto (z) = Vt (z) and z̄t = −∞.
   The feasibility constraint on labor in the home country is given by
                            Z Z
                                  lt (z, nx )dGx dMt (z) + Lmt = L                            (10.4)

and likewise in the foreign country.
   The feasibility constraint on the research good in the home country is
            Z µ       Z                                        ¶
   Met ne +      nf + ξ t (z, nx )nx dGx + h exp (z) c (pt (z)) dMt (z) = F (Xt , Lmt ),      (10.5)

and likewise in the foreign country.
   The evolution of the measure of operating firms Mt (z) over time, taking into account
endogenous exit, is given by

                         Mt+1 (z 0 ) = (G(z 0 ) − G(z̄t+1 ))Met +                             (10.6)
                                                Z z0 −s
                                       (1 − δ)          pt (z)dMt (z) +
                                                     z̄t+1 −s
                                                     Z   z 0 +s
                                           (1 − δ)                (1 − pt (z))dMt (z)
                                                     z̄t+1 +s

for z 0 ≥ z̄t+1 , and Mt+1 (z 0 ) = 0 for z 0 < z̄t+1 . The evolution of Mt∗ (z) for foreign firms is
defined analogously.
   Aggregate equilibrium conditions
   It is convenient to define four indices of aggregate productivity across firms. For home
firms these are
                           Z                                       Z
                   Zat =       exp(z)dMt (z) and Za∗ t =               exp(z)xt (z)dMt (z)    (10.7)


                                                     41
where the first of these is an index of productivity aggregated across all operating firms (recall
that Mt takes into account endogenous exit), and the second is an index of productivity across
all firms that export. Likewise, for the foreign firms we have
                         Z                            Z
                  Zb∗ t = exp(z)dMt (z) and Zbt = exp(z)x∗t (z)dMt∗ (z).
                   ∗                  ∗           ∗
                                                                                                           (10.8)

    The definition of the price index in the home country (2.5) and the analogous for the
foreign country imply
                                    "µ         ¶1−ρ        µ          ¶1−ρ #1/(1−ρ)
                          ρ               Wt                  Pt∗ Wt∗
                      1=                              Zat + D             Zbt∗      ,                      (10.9)
                         ρ−1              Pt                  Pt Pt∗
                                    "µ         ¶1−ρ           µ        ¶1−ρ       #1/(1−ρ)
                         ρ               Wt∗                    Pt W t
                     1=                               Zb∗∗ t + D ∗          Za∗ t          .              (10.10)
                        ρ−1              Pt∗                    Pt Pt
Labor market clearing requires that
         µ       ¶ρ µ ¶−ρ "           µ ¶−ρ            ∗
                                                         #
           ρ−1        Wt               Pt            Y
                             Yt Zat +       D1−ρ Za∗t t + Lmt = L                                         (10.11)
             ρ        Pt               Pt∗           Yt
           µ         ¶ρ µ         ¶−ρ     "           µ         ¶−ρ                 #
               ρ−1          Wt∗                           Pt∗             Y t
                                        Yt∗ D1−ρ                      Zbt∗ ∗ + Zb∗t
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                      + L∗mt = L∗ .       (10.12)
                ρ           Pt∗                           Pt              Yt
The first order conditions for the production of the research good implies
                                                F2 (Xt , Lmt )   Wt
                                                               =                                          (10.13)
                                                F1 (Xt , Lmt )   Pt
in the home country, and the analogous expression in the foreign country.
    Note that with our assumption of log-utility and common intertemporal prices Qt across
countries, the ratio of expenditure across countries Pt∗ Ct∗ /Pt Ct is constant over time with
that constant determined by the initial distribution of assets W̄ and W̄ ∗ . More precisely, we
have
                                              Q0                        Q0
                              Pt Ct = β t        P0 C0 and Pt∗ Ct∗ = β t P0∗ C0∗ .                        (10.14)
                                              Qt                        Qt
                                                                 ∗
    Hence, given expenditure in period 0 and measures Mt−1 (z), Mt−1 (z), the aggregates
{Zat , Za∗ t , Zbt∗ , Zb∗∗ t , Lmt , L∗mt , Xt , Xt∗ , Yt , Yt∗ , Ct , Ct∗ , Wt /Pt , Wt∗ /Pt∗ , Pt , and Pt∗ } are
the solution to these eight equations (10.9)-(10.14), the feasibility constraints for the final
good (2.11) in each country, and the free entry condition (2.10) in each country, with the
exit and export thresholds obtained from the solution of (10.2) and (10.3), the measures of

                                                                42
firms Mt (z) and Mt∗ (z) from (10.6), and the aggregate productivity indices from (10.7) and
(10.8). Firm entry Met in each country is solved for using the feasibility constraints for the
research good (10.5).
   Symmetric equilibrium
   From (3.3) and (3.4), home variable profits are given by Πdt exp (z) for domestic sales
and Πdt D1−ρ exp (z) for export sales, where
                                               (Wt )1−ρ (Pt )ρ Yt
                                       Πdt =                      .                          (10.15)
                                                ρρ (ρ − 1)1−ρ
Total static profits (10.1) are given by
                                     Z
                                         ©                           ª
               Πt (z) = Πdt exp(z) + max Πdt D1−ρ exp(z) − Wmt nx , 0 dGx .                  (10.16)

   Using conditions (10.9) and (10.11), aggregate output and the real wage are given by
                              £                ¤1/(ρ−1)
                         Yt = Zat + D1−ρ Za∗ t          (L − Lmt ) ,               (10.17)

and
                                        Wt   ρ − 1 Yt
                                           =             .                                   (10.18)
                                        Pt     ρ L − Lmt
   Symmetric Steady State
   We now describe how one can solve for the steady state allocations and prices in the
quantitative model. We normalize the aggregate price index P in each country to one.
               Πd
  1. Given     Wm
                  ,   solve for the Bellman equations described by (10.2) and (10.3) rescaled by
      the price of the research good Wm

                                          w (z) = max [0, wo (z)]                            (10.19)
                                                 Z     ½                      ¾
           o                     Πd                      Πd 1−ρ
         w (z) =     max            exp(z) − nf + max        D exp(z) − nx , 0 dGx
                 p∈[0,1], ξ(nx ) Wm                      Wm
                 −h exp (z) c (p) + (1 − δ)β [pw(z + s) + (1 − p)w(z − s)] ,    (10.20)

      and obtain the exit threshold z̄ defined by wo (z̄) = 0, and firms’ export and process
      innovations decisions. Note that in the absence of fixed operating costs, wo (z) = w(z)
      and z̄ = −∞. Note also that in steady state, the discount factor is given by β. Note
      also that, given our binomial process for z, we can solve the value functions in a discrete
      grid given by {zlow , zlow + s,zlow + 2s, ..., zhigh − s, zhigh }, where zlow and zhigh are the
      low and high truncation of the grid, that are suﬃciently large so that we can impose
      that z always belongs to the grid.

                                                   43
               Πd
2. Solve for   Wm
                    that satisfies the free entry condition
                                                  Z
                                           ne = β w(z)dG                              (10.21)

3. Compute the productivity measure normalized by the measure of entering firms, M (z) /Me ,
   using the steady state version of the law of motion for M, (10.6), and using z̄ and p (z)
   from 1.

4. Compute the aggregate productivity indices normalized by the number of entering
   firms, z̃a = Za /Me and z̃a∗ = Za∗ /Me :
                         Z                            Z
                                   dM(z)                          dM(z)
                    z̃a = exp(z)            and z̃a∗ = exp(z)x(z)       .             (10.22)
                                     Me                            Me
   Note that z̃, defined in words in Section 8, is given by z̃ = z̃a + D1−ρ z̃a∗ .

5. Solve for the remaining 6 aggregate unknowns, (W , Y , C, X, Lm , Me ) that satisfy the
   following 6 equations:
                                £ ¡                 ¢¤1/(ρ−1)
                             Y = Me z̃a + z̃a∗ D1−ρ           (L − Lm )               (10.23)
                                              ρ−1 Y
                                        W =                                           (10.24)
                                               ρ L − Lm
                                            C +X =Y                                   (10.25)
                                            λ X
                                                   =W                                 (10.26)
                                          1 − λ Lm
                                     Πd /Wm = κ (W )1−ρ−λ Y                           (10.27)

                                      ΥMe = (Lm )λ (X)1−λ ,                           (10.28)

   where 1/κ = ρρ (ρ − 1)1−ρ (λ)λ (1 − λ)1−λ , and Υ is given by
                             Z
                                                                 dM(z)
                   Υ = ne + [nf + x (z) nx + h exp (z) c(p(z)]         .
                                                                  Me
   Expressions (10.23) and (10.24) are the steady state versions of the expressions for out-
   put (10.17) and the real wage (10.18). Expression (10.25) is the resource constraint for
   the final good. Expression (10.26) combines the first order condition for the production
   of the research good (10.13) and the functional forms for F given by (4.3). Expression
                                                                    h             i−1
   (10.27) uses the definition of variable profits (10.15) and Wm = λλ (1 − λ)1−λ     Wλ
   (recall that we choose P as the numeraire). Finally, expression (10.28) is the steady
   state version of the resource constraint for the research good, given by (2.13).

                                              44
10.2. Appendix 2: Proof of Proposition 2

We use the steady state characterization of Appendix 1. When all firms export, z̃a = z̃a∗ .
We also have Π/Wm = Πd (1 + D1−ρ ) /Wm .
   First, given the result in Proposition 1 that process innovation decisions of firms (and
exit thresholds in the model with nf > 0) are unchanged with D in a steady state where all
firms export, z̃a , Π/Wm , and Υ are also unchanged with D.
   Second, Lm does not change with D. Starting from (10.27),


                     Π    κ (W )1−ρ Y (1 + D1−ρ )
                        =
                     Wm            (W )λ
                             ³ ´ρ−1
                               ρ
                          κ ρ−1        Y
                        =
                            (W )λ Me z̃a
                             ³ ´ρ−1 ¡        ¢
                               ρ          λ 1−λ
                          κ ρ−1          1−λ
                                                ΥY
                        =
                                   W Lm z̃a
                            µ      ¶ρ µ        ¶1−λ
                                 ρ           λ      Υ (L − Lm )
                        = κ                                     ,
                              ρ−1         1−λ       z̃a  Lm

where the first step combines (10.23) and (10.24), the second step combines (10.26) and
(10.28), and the third step uses (10.24). Clearly, given that Π/Wm is unchanged with D, Lm
is unchanged too.
   Third, we now have an expression for the number of entering firms Me . Starting again
from (10.27),

           Π    κ (W )1−ρ Y (1 + D1−ρ )
              =
           Wm             (W )λ
                   ³ ´ρ−1
                     ρ
                κ ρ−1          Y
              =
                  (W )λ Me z̃a
                   ³ ´λ+ρ−1
                     ρ
                κ ρ−1            Y 1−λ
              =                        (L − Lm )λ
                         Me z̃a
                  µ       ¶λ+ρ−1
                       ρ                                  ¡        ¢ 1−λ
              = κ                   (Me z̃a )(2−λ−ρ)/(ρ−1) 1 + D1−ρ ρ−1 (L − Lm )
                    ρ−1

where we used (10.23) and (10.24).
   From this expression we can see that if λ = 1, Me does not change with D. If λ < 1,


                                            45
given that Π/Wm , z̃a , and Lm are independent of D, Me is decreasing in D if and only if
ρ + λ > 2.

10.3. Appendix 3: Proof of Lemma

The first part of the Lemma follows by construction. The term Ad exp(z) with Ad given as
above represents the expected discounted present value of variable profits of a firm that sets
its process innovation decision p(z) to the constant p̄d and which never exports. Likewise,
the term Ax exp(z) with Ax given as above represents the expected discounted present value
of variable profits of a firm that sets its process innovation decision p(z) to the constant p̄x ,
which always exports, and which is so large that the fixed cost of exporting nx is a negligible
portion of its variable profits.
   For the second part of the Lemma, we show that Ad is increasing in Πd /Wm . Diﬀerenti-
ating (5.2):
             ∂Ad                             1                          ∂Ad ∂ p̄d
                     =                                                +               >0,
         ∂ (Πd /Wm )   1 − (1 − δ)β [p̄d exp(s) + (1 − p̄d ) exp(−s)]   ∂ p̄d ∂Πd /Wm

where we used the fact that process innovation choice is optimal, ∂Ad /∂ p̄d = 0, and (1 −
δ)β [p̄d exp(s) + (1 − p̄d ) exp(−s)] < 1 to guarantee that the discounted value of profits is
finite. This same logic can be used to show that Ax > Ad , Ax is increasing in Πd /Wm , and
Ax is decreasing in D.
   For the third part of the Lemma, we show that p̄d is increasing in Ad . Diﬀerentiating
(5.3):
                  ∂ p̄d ∂Ad    (1 − δ)                          ∂Ad
                              = 00       β [exp(s) − exp(−s)]         >0,
                  ∂Ad ∂Πd /Wm  hc (p̄d )                      ∂Πd /Wm
                    ∂Ad
where we used     ∂Πd /Wm
                            > 0, and the assumption that c00 (p̄d ) > 0. The same logic is used to
show that p̄x is increasing in Πd /Wm and decreasing in D.

10.4. Appendix 4: Solving transition dynamics.

Here we sketch how one can solve for the transition dynamics of our quantitative model in
response to a one time change in trade costs. We consider the case of symmetric countries.
   We first solve for the steady state value functions V (z), labor l(z, nx ) and export ξ(z, nx )
decisions, exit threshold z̄, process innovation decisions p (z), measure of firms M (z), aggre-
gate allocations {Y , C, X, Lm , Me }, prices {W, Wm } and profits Πd before and after the
change in international trade costs, as described in Appendix 1.

                                                 46
   We denote by t = 1 the period in which the trade cost changes to its new value. We
assume that the aggregate allocations and prices converge to the new steady state in T
periods, where T is suﬃciently high so that the resulting allocations are very insensitive
to increasing T . We normalize the price of the final good Pt to 1 every period. Then we
implement the following iterative procedure:

  1. Guess a sequence of variable domestic profits, research good prices, and interest rates
     {Πdt , Wmt , Qt+1 /Qt }Tt=1
                              −1
                                 .

  2. Solve for the value functions Vt (z) and Vto (z) from (10.2) and (10.3), with Πt (z) given
     by (10.16), and going backwards from t = T − 1 to t = 1. Note that in order to
     compute the value function at t = T − 1, we are using the new steady state value
     functions to compute the expected future values. Solving these value functions, we
     obtain the firms’ policy functions lt (z, nx ), ξ t (z, nx ), xt (z), z̄t , and pt (z).

  3. Obtain a new guess for the research good prices {Wmt }Tt=1 using the free entry condition
                                              h                    i1/λ
     (2.10), and a sequence of wages as Wt = λλ (1 − λ)1−λ Wmt          .

  4. For t = 1 to T − 1, moving forward:

        • Solve for Mt (z) using (10.6), given Mt−1 (z), Met−1 , and using the firms’ policy
           functions z̄t , pt (z) from 2. Note that at t = 1, Mt−1 (z) and Met−1 are given from
           the initial steady state.
        • Compute Zat , Za∗ t from (10.7), and L − Lmt from (10.4), using the firms’ policy
           functions lt (z, nx ) , xt (z) from 2. and the updated measures Mt (z) .
        • Compute Xt = (1 − λ) /λLmt Wt .
        • Solve for Met from (10.5).
        • Compute Yt and Ct using (10.17) and (2.11).

  5. Using the new values of {Yt ,Ct ,Wt }Tt=1 , update guesses for Πdt using (10.15), and
     Qt+1 /Qt = βCt /Ct+1 .

  6. If the initial and updated guesses for {Πdt , Wmt , Qt+1 /Qt } are not suﬃciently close,
     repeat 1. — 5.

   A similar logic can be used to solve for the transition dynamics in the asymmetric small
open economy.

                                                   47
                                           Table 1: Model Calibration

                                                                           1            2            3
                                                         US Data         b=3000        b=30         b=10

CALIBRATED PARAMETERS

 1    s , annualized                                                      0.25         1.25         2.25

 2     , annualized                                                     0.0055       0.0055       0.0055

 2    h      (or employment-based right-tail                            4.66E+40     4.01E-02     3.57E-01
              coefficient of large firms)                                ( -0.25 )    ( -0.25 )    ( -0.25 )

 4     e , annualized                                                     2.3          1.8          0.7

 5    D 1−                                                               0.231       0.231        0.231

 6    n̄ x                                                                 30           7.9        0.625

 7     nx , annualized                                                    0.6          0.5          0.3

TARGETS

 8    Employment growth rate of large firms,               25%            25%          25%          25%
      annual standard deviation

 9    Annual employment-based exit rate,                  0.55%          0.55%        0.55%        0.55%
      firms larger 500 employees

 10   Employment-based right tail coefficient,              -0.2          -0.20        -0.20        -0.26
      firms of size 1000 to 5000

 11   New firms, % employment of firms smaller             90%            90%          89%          86%
      than 500 employees

 12   Exports / GDP                                       7.50%           7.5%         7.5%         7.4%

 13   Employment share of exporters                        40%            40%          40%          40%

 14   Average switching rate, seven years                  12%            12%          12%          12%
    Table 2: Steady state and transition dynamics, 15% increase in exporter's trade intensity

                                                                   1             2               3
                                                                           Benchmark Model

   b Curvature parameter of C(p)                                b=3000         b=30         b=10




1 Exports / GDP (ratio of new to old SS)                          1.22         1.40             2.71

2 Output (ratio of new to old SS)                                1.001         1.003        1.019

3 Consumption (ratio of new to old SS)                           1.001         1.005        1.033

4 Average productivity index   z̃ (ratio of new to old SS)        1.02         1.14             9.07

5 Number of firms (ratio of new to old SS)                        0.99         0.88             0.11

6 Production employment (ratio of new to old SS)                 1.000         1.002        1.014

7 Exports / GDP , contemporaneous                                 0.98         0.54             0.14
  increase / SS increase

8 Welfare gain (equivalent variation)                            0.36%        0.38%         0.42%
                                                              Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis, Steady state and transition dynamics, 15% increase in exporter's trade intensity

                                                                   1           2           3                  4           5           6                   7           8              9       10          11          12
                                                                          Benchmark                           Higher trade share                     Lower substitution elasticity       Higher variance of entering firms
                                                                                                             exports / GDP = 0.15                                2

    b Curvature parameter of C(p)                               b=3000       b=30        b=10              b=3000       b=30        b=10               b=3000       b=30        b=10       b=3000       b=30       b=10


 1 Exports / GDP (ratio of new to old SS)                        1.22        1.40        2.71                1.21        1.33        1.90               1.22        1.40        2.71        1.20        1.33        2.44

 2 Output (ratio of new to old SS)                               1.001       1.003       1.019              1.004       1.007       1.023               1.006       1.024       1.152      1.002       1.003       1.009

 3 Consumption (ratio of new to old SS)                          1.001       1.005       1.033              1.004       1.010       1.036               1.006       1.028       1.195      1.002       1.004       1.014

 4 Average productivity index   z̃ (ratio of new to old SS)      1.02        1.14        9.07                1.04        1.25       60.67               1.02        1.14        9.07        1.02        1.09        3.72

 5 Number of firms (ratio of new to old SS)                      0.99        0.88        0.11                0.98        0.82        0.02               0.99        0.89        0.12        0.99        0.92        0.27

 6 Production employment (ratio of new to old SS)                1.000       1.002       1.014              1.000       1.002       1.014               1.000       1.005       1.044      1.000       1.001       1.005

 7 Exports / GDP , contemporaneous                               0.98        0.54        0.14                0.98        0.62        0.25               0.99        0.55        0.14        0.99        0.59        0.14
   increase / SS increase

 8 Welfare gain (equivalent variation)                          0.36%       0.38%       0.42%               0.80%       0.83%       0.92%              1.55%       1.81%        2.22%      0.37%       0.38%       0.40%




                                                                  13          14          15                  16          17          18                 19          20          21          22          23          24
                                                               Higher share of labor in                   Lower share of labor in                    Process innovation costs scaled       Learning by exporting
                                                               innovation ,       0. 95                 innovation ,      0. 25                     by total employment

    b Curvature parameter of C(p)                               b=3000       b=30        b=10              b=3000       b=30        b=10               b=3000       b=30        b=10       b=3000       b=30       b=10


 9 Exports / GDP (ratio of new to old SS)                        1.22        1.40        2.71                1.22        1.40        2.71               1.22        1.21        1.19        1.22        1.42        2.70

10 Output (ratio of new to old SS)                               1.001       1.005       1.032              1.001       1.002       1.011               1.001       1.000       0.999      1.001       1.009       1.076

11 Consumption (ratio of new to old SS)                          1.001       1.005       1.033              1.001       1.005       1.032               1.001       1.000       0.999      1.001       1.012       1.120

12 Average productivity index   z̃ (ratio of new to old SS)      1.02        1.14        9.07                1.02        1.14        9.07               1.02        1.01        0.98        1.02        1.16        8.61

13 Number of firms (ratio of new to old SS)                      0.985       0.880       0.114              0.986       0.879       0.112               0.99        0.99        1.02        0.99        0.88        0.13

14 Production employment (ratio of new to old SS)                1.000       1.003       1.024              1.000       1.001       1.007               1.000       1.000       1.000      1.000       1.004       1.049

15 Exports / GDP , contemporaneous                               0.98        0.54        0.14                0.98        0.54        0.14               0.99        1.02        1.23        0.99        0.52        0.12
   increase / SS increase

16 Welfare gain (equivalent variation)                          0.36%       0.37%       0.40%               0.35%       0.38%       0.42%              0.35%       0.20%        0.07%      0.36%       0.78%       2.23%
                                          Figure 1: Steady State, Inelastic Process Innovation (b = 3000)

                            Panel A: p(z) and fraction of exporters x(z)                   Panel B: Firm size distribution, employment-based, model (-) and US data 2003 (x)
           0.5                                                                      1                0



           0.4                                                                      0.75
                                                                                                      -0.5
p(z) (-)




                                                                                           x(z) (:)
           0.3                                                                      0.5


                                                                                                       -1
           0.2                                                                      0.25



           0.1                                                                      0                 -1.5
                  0         20       40       60        80        100        120                                 2         4           6        8             10
                                             (z-zbar)/s                                                                            Log employment



                      Panel C: Conditional growth rate, firms of size<100000                          Panel D: Exporters concentration: Model (-) and US data 2000 (x)
                                                                                                      0.5

           0.1
                                                                                                      0.4
       0.05
                                                                                                      0.3
             0

                                                                                                      0.2
     -0.05

                                                                                                      0.1
           -0.1

                                                                                                        0
              -2            0       2        4      6         8         10         12                        0          0.2        0.4          0.6        0.8       1
                                          Log employment                                                             Percent of exporters in decreasing size order
                                  Figure 2: Steady State, Moderately Elastic Process Innovation (b = 30)

                            Panel A: p(z) and fraction of exporters x(z)               Panel B: Firm size distribution, employment-based, model (-) and US data 2003 (x)
           0.5                                                                  1                0

                                                                                                  -0.2

           0.4                                                                  0.75              -0.4

                                                                                                  -0.6
p(z) (-)




                                                                                       x(z) (:)
           0.3                                                                  0.5               -0.8

                                                                                                   -1

           0.2                                                                  0.25              -1.2

                                                                                                  -1.4

           0.1                                                                  0                 -1.6
                  0         20         40         60       80       100                                      2         4           6        8             10
                                              (z-zbar)/s                                                                       Log employment



                      Panel C: Conditional growth rate, firms of size<100000                      Panel D: Exporters concentration: Model (-) and US data 2000 (x)
                                                                                                  0.5

           0.1
                                                                                                  0.4
       0.05
                                                                                                  0.3
             0

                                                                                                  0.2
     -0.05

                                                                                                  0.1
           -0.1

                                                                                                    0
                  0          2         4         6        8         10         12                        0          0.2        0.4          0.6        0.8       1
                                           Log employment                                                        Percent of exporters in decreasing size order
                                      Figure 3: Steady State, Highly Elastic Process Innovation (b = 10)

                            Panel A: p(z) and fraction of exporters x(z)               Panel B: Firm size distribution, employment-based, model (-) and US data 2003 (x)
           0.5                                                                  1                0



           0.4                                                                  0.75              -0.5
p(z) (-)




                                                                                       x(z) (:)
           0.3                                                                  0.5                -1



           0.2                                                                  0.25              -1.5



           0.1                                                               0                     -2
                  0           20          40         60           80       100                               2         4           6        8             10
                                            (z-zbar)/s                                                                         Log employment



                      Panel C: Conditional growth rate, firms of size<100000                      Panel D: Exporters concentration: Model (-) and US data 2000 (x)
                                                                                                  0.5

           0.1
                                                                                                  0.4
       0.05
                                                                                                  0.3
             0

                                                                                                  0.2
     -0.05

                                                                                                  0.1
           -0.1

                                                                                                    0
                  2            4           6        8             10           12                        0          0.2        0.4          0.6        0.8       1
                                         Log employment                                                          Percent of exporters in decreasing size order
                         Figure 4 : Transition Dynamics from a Decline in Marginal Trade Costs
                                                    Panel A: Exports / GDP

                       0.2

                                    b=3000
                      0.18
                                    b=30

                      0.16          b=10


                      0.14


                      0.12


                       0.1


                      0.08

                             0         50            100               150       200             250
                                                            Years




                                                     Panel B: Consumption

                      1.04

                     1.035

                      1.03

                     1.025
C / C Steady State




                      1.02

                     1.015

                      1.01

                     1.005

                        1

                     0.995

                      0.99
                             0         50            100               150       200             250
                                                            Years
