                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MEASURING ASPECTS OF FISCAL
                       AND FINANCIAL POLICY


                         Willem H. Buiter



                      Working Paper No. 1332




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 19814




Paper prepared for the International Seminar in Public Economics
held in February 19814 at the University of California at Santa
Cruz. Financial support from the Leverhulme Trust is gratefully
acknowledged Comments from the participants at the ISPE
Conference and especially from Stanley Fischer are gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies and project in Government
Budgets Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #1332
                                       April 1984




  Measuring Aspects of Fiscal and Financial Policy

                            ABSTRACT

     The paper develops a forward—looking comprehensive accounting

framework for the public    sector.   By integrating the public sector

budget constraint forward    in   time the government's present value

budget constraint (PVBC) is obtained. In addition to the familiar

financial   assets and liabilities, comprehensive public sector net

worth contains the following items: the value of the public sector

capital stock; the value of public sector property rights in land

and natural resources; the present value of future seigniorage, the

present value of future taxes net of transfers and subsidies and

the present value of future planned public sector capital formation,

privatization or nationalization programmes.



      From the "stock" PVBC   a   number of different "flow" deficit

concepts are derived; each one emphasizes a different aspect of the

"sustainability" of current and/or prospective fiscal and financial

plans. Together they provide a framework for organizing facts and

plans about fiscal, financial and monetary policy and for evaluating

the consistency of spending and revenue projections or scenarios,

public sector debt objectives and monetary targets.


                                          Willem H, Buiter
                                          London School of Economics
                                          Houghton Street
                                          EC2A 2AE, London
                                          England
           :asuri: aspects of fiscal   an financial poiicy

 I.   Introduction



      A sufficient reason for sendina one's students to read Blinder and

Solow's "Analytical Foundations of Fiscal Policy' (Blinder and Solow

[1974]) is that it Contains the clearest and most accessible statement

of the proposition that informative measures of the impact of fiscal and

financial policy actions or rules on the economy are "model—dependent'.

"Model—free" budget measures of varying ilk may ...   "supply   a number

summarizing the congeries of taxation and expenditure programs

(Blinder and Solow [1974, p. 12]); they are uninformative about the effects

of these programs on the economy. This holds for the uncorrected or "raw"

public sector financial deficit (level, change, percentage of GDP, at

current or at constant prices), for the cyclically corrected (full — or

high — employment deficit), for the inflation—corrected deficit and also

for the new budget measures I have proposed recently (Buiter [1983a, b

1984]), the "permanent deficit", the "constant net worth deficit" and the

constant permanent income deficit, which are discussed in Section II.



      Fiscal and financial policy impact measures summarize the effect

of the whole range of budgetary and/or financing decisions on the economy.

Such measures are, of course, functions of the model of the economy whose

"multipliers" are used in its construction. Examples are the "weighted

standardized surplus" proposed by Blinder and Solow [1974, p.23] and the

very similar demand weighted (i.e. adjusted for differences in marginal

propensities to spend on domestic output) and cyclically corrected deficit

measures calculated e.g. in the U.K. by the National Institute of Economic
and Social Research. The models that generate these articular

measures of the GDP effect of fiscal policy are static and Old-

Keynesian; output is always demand—determined and the treatment

of expectations ranges between the mechanical and the non—existent.

Any   particular   measure itself may therefore not be of great

interest. The iron law: no model — no fiscal and financial impact

measures, is or should be of interest.



      Conceptually there is no problem. Those fortunate enough to work

with very small models solve them analytically; all others simulate

numerically their preferred model(s) of the economy under different

values for the fiscal and financial policy parameters. The

differences between the solution trajectories under alternative

policy instrument values or alternative policy rules, or the

differences between the statistics that characterize the solution

trajectories, are ones measures of fiscal impact. Such measures

of fiscal and financial impact will therefore be model-dependent.

They will vary over time, as represented e.g. by a complete series

of dynamic multipliers ,      from impact to steady state. If

forward—looking expectations are important, these measures will

be functions of the date on which a particular policy action

(or rule change) was first anticipated, of its anticipated degree

of permanence and, with risk—averse behaviour, of the degree of

confidence with which these expectations are held.
      The practical problems in implementing this approach are almost
              1/
overwhelming. The purpose of this paper is therefore much more

modest. It does not aim to develop measures of fiscal stance or of

fiscal impact. Instead it outlines a forward-looking accountina

framework for the public sector, organized around this sectors

present value budget constraint. It represents a useful framework for

organizing facts, plans, expectations and scenarios about fiscal and

financial (including monetary) policy and for performing consistency

checks between the various components of the fiscal and financial

programme. Section II sets out the accounting framework. Section III

relates some deficit concepts suggested by the accounting framework

to the cnventional public sector deficit measures. Section IV

contains a few illustrations of the uses to which the approach can be

put and Section V discusses some further issues and complications.



II.    Measuring sustainability and consistency

       a framework for fiscal and financial planning.



       The starting point for the analysis is the conventional public

sector budget constraint given in equation (1). It consolidates the

accounts of the budgetary and monetary authorities (the Treasury and

the Central Bank) and of the nationalized industries.



                                                        M +B +   pc C   —   EF*
        iB  C             i*EF*
(1) g+K-T+— +—                    _PKK_PNN+PNN


1. Blanchard [1983a,b} develops relatively simple measures of fiscal
    impact on aggregate demand for a model with forward—looking
    rational expectations.
g is public sector consumption; K the public sector capital stock;

T taxes net of transfers; i the instantaneous nominal interest

rate on government bonds; B the stock of fixed nominal market value,

variable nominal interest rate bonds; p the general price level;

C the number of consols paying a coupon of one unit of currency;

i'' the foreign nominal interest rate on fixed foreign currency market

value bonds; E the spot price of foreign exchange; F* the stock of

foreign currency denominated assets of the government; K the real

net rental (after depreciation) per unit of public sector capital; N

the real return on a share in public sector natural resource property

rights; N the number of public sector shares in natural resource

property rights; N the real price of a unit of R; M the nominal

stock of non—interest bearing high—powered money and PC the price of

a consol, For any variable x, x            x .   The R.H.S. of equation (1)

corresponds to the British public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR)

which puts asset sales   (   - N)   above the line rather than below it,

when these asset sales involved the loss of a controlling interest by

the government.



     We also establish the further notation: W, real public sector

comprehensive net worth; K' real value of a unit of public sector

capital if it stays in the public sector; T, present value of future

expected taxes net of transfers;     II the real capital value of the

state's note issue monopoly; Z, the present value of the government's

future planned investment programme; G, the present value of the

government's future planned consumption programmeand r, the instantaneous

real rate of interest.
                                                                     5




           It is assumed that anticipated real rates of return on non—money

assets are equalized. Anticipations of the future are single—valued and

held with complete subjective certainty. For any variable x, x(s,t)

is the value of x at time s, anticipated as of time t, i.e.

x(s,t)            Ex(s) where Et is the expectation operator conditional on

information available at time t. We assume that x(s,t) =                                                  x(s)   s <   t,
i.e. the past and present are known with certainty.




           r(t) =     i(t)                        =              +
                                                                         P0:)          -   p(t,t)
(2)
                                                       p(t)

                  =   i*(t)   +   c(t,t)          —   p(t,t)     =       PN(t) +   PN(tlt)     =      PK(t)      +
                                                                                                                     PK(t,t)
                                      (t)              p(t)              PN(t)     PN(t)              PK(t)




            From equations (1) and (2) we can derive, after some rearranging of

terms, by forward integration, the present value budget constraint (PVBC)
                                                                2/
or comprehensive balance sheet constraint of the public sector.




 -    We could of course integrate the budget constraint "at current prices" to
      get an equivalent expression to (3) but involving discounting future
      iominal flows using nominal interest rates. E.g. the simplified budget
                                                      M+E
      constraint g                    —   T   =               can be integrated forward to yield


                                                                             —ii(u,t)du                                     —1i(u,t)du
                  +3(t)           I                        t                                          (
                                                                                                          i(s,t) M(s,t)e
                                                                                                                               t
           M(t)               —
                                  :p(s,t)(g(s,t) —T(s,t))e                                    ds-t-

                                  t
                                                                                  S
                                                                                 —f i(u,t)du
                                          + Lirn      I M(s,L)       3(s,t) ]e
                                                                                   t
                                                                           IMt) +B(t)         +p (t)C(t) -     L(t)F*(t)
(3)    G(tl    E                    K(t)           PN(t) N(t)                                      p(t)
                                                                                                                           )




                                            + T(t)             11(t)      +    Z(t) + (t)




                                           S


(4a)   G(t)
                   (
                            g(s,t)e
                            -
                                       -f
                                           t r(u,t)du ds
                   t
                   )




                                           S

                                           t r(u,t)du
                                       -f
                   I
(4b)   T(t) E               T(s,t)e                             ds
                   t



                                                           S
                                                       —f      r(u,t)du
(4c)   11(t)
                                       M(s,t)
                            i(s,t) p(s,t)             e                         ds.
                   J
                   t


                                                                       S
                                                                     -f       r(u,t)du
(4d)   Z(t)                 (p(s,t)         -1) K(s,t)e                                  ds.
                   J



                                           -f      r(u,t)du
                   r
(4e)                                                            ds
       PK(t) E
                   J
                            PK(stt)e
                   t
                                               S


(4i
                       I                    t r(u,t)du
                                           —f
                                                                ds.
       PN(t)       j
                            PN(s,t)e
                   t
                              S                                                                S
                       OD    —f     i(u,t)du                                                  -f   r(u,t)du
                                t                                          1      1
(4g)
       p(t)
                            e                       ds =       p(t)             p(s,t)
                                                                                          e                   ds.
                   J
                                    M(s,t) + B(s,t) ÷ p (s,t) C(s,t) —
                                                      C                   E(S,t)F*(S,t)
 (4h)                 =   urn
                                L                         p(s,t)
                                                                         C

                                                                   —v
                                                                        -f r(u,t)du
                                    — PK1ts,t)       P(Srt)N(5t)jC




             2(t) is determined by the terminal boundary condition in the solution

of the first—order linear differential equation that yields (3). It is

conventionally set equal to zero.



             If the real interest rate r exceeds the natural rate of growth of

output, n, this terminal condition is implied by the weak requirement
                                                                             M + B +      -
that    the ratio of marketable public sector wealth [PKK+PNN_
                                                                                              J

to   trend output iijus bounded. If the real interest rate lies below

the natural growth rate, however, honest Ponzi games (servicing existing

debt through further borrowing) are feasible and the condition (t) = 0

is arbitrary and ad-hoc.               r < n is possible as the competitive equil-

ibrium outcome in an overlapping generations model without intergenerational

gift and bequest motives (Diamond [19651). If a child-to-parent gift

motive is operative in a stationary equilibrium of a Diamond—type over-

lapping generations model with gifts and bequests, then this stationary

equilibrium must be characterized by dynamic inefficiency, i.e. r < n

(Buiter [1980], Carmichael [1982]).



            In what follows I assume, with a somewhat uneasy conscience, that
                 3/
        =   0.

3.      See page 8.
Footnote 3

Consider the simplified budget constraint g(t) +r(t) b(t) -T(t)                               =   b(t).
Bonds. are short and index-linked. Let g E                      1 ,b     — ,T     E   - ; g,       T   and
                                                                y        y            y

r are constant while y grows at the exogenously given rate n.                                      The

foward—looking present value budget constraint doesn't exist if n >                                    r
as can be seen by inspecting


b(t)    =   lim
                  I
                          J(t-g)e' '     " ' ds
                                 (v_r\ (1—c
                                                    +
                                                             (—r
                                                        b(T)e' '                 It is however clear
            T-°           t

                      -                 (r-n) (t—t 0)           -—       (r-n)   (t—t0) —
that   since b(t) =            b(t0)e                    +
                                                             (gT) Ll_e                    i

the    debt-output ratio is perfectly well—behaved f or any finite

"fundamental" deficit g— t ,                   with     a steady-state value of

One obvious "physical" constraint is 0 < g <                      1 .   The choice of

borrowing vs. taxes depends exclusively on distributional criteria

and on the relative efficiency costs of debt vs. tax financing. Taxes

need never be levied and may indeed be negative forever. Stanley Fischer

provided me with the example and the insights it contains.
11(t) is the present value of the profits earned by the central bank by

investing its entire expected portfolio at each future date (the

counterpart of its liability M) in interest-bearing assets. Integrating

(4c) by parts we find that



(5a)    11(t)   =   S(t)   +     M(t)
                                 p(t)
                                      5                                                      S
                                   —fr(u,t)du                                               —fr(u,t)du
(Sb)    S(t)
                    I   M(s,t)    e                 ds =        M(s,t) M(s,t)           e                ds
                    j   p(s,t)                             J    M(s,t)      p(s,t)
                    t                                      t




S(t) is the present value of current and future seigniorage. It follows

that (3) can be rewritten as




(6a)    G(t)        W(t)


                                                               (B(t) +p (t)C(t) _(t)F*(t))
(6b)    w(t)        PK(t) K(t) +                  N(t) -
                                          PN(t)                                  p(t)

                                                     +   T(t)    +   S(t)   +   z(t)



       Equations (6a, b) characterize consistent fiscal and financial plans.

By analogy with the present value budget constraint of a private agent,

we arrange the public sector P.V.B.C. so that, in present value terms, the

government's consumption programme, G, must be equal in value to its

comprehensive net worth, W. The question whether it makes any sense to

speak of a net worth constraint for the public sector, is addressed below.
     Tangible assets, K, R and F*, tangible liabilities M, B, and C

and intangible assets T, fl and Z make up public sector net worth, W.

Note, from the definition of Z in (4d) that government wealth is a

function of the future public sector capital formation programme only

to the extent that the shadow price of public sector capital, p,, differs
                                4/
from its opportunity cost, 1.        If public and private sectors use

capital with equal inefficiency, public sector capital formation does

not alter public sector net worth. Also, privatization of public sector

assets or nationalization of private assets (both at market prices)

affect public sector net worth only to the extent that the assets are

used with differing degrees of efficiency in the public and private sectors..



       Equations (6a, b) make clear how a government can finance a planned

increase in the present value of its consumption programme.. It can

raise the present value of planned future taxes net of transfers T or the

present value of its future seigniorage, S (the "inflation tax"). This

higher inflation tax will require a higher proportional rate of money

growth (in a stationary equilibrium) unless the inflation elasticity of

the demand for real money balances is negative and greater than unity in

absolute value. With K and R predetermined, an increase in K (say

brought about by an increase in the efficiency with which public sector

capital is operated) or in       (say through an oil discovery or an increase

in the price of oil) can raise pKK and pRR respectively..



       W can further be increased discontinuously at a point in time by



4. Note that     could be negative, e.g. if the public sector enterprises
    operating the public capital are secular loss makers.      is only
    the net cash return to the public sector.
                                        ii




completely or partially defaulting on the financial liabilities M, B

and C, either formally or de facto by engineering an upward jump in

the price level (which is possible in new classical flex—price models)

or a downward jump in          through current announcements of future

policy actions. Revaluation of foreign currency—denominated assets

(if a change in the real exchange rate can be engineered) is another

mechanism for altering W discontinuously, as is the announcement, if

K + 1,    of a change in the future public sector capital formation

programme or in future planned privatization or nationalization.



         Equations (6a, b) are a convenient accounting framework for

evaluating the consistency of current and future spending, tax and

transfer plans with the monetary targets, the future capital formation

programme, and the inherited stocks of tangible real and financial

assets and liabilities. They represent a feasthility or consistency

check on alternative fiscal and financial scenarios.



      Note that there are likely to be behavioural relationships linking

together the various items in equations (6a, b). E.g. in a Keynesian

world a cut in the spending programme G(t) may lower effective demand

and output, reduce the tax base and thus T, even at given tax rates. In

an economy characterized by financial crowding out (the displacement of

private capital by public sector interest-bearing debt) an increase in
B+p cC
           may reduce T etc.
  p
Sustainable or consistent fiscal and financial plans



       The government comprehensive balance sheet constraint or present

value budget constraint contains all the information required for an

evaluation of the sustainability of fiscal and financial plans, the

consistency of spending, revenue raising and monetization objectives,

etc. Almost the same information that is contained in this stock

constraint, however, can be expressed in the form of "flow" budget

constraints.



       First consider an infeasible or inconsistent plan. This will

be characterized by G —         W   +    0.     Such an excess or shortfall of

spending over resources will of course not be observed. Something

will adjust to re-establish equality, whether this takes the form of

changing G or W or both.



       Some interest attaches to the perpetuity equivalent or annuity

value of this present value deficit or surplus. This is given by the

"permanent deficit", D.



(7)        D(t)     R(t) [G(t) —        w(t)   I




           where
                            $
                                                    1 —1
                           —J   r(u,t)du
                    Ir
(8)        R(t) E     je                       ds
                    Lt


R(t)   is the coupon yield on an index-linked ("real") consol or the long

real rate of interest.
            D, the permanent share deficit, gives the constant proportion of

  capacity output, y, represented by the present value deficit or

  surplus. It is given by



  (9)       D(t)     R(t) [G(t) — W(t)       I




            where


            -
                                 -f[r(u,t) -n(u,t)]du        -1

(lOa)       R(t) =           e                          ds
                         t
                     L


            and



(lOb)       n(t) =   y(t)/y(t)



        The expression "permanent deficit" involves a mild abuse of language

 as this deficit will not materialize, let alone be permanent. It does

 however represent the permanent adjustment that must be made, either to
                          5/
 spending or to receipts.



        There are two other informative and             convenient   measures of fiscal and

 financial plans: the constant net worth deficit and the constant permanent

 income deficit.




        It is easily checked that the expected rate of change of public sector




5.      I   am indebted to Stanley Fischer for clarifying these issues.
net worth is given by


(11)       w(t,t) =     r(t)   W(t) -     g(t)


        The current level of public sector consumption can be said tc

be sustainable if it keeps comprehensive net worth constant ex—ante.

This will be the case when current public consumption equals the

short real interest rate times comprehensive net worth, i.e. when

g(t) =   r(t) w(t).        The constant net worth deficit is then given by




(12)          DW(t) E   — W(t,t)     =   g(t)    r(t) W(t)



         If ones criterion of the sustainability of current consumption

involves a constant (ex—ante) ratio of net worth to capacity output,

the sustainable consumption level is given by g(t) =         r(t)   W(t) where

r =    r-n.     The constant net worth share deficit can then be defined as




(13)          DW(t) =     g(t)   —   r(t)   W(t).




         The level (share) of consumption consistent with constant net

worth (a constant net worth share) will of course be subject to

anticipated fluctuations over time if the short real interest rate

varies over time. An alternative permanent income approach to defining

sustainability therefore suggests itself (see Miller [19821, Miller

and Babbs [19831).          The highest indefinitely sustainable constant

level of public sector consumption (or permanent income) is given by

multiplying net worth by the long real interest rate:
                                           15




(14)   g(t)       R(t) W(t)



       The anticipated rate of change of permanent income is



(15)   g(t,t) =    R(t) (g(t) — g(t))


       The constant permanent income deficit is then defined as



(16)   fl(t) =     g(t)   —   g(t)    =   g(t)   —   R(t) W(t)


       Finally, if a constant sustainable share of public sector

       consumption in capacity output is taken as one's criterion

       for the sustainability of current consumption, the constant

       permanent income share deficit D(t) suggests itself:



(17)   Dt(t) =     g(t)       R(t) W(t)




       If DW(t) (DW (t) )        is   positive, comprehensive net worth W

is falling (the ratio of public sector comprehensive net worth to

capacity output        is falling). This decline in W ()            can
                   y
                                            -

manifest itself in different ways. If PKKI PRR, — , T,                  S and

Z all remained constant (continued to grow at the natural rate n(t) )

the decline in W       (in      )     would come about through an increase in
                        y                                        B+pC
the real stock of interest bearing public sector debt                     (an

increase in the ratio of interest-bearing debt to capacity GNP). In
most models that 5 not exhibit debt neutrality, such an increase in

the real debt burden causes financial crowding out. The degree and

time pattern of such financial crowding out is of course model-specific.



          If D(t) (D Ct) )             is   positive, government permanent income

(the ratio of government permanent income to capacity output) is
                                                  SF *
declining.     If e.g. R[pKK + pRR           +           +T   + S + ZI   were constant
      -
(if   R[pK +   pR   ÷        +   T +   S +   Z]     were constant) the unsustainability

would show up through an increase in the real cost of debt service
    (B+p C)
R              (through an increase in the real cost of debt service as
       p
a proportion of capacity output).



       Note that        will coincide with DW if R=r and that D will
                       W
be the same as D           if R=r.


       To construct these various deficit concepts (except for the

permanent deficit in (7) and the permanent share deficit in (9),

government current spending on goods and services was singled out from

all other outlays and receipts. This reflects the view that the path

of public sector consumption spending over time is one of the four

central concerns of fiscal policy. Two of the other three —                      distribution
of income and wealth between agents, groups or classes and the efficiency

losses associated with non—lump sum taxes, transfers and subsidies -

cannot be addressed within a highly aggregative accounting framework.
The last -    fiscal    and financial stabilization policy - may make use of this

accounting framework, but only as one input among many. It should be clear
however that the sustainability of any spending programme can be

evaluated simply by transferring the present value of the relevant

outlays (e.g. transfers plus subsidies) to the left—hand—side of

the PVBC in (6a). The augmented present value of spending aggregate

G, say, and the correspondingly augmented comprehensive wealth

aggregate W ,         say, can then be put through their paces as in equations
(12) ,   (13)   ,   (16) and (17)



III      "Deficit corrections"



         One instructive way of looking at these new proposed deficit

measures is by listing the "corrections" required to go from the

conventional PSBR to the new measures. In equations CiBa, b) I list

the steps to go from the PSBR to                Ct) and      (t) respectively.

To get to D or DW instead, simply replace R by R (18a) and

r by r in (18b) and omit n(t) in (18b). To obtain D, the

permanent share deficit given in (9) simply add R(t)G(t) -g(t) on the right-

hand side of (iSa).                 This substitutes the perpetuity value of the

future consumption programme (corrected for trend output growth) for

current consumption. To get D, the permanent deficit given in (7),

from (18a) replace R by R in (iSa) and add R(t)G(t) —            g(t)   on the right-

hand—side. Since government consumption spending in the U.K. has tended

to grow in recent decades at the trend rate of growth of output, D and

      should not be too different from each other.
(iSa) D(t) = PSBR(t)                             -
                                                      p(t)          N(t) -
                                                                                  PK(t)
                                                                                             K(t) +   [Rft)    -   i(t)      I




                                        i             1       p(t)    C(t)           -                        c(t)F*(t)
                                                                                                              _________
              +        IR(t) —                        I                           — (R(t)      —

                       [                             ]             p(t)                                            p(t



              —
                   (t           —
                                        p(t)

                                        P:(t)
                                                          )               N (t)




              —
                      (t)       —
                                        p       (t)

                                        p(t) ) P(t)                       N(t) —     (R(t)         T(t) —     T(t)) — Rft)                  S(t).

              —        [R(t)    Z(t) —
                                                     (pK(t)
                                                                    — 1) K(t) I


(18b)       W(t) = PSBR(t) -       N(t) -                                                k     (
                                                                                                   p(t,t)     + n(t)
                                                                                                                                 B
                             PN(t)

                                            1
                                                              p(t)C(t)                              p(t,t)            (t,t)                  c(t)F*(t)
                  + (t —                                                           + In(t)+                    —                        1
                                        p(t)
                                                          )
                                                                   p(t)                             p(t)              E(t)              J      p(t)

                  -.
                       (rt          — PK(t)
                                        p(t)              )   p(t)        K(t)



                           —            PN(t)                                            —                                       -
                  — (r(t)           —
                                                (t)           p (t) N(t) —
                                                               N
                                                                                     (r(t)         T(t)   —
                                                                                                              T(t))      —       r(t)       S(t).
                                            N
                  —     [r(t)       Z(t) —                                1) K(t)}




           Since D (t) is probably the more interesting of the two measures,

 we shall concentrate on it. The figures are strictly back—of—the envelope

 and    are       for illustrative purposes only. Taking the corrections to the

 PSBR in (18a) in turn:

 —                 This is a proxy for t—ose net sales of existing public sector
     PNN

 assets that should be added to the PSBR to get the public sector financial

 deficit (PSFD) on a national accounts basis.
— PK          g(t) in (19 a, b)    is public sector consumption spending. Many

categories of exhaustive public spending possess characteristics both of

consumption and capital formation. In the illustrative figures for the

U.K. given in Table 1 I finesse these problems by following standard

national income accounting conventions. On this basis, estimates of

public sector net capital formation (at replacement cost) which should

be subtracted from the PSBR and PSFD as one of the steps to get to

are available in the U.K.



              B               pC
+ (R - 1)     — + (R   —   —)      this   is not merely an inflation and real
              P            Pc P
growth correction but also involves the permanent income smoothing
                                                    6/
reflected in the use of the long real interest rate.    (This last step

is omitted in (19b).) In public sector permanent income, debt service

on the bond debt should be evaluated by multiplying the real long run

(consol)rate of interest net of the natural growth rate, R(t), into the
market value of all bonds. Estimates for this correction for the U.K.
and   a    discussion of its methodological foundations are given in Miller
[1982] and in Miller and Babbs [1983]. They are reproduced here in Table I.

      - j*) CF*
            —   This corrects for chanaes
—
     (R   —
             p                        - in the domestic currency
value of foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities as well as
for domestic inflation, real growth and              permanent income smoothing.
It is very important for a number of LDC's which have borrowed externally
in dollars or other hard currencies.          (See Buiter 119831 .)   Its   significance
for   the U.K. and U.S. is likely to be quite minor.




6.        For conventional inflation corrections see Siegel 11979] ,        Threadgold
          and Taylor 1 1979] and Cukierman and Mortensen 1 1983 1
— (f      —
              I)p K
              —           It is difficult to assess the size and   maanituh of
the     excess of current income from public capital over p?rmanent income

and I do not attempt to do so. It is likely to be strongly procyclical.


      -
— (P.     -   —) PNN      North   Sea oil revenues are currently at or near their

exrected peak value. While in the mid and late seventies current oil

revenue fell short of its permanent value (as perceived at the time) this

situation is now reversed. The figures in Table 1 are merely illustrative

but are quite conservative, in the sense that they are more likely to

understate permanent oil revenue.



    (RT — T)              It should be clear that current taxes net of transfers
T(t) is likely to be a poor proxy for R(t) T(t). The most important
"corrections' to T(t) required to obtain a better approximation to R(t) T(t)
are the following:


(a)       "Cyclical" corrections to tax receipts and transfer payments.

          The yield from several major taxes (income taxes, national

          insurance contributions, VAT, corporation tax)     varies   inversely

          with   cyclical deviations of economic activity from its full
          employment,   trend or natural level. The optosite correlation
          holds for such transfer payments as unemployment benefits. Cyclical
          corrections to the conventionally measured deficit are, from
          this perspective, desirable not because they provide a better
          approximation to the short—run demand effect of the budget, but as
          one step towards the calculation of public sector permrient income
          or of the permanent deficit.
                                                                                 1/
      in   Table 1 I use the II"s estimates of the cyclical correction.

      These are very conservative in that they do not assign a zero

      cyclical correction to 1979 but instead assume the cyclically

      corrected deficit to be            of GDP larger than the actual deficit

      in l79 and 1.4% of GDP in 1980.



      This seems to indicate an expectation of a normal unemployment

      rate in the U.K. of 8 or 9 per cent. The Institute of Fiscal
                 8/
      Studies,        on the other hand, while coming up with very similar

      year—to—year changes in the cyclical correction, puts its level

      2 to 2½    percentage points of GDP higher. What matters for the
      sustainability     calculation is that a reasonable proxy for the
      expected average future levels of capacity utilization and unemp-
      loyment    be used. These levels may well be functions of the fiscal

      policies   adopted by the authorities and     need   not be equal to any
      "natural" or "full employment" values.


(b) There may be planned,       projected or exnected changes in the scale

      and scope of certain tax and benefit programmes. E.g. under existing

      legislation governing contributions and benefits, the greying of

      the U.K. population implies a growing excess of pension payments

      over contributions. Similar concerns have been voiced in the U.S.

      While   one could try   to make   some further rough structural or demographic
      corrections to the "cyclically corrected" tax and transfer total,
      I have not done so in Table I.


 7. 1MF World Economic Outlook.
 8.   John Kay 11983]
-                  The perpetuity value of future seignioraae revenue is not

so easily determined. Following the definition of S(t) given in (Sb)

one must estimate future government plans for monetary base growth

and future demands for real hich—nowered money balances



Note that



                                                                —f[r(u,t) — n (u,t)]du
           S(t) =
      R(t) —            R(t)   I   M(s,t)        M(S,t)     e                            ds.
                               ) M(s,t)              —
                y(t)                          p(s,t) y(s,t)




If both the rate of monetary growth and the income velocity of circul-

ation       of money are expected to be constant, then
            R(t) S(t) =       ... permanent seigniorage income relative
to trend output equals its current value. I will make this assumption,
but the overall outcome is not very dependent on it as the amounts involved
are fairly small.

—           —
                       1) K)                       This corrects for the excess of
the    current efficiency loss associated with public sector caDital
formation over its permanent                value. I have not tried to put a figure

on    it.
                        23




p)



     =
            —J
                  -                        :
(D          —
U)



0'
(V
             I
                              Net Public Sector
                              Capital Formation
                              Correction
                              K                         C)

                                                        C)

                         Permanent Debt Service         I-
                         and exchange rate              I—
                  ,      correction                     0
                  0
            aD                — B + ER-
                                     —  1
                                        —
                                                   p
                                                   —    0
     I-ri
                         +1   R-i] —
                                   P
                                          J
                                         Pc
                         -[   _j*J                      (V

                                                              tIj
                                                        (V
                                                        N
             I    I
                         North Sea Oil Correction
                  I-.
                  -.4                P                  CD

            8     8
                                     R                  CD

            +     +                                     I-
                         Cyclical Correction            c)
                                                        I-"
            )     .-J          -                        rt
            8     8          -(RT-T)
                         Structural and Demographic
                         Tax—Trans fer Correction.



             I    I
                         Permanent
            0
                              -s
                         Seigniorage Correction

                        Perin.capital formation effi
                        correction -(RZ- (PK_l)K)

            .0
            I-'
            0     0
                                              (V
                                                   (V


                        —                     0
                                                   D
                                                   (V
                         dP                   rf
                         0
SOURCES:




- PSBR, PSFD      :    ET May 1983, 56

—                 :    E]ue Book   Y82 cd. 1.7 1cr 17&-18i.
                       1982 on eztim.t€.



—   Permanent   Debt Service Correction: Miller and Babbs 11983 1.


—   North Sea Oil Correction: Own calculations based on NIER, May 1983.

                      F,J.   Atkinson, S.J. Brook and S.G.F. Hall,

                      "The Economic Effects of North Sea Oil", pp 38—44;

                      IFS, John Kay ed., The Econoy and the 1983 Budget;

                      M.P. Devereux, "Changes in the Taxation of North Sea

                      Oil", pp. 75—79.



-   Cyclical   Correction: IMF World Economic Outlook, 1982, Table 49, p.1E7.



—   Permanent Seigniorage Correction: Monetary base x long—run real rate;

                      Source: Miller & Babbs 119831
     Adopting the IFS cyclical correction instead of the one ca1cu1ate

by the IMF would lower the permanent deficit by 2 to 2     per cent of GDP
compared to the figures in the last column of Figure II. Together with

a slightly more generous estimate of the permanent income from North Sea

oil this would generate a 5 or 6 per cent of GD? permanent surplus in

1982. This would leave room for a sizeable sustainable increase in the

share of public consumption spending in trend GDP over its current level

and/or a cut in taxes or increase in transfer payments. Alternatively

the government could choose to indulge in a bout of financial "crowding

in", using its "permanent" surplus to reduce the real stock of interest—

bearing   debt. The U.K. economy, unlike the USA, would appear to have had
a lot of fiscal elbow room in 1981 and 1982.


      One advantage of the PVBC approach and of the various deficit

measures I have derived from it, is that they permit one to make

sense of many of the corrections to the conventionally measured deficit

that have been proposed in a more ad-hoc manner in the literature. Among

these are "inflation corrections" (Siegel [1979], Taylor and Threadgold

[1979]; Jump [1980]; Boskin [1982]; Buiter [1982a, b ; 1983]   ;   Miller
[1982]; Miller and Babbs [1983]; Cukierman and Mortensen [1983] )

permanent cost of debt service corrections (Miller [1982] ,    Miller   and

Babbs [1983]), corrections for public sector capital formation (Buiter

[1982 (a, b) ,   1983], Boskin [1982], Hills [1984]), corrections for
certain intangible assets and liabilities (Boskin [1982], Hills [1984])and

cyclical corrections.
IV    Some applications



      Eventual Monetization


      The apparatus developed here can be applied to the calculation of

the long—run" monetary growth rate implied by the fiscal stance.



      From (6a, b) and (5b) it follows that



                                             S
                                            -f r(u,t)du
                      M(s,t)     M(s,t) e                 ds =   G(t)
      5(t)
                 J    M(s,t)     p(s,t)
                 t



                      r                                     (B(t)   +p (t)C(t) _E(t)F*(t))
                                                                      c
                 -                                                                         +
                               K(t) +pR(t) R(t) +T(t)
                      ;PK(t)                                              p(t)                 Z(tfl




      This tells us what the amount of revenue to be raised through

seigniorage (the "inflation tax") is (in present value terms) given

the spending Drogramme and the government's tangible and intangible

non-monetary assets and liabilities. Solving this for a constant rate

of monetary growth               and a constant income velocity of circulation

V E          yields
                         G(t) -     T(t)            pK(t)t) +p (t)R(t)                   Z(t)
(19)        =    VR(t)                      -                                        -
                             y(t)                              y(t)
                                                                                 -
                                                                                         y(t)

                             B(t) +    p(t)C(t)          —   E(t)F*(t)
                         +
                                           p(t)   y(t)




        If the long-run inflation rate is governed by the rate of growth

of the money supply, say              =      - n,    and if the inflation elasticity of

velocity is less than unity, a higher monetary growth rate and a higher

rate of inflation are implied by a higher present value of public spending

relative to non-monetary assets and liabilities. Only if the public

sector's consumption and tax programmes, together with its non—monetary

assets and liabilities, imply a high value of                            in (19), is a fiscal

correction a necessary condition for achieving credibility for an anti—

inflationary policy. If we consider only stationary long-run equilibria,

(19) becomes




        H           -i     (PKK+PRR+Z                        (B+pcC_F*))             ______
                 V ——(r—n)i
(19')
                                                                                                i
             =                                       —
                                                                            J+
                   L
                                —                                —                      —




Eventual monetary growth is governed in steady state by the trend public
sector current account (or consumption account) deficit, with debt service

evaluated at the real interest rate net of the natural rate of growth.

This deficit measure can differ dramatically from the conventionally measured

public sector financial deficit or PSBR, which is often and erroneously
taken as an indicator to eventual monetization.                   (See Sarqent

[1931] ,   Sargent and Wallace [1961] and Buiter [1982a, bj and
Buiter [1983]




Financial crowding out pressure



       The change in the real stock of interest-bearing debt or in the

interest—bearing debt output ratio is often considered to be important,

because in many macromodels such changes are the proximate

determinants of changes in the degree of financial crowding out

pressure —    the   degree to which the public sector competes with the

private sector for investible resources. Following Sargent and Wallace
                                                                     B+p C
[1981] we may ask what governs the             behaviour    of          _
                                                                       py
                                                                                  , on   the
                                      N
assumption that p
                      K NK
                              ,   p         and
                                                  py
                                                         are   all kept constant. The


answer is given in (20).




                                                                                         M
(20)       (t,t) =           + (r-n) r            C_cF*)pl_pKK_PNN
                                     L                                      ..J




The change in the real "burden" of government interest—bearing debt

is given by the non—monetized part of the government's current,

inflation — and real growth —             corrected    deficit as a proportion of

trend GDP.      Clearly, the anticipated future path of 6 can be

evaluated for any      set   of assumptions concerning future behaviour of
 public sector capital formation, asset sales and external debt

 accumulation. Equation (20) is merely a convenient benchmark.




 V   Conclusion



     There remain three loose ends to be tied up. First, how should

one view the partial balance sheets, often including only the tangible,

explicit and/or potentially marketable assets and liabilities of

the public sector? Second, there is the related question as to

whether the concept of public sector net worth makes sense. Third,

what discount rates should be used in the present value calculations

when there are non—lump sum taxes?



Tangible or potentially marketable public sector net worth



         Frequently analysts focus on a subset of the items in the PVBC.

A recent example is Hills [1984] who considers a U.K. government

balance sheet consisting mainly of physical and financial assets and

liabilities, although future oil revenues, corporations' deferred

tax, state pension rights and unfunded public service pensions are

included. In terms of the PVBC in (6a, b) Hills omits most but not

all of T(t) ,      the   present value of taxes net of transfers, subsidies,

etc. ,     all   of S(t), the present value of future seigniorage and all of

z(t) ,   the   present value of future public sector capital accumulation.

There is no harm in principle in focussing on the tangible and/or

(potentially) marketable items in the comprehensive public sector balance
sheet. Indeed, it is not hard to think o: behavioural models in

which the impact of explicit, tanoible assets and liabilities

differs significantly from that of implicit, intangible assets

and liabilities that often reflect no more than the uncertain and

reversible plans or promises of current and past and antictpated future
overnmefltS.

      Nevertheless, the omission of T, S and Z may give a distorted

perspective on the fiscal and financial options actually open to the

government; great care should be taken when making projections of a

restricted public sector net worth concept, that the omitted balancing

items aren't implicitly asked to behave in an impossible or implausible

manner.



Does the concept of public sector net worth make sense?



      It has been argued by several economists that the notion of "net
                                            9/
worth" of the public sector makes no sense.    I believe that any

disagreement on this matter is largely semantic. If the discount

rate exceeds the natural rate of growth and if the certainty equiv-

alence assumption we make is acceptable, then equations (6a, b) ,   the

PVBC, makes sense. The only issue is whether W should be called public

sector net worth or something else. T, S and Z are the present discounted

values of expected or planned future taxes net of transfers, seigniorage

and capital formation. That means that W is to a large extent a

choice variable of the government.




;. Richard Musgrave made this point forcefully at the February 1984
    meeting of the ISPE in Santa Cruz.
        When applied in a private sector context, net worth has the

connotation of something that is predetermined from the point of

view of the individual agent, i.e. something parametric in the
               10 /
short   run.          Net worth is defined as the sum of non—human capital

and human capital. Human capital is the present discounted value

of the future stream of labour endowments. If employment is a choice

variable, and if we define human capital as the present discounted

value of future labour income (as is done occasionally) rather than

of future labour endowments (labour time plus leisure time)           ,   then   the

private net worth concept would be perfectly analogous to our W.

The counterpart to the private endowment of labour is the public sector's

maximum tax yield, i.e. its capacity to levy          taxes   rather than the
                                                    11/
taxes it actually expects or plans to levy.               We could have entered

the maximal present discounted value of future potential tax receipts

in the P.V.B.C. on the asset side and        the   excess of this maximal

present value over the actual planned or expected present value on the

liability side as a present value transfer (analogous to the present

value of leisure time in the private sector case). Netting out the

maximal present value of future taxes from the PVBC as is done in this

paper, is misleading only if planned future taxes violate the taxable

capacity constraint.




10.Note that through the possibility of deliberate (dishonest) default,
   even private net worth will be to some extent a choice variable at
   a point in time.
11.The upper bound on the capacity to tax is certain to be less than the
   physical upper bound of 100% of pri :e income nd             is
                                                         likely to be
   political in nature.
The discount rate for the present value calculations



       Assume there is a tax at a proportional rate V. on interest
                                                                                   1

income, a capital gains tax (with full loss offset) at a proportional

rate v      and taxes on natural resource income and caDital
                                                       -     income at
        C

rates VN and VK respectively. Capital gains or losses due to
general inflation are not taxed.                       and              are now the nominal

rentals and          and              the price of resource rights and capital

in money terms.



       The arbitrage conditions in (2) now become




                                                                                   (t,t) (1—v)
(21)    (t) =     i(t)(1-vi           p(t,t)     =      1
                                                                   (1          +
                                                                                              c
                                                                                                  p(t,t)
                                       p(t)            Pc(t)
                                                                           i
                                                                                       P(t)        p(t)



              =   j*(1 -v.)     +
                                      c (t,t)
                                                (1-v )       - p(t,t)
                         1             (t)              c           p(t)



              =
                  PN(t)
                           (1          +
                                             PN(t,t)
                                                       (1-v )           - p(t,t)
                                                                          _____
                                vN)                            c           p(t)
                  PN(t)


              =   PK(t)                +
                                           pK(tt)
                                                        (1—v )          - p(t,t)
                                                                          ______
                                vK)                             c          p(t)
                  PK(t)




       The budget constraint (1) is of course still valid; taxes on

interest are included in T and interest payments or receipts are

entered gross of tax.
      It is easily checked that the PVBC (6a, b) still holds, provided

the following changes are made.



1)    The instantaneous discount rate is r(t) defined in (21) rather

      than r(t).



2)   The present value of central bank profits is no longer 11(t) as

     in (4c) but 11(t) which is defined by
                                                         S
                                                       —I    r(u,t)du
     11(t)            i(s,t)(1—v.)
                                3-
                                   M(St)et                              ds.   Note that this
                  )                           p(s,t)
                  t

     makes no difference to S(t), other than the replacement of r(u,t)

     by r(u,t) in (5b).



3)   The stream of total taxes net of transfers T that is discounted

     to yield T in (6a, b) is replaced by



     TT—vj
     -'
              F       (iB +   C -
                                          )
                                              +vc      c NN - K
                                                         C -  r, K - EF*
        (1                     p                                 p



                              -     vNPNN      - vKPKK
                                      p            p



     Thus gross taxes t are replaced by taxes net of any                      receipts   from

     income and capital gains taxes on the assets and liabilities

     appearing in the budget constraint.



     The main implication is that after-tax rate of interest should be
used to discount future flows of ievenue anu expenditure.



      It should be clear that neither tne PVBC in (6a, b) nor the

permanent deficit, the constant net worth deficit or the constant

permanent income deficit are measures of fiscal stance or fiscal

impact. They provide a useful framework for organizing facts and

plans about fiscal, financial and monetary policy and for evaluating

the consistency of spending and revenue projections, public sector

debt objectives and monetary targets. Its weakest feature is its

cavalier (heroic?) use of certainty equivalence. Even that strong

assumption does not purchase us any information on short—term, medium—

term or long—term fiscal impact. For that we need a specific macro-

economic model.



      The construction of informative measures of fiscal impact very

soon requires an amount of effort and calculation that renders it

observationally equivalent to performing policy evaluation exercises on

complete sequential general equilibrium models. While the simple model—

free" balance sheet and budget measures proposed in this paper are

essential for consistent fiscal and financial planning, the PVBC and its

associated deficit concepts are prone to be misused as measures of

fiscal impact on economic activity. It is unfortunately a fact that

"model—free" measures become the natural habitat of implicit theorizing.

They should perhaps be made to carry an official health warning.
                                   35


                                REFERENCES




 Olivier   J. Blanchard {1983a] "Current and Anticipated Deficits,

       Interest Rates and Economic Activity", unpublished, July.



 Olivjer J. Blanchard [1983b} "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons",

       unpublished, October.



A.S. Blinder. R.M. Solow et. al. [1974] The Economics of Public

      Finance,   The Brookings Institution.



Michael J. Boskin [1982] "Federal Government Deficits: Some Myths

      and Realities", American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,

      72, May, pp 296—303.



Willem H. Buiter [1980aJ "Crowding Out'      of   Private Capital Formation by

      Government Borrowing in the Presence of Intergenerational Gifts

      and Bequests", Greek Economic Review, 2, August, pp 111-142.



Willem H. Buiter [1982a] "Comment on T.J. Sargent and N. Wallace: Some

      Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic", NBER Working Paper No. 867,

      March.




Willem H. Buiter [1982b} "Deficits, Crowding Out and Inflation: The

     Simple Analytics", Centre for Labour Economics, London School

     of Economics, Discussion Paper No. 143, December.
                                      3E




Willem H. Buiter [1983] "The Measurement of Public Sector Deficits
      and its Implications for Policy Evaluation and Design", IMF

      Staff Papers, June 1983.



Willem H. Buiter [1983b} "The Theory of Optimum Deficits and Debt",

      NBER Working Paper No 1232, November.



Willem H. Buiter [19841 "Allocative and Stabilization Aspects of

      Budgetary and Financial Policy", Centre for Economic Policy

      Research Working Paper, forthcoming in Economica.



Willem H. Buiter and Marcus H. Miller [19831 "Changing the Rules: Economic

      Consequences of the Thatcher Regime", Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity 1983, 2, pp 305—365.

J. Carmichael [1982] "On Barro's Theorem of Debt Neutrality: The

      Irrelevance of Net Wealth", American Economic Review, 72,

      March, pp 202—213.



Alex Cukierman and   Jorgen   Mortensen [1983] "Monetary assets and inflation—

      induced distortions of the national accounts —     conceptual   issues

      and the correction of sector income flows in 5 EEC countries",

      Commission of the European Communities, Directorate General for

      Economic and   Financial   Affairs, Economic Papers, No.. 15, June.



P. Diamond [1965] "National Debt in a Neo-Classical Growth Model",

      American Economic Review, 55, pp 1126-1150.
John Hills [1984] "Public Assets and Liabilities and the Presentation

      of Budgetary Policy" in Public Finances in Perspective, IFS

      Report Series No 8.



G.V. Jump [1980] "Interest rates, inflation expectations, and spurious

      elements in measured real income and savings", American Economic

      Review, 70, December, pp 990—1004.



Marcus H. Miller [1982] "Inflation—Adjusting the Public Sector Financial

      Deficit", in J. Kay, ed. The 1982 Budget, Oxford.



Marcus H. Miller and Simon Babbs [1983] "The True Cost of Debt Service

      and the Public Sector Financial Deficit", mimeo, April 1983.



T. Sargent [1981] "Stopping Moderate Inflation: The Methods of Poincar

      and Thatcher", unpublished.



T. Sargent and N. Wallace [1981] "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic"

      Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Autumn 1981.



J. Siegel [1979] "Inflation—Induced Distortions in Government and Private

      Saving Statistics", Review of Economics and Statistics, February

      1979, pp 83—90.



C.T. Taylor and A.R. Threadgold [1979] "Real' National Saving and its

     Sectoral Composition", Bank of England, Discussion Paper No. 6,

     October.
