                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  REEVALUATING THE MODERNIZATION HYPOTHESIS

                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                           Simon Johnson
                                         James A. Robinson
                                            Pierre Yared

                                        Working Paper 13334
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13334


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of José Antionio Cheibub, Jorge Dominguez, Peter
Hall, and Susan Stokes. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reevaluating the Modernization Hypothesis
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 13334
August 2007
JEL No. O10,P16

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper revisits and critically reevaluates the widely-accepted modernization hypothesis which
claims that per capita income causes the creation and the consolidation of democracy. We argue that
existing studies find support for this hypothesis because they fail to control for the presence of omitted
variables. There are many underlying historical factors that affect both the level of income per capita
and the likelihood of democracy in a country, and failing to control for these factors may introduce
a spurious relationship between income and democracy. We show that controlling for these historical
factors by including fixed country effects removes the correlation between income and democracy,
as well as the correlation between income and the likelihood of transitions to and from democratic
regimes. We argue that this evidence is consistent with another well-established approach in political
science, which emphasizes how events during critical historical junctures can lead to divergent political-economic
development paths, some leading to prosperity and democracy, others to relative poverty and non-democracy.
We present evidence in favor of this interpretation by documenting that the fixed effects we estimate
in the post-war sample are strongly associated with historical variables that have previously been used
to explain diverging development paths within the former colonial world.

Daron Acemoglu                                          James A. Robinson
Department of Economics                                 Harvard University
MIT, E52-380B                                           Department of Government
50 Memorial Drive                                       N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                and NBER
daron@mit.edu                                           jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

Simon Johnson                                           Pierre Yared
Sloan School of Management                              Columbia University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                   Graduate School of Business
50 Memorial Drive, E52-562                              Uris Hall, 3022 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                pyared@columbia.edu
sjohnson@mit.edu
1    Introduction

At the heart of comparative politics is an attempt to understand why di¤erent societies are
organized in di¤erent ways. Why are some societies democratic, while others are not? Why
do some societies develop modern e¤ective nation states, while others do not? Why do some
societies experience revolutions, while others undertake more gradual change? And …nally, why
are some societies relatively prosperous, while others are not?
    Two distinct approaches to these questions have been popular in empirical social science. The
…rst focuses on the potentially causal channel from one of these variables, for example, income
per capita, to the rest. The second emphasizes that many of the key outcomes of interest covary;
at certain critical junctures societies make decisions that move them onto distinct development
paths and along these paths various outcomes coevolve.
    The seminal example of the …rst approach is Seymour Martin Lipset’s (1959) modernization
hypothesis. In Lipset’s view, the level of economic development and variables closely associated
with it, such as the level of educational attainment and urbanization, drive institutional change.
They particularly shape the possibilities for the creation and consolidation of democracy.
    The second approach, which we may refer to as the critical junctures hypothesis, is exempli…ed
by Barrington Moore’s famous (1966) thesis that the reasons why Britain moved gradually to
democracy, Germany to fascism, and Russia to communist revolution are to be found in the
di¤erential organization of agriculture and the di¤erential intensities of feudal legacies. Not
only are the paths to the modern world through capitalist democracy, fascism, and communism
distinct from one another, but they are also initiated by di¤erences during a certain critical
juncture, which in Moore’s account is the end of the medieval world. Societies, like Britain,
where feudalism had collapsed most comprehensively moved onto a path of successful capitalist
development, prosperity, and democracy. Societies where the feudal legacy endured, such as
Russia, had a weak bourgeoisie, thwarted capitalism, backward agriculture, and eventually,
communist revolution. Other studies which share a similar methodological approach include
Lipset and Rokkan (1967), Collier and Collier (1991), Scully (1992), Engerman and Sokolo¤
(1997), Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001,2002), Mahoney (2002), as well as the essays
in Steinmo, Thelen, and Longstreth (1992) and Mahoney and Rueschemeyer (2003).
    Despite the appeal of the critical junctures hypothesis in many country studies, the modern-
ization hypothesis and Lipset’s work have been much more in‡uential in the empirical political
and social science literatures. Most importantly, the research on the creation and consolidation
of democracy has stayed close to Lipset’s causal scheme and investigated the role of income per
capita and other socio-economic factors in accounting for variation in measures of democracy.



                                                1
Most of this work has concluded that there is a causal e¤ ect of income per capita, prosperity
or modernization on democracy or democratic consolidation. Examples of this work include
Londregan and Poole (1996), Przeworski and Limongi (1997), Barro (1997, 1999), Przeworski,
Alvarez, Cheibub, and Limongi (2000), Boix (2003), and Epstein, Bates, Goldstone, Kristensen,
and O’Halloran (2006).1
       In this paper, we demonstrate that the evidence supporting this conclusion and the mod-
ernization hypothesis is much weaker than the previous work claimed or presumed. Instead, we
present evidence consistent with the existence and importance of critical junctures.
       Most previous work on the determinants of democracy uses cross-sectional regression analysis
in order to investigate the causal relationship between income and democracy.2 However, to
the extent that there is any validity to the critical junctures hypothesis, one would want to
control for common variables a¤ecting income and democracy. After all, not all correlation is a
manifestation of a causal relationship. The simplest way of accomplishing this is to investigate
the relationship between income and democracy in a panel of countries and to control for …xed
e¤ects. Controlling for …xed e¤ects is not only a simple and transparent strategy, but is also in
the spirit of the critical junctures hypothesis, since it takes out the e¤ect of constant, potentially
historical, factors.
       Our …rst …nding in this paper is that once …xed e¤ects are introduced into standard re-
gressions of democracy, the positive relationship between income per capita and democracy
disappears.3 Our main results then show that high levels of income per capita do not promote
transitions to democracy from non-democracy, nor do they forestall transitions to non-democracy
from democracy. Our …ndings are robust across di¤erent measures of democracy, the use of ad-
ditional covariates, econometric speci…cations and estimation techniques. An important aspect
of our result is that controlling for …xed e¤ects removes omitted factors a¤ecting both income
and democracy, and this removes the in‡uence of income per capita both on transitions away
from democracy and transitions to democracy.
       In addition to a linear speci…cation, which we use to investigate both the e¤ect of income
   1
      Przeworski et al. (2000, p. 89) focus on the e¤ect of income on the consolidation of democracy rather
than likelihood of democracy or the creation of democracy. They use Lipset’s phrase “this means that the more
well-to-do a nation, the greater the chances that it will sustain democracy” (Lipset, 1959, p. 75) to justify their
claim that Lipset was connecting income per-capita only to democratic consolidation, as they do. Nevertheless,
elsewhere in the article Lipset claims that higher income per-capita both creates and consolidates democracy. For
example, (p. 83) “Increased wealth is not only related causally to the development of democracy...” See also his
discussion on p.102 about whether Latin America will become democratic, where it is clear that he is talking
about economic development causing countries to become more democratic.
    2
      Among the papers mentioned above only Londregan and Poole (1996) include …xed country e¤ects in their
analysis. However, they fail to include time e¤ects, and despite using annual data, they do not correct for serial
correlation in the residuals. Their results are sensitive to these choices (see Section 6).
    3
      For similar results focusing on the relationship between income and the level of democracy, see Acemoglu,
Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2007).


                                                        2
per capita on the level of democracy and on transitions, we develop and implement a double
hazard model for the simultaneous estimation of transitions to democracy and transitions away
from democracy. Though a major focus of political science research on democratization has been
the study of transitions to and away from democracy, the econometrics of transition models is
not entirely straightforward. Speci…cally, one cannot look at transitions to democracy or away
from democracy as separate events because whether or not an observation …nds itself in the
at-risk sample is endogenously determined. We develop a framework to deal with this issue
which allows for the incorporation of …xed e¤ects in a straightforward and intuitive way, and we
…nd that income per capita conditional on the …xed e¤ect does not predict either transitions to
democracy or transitions away from democracy.
       Our initial results refer to the most-commonly used sample period of 1960-2000. One might
argue, along the lines of Boix and Stokes (2003), that this post-war sample misses the democrati-
zation of much of Western Europe and North America in the late nineteenth century. Motivated
by this concern, we also look at the relationship between income and democracy for a balanced
sample during the period 1875-2000. Again we do not …nd a signi…cant relationship between in-
come and democracy once we control for …xed e¤ects. Moreover, using our double hazard model,
we also do not …nd a signi…cant relationship between income and transitions to democracy or
transitions away from democracy.
       These empirical results show that while the level of per capita income and the level of
democracy are correlated, there is no relationship between the change in income per capita and
the change in democracy over the past 150 years. Interestingly, this point was made some time
ago by O’Donnell (1973, p. 6) who noted in his discussion of the existing empirical literature on
modernization that

            “the data used refer to a set of countries at a single point in time, while the
         postulated relationship refers to changes over a period of time in each of the countries
         ... The attempt to substitute “horizontal”data referring to many countries ... for this
         “longitudinal data” and still say something about causal, time-spanning processes
         within each unit [is a] fallacy.”4

       In essence, the …nding that income per capita causes democracy comes only from the cross-
sectional variation in the data. It is exactly this cross-sectional variation that …xed e¤ects re-
move, and …xed e¤ects estimators essentially exploit the within variation called for by O’Donnell
   4
    Przeworski et al. (2000, p. 99) object to O’Donnell’s study of how increasing income per capita in Argentina
induced a coup on the grounds that he “studied a country that turns out to be a distant outlier”. Our empirical
work shows that the patterns isolated by O’Donnell in the Southern Cone of Latin America are actually consistent
with data from both the postwar era and throughout the 20th century.


                                                       3
by looking at the relationship between changes in income and changes in democracy. It is im-
portant to note that using …xed e¤ects is not the same as looking at transitions, for example as
in the work by Przeworski et al. (2000). Przeworski et al. (2000) …nd a relationship between
income per capita and the propensity for coups because their key right-hand side variable is still
the level of income, and thus they are documenting that richer democracies have fewer coups.
Consequently, their econometric strategy does not deal with omitted variables a¤ecting both
democratization and economic growth, and these …ndings establish neither the presence of a
causal e¤ect of income on the likelihood of coups nor provides any evidence that democracies
that become richer experience fewer coups.
      Figures 1 and 2 provide a simple diagrammatic illustration of these point. Both …gures
use Przeworski et al.’s data and focus on the sample of democracies in every …ve year interval
between 1955 and 1990. We then observe which of these democracies experience a coup …ve
years later. In Figure 1, we group observations depending on whether log income per capita
is above or below the average log income per capita in the world for the observation year, and
we calculate the fraction of democracies in each group which experienced a coup. This …gure
corresponds to regressions without controlling for …xed e¤ects, and consistent with Przeworski et
al.’s …ndings, it shows that democracies with low income per capita are more likely to experience
a coup than democracies with high income per capita. Figure 2, on the other hand, provides
a visual representation of the patterns once we take out some of the time-invariant omitted
variables. To do this, we group observations depending on whether log income per capita is
above or below the average log income per capita for that country between 1955 and 1990.5
In contrast to Figure 1, Figure 2 shows that democracies that are poorer than usual are not
more likely to experience a coup. This …gure therefore provides a preview of how the results
are likely to change once we control for omitted variables a¤ecting both income and democracy.
Our empirical work will show in detail that the pattern shown in Figure 2 is very robust, and
this leads us to conclude that the empirical support for and the strong conclusions drawn from
the modernization hypotheses need to be reevaluated.
      But if income does not cause democracy, then what does? The fact that including …xed
e¤ects removes the correlation between income and democracy suggests that relatively time-
invariant, possibly historical factors are at the root of both the relative prosperity and the
relative democratic experience of some countries. In the second part of the paper, we discuss
whether, as emphasized by the critical junctures hypothesis, the relationship between prosperity
and democracy is underpinned by the divergent development paths of the countries in our
sample. We accomplish this by investigating whether the …xed e¤ects estimated in the post-
  5
      Both of these values are demeaned from the world average to account for time trends.



                                                        4
war regressions are systematically related to historical variables associated with political and
economic divergence in history.
   For this exercise, we focus on the sample of former European colonies, since for this sample
there is a speci…c theory of political and economic development related to divergent development
paths, and there is also data related to the determinants of these di¤erent paths during the
critical junctures facing these former colonies. In particular, we build on Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001, 2002) who exploit the quasi-natural experiment provided by the colonization
of many diverse societies by European powers after 1492. They show that the institutional
di¤erences created at the critical juncture of European colonization persisted and signi…cantly
contributed to the large di¤erences in both the form of government (particularly the extent of
constraints on the executive) and the economic success of these societies. They also show that
the di¤erent paths of economic and political development are systematically related to a number
of historical variables which in‡uenced the costs and bene…ts of di¤erent sets of institutions.
   Institutional variation within the former colonies was in‡uenced by the types of initial con-
ditions that the European powers encountered. In colonies where there were initially large
densities of indigenous peoples, where the mortality environment was unfavorable for European
settlements, and which were relatively prosperous, extractive institutions designed to transfer
rents to Europeans emerged. Such institutions did not create e¤ective property rights except for
small minorities, they did not generate incentives for investment, education, or innovation, and
they consequently retarded economic growth. The political institutions in such societies were
complementary to the extractive economic institutions; they were coercive, hierarchical, and au-
thoritarian, aimed primarily at controlling indigenous populations, and focused on maintaining
and perpetuating a fundamentally unequal order. Since institutions have a tendency to persist,
the colonial economic and political institutions created in these extractive colonies persisted into
the 19th and 20th centuries and continued to bene…t relatively small elites. These elites had a lot
to lose from democracy, not just because it would have directly taken away their formal political
power, but also because the change in the distribution of power would have undermined their
preferred set of economic institutions. Consequently, in these societies, elites were prepared to
…ght harder to stop democracy (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). Moreover, given that such
societies were based on relatively coercive institutions, elites were better able to repress those
who pushed for democracy, and subsequently, if democracy was conceded, they were better able
to undermine it by mounting coups. Therefore, the development path starting with extractive
institutions was nondemocratic and associated with relatively slow economic growth.
   In colonies with di¤erent initial conditions, where there were few indigenous peoples, where
the disease environment was relatively benign for Europeans, and which were initially poor,


                                                 5
very di¤erent economic institutions emerged. Since there were few people to exploit and little
to extract from indigenous peoples, relatively non-coercive societies emerged. Such societies,
best exempli…ed by the settler colonies in North America and Australasia, developed economic
institutions providing most inhabitants access to land, secure property rights, and equality before
the law. They also quickly developed political institutions placing e¤ective constraints on the
exercise of power. The incentives for investment and innovation in these societies paved the
way for economic growth. This situation is well illustrated by the development path of North
America, where already during the colonial period a relatively egalitarian society emerged with
representative assemblies in each state where free adult males could vote.6 This institutional
nexus provided relatively good economic incentives for the non-slave population and provided
weaker incentives for the political elites to pursue strategies to block economic development or
undermine democracy. Moreover, these initial institutions implied that later political elites, even
when they tried, were unable to tilt the balance away from growth promoting and democratic
institutions.
      We con…rm the importance of the critical junctures emphasized in Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001, 2002) by showing that the …xed e¤ects estimated in the post-war data are
very strongly related to factors linked to the past colonization experiences of these countries.
In particular, we show a very strong relationship between these …xed e¤ects and the mortality
rates faced by European settlers, the indigenous population density before colonization, the
constraint on the executive at (or shortly after) independence, and the date of independence.
Settler mortality and indigenous population density before colonization proxy for the initial
conditions a¤ecting the colonization strategy and the subsequent development path (Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson, 2001, 2002); constraint on the executive at independence is the closest
variable we have to a direct measure of relevant institutions during the colonial period; and date
of independence is another measure of colonization strategy, since non-extractive colonies gained
their independence typically earlier than the extractive ones.
      We also investigate the relationship between other variables, such as geography, religion and
ethno-linguistic fragmentation, on the propensity of a society to be democratic. Interestingly,
conditional on the historical variables related to the colonization strategy pursued by Europeans,
these variables seem to have no correlation with the …xed e¤ects for democracy.
      In addition to the papers already mentioned, our work is most closely related to Acemoglu,
Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2007) who also investigate the relationship between income and
  6
    Though slavery was important in the South, the key U.S. institutions were formed in the 17th century when
slavery was insigni…cant and at no time did slaves form more than 20% of the entire population. In contrast,
indigenous peoples formed 80-90% of the populations of Peru, Bolivia or Mexico, while slaves constituted more
than 90% of the population in most Caribbean islands (Engerman and Sokolo¤, 1997).



                                                     6
democracy. Despite the similarities between the two papers, there are also major di¤erences.
Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2007) focus on instrumental variable estimates of the
impact of income on democracy and also focus on the very long run relationship (between 1500
and 2000). The main innovations in the current paper include the focus on the modernization
hypothesis (and the contrast to the critical junctures hypothesis), the investigation of the re-
lationship between income and the dichotomous measures of democracy commonly used in the
political science literature, and most importantly, a detailed analysis of the relationship between
income and transitions to and away from democracy using a double hazard model. Our paper
is also related to a large literature empirically investigating the modernization hypothesis. We
discuss the relationship between our work in this literature in greater detail in Section 6.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the data we use. In Section 3, we replicate
some of the basic regression results in the literature using pooled OLS, and in Section 4, we
show that the introduction of …xed e¤ects into these models leads income per capita to become
completely insigni…cant. After having focused on results where the level of democracy is the
dependent variable we then move in Section 5 to consider various ways of measuring transitions
towards and away from democracy, and we develop a double hazard model which allows for
the incorporation of …xed e¤ects. We …nd the same results. In Section 6, we discuss in detail
the relationship between our results and the existing research in the political science literature.
In Section 7, we investigate our interpretation of the …xed e¤ects regressions, and in Section
8, we examine our basic …ndings over the period 1875-2000, rather than 1960-2000. Section 9
concludes.


2        Data and Descriptive Statistics

We follow the existing empirical research in the way we measure democracy. Though there is
some controversy about how to exactly measure democracy, our strategy is to show that our
results are robust to any of the measures that are widely used in the literature. Our …rst measure
of democracy is the Freedom House Political Rights Index. This index ranges from 1 to 7, with
7 representing the least amount of political freedom and 1 the most freedom. A country gets
a score of 1 if political rights come closest to the ideals suggested by a checklist of questions,
beginning with whether there are free and fair elections, whether those who are elected rule,
whether there are competitive parties or other political groupings, whether the opposition plays
an important role and has actual power, and whether minority groups have reasonable self-
government or can participate in the government through informal consensus.7 Following Barro
(1999), we supplement this index with the related variable from Bollen (1990, 2001) for 1950,
    7
        See Freedom House (2004), http://www.freedomhouse.org/research/freeworld/2003/methodology.htm


                                                       7
1955, 1960, and 1965. As in Barro (1999), we transform both indices so that they lie between 0
and 1, with 1 corresponding to the most democratic set of institutions.
       The Freedom House index, even when augmented with Bollen’s data, only enables us to look
at the post-war era. The Polity IV dataset, on the other hand, provides information for all
countries since independence starting in 1800. Both to look at pre-1940 events and as a check
on our main measure, we also use the composite Polity index, which is the di¤erence between
the Polity’s Democracy and Autocracy indices.8 The Polity Democracy Index ranges from 0 to
10 and is derived from coding the competitiveness of political participation, the openness and
competitiveness of executive recruitment, and constraints on the chief executive. The Polity
Autocracy Index also ranges from 0 to 10 and is constructed in a similar way to the democracy
score. To facilitate comparison with the Freedom House score, we also normalize the composite
Polity index to lie between 0 and 1.
       Both of these measures enable us to distinguish between di¤erent shades of democracy. An
alternative empirical approach has been defended and used by Przeworski and his coauthors
(Przeworski et al., 2000, chapter 1), who argue that a simple dichotomy between democracy
and non-democracy is the most useful empirical de…nition. Dichotomous measures may also be
better suited to analyses of transitions from and to democracy. Therefore, we present results
using the Boix-Rosato dataset which extends the Przeworski et al. (2000) in which the index
equals 1 if a country is a democracy and equals 0 otherwise. We also develop a simple double
hazard model to deal with the simultaneous modeling of transitions to and from democracy. All
of these exercises using the dichotomous measures give very similar results to those using the
continuous measures.
       We construct …ve-yearly and annual panels. For the …ve-year panels, we take the observation
every …fth year. We prefer this procedure to averaging the …ve-yearly data, since averaging
introduces additional serial correlation, making inference and estimation more di¢ cult.9
       In addition, we use GDP per capita data from the Summers-Heston dataset for the post-war
period (Heston, Summers, and Atten, 2002), GDP per capita data from Maddison (2003) for
the prewar and long samples, a measure of educational attainment from the Barro-Lee dataset
(average years of schooling for people in the population over the age of 25), and total population
from the World Bank (2002).
       When we turn to the former European colonies sample, we obtain the date of independence
from the CIA World Factbook and the constraint on the executive after independence from the
   8
     See Marshall and Jaggers (2004) and http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/
   9
     For the Freedom House data which begins in 1972, we follow Barro (1999) and assign the 1972 score to 1970
for the purpose of the …ve-year regressions. Moreover, we assign the 1994 score in the Boix-Rosato data to 1995
for the purpose of the …ve-year regressions.



                                                      8
Polity IV dataset.10 Population density in 1500 is calculated by dividing the historical measures
of population from McEvedy and Jones (1975) by the area of arable land (see Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson, 2002). Finally, data on settler mortality are from Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001), who constructed it based on research by Philip Curtin and other historians.
    Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for the key variables both for the whole world and for
former European colonies, the sample we focus on for some of the regressions. Throughout the
paper, we adopt the de…nition of former European colonies used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001, 2002), which excludes the Middle Eastern countries that were brie‡y colonized
by European powers during the 20th century. This de…nition is motivated by our interest in
former colonies as a sample in which the process of institutional development, in particular during
the 19th century and earlier, was shaped by European intervention (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson, 2002).11
    Table 1 shows that there is signi…cant variation in all the variables for both the entire
sample and the former colonies sample. Countries in the former colonies sample are somewhat
less democratic and substantially (about 30 percent) poorer than the average country in the
whole sample.


3     Pooled Cross-Section Results

We …rst replicate the basic results in the literature using a pooled cross-sectional approach. The
…rst column of Table 2 reports estimates of the following simple linear regression model:

                                       dit = dit    1   + yit   1   +   t   + vit                               (1)

where dit is the democracy score of country i in period t. The lagged value of this variable on
the right hand side is included to capture persistence in democracy and also potentially mean-
reverting dynamics (i.e., the tendency of the democracy score to return to some equilibrium
value for the country). The main variable of interest is yit                1,   the lagged value of log income per
capita. The parameter          therefore measures the impact of income per capita on democracy. In
addition, the     t ’s   denote a full set of time e¤ects, which capture common shocks to (common
   10
      The data on constraint on the executive from Polity begins in 1800 or at the date of independence. In our
former colonies sample only one country, the United States became independent before 1800. The United States
broke with Britain in 1776 and was recognized as the new nation following the Treaty of Paris in 1783. We code
the U.S. date of independence as 1800.
   11
      By the time the Middle East was colonized, the whole ‘colonial project’ was on the retreat. The European
powers had little in‡uence on the institutions of these societies. In contrast, Latin American countries were
colonies for almost 300 years and the Spanish colonial state penetrated into all areas of life. Though most
African and Asian countries were not formally colonized until towards the end of the 19th century, they had been
experiencing the e¤ects of European colonialism since the mid 17th century. For example, in Africa the Atlantic
slave trade took o¤ in the …rst half of the 17th century and existing evidence suggests that this had a large impact
on institutions even before formal colonization.


                                                          9
trends in) the democracy score of all countries, and vit is an error term, capturing all other
omitted factors, with E (vit ) = 0 for all i and t. The sample period is 1960-2000 and time
periods correspond to …ve-year intervals.
         Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regressions of (1) will lead to consistent estimates of the para-
meter of interest, , when cov (dit         1 ; vit )   = cov (yit   1 ; vit )   = 0. In other words, OLS estimation
requires that there be no omitted variables correlated with the right-hand side variables in the
regression.12
         The panel A of Table 2 uses the Freedom House data, panel B uses the Polity data, and
panel C uses the dichotomous Przeworski index to present pooled cross-sectional regressions of
democracy on income. All panels pool the time-series and cross-sectional variation. All standard
errors in the paper (unless indicated otherwise) are robust against arbitrary heteroskedasticity
in the variance-covariance matrix, and they allow for clustering at the country level.13
         The regressions include one lag of democracy, one lag of log GDP per capita, and time
e¤ects. The sample size varies because of data availability, and the panel is unbalanced. Lagged
democracy is highly signi…cant and shows a considerable degree of persistence (mean reversion)
in democracy. Log GDP per capita is also signi…cant and illustrates the well-documented positive
relationship between income and democracy. Though statistically highly signi…cant, the e¤ect
of income is quantitatively small. For example, the coe¢ cient of 0.073 (standard error = 0.010)
in column 1 of panel A implies that a temporary 10 percent increase in GDP per capita is
associated with an increase in the Freedom House score of 0.0073, and a permanent increase
in GDP per capita by 10 percent is associated with an increase in the (steady state) Freedom
House score of 0.0073/(1-.703) 0.025. This e¤ect is quantitatively small (for comparison, the
gap between the United States and Colombia today is 0.5).
         Overall, the regressions in Table 2 con…rm the main …nding of the existing literature of
a positive association between income and democracy. While the earlier literature has typi-
cally interpreted this as the causal e¤ect of income on democracy, we next show that such an
interpretation may not be warranted.


4         Panel Regressions with Fixed E¤ects

We now revisit the basic results of the last section in the panel set-up with …xed e¤ects. In terms
of equation (1), the presence of …xed e¤ects implies that the error term can be represented as
    12
     The fact that the democracy index takes discrete values induces a special type of heteroscedasticity, but
creates no di¢ culty for inference with OLS, as long as standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity (e.g.,
Wooldridge, 2002, Section 15.2).
  13
     Clustering is a simple strategy to the correct the standard errors for potential correlation across observations
both over time and within the same time period. See for example Moulton (1986) or Bertrand, Du‡o, and
Mullainathan (2004).


                                                            10
vit =      i   + uit , where now E (uit ) = 0 for all i and t. Taking this into account, the estimating
equation becomes:
                                        dit = dit     1   + yit      1   + x0it   1   +   t   +    i   + uit ;                                  (2)

which di¤ers from (1) because it includes a full set of country dummies, the                                                  i ’s,   and because
we now allow for other covariates captured by the vector                                  x0it 1       with coe¢ cient vector              . The
country dummies capture any time-invariant country characteristic that a¤ect the equilibrium
level of democracy.
       The most important bene…t of the …xed e¤ect estimator is that, as well known, if the error
term takes the form vit =                    i   + uit , with the         i ’s,   correlated with yit            1   or xit     1,    then pooled
OLS estimates are biased and inconsistent. In contrast, even if cov (yit                                               1; i    + uit ) 6= 0 (or
cov xjit        1; i   + uit     6= 0 where xjit          1   represents the j’th component of the vector xit                              1)   but
cov (yit       1 ; uit )   = cov xjit    1 ; uit   = 0 for all j, then the …xed e¤ects estimator will be consistent.
       This structure of correlation is particularly relevant in this context, because the critical
junctures hypothesis suggests precisely the presence of historical factors a¤ecting both political
and economic development.14
       In addition to the conceptual issues, there is also an econometric problem involved in the
estimation of (2). The regressor dit                          1   is mechanically correlated with uis for s < t, so the
standard …xed e¤ects estimation is not consistent (e.g., Wooldridge, 2002, chapter 11). However,
it can be shown that the …xed e¤ects OLS estimator becomes consistent as the number of time
periods in the sample increases. Here, we start with the …xed e¤ects OLS estimates, and then
consider various alternative estimation strategies to deal with this issue.
       Table 2 column 2 presents our basic results using the Freedom House score (panel A), the
Polity score (panel B), and the Przeworski index (panel C). In none of the panels is income per
capita signi…cant, and it typically has a very small coe¢ cient. With the Freedom House data
the coe¢ cient in 0.008 (for example, compared to 0.073 in column 1 of Table 2) with a standard
error of 0.034. With the Polity data in panel B, the estimate is basically zero, -0.003 (standard
error=0.038).
       A potential concern with …xed e¤ects regressions is that once …xed e¤ects are included, there
may not remain enough variation in the right-hand side variables to obtain precise estimation.15
The results in Table 2 show that this is not the case in our empirical investigation. The standard
  14
     Nevertheless, there should be no presumption that …xed e¤ects regressions will necessarily estimate the causal
e¤ect of income on democracy, for example because there are time varying omitted variables. See Acemoglu,
Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2007) for instrumental variable strategies designed to estimate the causal e¤ect
of income on democracy.
  15
     This issue is raised by a number of recent papers in the political science literature, debating the pros and
cons of the …xed e¤ects methodology. See, for example, Green, Kim, and Yoon (2001) and the accompanying
symposium, as well as Beck (2001).



                                                                         11
errors of the estimates of the e¤ect of income on democracy are relatively small. For example,
the standard error in column 2 of panel A of Table 2 is 0.034, compared to 0.010 in column 1. An
e¤ect of income on democracy of the same size as in column 1 (0.073), which, as noted in Section
3, is itself quantitatively very small, falls just outside the two standard error con…dence interval
of the …xed e¤ect estimate. This shows that the lack of a positive e¤ect of income per capita
on democracy when we control for time-invariant omitted variables is not driven by imprecise
estimates. Instead, it is likely due to the fact that these omitted variables are responsible for
the positive relationship that previous cross-sectional (or pooled cross-section and time-series)
studies have found.16
       Furthermore, Figures 3-5 document that the lack of a signi…cant relationship between income
per capita and democracy is not driven by some econometric problems or some unusual feature of
our data. Figures 3 and 4 plot the change in the Freedom House and Polity score for each country
between 1970 and 1995 against the change in GDP per capita over the same period. These
scatterplots correspond to the estimation of the …xed e¤ects equation (2) in time di¤erenced
form without any covariates other than contemporaneous income, and using only two data
points, 1970 and 1995 (these two dates are chosen to maximize sample size).17 They show
clearly that there is no strong relationship between income growth and changes in democracy
over this period. Figure 5 performs a similar exercize using the Przeworski index. In contrast
to the continuous Freedom House and Polity scores, this index is dichotomous so that change in
democracy is either -1, 0, or 1. Therefore, we document the average change in democracy score
for countries grouped by income per capita growth quintile. This …gure shows that there is no
relationship between the income per capita growth quintile and the change in the democracy
score.18
       These initial results show that once we allow for …xed e¤ects, per capita income is not a major
determinant of democracy. The remaining columns of the table consider alternative estimation
strategies to deal with the potential biases introduced by the presence of the lagged dependent
variable discussed above.
       Our …rst strategy, adopted in column 3, is to use the Generalized Method-of-Moments Es-
timator (GMM) proposed by Arellano and Bond (1991). This builds on the approach …rst
suggested by Anderson and Hsiao (1982) and uses second and higher order lags as instruments
  16
     Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2007) report similar results also instrumenting for income per-
capita using various di¤erent instruments. They show that the lack of a positive relationship documented here is
robust to these instrumental variables strategies.
  17
     The regression of the change in Freedom House score between 1970 and 1995 on change in log income per
capita between 1970 and 1995 yields a coe¢ cient of 0.032, with a standard error of 0.058, while the same regression
with Polity data gives a coe¢ cient estimate of -0.024, with a standard error of 0.063.
  18
     We have also investigated whether the lack of a statistical association between income and democracy once
we condition on …xed e¤ects is driven by some outliers in the data, and found no major outliers.


                                                        12
under the assumption of no serial correlation in the residual, uit , in equation (2). With the
Arellano-Bond’s GMM estimator, the coe¢ cient on income per capita is now negative in all
panels.
    Our second strategy, reproduced in column 4, estimates (2) with …xed e¤ects OLS using
annual observations. This is useful since the …xed e¤ects OLS estimator becomes consistent
as the number of observations becomes large. With annual observations, we have a reasonably
large time dimension. However, estimating the same model on annual data with a single lag
would induce signi…cant serial correlation (since our results so far indicate that …ve-year lags
of democracy predict changes in democracy). For this reason, we now include …ve lags of both
democracy and log GDP per capita in these annual regressions. The table reports the p value
of an F-test for the joint signi…cance of these variables. The results show no evidence of a
signi…cant positive e¤ect of income on democracy in any of the panels (while democracy is
strongly predicted by its lags, as was the case in earlier columns).
    In columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 we add average years of schooling and population as additional
explanatory variables, and we repeat the regressions reported in columns 2 and 3 with very
similar results. In particular, income never has a positive e¤ect on democracy, and interestingly
there is also no evidence of a positive relationship between education and democracy.
    In addition, in regressions not reported here, we check for potential nonlinear interactions
between income and other variables, and we …nd no evidence of such relationships.
    Overall, the inclusion of …xed e¤ects proxying for time-invariant and country-speci…c char-
acteristics removes the entire cross-country correlation between income and democracy (and
education and democracy). These results shed considerable doubt on the conventional wisdom
that income has a strong causal e¤ect on democracy.


5    Transitions to and from Democracy

In the previous two sub-sections we focused attention on the level of democracy as the dependent
variable. Much of the empirical literature since the work of Przeworski and Limongi (1997) and
Przeworski et al. (2000) has instead focused on estimating separate models for transitions to
and away from democracy. In this section we investigate whether the …ndings in this literature
are robust to the inclusion of …xed e¤ects. We …rst investigate this question using a variety of
linear models. We then develop and implement a double hazard model for the simultaneous
estimation of transitions to democracy and transitions away from democracy. All of our various
econometric strategies show that once …xed a¤ects are included to control for time-invariant
omitted variables simultaneously a¤ecting both income and democracy, there is no evidence of
an e¤ect of income per capita on transitions to or away from democracy.

                                               13
5.1    Linear Models

Standard analyses of transitions to and from democracy use dichotomous measures such as the
Przeworski/Boix-Rosato data. Here we start with a more straightforward, and to the best of
our knowledge novel, approach using the democracy scores in the Freedom House and Polity
data. Our strategy is to modify the model in equation (2) as follows:

                              d+
                               it = dit     1   + yit   1   + x0it   1   +   t    +   i   + uit                        (3)

for transitions to democracy and

                              dit = dit     1   + yit   1   + x0it   1   +   t    +   i   + uit                        (4)

for transitions from democracy, where d+
                                       it = max fdit ; dit                   1g   and dit = min fdit ; dit   1 g.
                                                                                                                 19   This
procedure implies that for     d+
                                it ,   we only consider upward movements on the democracy score, and
thus ignore declines in democracy. For dit , we only consider deterioration in the democracy score.
This approach therefore enables us to study increases and decreases in democracy separately,
while still maintaining linearity.
    Table 3 reports estimates of (3) while Table 4 reports estimates of (4). In both tables, panel
A uses the Freedom House data while panel B uses the Polity data. Panel C of both tables uses
the Przeworski dichotomous index where the formulas (3) and (4) also represent the model we
estimate. Columns 1-6 of these two tables are analogous to columns 1-6 of Table 2 with the only
di¤erences being in the left hand side variable.
    In the …rst columns of both tables we start with regressions without the …xed e¤ects, the                          i ’s,

to replicate the results of the previous literature in our framework. The results in Table 3 using
the pooled OLS approach show that, surprisingly and contrary to the claims of Przeworski and
Limongi (1997), income per capita is positively associated with transitions to democracy. In line
with Elkins (2000), Table 3 shows that even the basic results of Przeworski and Limongi (1997)
are not entirely robust. In Table 4, we also …nd statistically signi…cant correlations between
income and transitions away from democracy with all three types of data (note that a positive
coe¢ cient in the transitions to non-democracy regressions means that higher income countries
are less likely to experience coups).
    Our main results, which add …xed e¤ects, are presented in column 2 of Tables 3 and 4.
The …ndings here are similar to those reported in Table 2. Once we introduce the …xed e¤ects,
income per capita is never signi…cant. In Table 3, the coe¢ cient on income in panel A is
  19
     Although (3) and (4) are nonlinear in dit , they are linear in the parameters and in particular, in the …xed
e¤ects, the i ’s. This implies that the …xed e¤ects can be di¤erenced out to achieve consistent estimation (without
creating an incidental parameters problem).



                                                            14
similar to column 1, but no longer signi…cant, whereas in Table 4 the coe¢ cient is negative and
insigni…cant.
   Column 3 of both tables then turns to GMM estimation of the models with …xed e¤ects.
The estimates again show no evidence of an e¤ect of income on either transitions to democracy
or away from democracy. In fact, the estimated impact of income per capita on the likelihood of
the transition to democracy or of remaining a democracy is negative in all speci…cations except
in panel C of Table 3.
   In column 4 we turn to the alternative strategy of using annual data. We again report the
level of signi…cance of an F-test on the joint signi…cance of the lags of income per capita. The
general picture here is that income per capita is insigni…cant although in panel B of Table 3
using the Polity dataset the variables are jointly signi…cant at the 11% level. The …nal two
columns of the table repeat columns 2 and 3 adding the same covariates as in Table 2 columns 5
and 6. The same message comes through here, once …xed e¤ects are included income per capita
is insigni…cant.
   The results are consistent with those reported in Section 4. Though with pooled OLS
the coe¢ cient on income per capita is signi…cant on transitions to and transitions away from
democracy, once we add …xed e¤ects, income is never signi…cant in any speci…cation.
   In summary, when we control for the presence of country-speci…c omitted factors, there is
little e¤ect of income per capita either on transitions to democracy, or contrary to the emphasis
in Przeworski et al. (2000), on transitions away from democracy.

5.2   Nonlinear Models

We have so far reported linear probability models of transitions to and away from democracy
rather than nonlinear models of transitions because they are more transparent, simpler, and
consistent under a weaker set of assumptions (see Wooldridge, 2002, chapter 15.2). Another
advantage of the linear probability model is that standard panel data techniques can be used
for consistent estimation in the presence of …xed e¤ects (with large T ). In contrast, because
the conditional mean function in a nonlinear model is not linear in the parameters, the model
with …xed e¤ects cannot be estimated consistently (see, for example, Wooldridge, 2002, chapter
15.8). This makes the linear probability model with …xed e¤ects a natural starting point for the
analysis of transitions. Nevertheless, the political science literature and parts of the economics
literature focus on nonlinear models of transitions. Though more complicated and somewhat
more di¢ cult to interpret, these nonlinear models also have advantages. In particular, they
provide a better approximation to the structural form that might be generating the data on
transitions to and away from democracy.


                                               15
       We now develop and estimate a nonlinear double hazard model to measure the impact of
income on transitions to democracy and transitions away from democracy. The reason why
we need to turn to a double hazard model rather than use existing approaches relying on pro-
bit or duration model analysis is that transitions to democracy or away from democracy are
jointly determined events. They cannot be treated as separate events because whether or not an
observation …nds itself in the at-risk sample is endogenously determined. Our modest method-
ological contribution here is to develop a framework to deal with this issue which also allows the
incorporation of …xed e¤ects in a straightforward manner.
       Our double hazard model can be expressed in terms of two conditional mean functions for
the probability of transitioning to democracy and the probability of remaining in democracy:20

                                                                                                    pos                    pos
                          Pr (dit = 1 j dit     1   = 0; yit         1 ; t)       =             (         yit     1   +    t )    (5)
                                                                                                    neg                    neg
                          Pr (dit = 1 j dit     1   = 1; yit         1 ; t)       =             (         yit     1   +    t ),   (6)

where         is an increasing function with a range between 0 and 1. Equation (5) describes the
probability that a dictatorship collapses (transitions to democracy), and equation (6) describes
the probability that a democracy survives, which is negatively related to the probability of a
coup (transitions away from democracy). Together, these two equations characterize the law of
motion of democracy for a given country, so that we can think of these equations as constituting a
“double hazard model”. The parameters                          pos   and          neg   represent the e¤ect of income on positive
                                                                   pos                neg
and negative transitions respectively, and                         t      and         t         represent the time e¤ects on positive
and negative transitions, respectively. Note that equations (5) and (6) model the appropriate
transitions to and away from democracy, but they do not yet introduce …xed country e¤ects.
       To make further progress, let us also assume that                                ( ) is the normal cumulative distribution
function, so that the system described by (5) and (6) is an exponential double hazard model.
Since this system of equations characterizes the entire motion of democracy, it can easily be
estimated by maximum likelihood.21
       Table 5 reports estimates of (5) and (6) using the Przeworksi/Boix-Rosato dichotomous
measures of democracy. Column 1 of Table 5 estimates (5) and (6) simultaneously on a balanced
  20
       Instead of (6), we could have alternatively written
                                                                                            neg                   neg
                                 Pr (dit = 0 j dit      1   = 1; yit     1 ; t)   =     (           yit   1   +   t   );

in which case we would have
                                                                                                neg                   neg
                               Pr (dit = 1 j dit    1   = 1; yit     1 ; t)   =1            (         yit     1   +   t   ):

While these two speci…cations are econometrically equivalent, the interpretation of the parameters neg and neg                  t
is less intuitive, making us prefer the system of equations given by (5) and (6).
   21
      The likelihood function is straightforward to compute. For example, for a given country i, we have that
Pr fdi1 ; :::; diT jyi0 ; :::; yiT 1 g = Pr fdiT jdiT 1 ; yiT 1 ; T g Pr fdiT 1 jdiT 2 ; yiT 2 ; T 1g ::: Pr fdi1 jdi0 ; yi0 ; 1g.


                                                                       16
panel and reports the estimates of the marginal e¤ect of lagged income.22 In panel A, we
                  pos          neg           pos             neg
constrain               =            and     t       =       t .   The estimates show a signi…cant (cumulative) e¤ect of
income per capita on transitions to and away from democracy. In panel B, we allow                                                                  pos   6=   neg ,

                                       pos           neg
while still constraining               t     =       t .      This is useful as a check of whether the impact of income
di¤ers in the two equations as emphasized by Przeworski and Limongi (1997) and Przeworski
et al. (2000). Income per capita is signi…cant for both transitions to and transitions away
from democracy, though the coe¢ cient on transitions away from democracy is higher and more
signi…cant, which is in line with the basic …nding of these works. In panel C, we estimate the
                                                      pos          neg               pos             neg
most ‡exible speci…cation with                               6=          and         t       6=      t .     The estimates are again similar.
       The major problem of the double hazard model, like all other models that are nonlinear in
parameters, is that it cannot accommodate …xed e¤ects. For example, if …xed e¤ects are added,
                                                                                             pos y               pos        pos
the right hand side of equation (5) changes to                                           (         it 1      +   t     +    i ),    and the right hand
                                                             neg y               neg              neg
side of equation (6) changes to                          (           it 1   +    t           +    i ),       where the       i ’s   are the …xed e¤ects
for observation i. This speci…cation creates an incidental parameters problem in the estimation
of the     i ’s   (because the number of parameters to be estimated increases at the same rate as
the number of observations in the cross-section). This incidental parameters problem makes
consistent estimation impossible. One solution to this problem is suggested by Mundlak (1978)
and Chamberlain (1980), and it involves imposing a functional form on the                                                                 i ’s.   Speci…cally,
Chamberlain (1980) posits that

                                        j                                                j              j
                                 Pr     i   =        j yi1 ; :::yiT      =                   + yi            , j = pos; neg                                   (7)

           j              j
where          and            are exogenous parameters, and yi is the average of yi                                           1     for     = 1; :::; T . The
                                                                                     j
important assumption is that the component of                                        i   which is uncorrelated with yi will be random
in that it will not be correlated with dit . As a consequence, we can write (incorporating the
                          j                                        j
constant term                 into the time e¤ects                 t)

                                                                                                 pos                 pos            pos
                        Pr (dit = 1 j dit        1   = 0; yit      1 ; t)    =                         yit   1   +   t     + yi                               (8)
                                                                                                 neg                 neg            neg
                        Pr (dit = 1 j dit        1   = 1; yit      1 ; t)    =                         yit   1   +   t     + yi             .                 (9)

This speci…cation is less ‡exible than including a full set of …xed e¤ects, which was our strategy
in the linear models, because it imposes considerable amount of structure on how unobserved
heterogeneity (omitted time-invariant factors) a¤ects democratic transitions. Consequently, this
speci…cation makes it less likely that we will be able to fully control for the e¤ect of omitted
variables simultaneously a¤ecting income and democracy. Thus it makes it more likely that we
  22
    As is typically the case in studies like this we focus on a balanced panel. Our results do not change if we
instead modify the exercise to consider an unbalanced panel. Details available upon request.


                                                                                17
may still …nd a spurious positive e¤ect of income on transitions to and away from democracy.
Nevertheless, column 2 of Table 5 shows that even with this more restrictive Chamberlain hazard
model, there is no e¤ect of income per capita on transitions to or away from democracy. Once
                                                                    pos                 pos       neg
again, in panel A, we constrain                  pos   =   neg ,
                                                                    t     = neg
                                                                             t , and          =         . In panel B, we
                                                                                pos      neg
allow       pos     6=     neg   but we      constrain pos
                                                        t     =       neg
                                                                      t    and      =          . In panel C, we allow
 pos        neg ,    pos         neg           pos    neg
       6=            t     6=    t ,   and        6=       . In all of these panels, the e¤ect of income per capita
is reduced and is insigni…cant. Overall, there is no evidence that income per capita has a causal
e¤ect on transitions to or away from democracy once we include controls for omitted variables
simultaneously a¤ecting the evolution of income and democracy.
    Columns 3 and 4 are analogous to columns 1 and 2 on an annual balanced sample, and
achieve similar results. Column 5 adds lagged population and lagged education to the sample
of columns 1 and 2, where the averages of lagged population and lagged education are used in
the calculation of (7), and again, income per capita has no e¤ect on transitions to democracy
or transitions away from democracy.
    These results thus establish that the source of the di¤erence between our results and those
of Przeworski et al. (2000) are due to the presence of …xed e¤ects, and are not related to
di¤erences in the measures of democracy or estimation methods. All in all, the results in
the last two sections show that no matter what estimation approach one takes, controlling
for omitted variables simultaneously a¤ecting income and democracy–either by including a full
set of …xed country e¤ects or by using the parameterized approach of Chamberlain, 1980–
removes the empirical relationship between income per capita and democracy. These results
shed considerable doubt on the existence of a causal e¤ect of income on democracy which has
been the plinth of modernization theory for almost 50 years.


6      Comparison to the Existing Literature

The empirical results we present in this paper stand in contrast to the conventional wisdom and
the previous literature. In this section we discuss in more detail why our results di¤er.
    Beginning with Lipset (1959) most scholars have adopted a simple empirical strategy to
evaluate the determinants of democracy. Much cited papers by Jackman (1973), Bollen (1979),
and Muller (1995) look for the cross-sectional relationship between per capita income and other
covariates and some measure of democracy. In such studies, a particular date is chosen, and
each country constitutes one observation. An advance over these approaches was the addition
of time-series data in the paper by Burkhart and Lewis-Beck (1994) who pooled time-series
data with cross-sectional data. This latter approach is common in many contemporary studies
(Barro, 1997, 1999, Ross, 2001, Fish, 2003). That our results are di¤erent from this literature is

                                                                   18
not very surprising given that these papers do not investigate the possibility that the correlation
between income and democracy may be generated by omitted variables a¤ecting both variables.
The results we have presented so far make it clear that the source of di¤erence between our
…ndings and these studies is the presence of …xed e¤ects in our models. Both because there are
likely to be many potential omitted factors, and also because the alternative critical junctures
hypothesis emphasizes the importance of time-invariant historical factors, we believe that a …xed
e¤ects speci…cation is more appropriate, and that our results are likely to be closer to the causal
e¤ect of income on democracy.23
       Several more recent empirical studies have used dynamic probit models to investigate the
determinants of transitions to and away from democracy. Przeworski et al. (2000), Boix (2003),
Boix and Stokes (2003), Epstein, Bates, Goldstone, Kristensen, and O’Halloran (2004) and
Papaioannou and Siourounis (2004), for example, …nd a positive relationship between income
and democracy using such an approach (though Przeworski et al., 2000, emphasizes the e¤ect
of income on coups rather than on democratizations). As the last sub-section documented, the
critical di¤erence is that these previous empirical speci…cations do not include …xed e¤ects and
do not control for other cross-country di¤erences potentially a¤ecting income and democracy.
       Another important and in‡uential paper relevant to our investigation is Londregan and Poole
(1996), which is the only paper we are aware of that estimates models of democracy with …xed
e¤ects. A natural conjecture would have been that their results would parallel ours. However,
they also report positive and signi…cant e¤ects of income on democracy. Although Londregan
and Poole (1996) use maximum likelihood estimation in a two-equation model, their equation
for democracy is basically linear. Appendix Table A2 reports their basic result in column 1,
together with our linear estimation of their model in column 2.24 The estimates are very close,
in fact practically identical, to those in their original paper. In column 3, we omit Londregan
and Poole’s “transition”variable, which is an index giving a value of 1 to countries with missing
lagged democracy values, making their speci…cation more comparable to ours.25 This shows
that the results do not change much as a result of this exclusion.
       So why are these estimates so di¤erent from our results in the previous tables? The answer
is twofold. First, Londregan and Poole (1996) estimate their model on annual data, but do
not correct the standard errors for the serial correlation in the residuals. Second, they do not
  23
     In fact, to the extent that there are time-varying omitted variables, we would expect changes in these omitted
variables to have a positive e¤ect on both income and democracy, so that even …xed e¤ects estimators may lead to
results that are upwardly biased. Therefore, one may want to interpret our results as providing an upper bound
on the causal e¤ect of income on democracy.
  24
     We use their data, both to increase comparability (there have been revisions to the data since then), and also
to include the additional variables they have put together.
  25
     Our results are similar if we do not drop the transition variable, and in column 5 add …ve lags of this variable
together with …ve lags of GDP per capita and democracy.


                                                         19
include time e¤ects. Lack of time e¤ects in their models implies that their estimate of the
e¤ect of income may partly pick up the common trend in democracy and income. Equally
important, their standard errors are signi…cantly biased downward because of serial correlation
in the residual.26 Column 4 adds a full set of time e¤ects, and corrects the standard errors by
clustering on country. Now, log income per capita is no longer signi…cant, though it continues to
be positive. However, this positive estimate is also di¢ cult to interpret, since the regression also
includes income per capita growth, which is estimated to have a negative coe¢ cient. For this
reason, in column 5, we estimate their equation in line with our annual regressions (column 4 in
Table 2), including …ve lags of democracy and …ve lags of income per capita (which is naturally
much more ‡exible than including the one lag and two growth terms). Now, all of the income
terms are insigni…cant. We therefore conclude that Londregan and Poole’s (1996) results are
also consistent with ours.


7         Understanding the Fixed E¤ects Results

In the introduction, we argued that the …xed e¤ects results are consistent with the hypothesis
that the (long run) political and economic development paths of societies are intimately linked.
Political institutions and the distribution of resources in a society determine the distribution of
political power which then in‡uences both the economic institutions today and the evolution
of future political institutions. Economic institutions, in turn, determine both the aggregate
economic performance of the society and how its resources will be distributed. There is therefore
a natural complementarity between political and economic institutions. Economies grow if their
economic institutions encourage investment and innovation, for example, by providing secure
property rights and equality before the law; but this can only happen when those controlling
political power (the political elites) are constrained. We should thus expect democracy to be
associated with economic institutions that foster growth. Moreover, if events at some critical
juncture create a divergence in the political and economic institutions of a set of societies, we
may expect these di¤erences to persist over time; some of these societies may embark on a path
to high income and democracy, while others experience relative stagnation and non-democracy.27
         According to this theory, the paths of economic and political development are intertwined,
    26
     To see why this is an important concern, consider a hypothetical dataset in which we have minute-by-minute
data on democracy and income. Since the number of observations in this dataset would be near in…nite, the
standard error estimates without correcting for serial correlation would be essentially equal to zero and any
estimated coe¢ cient would be highly signi…cant. However, it is clear that the standard errors are not really equal
to zero in this case, because democracy and income from one minute to another are not independent observations;
they are highly serially correlated. To obtain an unbiased estimate of the variance-covariance matrix, one needs
to allow for an arbitrary pattern of serial correlation by country, which is what clustering achieves.
  27
     See the discussion of the role of critical junctures in Collier and Collier (1991).



                                                        20
and we expect democracy and income to evolve jointly. Nevertheless, conditional on a given
development path, economic growth does not necessarily lead to democratization.28 This rea-
soning suggests that the …xed e¤ects estimated in the previous section should be closely linked
to the underlying institutional development paths and to the factors a¤ecting what type of path
a society has followed. We now investigate this question.

7.1    Divergent Development Paths Among the Colonies

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002) document that factors a¤ecting the pro…tability
of di¤erent institutional structures for European colonizers had a major impact on early institu-
tions and on subsequent political and economic development in former European colonies. Based
on their ideas, we expect countries with high rates of settler mortality and higher indigenous
population density in 1500 to have experienced greater extraction of resources and repression
by Europeans, and consequently to be less democratic today. However, both population density
in 1500 and European settler mortality rates are subject to a large amount of measurement
error, and they are only some of the in‡uences on the ultimate choice of development path. For
example, for various reasons, Europeans opted for extractive institutions in many areas, such
as Brazil, with low population density. Therefore, a direct measure of institutions immediately
after the end of the colonial period is also useful to gauge the e¤ect of the historical develop-
ment paths on current outcomes. For this reason, we look at the measure of constraint on the
executive from the Polity IV dataset right after independence for each former colony, measured
as the average score during the …rst ten years after independence. This is the closest variable
we have to a measure of institutions during colonialism. We normalize this score to a 0 to 1
scale like democracy, with 1 representing the highest constraint on the executive.29 Finally, we
also control for the date of independence. This is useful because constraint on the executive
at di¤erent dates of independence may mean di¤erent things. In addition and potentially more
importantly, countries where Europeans settled and developed secure property rights and more
democratic institutions typically gained their independence earlier than colonies with extractive
institutions. Another important e¤ect of the date of independence on political and economic
development might be that former colonies undergo a relatively lengthy period of instability
after independence, adversely a¤ecting both growth prospects and democracy.
  28
     Similarly, there is no natural presumption that, conditional on a particular development path, a temporary
improvement in the democracy score should lead to higher incomes.
  29
     For example, Peru had a constraint on the executive score equal to 0.33, while the United States’s score was
1 at independence. These numbers are clearly indicative of the institutions that these countries had within the
colonial period itself.




                                                       21
7.2   Historical Variables and Fixed E¤ects

Our basic results with the former colony sample are in Table 6. Table 6 has three panels
which take the …xed e¤ects from our basic …xed e¤ects OLS regressions in Table 2, column
2. As a caveat, we remind the reader that in the regressions in Table 2, the …xed e¤ects are
not consistently estimated, because the time dimension, T , is small. Therefore, these results
should only be interpreted as suggestive of a general pattern. The …rst column of panel A
shows that the …xed e¤ect for the level of democracy using the Freedom House measure of
democracy is negatively correlated with population density in 1500. The higher was historical
population density, the lower is the …xed e¤ect today. Population density is highly signi…cant
with a t-statistic of almost 4. In the column 2 panel A we then investigate the e¤ect of settler
mortality. This again has the expected sign and greater historical mortality of European settlers
is negatively associated with the democracy …xed e¤ect. Column 3 then introduces our two
variables which should capture historical institutions more directly. The results in this column
show that greater constraint on the executive at independence is signi…cantly associated with
a greater …xed e¤ect, and a more recent independence date is signi…cantly associated with a
lower …xed e¤ect. In column 4 we include all of the historical variables. When we do so, settler
mortality loses signi…cance, and so in column 5 we include just the three signi…cant variables
from column 4. The historical variables are highly signi…cant with the expected signs and explain
63% of the variation in the …xed e¤ects.
   The robustness of the relationships found in Table 6 can be illustrated with scatterplots.
In Figures 6-9 we plot the …xed e¤ect from Table 2 column 2 panel A against the four histor-
ical variables. These …gures show that there are distinct relationships between these historical
variables and the …xed e¤ects which strongly supports our interpretations of our …ndings.
   Panels B and C of Table 6 are similar to panel A and examine the …xed e¤ects from regres-
sions which use Polity and Przeworski measures of democracy. The results are very similar to
those in panel A. The historical variables are all jointly signi…cant but not always individually
signi…cant. The main di¤erence is that population density loses signi…cance when it is included
with constraint on the executive and independence year when we consider the Przeworski mea-
sures of democracy.
   Many other time-invariant slow-moving characteristics of a society may also in‡uence its
propensity to be democratic. In Table 7, we investigate whether some obvious candidates might
be responsible for some of our …ndings and whether they alter the explanatory power of our
historical variables in the sample of former colonies. In particular, we add a number of additional
control variables to the three regressions from column 5 of Table 6. In each panel, we report
the coe¢ cient or the F-test for signi…cance of the additional variables, and at the bottom, we

                                                22
report the F-test for the joint signi…cance of our historical variables from Table 6 to demonstrate
the robustness of the …ndings there (we do not report the coe¢ cient of each of these historical
variables to save space).
    Many scholars have argued that countries formally colonized by the British inherit a culture
more compatible with democracy (Weiner, 1987, Muller, 1995). Column 1 of Table 7 investigates
this issue by adding a set of dummy variables capturing the identity of the colonial power. None
of these variables are individually signi…cant (the coe¢ cient estimates are not reported to save
space) and an F-test also reveals that they are jointly insigni…cant in all of the three regressions.
Contrary to these widespread views in the literature, there is no evidence here that having been
colonized by the British relative to some other power tends to promote democracy, facilitate
democratizations, or reduce the propensity of a society to experience coups.30 When these
colonial dummies are added the impact of the variables proxying for the determinants of the
development path is unchanged.
    Another popular argument points to religion as an important determinant of political devel-
opment, suggesting that countries whose population is predominantly Muslim are less likely to
be democratic (e.g. Huntington, 1991, Fish, 2002). Column 2 investigates this issue by adding
the proportions of the population that are Catholic, Protestant and Muslim. As with variables
capturing colonial origins, there is no evidence here that religion in‡uences the democracy …xed
e¤ect in the sample of former colonies.31 None of the individual coe¢ cients are signi…cant and
an F-test again shows them to be jointly insigni…cant.
    Column 3 adds the absolute value of latitude (distance from the equator), a popular proxy
for geographic e¤ects on economic development, and shows that latitude is insigni…cant and does
not alter the joint impact of the historical variables. Column 4 then examines the signi…cance of
a dummy variable which captures whether or not the country is a major oil producer. It has been
widely argued in political science that countries dominated by natural resources tend to be less
democratic (Ross, 2001), though recent work contests this (e.g., Dunning, 2007). This variable is
   30
      This is despite the fact that there appears to be an oft-emphasized correlation between democracy and
having been a British colony. Britain became a colonial power later than Spain and Portugal and even the
Netherlands. When it …nally expanded into the world many of the places which were promising colonies, such as
Latin America, were taken. Thus, by being a latecomer, Britain was forced to colonize what at the time appeared
relatively unappealing places to colonize, such as the United States or subsequently Australia. It was precisely
these relatively unattractive places which had initial conditions which did not lend themselves to the creation of
extractive colonies. But it was not because it was colonized by the British that led the United States to become
democratic, but rather how the initial conditions moulded the formation of institutions. Once the in‡uence of
these initial conditions is controlled for, there is no additional positive e¤ect of British colonization on democracy.
   31
      A dummy variable denoting whether the fraction of the population which is Muslim exceeds 20% is nevertheless
signi…cant if population density is excluded. Note that religion might still be an important determinant of the
development path in the entire world sample without being important in the former colony sample. In addition,
since these results are for a set of former European colonies which exclude the Middle East, our results cannot
convincingly settle the issue of the relationship between Islam and democracy.



                                                          23
also not signi…cant in any panels of the table. Finally we examine the impact of ethnolinguistic
fragmentation. The …nal column of Table 7 shows that conditional on the historical variables,
greater ethnolinguistic fragmentation is negatively correlated with the …xed e¤ects in panel A,
though it is only statistically signi…cant when we use the Freedom House measure of democracy.
In all panels, the addition of this variable has no impact on the signi…cance or explanatory power
of our historical variables.
    Overall, this section has provided evidence that is consistent with our interpretation of the
…xed e¤ects results as capturing the e¤ect of time-invariant, historical variables simultaneously
a¤ecting the evolution of income and democracy. It has documented that various historical
variables that proxy for the factors in‡uencing the subsequent evolution of institutions in former
European colonies are closely related to the …xed e¤ects from the democracy regressions. This
pattern is consistent with the general thrust of the critical junctures hypothesis.


8     Democracy and Income in the Long Run

We have so far followed much of the existing literature in focusing on the post-war period, where
the democracy and income data are of higher quality. Nevertheless, it is important to investigate
whether the relationship between income and democracy emerges only over a longer period of
time. This is of interest because when Lipset (1959) formulated modernization theory in the late
1950s, he probably had in mind the connection between industrialization, income growth, and
democracy that seemed to characterize the development experiences of the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. This point is emphasized by Boix and Stokes (2003), who argue that
the post-war sample misses the democratization of much of Western Europe and North America
in the late nineteenth century.
    Although historical data are typically less reliable, the Polity IV dataset extends back to
the beginning of the nineteenth century for all independent countries, as does the Boix-Rosato
extension of Przeworski et al.’s dataset, and Maddison (2003) gives estimates of income per capita
for many countries during this period. We therefore construct a data set starting from 1875,
where we study the data in 25 year intervals in order to maximize the cross-section of countries
which can be observed. We construct a balanced panel of countries for which democracy, lagged
democracy (calculated 25 years earlier), and lagged income (calculated 25 years earlier) are
available for every 25th year between 1875 and 2000.32 The result is a sample of 25 countries for
  32
     For reasons of data availability, we assign income per capita in 1820 to 1850, income per capita in 1870 to
1875, and income per capita in 1929 to 1925. All of our results are robust to dropping the 1875 observation so as
to not use the 1850 estimate of income per capita as the value of lagged income. For all observations, if income
per capita is not available for a particular observation, it is estimated at the lowest aggregation level which it is
available, and the regressions are clustered by the highest aggregation level assigned to a particular country. We



                                                         24
the regressions using the Polity measure and a sample of 30 countries for the regressions using
the Przeworski/Boix-Rosato measure.33
    In Table 8 we present our …xed e¤ects results with this long run panel. The speci…cations of
columns 1-3 in Table 8 are identical to the speci…cations of columns 1-3 of Table 2 over the long
25 year sample where the dependent variable is the Polity index. In columns 4-6, the dependent
variable is the Przeworski/Boix-Rosato index. The results in this table are very similar with
either measure of democracy. Columns 1 and 4 report the basic pooled OLS regressions without
…xed e¤ects. These show the usual …ndings since income per capita has a positive coe¢ cient and
is strongly signi…cant. Columns 2 and 5 then add the …xed e¤ects, and the introduction of …xed
e¤ects makes income per capita insigni…cant. In columns 3 and 6, the use of the Arellano-Bond
estimator causes income to have the wrong (negative) sign.
    In Table 9 we examine whether there is a relationship between transitions to democracy and
transitions away from democracy in this long run panel using the dichotomous Przeworski/Boix-
Rosato measure of democracy. We again implement the double hazard model introduced in
Section 5.2. As before, we estimate the three possible models with di¤ering degrees of ‡exibility
in cross-equation restrictions.34 As in the post-war panel, without …xed e¤ects the e¤ect of
income is large and signi…cant on transitions to democracy and transitions away from democracy.
However, once again when we include …xed e¤ects to control for omitted variables simultaneously
a¤ecting the evolution of income and democracy, the relationship between income per capita
and transitions to and away from democracy becomes insigni…cant.
    The conclusion from this investigation is that the long run historical evolution of countries is
similar to the evolution of countries in the post-1960 sample. Once we control for …xed e¤ects,
there is no signi…cant relationship between income per capita and democracy.


9    Conclusion

There is a general consensus in the empirical political science literature that the modernization
hypothesis provides a good approximation of the relationship between economic growth and
democratization. In particular, most empirical studies conclude that there is a causal e¤ect
of per capita income on democracy, though this may perhaps only work through the process
also assign the 1994 Przeworski/Boix-Rosato democracy score to 2000.
  33
     Countries in both samples are Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Den-
mark, El Salvador, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela. The sample with Przeworski/Boix-Rosato
measure additionally includes France, Japan, Peru, Portugal, and Spain.
  34
     Speci…cally, Columns 1 and 2 correspond to the speci…cations of columns 1 and 2 of panel A of Table 5;
columns 3 and 4 correspond to the speci…cations of columns 1 and 2 of panel B of Table 5; and columns 5 and 6
correspond to the speci…cations of columns 1 and 2 of panel C of Table 5.



                                                      25
of democratic consolidation. In this paper, we argue that, though income and democracy are
positively correlated, there is no evidence of a signi…cant causal e¤ect of income on democracy.
Instead, omitted, most probably historical, factors appear to have shaped the divergent political
and economic development paths of various societies, leading to the positive association between
economic performance and democracy.
   The previous literature did not reach this conclusion because most papers did not control
for the endogeneity of income per capita. This empirical methodology is potentially problematic
because it fails to control for omitted variables correlated with both income and democracy. This
is particularly concerning, since an alternative hypothesis, the critical junctures theory, implies
that such omitted variables are responsible for the correlation between income and democracy.
We show that when we control for these omitted variables by including …xed e¤ects or by
using other econometric techniques, the e¤ect of income per capita on democracy disappears.
The most plausible interpretation of our …ndings is that previous research has su¤ered from
omitted variable biases. We then show that in the sample of former European colonies, where
we have measures of the historical sources of variation in development paths, the …xed e¤ects
indeed capture the impact of historical di¤erences which researchers have shown can account for
economic and institutional divergence.
   Our overall conclusion is that the relationship between income and democracy and the widely-
accepted modernization hypothesis need to be reevaluated, with much greater emphasis on the
underlying factors a¤ecting both variables and the political and economic development path
of societies. Our results indicate that countries have embarked upon di¤erent development
paths, most likely at some critical junctures during their histories, and while some paths have
led to democracy and prosperity, some others involved non-democracy and relative poverty.
Although democracy and prosperity coevolve along the “virtuous” development path, there is
no evidence that income has a causal e¤ect on democracy conditional on the development path.
Consequently, there is no reason to expect income changes over 5, 10 or even 20 year intervals
observed during the post-war era to lead to signi…cant changes in regimes above and beyond
those experienced by the world as a whole. Though this conceptual approach di¤ers from that
proposed by Lipset (1959) and intensively pursued by the empirical literature, it is close to that
developed by Moore (1966) and elaborated by many non-quantitative scholars.
   Our results should not be interpreted as implying that historical factors (or time-invariant
factors captured by …xed e¤ects) are the only or the major determinant of democracy today.
There is a large amount of variability in democracy across countries that is not explained by our
historical variables and also a substantial amount of over-time variability in the democracy score
of a country that still needs to be understood and accounted for. For example, it remains true


                                                26
that over time there is a general tendency towards greater incomes and education, and increased
political participation across the world. In our regressions, time e¤ects capture these general
(world-level) tendencies. Our estimates suggest that these world-level movements in democracy
are unlikely to be driven by the causal e¤ect of income and education on democracy. Just what
is causing them is a subject for future research. One possibility, for example, is that there are
important di¤usion e¤ects (see for instance, Simmons and Elkins, 2004) so that the democracy
level of one country interacts with that of its neighbors.




                                                27
Bibliography

    Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,”American Economic Review,
December, 91, 1369-1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of
Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1231-1294.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictatorship
and Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2007)
“Income and Democracy,” forthcoming American Economic Review.
   Anderson, Theodore W. and Cheng Hsiao (1982) “Formulation and Estimation of
Dynamic Models using Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 18, 67-82.
   Arellano, Manuel and Stephen R. Bond (1991) “Some Speci…cation tests for Panel
Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, 58, 277-298.
   Barro, Robert J. (1997) The Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Em-
pirical Study, Cambridge; MIT Press.
   Barro, Robert J. (1999) “The Determinants of Democracy,”Journal of Political Economy,
107, S158-S183.
   Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2000) “International Data on Educational At-
tainment: Updates and Implications,” CID Working Paper #42.
   Beck, Nathaniel (2001) “Time-Series Cross-Section Data: What have we learned in the
past few Years?” Annual Review of Political Science, 4, 271-293.
   Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Du‡o, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004) “How Much
Should we Trust Di¤erences-in-Di¤erences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
249 - 275.
   Boix, Carles (2003) Democracy and Redistribution, Cambridge University Press; New
York.
   Boix, Carles and Sebastián Rosato (2001) “A Complete Data Set of Political Regimes,
1800-1999,” Unpublished, Department of Political Science, University of Chicago.
   Boix, Carles and Susan C. Stokes (2003) “Endogenous Democratization,” World Pol-
itics, 55, 517-549.
   Bollen, Kenneth A. (1979) “Political Democracy and the Timing of Development,”Amer-



                                              28
ican Sociological Review, 44, 572-587.
   Bollen, Kenneth A. (1990) “Political Democracy: Conceptual and Measurement Traps,”
Studies in Comparative International Development, 25, 7-24.
   Bollen, Kenneth A. (2001) “Cross-National Indicators of Liberal Democracy, 1950-1990”
[Computer …le]. 2nd ICPSR version. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina [producer],
1998. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
   Burkhart, Ross E. and Michael S. Lewis-Beck (1994) “Comparative Democracy: The
Economic Development Thesis,” American Political Science Review, 88, 903-910.
   Central Intelligence Agency (2004) CIA World Factbook, Website and Book. Wash-
ington, DC.
   Chamberlain, Gary (1980) "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data," Review of
Economic Studies, 47, 225-238.
   Collier, David and Ruth Berins Collier (1991) Shaping the political arena: critical
junctures, the labor movement, and regime dynamics in Latin America, Princeton; Princeton
University Press.
   Dunning, Thad (2007) Crude Democracy: Natural Resource Wealth and Political Regimes,
Unpublished book manuscript, Department of Political Science, Yale University.
   Elkins, Zachary (2000) “Gradations of Democracy? Empirical Tests of Alternative Con-
ceptualizations,” American Journal of Political Science, 44, 293-300.
   Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤ (1997) “Factor Endowments, Insti-
tutions, and Di¤erential Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in Stephen H. Haber
ed. How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford; Stanford University Press.
   Epstein, David L., Robert H. Bates, Jack Goldstone, Ida Kristensen, and Sharyn
O’Halloran (2006) “Democratic Transitions,”American Journal of Political Science, 50, 551-
569.
   Fish, Steven M. (2002) “Islam and Authoritarianism,” World Politics, 55, 4-37.
   Freedom House (2004) Freedom in the World, Website and Book. Washington, DC.
   Green, Donald P., Soo Yeon Kim, and David H. Yoon (2001) “Dirty Pool,” Inter-
national Organization, 55, 441-468.
   Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Atten (2002) Penn World Tables
Version 6.1. Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).
   Jackman, Robert W. (1973) “On the relation of Economic Development to Democratic
Performance,” American Journal of Political Science, 17, 611-621.
   Lipset, Seymour M. (1959) “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Develop-
ment and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review, 53, 69-105.


                                               29
   Lipset, Seymour M. and Stein Rokkan eds. (1967) Party systems and voter align-
ments: cross-national perspectives, New York; Free Press.
   Londregan, John B. and Keith T. Poole (1996) “Does High Income Promote Democ-
racy?” World Politics, 49, 1-30.
   Maddison, Angus (2003) The world economy: historical statistics, Development Centre
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, France.
   Mahoney, James (2002) Legacies of Liberalism: Path Dependence and Political Regimes
in Central America, Baltimore; Johns Hopkins University Press.
   Mahoney, James and Dietrich Rueschemeyer eds. (2003) Comparative Historical
Analysis in the Social Sciences, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Marshall, Monty G. and Keith Jaggers (2004) “Political Regime Characteristics and
Transitions, 1800-2002,” Polity IV Project. University of Maryland.
   McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones (1975) Atlas of World Population History, New
York; Facts on File.
   Moulton, Brent R. (1986) “Random Group E¤ects and the Precision of Regression Es-
timates,” Journal of Econometrics, XXXII, 385-397.
   Muller, Edwin N. (1995) “Economic Determinants of Democracy,”American Sociological
Review, 60, 966-982.
   Mundlak, Yair (1978) “On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data,” Econo-
metrica, 46, 69-85.
   O’Donnell, Guillermo (1973) Modernization and Bureaucratic Authoritarianism: Studies
in South American Politics, Berkeley; University of California Press.
   Papaioannou, Elias and Gregorios Siourounis (2004) “Economic and Social Factors
Driving the Third Wave of Democratization” Unpublished, London Business School.
   Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, José A. Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi
(2000) Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and material well-being in the world,
1950-1990, Cambridge University Press, New York NY.
   Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1997) “Modernization: Theory and Facts,”
World Politics, 49, 155-183.
   Ross, Michael L. (2001) “Does Oil Hinder Democracy?” World Politics, 53, 325-361.
   Scully, Timothy R. (1992) Rethinking the center: party politics in nineteenth- and
twentieth-century Chile, Stanford; Stanford University Press.
   Simmons, Beth A. and Zachary Elkins (2004) “The Globalization of Liberalization:
Policy Di¤usion in the International Political Economy,”American Political Science Review, 98,
171-189.


                                              30
   Steinmo, Sven, Kathleen Thelen, and Frank Longstreth eds. (1992) Structuring
politics: historical institutionalism in comparative analysis, New York; Cambridge University
Press.
   Weber, Max (1930) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Allen and Unwin;
London.
   Weiner, Myron (1987) “Empirical Democratic Theory,”in Myron Weiner and E. Ozbudan
eds. Competitive Elections in Developing Countries, Duke University Press; Durham.
   Wooldridge, Je¤rey M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
MIT Press; Cambridge.
   World Bank (2002) World Development Indicators, CD-ROM and Book. Washington,
DC.




                                             31
                                                        Table 1
                                                  Descriptive Statistics


                                                                  Former               High Income           Low Income
                                         All countries            Colonies              Countries             Countries
                                              (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)

Freedom House Measure                         0.55                   0.47                   0.74                  0.35
of Democracy                                 (0.36)                 (0.34)                 (0.31)                (0.29)

Polity Measure                                0.54                   0.47                   0.75                  0.34
of Democracy                                 (0.38)                 (0.36)                 (0.34)                (0.31)

Przeworski Measure                            0.43                   0.32                   0.68                  0.18
of Democracy                                 (0.49)                 (0.47)                 (0.47)                (0.38)

Log GDP per Capita                            8.14                   7.82                   9.01                  7.27
 (Chain Weighted 1996 Prices)                (1.03)                 (0.89)                 (0.58)                (0.51)

Constraint on the Executive                                          0.40
 at Independence                                                    (0.35)

Independence Year                                                    1918
                                                                     (63)

Log Population Density in 1500                                       0.45
                                                                    (1.58)

Log Settler Mortality                                                4.76
                                                                    (1.24)

Observations                                  822                    557                    411                    411
Values are averages during sample period, with standard deviations in parentheses, where the sample is from 1960-2000 and
data is included in five year intervals. All countries are those for which democracy--using all three potential measures--and
income per capita in five-year intervals are available at least once during 1960-2000. Column 1 refers to the world sample, and
column 2 refers to the sample of former colonies. Columns 3 and 4 split the sample in column 1 by the median income (from
Penn World Tables 6.1) in the sample of column 1. Freedom House Measure of Democracy is the Political Rights Index,
augmented following Barro (1999). Polity Measure of Democracy is Democracy Index minus Autocracy Index from Polity IV.
Przeworski Measure of Democracy is from Boix-Rosato (2001). GDP per capita in 1996 prices with PPP adjustment is from
the Penn World Tables 6.1. Constraint on the Executive at Independence is from Polity. Year of independence is from the CIA
World Factbook. Log Population Density in 1500 is from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002). Log Settler Mortality is
from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001). Former colonies is the subsample colonized by European powers before
1900. For detailed definitions and sources, see Appendix Table A1.
                                                                           Table 2
                                                            Fixed Effects Results using Democracy
                                                                               Base Sample, 1960-2000
                                                        5-year data                           Annual data                5-year data
                                                       Fixed Effects     Arellano-Bond       Fixed Effects    Fixed Effects      Arellano-Bond
                                Pooled OLS                 OLS               GMM                 OLS              OLS                 GMM
                                    (1)                     (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)                 (6)
Panel A                                                     Dependent Variable is Freedom House Measure of Democracy
Democracy t-1                        0.703                 0.377             0.489              [0.00]            0.362               0.508
                                    (0.036)               (0.052)           (0.085)                              (0.056)             (0.093)
Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.073                  0.008                  -0.129                   [0.33]                   -0.038                  -0.153
                                    (0.010)                (0.034)                (0.076)                                           (0.042)                 (0.133)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                   -0.019                  0.016
                                                                                                                                    (0.083)                 (0.119)
Education t-1                                                                                                                        -0.012                  -0.025
                                                                                                                                    (0.019)                 (0.024)
Observations                         955                    955                     838           2896                685                                     589
Countries                            150                    150                     127            148                 96                                      92
R-squared                            0.72                   0.79                                  0.93                0.76
Panel B                                                           Dependent Variable is Polity Measure of Democracy
Democracy t-1                        0.748                  0.447            0.590               [0.00]              0.453                                   0.633
                                    (0.034)                (0.063)          (0.106)                                 (0.068)                                 (0.112)
Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.053                  -0.003                 -0.351                   [0.53]                   -0.006                  -0.229
                                    (0.010)                (0.038)                (0.127)                                           (0.044)                 (0.186)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                   0.160                   0.156
                                                                                                                                    (0.081)                 (0.106)
Education t-1                                                                                                                        -0.028                  -0.027
                                                                                                                                    (0.021)                 (0.028)
Observations                         856                     856              747                  3705              643                                      541
Countries                            136                     136              114                   134               93                                       91
R-squared                            0.77                    0.82                                  0.96              0.80
Panel C                                                         Dependent Variable is Przeworski Measure of Democracy
Democracy t-1                        0.679                  0.318            0.457                [0.00]            0.293                                    0.389
                                    (0.046)                (0.058)          (0.092)                                (0.062)                                  (0.106)
Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.097                  0.051                  -0.017                   [0.77]                   0.052                   0.107
                                    (0.018)                (0.055)                (0.138)                                           (0.088)                 (0.233)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                   0.066                   0.301
                                                                                                                                    (0.144)                 (0.206)
Education t-1                                                                                                                        -0.012                  -0.045
                                                                                                                                    (0.045)                 (0.040)
Observations                         862                    862                     792                     3720                      619                     524
Countries                            123                    123                     118                      119                       95                      93
R-squared                            0.67                   0.76                                            0.92                      0.75
Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, 4, and 5,
with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Columns 3 and 6 use GMM of Arellano and Bond (1991), with robust standard
errors; in both columns we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Freedom House Measure of
Democracy in panel A; Polity Measure of Democracy in panel B; and Przeworski Measure of Democracy in panel C. Base sample in columns 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 is an
unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); column 4 uses
annual data from the same sample. In column 4, each right hand side variable has five annual lags; we report the p-value from an F-test for the joint significance of all 5
lags. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                                             Table 3
                                                      Fixed Effects Results using Transitions to Democracy
                                                                                 Base Sample, 1960-2000
                                                         5-year data                             Annual data                5-year data
                                                        Fixed Effects     Arellano-Bond          Fixed Effects  Fixed Effects       Arellano-Bond
                                 Pooled OLS                 OLS                GMM                   OLS             OLS                 GMM
                                     (1)                     (2)                (3)                   (4)             (5)                 (6)
Panel A                                               Dependent Variable is Freedom House Measure of Transitions to Democracy
Democracy t-1                         0.820                 0.656              0.761                [0.00]           0.634               0.738
                                     (0.024)               (0.031)            (0.049)                               (0.035)             (0.057)
Log GDP per Capita t-1                0.021                  0.019                   -0.022                    [0.30]                    -0.009                  0.033
                                     (0.007)                (0.023)                 (0.046)                                             (0.025)                 (0.075)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                       -0.003                  0.083
                                                                                                                                        (0.045)                 (0.065)
Education t-1                                                                                                                            -0.013                  -0.033
                                                                                                                                        (0.012)                 (0.020)
Observations                          955                     955              838                  2896                685                                       589
Countries                             150                     150              127                   148                 96                                        92
R-squared                             0.84                    0.88                                  0.96                0.86
Panel B                                                     Dependent Variable is Polity Measure of Transitions to Democracy
Democracy t-1                         0.851                  0.674            0.813                [0.00]              0.668                                     0.829
                                     (0.023)                (0.043)          (0.061)                                  (0.049)                                   (0.066)
Log GDP per Capita t-1                0.015                  -0.016                  -0.237                    [0.11]                    -0.013                  -0.056
                                     (0.008)                (0.031)                 (0.073)                                             (0.032)                 (0.106)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                       0.130                   0.176
                                                                                                                                        (0.052)                 (0.069)
Education t-1                                                                                                                            -0.029                  -0.045
                                                                                                                                        (0.014)                 (0.022)
Observations                          856                    856               747                3705                 643                                        541
Countries                             136                    136               114                 134                  93                                         91
R-squared                             0.85                   0.88                                 0.97                 0.87
Panel C                                                  Dependent Variable is Przeworski Measure of Transitions to Democracy
Democracy t-1                         0.842                 0.582             0.753              [0.00]               0.568                                      0.721
                                     (0.027)               (0.042)           (0.064)                                 (0.047)                                    (0.079)
Log GDP per Capita t-1                0.040                  0.009                   0.009                     [0.91]                    0.012                   0.220
                                     (0.014)                (0.042)                 (0.112)                                             (0.059)                 (0.174)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                       0.034                   0.274
                                                                                                                                        (0.087)                 (0.134)
Education t-1                                                                                                                            -0.027                  -0.080
                                                                                                                                        (0.029)                 (0.035)
Observations                          862                     862                     792                       3720                      619                     524
Countries                             123                     123                     118                        119                       95                      93
R-squared                             0.77                    0.84                                              0.95                      0.84
Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, 4, and 5,
with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Columns 3 and 6 use GMM of Arellano and Bond (1991), with robust standard
errors; in both columns we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Freedom House Measure of
Transitions to Democracy in panel A; Polity Measure of Transitions to Democracy in panel B; and Przeworski Measure of Transitions to Democracy in panel C, where the
construction of the variables is described in Section 5.1 of the text. Base sample in columns 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 is an unbalanced panel, 1960-2000, with data at 5-year
intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); column 4 uses annual data from the same sample. In column 4, each
right hand side variable has five annual lags; we report the p-value from an F-test for the joint significance of all 5 lags. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table
1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                                      Table 4
                                           Fixed Effects Results using Transitions away from Democracy
                                                                           Base Sample, 1960-2000
                                                  5-year data                             Annual data               5-year data
                                                 Fixed Effects      Arellano-Bond        Fixed Effects   Fixed Effects      Arellano-Bond
                                 Pooled OLS          OLS                 GMM                 OLS             OLS                 GMM
                                     (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)             (5)                 (6)
Panel A                                    Dependent Variable is Freedom House Measure of Transitions away from Democracy
Democracy t-1                       0.882            0.721               0.728              [0.00]           0.729               0.770
                                   (0.022)          (0.035)             (0.056)                             (0.037)             (0.055)
Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.052                  -0.011                 -0.108                   [0.19]                    -0.029                 -0.186
                                    (0.007)                (0.017)                (0.054)                                            (0.026)                (0.102)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                    -0.016                 -0.067
                                                                                                                                     (0.049)                (0.085)
Education t-1                                                                                                                         0.001                  0.008
                                                                                                                                     (0.011)                (0.014)
Observations                          955                  955                838                 2896                685                                      589
Countries                             150                  150                127                  148                 96                                       92
R-squared                             0.90                 0.92                                   0.97                0.91
Panel B                                               Dependent Variable is Polity Measure of Transitions away from Democracy
Democracy t-1                        0.898                0.773              0.776               [0.00]              0.786                                   0.805
                                    (0.022)              (0.040)            (0.067)                                 (0.039)                                 (0.067)
Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.038                  0.013                  -0.114                   [0.34]                    0.006                  -0.172
                                    (0.008)                (0.016)                (0.073)                                            (0.027)                (0.120)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                    0.030                  -0.020
                                                                                                                                     (0.047)                (0.073)
Education t-1                                                                                                                         0.001                  0.017
                                                                                                                                     (0.013)                (0.014)
Observations                          856                856                 747                3705                643                                        541
Countries                             136                136                 114                 134                 93                                         91
R-squared                             0.92               0.94                                   0.98                0.93
Panel C                                           Dependent Variable is Przeworski Measure of Transitions away from Democracy
Democracy t-1                        0.837              0.736               0.705              [0.00]              0.725                                     0.668
                                    (0.031)            (0.044)             (0.054)                                (0.047)                                   (0.061)
Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.057                  0.042                  -0.026                   [0.48]                    0.040                  -0.113
                                    (0.013)                (0.028)                (0.092)                                            (0.046)                (0.168)
Log Population t-1                                                                                                                    0.032                  0.027
                                                                                                                                     (0.077)                (0.137)
Education t-1                                                                                                                         0.015                  0.034
                                                                                                                                     (0.024)                (0.022)
Observations                          862                    862                    792                      3720                      619                     524
Countries                             123                    123                    118                       119                       95                      93
R-squared                             0.88                   0.91                                            0.97                      0.90
Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in column 1, with robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, 4, and 5,
with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Columns 3 and 6 use GMM of Arellano and Bond (1991), with robust standard
errors; in both columns we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Freedom House Measure of
Transitions away from Democracy in panel A; Polity Measure of Transitions away from Democracy in panel B; and Przeworski Measure of Transitions away from
Democracy in panel C. The construction of the variables is described in Section 5.1 of the text. Base sample in columns 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 is an unbalanced panel, 1960-
2000, with data at 5-year intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1960, so t-1=1955); column 4 uses annual data from the same
sample. In column 4, each right hand side variable has five annual lags; we report the p-value from an F-test for the joint significance of all 5 lags. For detailed data
definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                                   Table 5
                                Hazard Model using Przeworski Measure of Transitions to and away from Democracy
                                                                                                    Balanced Panel, 1965-1995
                                                                                5-year data                       Annual data                   5-year data
                                                                                   Chamberlain                       Chamberlain    Chamberlain
                                                                      Exponential  Exponential       Exponential      Exponential   Exponential
                                                                        Hazard        Hazard           Hazard           Hazard        Hazard
                                                                         (1)           (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)
Panel A: Constrained Model                                                  Dependent Variable is Transitions to and away from Democracy
Log GDP per Capita t-1                                                  0.412         0.014              0.397          -0.052         -0.044
                                                                         (0.047)          (0.099)             (0.046)          (0.095)            (0.139)

Log Population t-1                                                                                                                                 -0.263
                                                                                                                                                  (0.277)

Education t-1                                                                                                                                      0.030
                                                                                                                                                  (0.071)

Observations                                                               735           735               3180            3180            588
Countries                                                                  105           105                106             106             88
Panel B: Partially Constrained Model                                          Dependent Variable is Transitions to and away from Democracy
Log GDP per Capita t-1 on Transitions to Democracy                        0.180         -0.050            0.080           -0.157         -0.081
                                                                         (0.039)          (0.113)             (0.028)          (0.089)            (0.148)

Log GDP per Capita t-1 on Transitions away from Democracy                 0.288            0.056               0.265            0.027              0.017
                                                                         (0.034)          (0.112)             (0.026)          (0.089)            (0.148)

Log Population t-1                                                                                                                                 0.012
                                                                                                                                                  (0.293)

Education t-1                                                                                                                                      0.018
                                                                                                                                                  (0.084)

Observations                                                               735           735               3180            3180            588
Countries                                                                  105           105                106             106             88
Panel C: Unonstrained Model                                                   Dependent Variable is Transitions to and away from Democracy
Log GDP per Capita t-1 on Transitions to Democracy                        0.147         -0.101            0.085           -0.112         -0.135
                                                                         (0.049)          (0.108)             (0.029)          (0.077)            (0.148)

Log GDP per Capita t-1 on Transitions away from Democracy                 0.344            0.341               0.208           -0.010              0.308
                                                                         (0.089)          (0.279)             (0.049)          (0.099)            (0.336)

Log Population t-1                                                                                                                                 0.017
                                                                                                                                                  (0.085)

Education t-1                                                                                                                                      0.219
                                                                                                                                                  (0.349)

Observations                                                                 686             686                2062            2062                 540
Countries                                                                    105             105                 106             106                  88
 Exponential double hazard model in columns 1 and 3 and Chamberlain exponential double hazard model in columns 2, 4, and 5. Coefficients correspond
 to average marginal effects. Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent
 variable is Przeworski Measure of Democracy. Base sample in columns 1 and 2 is a balanced panel 1965-1965 with data at 5-year intervals, where the
 start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1965, so t-1=1960). Column 5 is the same panel for which population and education data is
 available. Columns 3 and 4 is a balanced panel 1965-1994 in annual intervals, where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e.,
 t=1965, so t-1=1964). In columns 1 and 3, in panel A, the coefficients in equations (5) and (6) are constrained to be identical; in panel B, the coefficient
 on income is allowed to be different; in panel C, the coefficient on income and time effects are allowed to be different. In columns 2, 4, and 5, in panel
 A, the coefficients in equations (8) and (9) are constrained to be identical; in panel B, the coefficient on income is allowed to be different; in panel C, the
 coefficient on income, time effects, and country fixed effects are allowed to be different. For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and
 Appendix Table A1. See text for a detailed discussion of estimation technique.
                                                               Table 6
                                Effect of Historical Institutions on Democracy: Former Colonies
                                                                           Former European Colonies
                                                                                  5-year data
                                                    OLS               OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS
                                                     (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
Panel A                                              Dependent Variable is Fixed Effect from panel A column 2 of Table 2
Constraint on the Executive at Independence                                          0.308          0.266           0.288
                                                                                    (0.036)        (0.042)         (0.036)
Independence Year/100                                                                             -0.163              -0.136              -0.142
                                                                                                 (0.020)             (0.023)             (0.021)
Log Population Density in 1500                            -0.045                                                      -0.016              -0.021
                                                         (0.011)                                                     (0.008)             (0.008)
Log Settler Mortality                                                         -0.086                                  -0.017
                                                                             (0.014)                                 (0.013)
Observations                                                90            73                82              68              80
R-squared                                                  0.15          0.35              0.59            0.69            0.63
Panel B                                                    Dependent Variable is Fixed Effect from panel B column 2 of Table 2
Constraint on the Executive at Independence                                               0.293           0.283           0.266
                                                                                         (0.033)         (0.041)         (0.034)
Independence Year/100                                                                             -0.147              -0.139              -0.131
                                                                                                 (0.018)             (0.023)             (0.019)
Log Population Density in 1500                            -0.042                                                      -0.017              -0.018
                                                         (0.010)                                                     (0.008)             (0.008)
Log Settler Mortality                                                         -0.074                                  0.001
                                                                             (0.013)                                 (0.013)
Observations                                                80            70                82              68              80
R-squared                                                  0.18          0.31              0.59            0.67            0.62
Panel C                                                    Dependent Variable is Fixed Effect from panel C column 2 of Table 2
Constraint on the Executive at Independence                                               0.276           0.294           0.255
                                                                                         (0.062)         (0.084)         (0.065)
Independence Year/100                                                                             -0.220              -0.221              -0.228
                                                                                                 (0.034)             (0.048)             (0.037)
Log Population Density in 1500                            -0.032                                                      -0.005              0.005
                                                         (0.017)                                                     (0.017)             (0.015)
Log Settler Mortality                                                         -0.077                                  0.012
                                                                             (0.023)                                 (0.027)
Observations                                                83                  71                  81                 68                  79
R-squared                                                  0.04                0.14                0.39               0.39                0.40
Weighted cross-sectional OLS in all columns. Dependent variable in panels A, B, and C is the country fixed effect calculated column 2 of Table 2 in
panels A, B, and C, respectively. Weights correspond to the inverse non-robust standard error of the country fixed effect calculated in column 2 of
Table 2. In all columns, data represents all available values in the former colonies sample, where a country can only enter once. For detailed data
definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                        Table 7
                        Effect of Alternate Historical Factors on Democracy: Former Colonies
                                                                  Former European Colonies
                                                                         5-year data
                                            OLS              OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS
                                             (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
Panel A                                     Dependent Variable is Fixed Effect from panel A column 2 of Table 2
Former Colonizer F-test                    [0.54]

Religion F-test                                                             [0.55]

Latitude                                                                                          0.124
                                                                                                 (0.104)
Significant Oil Producer                                                                                               0.000
                                                                                                                      (0.048)
Ethno-Linguistic Fragmentation                                                                                                              -0.104
                                                                                                                                           (0.042)
Historical Institutions F-test                         [0.00]               [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]               [0.00]
Observations                                             80            80                80              80              77
R-squared                                               0.64          0.64              0.63            0.63            0.68
Panel B                                                 Dependent Variable is Fixed Effect from panel B column 2 of Table 2
Former Colonizer F-test                                [0.71]

Religion F-test                                                             [0.41]

Latitude                                                                                          0.005
                                                                                                 (0.097)
Significant Oil Producer                                                                                               -0.001
                                                                                                                      (0.045)
Ethno-Linguistic Fragmentation                                                                                                              -0.067
                                                                                                                                           (0.042)
Historical Institutions F-test                         [0.00]               [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]               [0.00]
Observations                                             80            80                80              80              77
R-squared                                               0.62          0.63              0.62            0.62            0.65
Panel C                                                 Dependent Variable is Fixed Effect from panel C column 2 of Table 2
Former Colonizer F-test                                [0.85]

Religion F-test                                                             [0.29]

Latitude                                                                                          -0.023
                                                                                                 (0.187)
Significant Oil Producer                                                                                               0.025
                                                                                                                      (0.087)
Ethno-Linguistic Fragmentation                                                                                                              -0.132
                                                                                                                                           (0.082)
Historical Institutions F-test                         [0.00]               [0.00]               [0.00]                [0.00]               [0.00]
Observations                                             79                   79                    79                   79                   77
R-squared                                               0.40                 0.43                  0.40                 0.40                 0.42
Weighted cross-sectional OLS in all columns. Dependent variable in panels A, B, and C is the country fixed effect calculated column 2 of Table 2
in panels A, B, and C, respectively. Weights correspond to the non-robust standard error of the country fixed effect calculated in column 2 of
Table 2. In all columns, data represents all available values in the former colonies sample, where a country can only enter once. Constraint on the
Executive at Independence, Independence Year/100, and Log Population Density in 1500 are included in all columns but not displayed; the
historical institutions F-test reports the p-value for their joint significance. Former colonizer F-test reports the p-value for the joint significance of
British, French, and Spanish colony dummies which are included but not displayed in column 1. Religion F-test reports the p-value for the joint
significance of fraction Catholic, fraction Protestant, and fraction Muslim which are included but not displayed in column 2. For detailed data
definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                                   Table 8
                                           Fixed Effects Results using Democracy in the Long Run
                                                                      Balanced Panel, 1875-2000
                                                                             25-year data
                                                Fixed Effects     Arellano-Bond                                            Fixed Effects        Arellano-Bond
                                 Pooled OLS         OLS               GMM              Pooled OLS                              OLS                  GMM
                                     (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)                                  (5)                   (6)

                                                                                                       Dependent Variable is Przeworski Measure of
                              Dependent Variable is Polity Measure of Democracy                                       Democracy
Democracy t-1                      0.487             0.192             0.439                             0.311            0.042            0.215
                                  (0.085)           (0.119)           (0.143)                           (0.102)          (0.119)          (0.143)

Log GDP per Capita t-1               0.116                -0.020                -0.495                    0.259                 0.163                -0.692
                                    (0.034)               (0.093)               (0.266)                  (0.048)               (0.104)               (0.198)

Observations                          150                   150                   125                     180                   180                    150
Countries                              25                    25                    25                      30                    30                     30
R-squared                             0.55                  0.65                                          0.53                  0.63
 Pooled cross-sectional OLS regression in columns 1 and 4, with robust standard errors clustered by highest level of aggregation for income data in parentheses.
 Fixed effects OLS regressions in columns 2, and 5, with country dummies and robust standard errors clustered by highest level of aggregation for income data in
 parentheses. Column 3 and 6 use GMM of Arellano and Bond (1991), with robust standard errors; we instrument for income using a double lag. Year dummies
 are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Polity Measure of Democracy in columns 1-3 and Przeworski Measure of Democracy in columns 4-6. Base
 sample is a balanced panel 1875-2000. All columns use 25-year data where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1875, so t-1=1850).
 GDP per capita is from Maddison (2003). For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                                                  Table 9
                                               Hazard Model using Transitions to and away from Democracy in the Long Run
                                                                                                      Balanced Panel, 1875-2000
                                                                                                               25-year data
                                                                                       Chamberlain                    Chamberlain                 Chamberlain
                                                                      Exponential       Exponential  Exponential       Exponential    Exponential Exponential
                                                                          Hazard          Hazard         Hazard          Hazard         Hazard      Hazard
                                                                            (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                                     Dependent Variable is Transitions to and away from Democracy
Log GDP per Capita t-1                                                     0.612           0.035
                                                                          (0.082)         (0.159)

Log GDP per Capita t-1 on Transitions to Democracy                                                                       0.455              0.056              0.508               0.153
                                                                                                                        (0.066)            (0.146)            (0.079)             (0.177)

Log GDP per Capita t-1 on Transitions away from Democracy                                                                0.509              0.103              0.533               0.206
                                                                                                                        (0.064)            (0.145)            (0.082)             (0.226)

Observations                                                                        180                180                180                180                 173                173
Countries                                                                           30                 30                 30                 30                  30                 30
 Exponential double hazard model in columns 1, 3, and 5, and Chamberlain exponential double hazard model in columns 2, 4, and 6. Robust standard errors clustered by highest level of
 aggregation for income data in parentheses. Year dummies are included in all regressions. Dependent variable is Przeworski Measure of Democracy. Base sample is a balanced panel 1875-
 2000. All columns use 25-year data where the start date of the panel refers to the dependent variable (i.e., t=1875, so t-1=1850). In column 1 the coefficients in equations (5) and (6) are
 constrained to be identical; in column 3, the coefficient on income is allowed to be different; in column 5, the coefficient on income and time effects are allowed to be different. In column
 2 the coefficients in equations (8) and (9) are constrained to be identical; in column 4, the coefficient on income is allowed to be different; in column 6, the coefficient on income, time
 effects, and country fixed effects are allowed to be different. GDP per capita is from Maddison (2003). For detailed data definitions and sources see Table 1 and Appendix Table A1.
                                                                          Appendix Table A1
       VARIABLE                                        DESCRIPTION                                                              SOURCE
Freedom House Measure of Data for 1972-2000 in Freedom House Political Rights Index, original range http://www.freedomhouse.org/ratings/, and Bollen (2001)
Democracy                1,2,3,…,7 normalized 0-1. Data for 1972 used for 1970 in the five-year          "Cross National Indicators of Liberal Democracy 1950-
                         sample. Data for 1950, 1955, 1960 and 1965, in Bollen, original range           1990" available on ICPSR
                         0.00,0.01,…0.99,1. Transitions to democracy are calculated as max((d it,d it-1)
                         and transitions away from democracy are calculated as min(d it,d it-1).
Polity Measure of           Data for 1840-2000 in Polity IV. The composite index is the democracy score         http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/
Democracy                   minus the autocracy score. Original range -10,-9,...10, normalized 0-1.
                            Transitions are coded in the same fashion as the Freedom House Measure of
                            Democracy
Przeworski Measure of       Data for 1840-1995 in Boix and Rosato (2001). Range is 0,1. Data for 1994 is        Boix and Rosato (2001)
Democracy                   used for 1995 in the 5-year sample. Data for 1994 is used for 2000 in the 25-
                            year sample. Transitions are coded in the same fashion as the Freedom House
                            Measure of Democracy.
GDP per Capita (Chain       Data for 1950-2000 measured as Log Real GDP per Capita (Chain Method in             http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/
Weighted 1996 Prices)       1996 prices) from Penn World Tables 6.1.
GDP per Capita (1990        Data for 1800-2000 measured as Log Real GDP per Capita (1990 Geary-                 http://www.eco.rug.nl/~Maddison/
dollars)                    Khamis dollars) from Maddison (2003). Countries are assigned values at the
                            lowest possible aggregation. Data in 1820 is used for 1850. Data in 1870 is
                            used for 1875. Data in 1929 is used for 1925.
Population                  Total population in thousands.                                                      World Bank (2002)
Education                   Average total years of schooling in the population aged 25 and over. Data for       Barro and Lee (2000) available at
                            1960, 1965,…, 1995 from Barro and Lee.                                              http://www.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/ciddata.html
Constraint on the Executive Data in Polity IV, original range 1,2,3...7, normalized 0-1. Calculated as the      http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/
at Independence             average of constraint on the executive in a country during the first 10 years
                            after its independence (ignoring missing data). If data for the first 10 years
                            after independence is missing, we find the first year these data are available in
                            Polity, then average over the following ten years (ignoring missing data).

Independence year          Year when country became independent, with any year before 1800 coded as CIA World Factbook (2004) available at
                           1800. We coded Taiwan's independence year to 1948 and changed             http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/
                           Zimbabwe's independence year to 1964. Classification of countries follows
                           Polity.
Population Density in 1500 Indigenous population divided by arable land in 1500.                     Acemoglu et al (2002)

Settler mortality            Historical mortality rates of potential European settlers.                   Acemoglu et al (2001)
Colonial Origin              Dummies for whether the country was a (1) French colony, (2) British colony, La Porta et al (1999)
                             (3) Spanish colony, or (4) Other (Portuguese, Belgian).
        VARIABLE                                           DESCRIPTION                                                         SOURCE
Religion                   Percent of population in 1980 which is (1) Catholic, (2) Protestant, or (3) La Porta et al (1999)
                           Muslim.
Latitude                   Distance from equator (absolute value).                                     La Porta et al (1999)
Significant Oil Producer   Dummy=1 for Algeria, Gabon, Indonesia, Libya, Nigeria, and Venezuela and
                           dummy=0 otherwise. Middle Eastern countries are not included in the sample
                           of former colonies.
Ethno-Linguistic           Average of five different indices of ethno-linguistic fragmentation.        La Porta et al (1999)
Fragmentation
                                                                     Appendix Table A2
                                              Fixed Effects Results: Investigating Londregan and Poole (1996)
                                                                            Londregan and Poole Sample, 1952-1985
                                            Table 3, Londregan
                                             & Poole (1996)    Fixed Effects OLS Fixed Effects OLS Fixed Effects OLS Fixed Effects OLS
                                                    (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)            (5)
                                                                            Dependent Variable is Democracy
Democracy t-1                                      0.848             0.848               0.858               0.858         [0.00]
                                                  (0.014)           (0.015)             (0.014)             (0.031)

Log GDP per Capita F-test                                                     [0.00]                   [0.00]                    [0.12]                   [0.32]

Log GDP per Capita t-1                              0.119                     0.119                    0.117                     0.126
                                                   (0.032)                   (0.033)                  (0.033)                   (0.080)

Log GDP per Capita Growth t                         -0.305                    -0.305                   -0.341                    -0.302
                                                   (0.161)                   (0.164)                  (0.164)                   (0.172)

Log GDP per Capita Growth t-1                       -0.027                    -0.027                   -0.038                    0.012
                                                   (0.156)                   (0.159)                  (0.160)                   (0.156)

Transition                                          0.197                     0.197
                                                   (0.069)                   (0.071)

Nonconstitutional Leader                            0.020                     0.020                    0.009                     0.013                     0.002
                                                   (0.040)                   (0.041)                  (0.040)                   (0.062)                   (0.081)

Leader is a Prime Minister                          0.221                     0.221                    0.226                     0.228                     0.205
                                                   (0.086)                   (0.088)                  (0.088)                   (0.152)                   (0.213)

Leader had a Military Career                        0.093                     0.093                    0.086                     0.078                     0.093
                                                   (0.036)                   (0.037)                  (0.037)                   (0.068)                   (0.082)

Time Since Leader Came to Power                     -0.004                    -0.004                   -0.004                    -0.004                    -0.005
                                                   (0.002)                   (0.002)                  (0.002)                   (0.003)                   (0.003)

Leader has a CMIP                                   -0.020                    -0.020                   -0.075                    -0.087                    -0.151
                                                   (0.063)                   (0.065)                  (0.062)                   (0.103)                   (0.127)

Time Remaining in Leader's CMIP                     -0.017                    -0.017                   -0.017                    -0.015                    -0.010
                                                   (0.013)                   (0.013)                  (0.013)                   (0.012)                   (0.012)

Leader's CMIP Expires This Year                     -0.027                    -0.027                   -0.027                    -0.025                    -0.024
                                                   (0.045)                   (0.046)                  (0.046)                   (0.047)                   (0.046)

Leader's Age/10                                     0.011                     0.011                    0.011                     0.009                     0.007
                                                   (0.012)                   (0.013)                  (0.013)                   (0.016)                   (0.017)

Time Effects F-test                                                                                                              [0.04]                   [0.02]

Residual AR(1) Test                                                           [0.00]                   [0.00]                    [0.00]                   [0.00]
Observations                                         2798                      2798                     2798                      2798                     2364
Countries                                                                       100                      100                       100                      99
R-squared                                            0.96                      0.96                     0.96                      0.96                     0.96
In both columns 1 and 2, non-robust standard errors are in parentheses. Country dummies are included in all columns. Columns 3 and 4 include time effects and
cluster the standard errors (included in parentheses) to account for potential residual serial correlation. Column 5 includes lags of democracy up to t-5 and includes up
to 5 lags of income and removes growth terms so that income variables correspond more closely to the variables we include in Tables 2, column 4. Dependent
Variable: Polity Composite Index (Logistic Transform), from Londregan and Poole (1996). This takes the original Polity score, ranging from -10 to 10, and creates a
variable ln(Polity+10.5)-ln(10.5-Polity) ranging from -3.71 to 3.71. Sample is unbalanced panel from 1952 and 1985, from Londregan and Poole. Log GDP per Capita
Growth is calculated on an annual basis. Column 1 reports coefficients from Table 3, columns 3 and 4, on p.19 of Londregan and Poole (1996), which is generated
using maximum likelihood estimation on a two equation model. The Income F-test corresponds to a joint test of the significance of coefficients on all income
variables listed at the top of table in columns 2, 3, and 4. The Democracy F-test does the same for democracy variables. Columns 2-5 include a test of first order
autocorrelation in the residual term; see Wooldridge (2002), section 10.6.3. CMIP stands for constitutionally mandated interelection period. See Londregan and Poole
(1996) for data and definitions.
                                        Appendix Table A3
                            Codes Used to Represent Countries in Figures

Country                    Code     Country               Code     Country                      Code
Andorra                    ADO      Ghana                 GHA      Netherlands                    NLD
Afghanistan                AFG      Guinea                GIN      Norway                         NOR
Angola                     AGO      Gambia, The           GMB      Nepal                          NPL
Albania                    ALB      Guinea-Bissau         GNB      New Zealand                    NZL
United Arab Emirates       ARE      Equatorial Guinea     GNQ      Oman                           OMN
Argentina                  ARG      Greece                GRC      Pakistan-post-1972             PAK
Armenia                    ARM      Grenada               GRD      Pakistan-pre-1972              PAK_1
Antigua                    ATG      Guatemala             GTM      Panama                         PAN
Australia                  AUS      Guyana                GUY      Peru                           PER
Austria                    AUT      Honduras              HND      Philippines                    PHL
Azerbaijan                 AZE      Croatia               HRV      Papua New Guinea               PNG
Burundi                    BDI      Haiti                 HTI      Poland                         POL
Belgium                    BEL      Hungary               HUN      Korea, Dem. Rep.               PRK
Benin                      BEN      Indonesia             IDN      Portugal                       PRT
Burkina Faso               BFA      India                 IND      Paraguay                       PRY
Bangladesh                 BGD      Ireland               IRL      Qatar                          QAT
Bulgaria                   BGR      Iran                  IRN      Romania                        ROM
Bahrain                    BHR      Iraq                  IRQ      Russia                         RUS
Bahamas                    BHS      Iceland               ISL      Rwanda                         RWA
Bosnia and Herzegovina     BIH      Israel                ISR      Saudi Arabia                   SAU
Belarus                    BLR      Italy                 ITA      Sudan                          SDN
Belize                     BLZ      Jamaica               JAM      Senegal                        SEN
Bolivia                    BOL      Jordan                JOR      Singapore                      SGP
Brazil                     BRA      Japan                 JPN      Solomon Islands                SLB
Barbados                   BRB      Kazakhstan            KAZ      Sierra Leone                   SLE
Brunei                     BRN      Kenya                 KEN      El Salvador                    SLV
Bhutan                     BTN      Kyrgyz Republic       KGZ      Somalia                        SOM
Botswana                   BWA      Cambodia              KHM      Sao Tome and Principe          STP
Central African Republic   CAF      Kiribati              KIR      Suriname                       SUR
Canada                     CAN      St. Kitts and Nevis   KNA      Slovakia                       SVK
Switzerland                CHE      Korea, Rep.           KOR      Slovenia                       SVN
Chile                      CHL      Kuwait                KWT      Sweden                         SWE
China                      CHN      Lao PDR               LAO      Swaziland                      SWZ
Cote d'Ivoire              CIV      Lebanon               LBN      Seychelles                     SYC
Cameroon                   CMR      Liberia               LBR      Syrian Arab Republic           SYR
Congo, Rep.                COG      Libya                 LBY      Chad                           TCD
Colombia                   COL      St. Lucia             LCA      Togo                           TGO
Comoros                    COM      Liechtenstein         LIE      Thailand                       THA
Cape Verde                 CPV      Sri Lanka             LKA      Tajikistan                     TJK
Costa Rica                 CRI      Lesotho               LSO      Turkmenistan                   TKM
Cuba                       CUB      Lithuania             LTU      Tonga                          TON
Cyprus                     CYP      Luxembourg            LUX      Trinidad and Tobago            TTO
Czech Republic             CZE      Latvia                LVA      Tunisia                        TUN
Germany                    DEU      Morocco               MAR      Turkey                         TUR
Djibouti                   DJI      Moldova               MDA      Taiwan                         TWN
Dominica                   DMA      Madagascar            MDG      Tanzania                       TZA
Denmark                    DNK      Maldives              MDV      Uganda                         UGA
Dominican Republic         DOM      Mexico                MEX      Ukraine                        UKR
Algeria                    DZA      Macedonia, FYR        MKD      Uruguay                        URY
Ecuador                    ECU      Mali                  MLI      United States                  USA
Egypt, Arab Rep.           EGY      Malta                 MLT      Uzbekistan                     UZB
Eritrea                    ERI      Myanmar               MMR      St. Vincent and the Grenadines VCT
Spain                      ESP      Mongolia              MNG      Venezuela, RB                  VEN
Estonia                    EST      Mozambique            MOZ      Vietnam                        VNM
Ethiopia                   ETH      Mauritania            MRT      Vanuatu                        VUT
East Timor                 ETM      Mauritius             MUS      Western Samoa                  WSM
Finland                    FIN      Malawi                MWI      Yemen                          YEM
Fiji                       FJI      Malaysia              MYS      Yugoslavia - post 1991         YUG
France                     FRA      Namibia               NAM      South Africa                   ZAF
Gabon                      GAB      Niger                 NER      Congo, Dem. Rep.               ZAR
United Kingdom             GBR      Nigeria               NGA      Zambia                         ZMB
Georgia                    GEO      Nicaragua             NIC      Zimbabwe                       ZWE
                                                                                    Figure 1
                                      Transition to Non-Democracy and Income Level, 1960-1995
                      20
      % Transition to Non-Democracy
        5          10 0     15




                                        Below World Mean                                                             Above World Mean
                                                  Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Sample includes all countries in five year intervals between 1955 and 1990 which are democratic according to the Przeworski
Measure of Democracy for which at least two observations are available. Observations are grouped depending on whether log income per capita is above or below the average log
income per capita in the world for the observation year. Each column measures the fraction of observations within each group which experience a transition to non-democracy five
years later.
                                                                                    Figure 2
                                      Transition to Non-Democracy and Income Level, 1960-1995
                      8
      % Transition to Non-Democracy
         2          4 0      6




                                       Below Country Mean                                                          Above Country Mean
                                                  Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)
See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Sample is the same as in Figure 1. Log income per capita for every observation is demeaned from the average log income per
capita in the world for the observation year. Observations are grouped depending on whether demeaned log income per capita is above or below the average demeaned log income per
capita in the country between 1955 and 1990. Each column measures the fraction of observations within each group which experience a transition to non-democracy five years later.
                                                                                                Figure 3
                                                             Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1970-1995
       Change in Freedom House Measure of Democracy
                                               1
                                                                                            MLI
                                                                                          BEN             MWI
                                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                                          PAN ECU
                                                                                                            HUN

                                                                 CAF                            HND
                                                                                                ARG              ESP PRT                           THA
                                     .5



                                                                      NER MDG               BOL            LSO
                                                                                                           NPL    COG
                                                                                                                  BRA       ROM                                KOR
                                                                                                                                                                 TWN

                                                                        ZMB           SENGHA
                                                                                       PER             UGA HTIJOR
                                                                                                      PHL                                MUS

                                                                         TGO        BDI
                                                                                    TZA     ZAFGIN MEX
                                                                                                   GAB
                                                                                                 ZWE  URY FIN ISR JPN LUX
                                                                                                     TTO                                  CYP                  BWA
                            0




                                                      ZAR       NIC           MRTTCDRWA
                                                                                   CIV       GUY CRI
                                                                                               CHE DZA
                                                                                                 NZLSWEMAR
                                                                                                     DNK GBR
                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                                      AUSCAN EGY
                                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                                           BEL
                                                                                                           USAISL
                                                                                                              AUT NOR
                                                                                                              PRY    IRL
                                                                                                                   BRB
                                                                                                                  TUNSYR                        CHN      SGP

                                                      GNQ                     VEN   NGA IRN
                                                                                         JAM
                                                                                          SLV CMRBGD              DOM
                                                                                                                 CHL

                                                                                                      GTM  KENTUR
                                                                                                       BFA FJI COL
                                                                                                                INDLKA                    MYSIDN
                   -.5




                                                                        SLE




                                                                                          GMB
         -1




                                                        -1                      0                   1                                                                       2
                                                                 Change in Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)

See Appendix Table A1 for data definitions and sources. Changes are total difference between 1970 and 1995. Start and end dates are chosen to maximize the number of countries in
the cross-section. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.032 (standard error=0.058), N=103, R2=0.00.
                                                                                          Figure 4
                                                           Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1970-1995
                                                1                                                                      PRT
          Change in Polity Measure of Democracy

                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                       LSO   BRA
                                                                                                         HUNESP
                                                              NIC                        ARG            HTI
                                                                                                      PAN
                                                                                                      MWI
                                                                    NER                                      PRY                             TWN
                                                                                     BOL
                                                                                     MLI               NPL
                                                               CAF                                                COG       ROM
                                       .5



                                                                          MDG                MEX
                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                    BEN GIN
                                                                                  PER                    DOM
                                                                                     SLVHND          JOR                      THA
                                                                      ZMB     TZASEN          DZA
                                                                                            PHL
                                                                       TGO TCD         GUY GAB
                                                                                      ZAF                      TUN
                                                                                   IRN                  EGY
                                                                             CIV          CMRUGA                        CYP           KOR
                                                    GNQ                                           KEN CHL
                                                                                            GTM URY
                                                                                                  MAR                  MYS
                                                                         MRT  NGA              TTO FRA                MUS CHN         BWA
                            0




                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                            NZL  AUS
                                                                                            CRISWE
                                                                                                 DNK  BEL
                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                      COL
                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                   NLD ITA
                                                                                                     TUR  AUT
                                                                                                        ISR
                                                                                                      USAIND
                                                                                                          ISLJPN
                                                                                                               NORIRL
                                                                                                                  SYR     IDN     SGP
                                                                         VEN  RWA JAM        BFA
                                                                                                                    LKA
                                                                                    GHA                 FJI


                                                                      SLE
                -.5




                                                                                             ZWE



                                                                                   GMB
       -1




                                                      -1                      0                   1                                                2
                                                               Change in Log GDP per Capita (Penn World Tables)

See notes to Figure 3. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.024 (standard error=0.063), N=98, R2=0.00.
                                                                                     Figure 5
      Change in Przeworski Measure of Democracy
                                                   Change in Democracy and Change in Income, 1970-1995
      0           .1           .2           .3




                                                   1st         2nd                            3rd                           4th                            5th
                                                  Change in Log GDP per Capita Quintile (Penn World Tables)
See notes to Figure 3. Countries are grouped into quintiles corresponding to the total change in Log GDP per Capita between 1970 and 1995. Change in democracy is the average
change within each quintile.
                                                                                          Figure 6
                                                 Democracy Fixed Effect and Log Settler Mortality
                   .4

                                    NZL
                                    AUS          CAN                                  BRB
                                                                                     CRI
                                                USA
                                                                                                        BLZ
                           .2
       Democracy Fixed Effect




                                                             MUS                      TTO        JAM
                                                 MLT
                                                                      IND            VEN
                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                  PAK_1          URY
                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                 COL
                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                   SLV           DOM
                                                ZAF           GUY                CHL
                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                 ECU
                                                                                   HND
                                                                                 GTM
                 0




                                                  MYS                            MEX
                                                                                 PER
                                                                                                        SEN                   MDG
                                                                                                        PAN
                                                                                                        NIC
                                          FJI
                                                                                   PRY
                                                                                  BGD                                                                  GMB
                                                  SGP                              MAR                                             GHA
                                                                                                        GNB
                                                                                                        IDN
                                                                  PAK                                           BFA
                                                                                                               BEN                                            NGA       MLI
                                                                                 EGY                                        SLE
        -.2




                                                                                                  KEN           TZA
                                                                                                                GAB
                                                                                                                CAF
                                                                                                 HTI            UGA    NER
                                                                               TUNDZA                         COG                  CIV
                                                                                                                MRT
                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                TCD
                                                                                                                BDI                TGO
                                                                                                                RWA
                                                                                                              ZAR           GIN
                                                                                                                AGO
                   -.4




                                                                                                   VNM


                                2                                       4                            6                                                              8
                                                                                 Log Settler Mortality

Country fixed effects are those estimated in the specification of Table 2, column 2 using Freedom House measure of democracy. PAK_1 refers to Pakistan pre-1972. The regression
represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.086 (standard error=0.013), N=73, R 2=0.35.
                                                                                          Figure 7
                                       Democracy Fixed Effect and Log Population Density in 1500
                   .4

                                     CAN
                                       AUS                                  NZL                    BRB
                                                                                                    CRI
                                                   USA                                             LCA
                                                                                                   GRD
                                                                                                    BLZ
                           .2


                                                                                                   KNA
       Democracy Fixed Effect




                                                                                                   TTO
                                                                                                   DMA                 JAM                               MLT
                                                           BWA                 VEN
                                                                                                   VCT
                                                                                                   PNG                                       IND
                                                       URY                                                                                   PAK_1
                                                         NAM                                                     LKA
                                                       ARG                             COL DOM
                                                                                           SLV
                                                        BRA       GUY            ZAF CHL     PHL
                                                                                     BOL
                                                                                 CPV        PERECU
                                                                                            HND
                                                                                            GTM   MEX
                 0




                                                                                         MYS
                                                                                         MDG          SEN
                                                                                           PAN
                                                                                           NIC
                                                                                 PRY                  GMB            BGD
                                                   SGP                           LSO       ATG               MAR
                                                                                         MOZ          GHA
                                                                                     ZMB              GNB
                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                                       MLI
                                                                                     ZWE
                                                                                     MWI              BFA
                                                                                                      NGA
                                                                                                      BEN            PAK
                                                                                                      SLE                                                      EGY
                                                                                               TZAKEN COM
        -.2




                                                                                           GAB
                                                                                           CAF
                                                                                       NERHTI              UGA
                                                                                           COG        CIV DZA TUN
                                                                                       TCD CMR     MRTTGO             BDI
                                                                                                                      RWA
                                                                                           ZAR        GIN   KHM
                                                                                           AGO
                                                                                           GNQ
                   -.4




                                                                                                                            VNM
                                                                               CUB


                                -4                    -2                      0                2                                                     4
                                                                       Log Population Density 1500

See notes to Figure 6. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.412 (standard error=0.012), N=90, R2=0.12.
                                                                                       Figure 8
                           Democracy Fixed Effect and Constraint on the Executive at Independence
                 .4


                                                                        CRI                                                                            NZL
                                                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                                       USA
                          .2
      Democracy Fixed Effect




                                                                                                                                                       MUS
                                                                                                                                                       TTO
                                                                                                                                                       JAM
                                   VEN                                                                                     BWA
                                                                                                                                                       IND
                                                                                                                                                       PNG
                                   URY                                                                      PAK_1
                                                                                                                           NAM                         LKA
                                   ARG                                  COL
                                                                        SLV
                                                                        DOM
                                   CHL
                                   BRA                                                                 PHL                                   GUY       ZAF
                                                                        BOL
                                                                        ECU
                                   GTM                                  PERHND
                                                                        MEX
                0




                                                                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                        SEN
                                                                        MDG
                                                                        PAN
                                   NIC
                                                                                                                                                       FJI
                                   PRY                                BGD                                                  GMB
                                                    MAR                SGP                LSO
                                   GHA             MOZZMB              GNB                                                           IDN
                                               BEN    BFA     MLI                                 PAK                                                  ZWE
                                   MWI
                                                                      COM                                SLE NGA                       EGY
       -.2




                                   CAF          GAB                    TZA                     KEN
                                   HTI                                 NER                                   UGA
                                   CIV DZA
                                   TUN                                     COG
                                   TCD           BDI     TGO            CMR MRT
                                   RWA
                                   ZAR
                                   KHM
                                   GIN
                                                                        AGO
                                         GNQ
                 -.4




                                                                        VNM
                                                                        CUB


                               0                   .2            .4            .6            .8                                                    1
                                                     Constraint on the Executive at Independence

See notes to Figure 6. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of 0.263 (standard error=0.047), N=82, R2=0.27.
                                                                                          Figure 9
                                                   Democracy Fixed Effect and Independence Year
                   .4

                                                 CRI                          CAN                        AUSNZL                                        BRB
                                 USA                                                                                                                       GRDLCA
                                                                                                                                                               BLZ
                           .2


                                                                                                                                                                KNA
       Democracy Fixed Effect




                                                                                                                                                      TTO
                                                                                                                                                      JAMMUS
                                           VEN                                                                                                          BWA DMA
                                                                                                                                                       MLT
                                                                                                                                              IND             VCT
                                                                                                                                                            PNG
                                                  URY                                                                                         PAK_1
                                                                                                                                               LKA                    NAM
                                           COLARG
                                                SLV        DOM
                                           CHL BRA                                                              ZAF                          PHL       GUY
                                                  BOL
                                                ECU
                                                HND
                                                GTM                                                                                                          CPV
                                           MEX PER
                 0




                                                                                                                                                   MYS       STP
                                                                                                                                                    SEN
                                                                                                                                                    MDG
                                                                                                          PAN
                                                 NIC
                                                                                                                                                          FJI
                                           PRY                                                                                                         GMBBGD SYC
                                                                                                                                                  MAR   LSO
                                                                                                                                                   GHA SGP MOZ  ATG
                                                                                                                                             IDN      ZMB GNB
                                                                                                                                                    MLI
                                                                                                                                                      MWIPAK
                                                                                                                                                    BFA
                                                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                                                                                                                    BENZWE
                                                                                                                         EGY                         SLE     COM
        -.2




                                                                                                                                                     TZA
                                                                                                                                                    GAB
                                                                                                                                                    CAF
                                                                                                                                                      KEN
                                     HTI                                                                                                             UGA
                                                                                                                                                    NER
                                                                                                                                                    CIV
                                                                                                                                                     DZA
                                                                                                                                                    COG
                                                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                                                    MRT
                                                                                                                                                    TCD
                                                                                                                                                    CMR
                                                                                                                                                    TGO
                                                                                                                                                     BDI
                                                                                                                                                     RWA
                                                                                                                                                 KHMZAR
                                                                                                                                                   GIN
                                                                                                                                                             AGO
                                                                                                                                                         GNQ
                   -.4




                                                                                                                                             VNM
                                                                                                          CUB


                                18                        18.5                       19                                                  19.5                          20
                                                                            Independence Year/100

See notes to Figure 6. The regression represented by the fitted line yields a coefficient of -0.081 (standard error=0.025), N=94, R2=0.07.
