                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INDUSTRY COMPENSATION AND THE COSTS OF ALTERNATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL
                       POLICY INSTRUMENTS

                                          A. Lans Bovenberg
                                         Lawrence H. Goulder
                                          Mark R. Jacobsen

                                         Working Paper 13331
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13331


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by A. Lans Bovenberg, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Mark R. Jacobsen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Industry Compensation and the Costs of Alternative Environmental Policy Instruments
A. Lans Bovenberg, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Mark R. Jacobsen
NBER Working Paper No. 13331
August 2007
JEL No. H21,H23,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper explores how the costs of meeting given aggregate targets for pollution emissions change
with the imposition of the requirement that key pollution-related industries be compensated for potential
losses of profit from the pollution regulation. Using analytically and numerically solved equilibrium
models, we compare the incidence and economy-wide costs of emissions taxes, fuel (intermediate
input) taxes, performance standards and mandated technologies in the absence and presence of this
compensation requirement. Compensation is provided either through lump-sum industry tax credits
or industry-specific cuts in capital tax rates. We decompose the added costs from the compensation
requirement into (1) an increase in "intrinsic abatement cost," reflecting a lowered efficiency of pollution
abatement, and (2) a "lump-sum compensation cost" that captures the efficiency costs of financing
the compensation. The compensation requirement affects these components differently and thus can
alter the cost-rankings of policies. When compensation is provided through tax credits, the lump-sum
compensation cost is higher under the emissions tax than under performance standards and mandated
technologies -- a reflection of the emission tax's higher compensation requirements. If in this setting
the required pollution reduction is modest, imposing the compensation requirement causes the emissions
tax to become more costly than command and control policies. In contrast, if required abatement is
extensive, the emissions tax emerges as the most cost-effective policy because its relatively low intrinsic
abatement costs assume greater importance.

A. Lans Bovenberg                                    Mark R. Jacobsen
Tilburg University, P.O. Box 90153                   Department of Economics
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands                     University of California, San Diego
a.l.bovenberg@uvt.nl                                 9500 Gilman Drive
                                                     San Diego, CA 92093
Lawrence H. Goulder                                  m3jacobs@ucsd.edu
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building 328
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
goulder@stanford.edu
1        Introduction
A critical environmental policy decision is the choice of policy instrument to achieve
given aggregate targets for pollution emissions or concentrations. The policy maker’s
toolkit includes emissions taxes, fuel taxes, performance standards, tradable emissions
allowances, and mandated production technologies.
        In ranking these alternatives, economists tend to compare the instruments in terms
of their cost-eﬀectiveness.1 However, policy makers often are at least as much concerned
with how these options may diﬀer in terms of the distribution of policy costs, since such
diﬀerences importantly aﬀect political feasibility.
        Distributional impacts can be measured along several diﬀerent dimensions — across
household income groups, generations, geographic regions, and industries. The distribu-
tion across industries can be especially important, since industry groups often constitute
a powerful political force. To the extent that industrial stakeholders wield significant
political power, designing policies that achieve environmental goals while avoiding seri-
ous adverse impacts on key industries can enhance political feasibility.
        In this paper we examine how the costs of meeting given targets for pollution emis-
sions change once one adds the requirement that the regulations cause no loss in profit
in key pollution-related industries. In our investigation, this requirement is met by in-
cluding, as part of the environmental policy, either tax credits or reductions in capital
tax rates to certain aﬀected industries.
        Our analysis is in the spirit of a paper by Bovenberg, Goulder, and Gurney (2005),
which examined how introducing a constraint on profit-losses aﬀects the costs of emis-
sions taxes and quotas. The present paper goes beyond the previous paper by con-
sidering a wider range of policy instruments, focusing not only on emissions taxes and
quotas2 but also on taxes on fuels (intermediate inputs associated with pollution) and
two “command-and-control” policies — performance standards and mandated production
technologies.
        We apply both analytical and numerical equilibrium models in this investigation.
Compared with the Bovenberg et al. paper, the present investigation requires consid-
    1
   See, for example, Tietenberg (1990), Stavins (1996), Goulder et al. (1999) and Fischer et al. (2003).
    2
   In this analysis a system of tradable emissions quotas is equivalent to an emissions tax with a tax
exemption for some emissions.


                                                   1
erably more complex analytical modeling in order to capture the impacts of this wider
range of instruments. The analytical and numerical models both show that the over-
all gross cost3 of achieving a given reduction in emissions can be understood in terms
of two components: an intrinsic abatement cost and a lump-sum compensation cost.
The former cost depends on the eﬃciency with which the policy instrument in ques-
tion makes use of the three major channels for emissions reductions: input substitution,
end-of-pipe treatment, and output reduction.               The second cost reflects ineﬃciencies
associated with providing the compensation to meet the no-profit-loss constraint, when
this compensation takes the form of lump-sum payments such as corporate tax credits.4
    As in earlier studies, we find that in the absence of a profits constraint, emissions
taxes are less costly than fuel taxes and the command-and-control policies because they
most eﬀectively employ the three major channels for emissions reductions. However,
introducing the distributional constraint can reverse the overall cost rankings. In par-
ticular, when compensation takes the form of tax credits and the required amount of
abatement is small or moderate, the command-and-control policies emerge as less costly
than emissions taxes. The analytical and numerical models show that at low levels of
abatement, emissions taxes (and fuel taxes) have a significant disadvantage in terms of
the costs of compensation — the lump-sum compensation cost is significant. The higher
compensation cost more than oﬀsets the emissions tax’s advantage in terms of the intrin-
sic abatement cost. In contrast, when environmental policy is more stringent (that is,
requires greater abatement), the emissions tax’s advantage by virtue of its lower intrinsic
abatement cost becomes more important than its disadvantage in terms of the compen-
sation cost. Thus, the relative costs of emissions taxes and the command-and-control
instruments depend importantly on the extent of required abatement.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the analytical
model and derives and interprets its results. The analytical results stem from linear ap-
proximations; hence they are not necessarily valid for large policy changes. In addition,
the analytical model assumes that the regulated pollution-supplying industries are very
small relative to the economy as a whole. The linearity and small-industry assumptions
are relaxed in the numerical model of Section 3, which provides quantitative results.
   3
     By “gross cost” we mean the cost before netting out the benefits from policy-induced environmental
improvements.
   4
     As shown below, when compensation takes the form of reductions in marginal corporate tax rates,
the compensation is costly because it implies less eﬀective use of the three abatement channels. In formal
terms, this compensation-related cost is in fact an increase in the intrinsic abatement cost relative to
what that cost would be in the absence of a compensation requirement.




                                                    2
Section 4 oﬀers conclusions.


2     An Analytical Model
Here we describe an analytically tractable equilibrium model designed to capture the
eﬃciency and distributional eﬀects of a range of environmental policy instruments. The
model can assess how the eﬃciency impacts change when the policies include compen-
sation to aﬀected industries. In the model, pollution cuts can be accomplished through
both input-substitution and “end-of-pipe” emissions treatment. The model recognizes
the imperfect mobility of capital, which is critical for evaluating the profit impacts of
various policies.
    There are two primary factors of production, capital (K) and labor (L).      Capital
is treated as imperfectly mobile across industries, labor as perfectly mobile. The model
distinguishes three industries: an upstream industry that produces an intermediate
good X whose use is associated with pollution, a downstream industry that produces
a final good Y and generates pollution emissions, and another final good industry that
produces a clean, final good C without generating any pollution. Industry Y ’s emissions
depend on the extent to which it employs the intermediate input X. Industry Y can
reduce these emissions by changing its input mix (substituting labor or capital for X)
and by engaging in end-of-pipe treatment. One can think of the intermediate input, X,
as a fossil fuel and regard the downstream industry, Y , as an industry like electricity
that burns the fuel and produces pollution.


2.1     Model structure

2.1.1    Production

The upstream industry produces the intermediate good X according to the following
constant-returns-to-scale production function

                                    X = fx (Lx , Kx ),                                (1)

where Lx denotes employment in the upstream industry and Kx stands for the capital
stock in that industry. Competitive maximizing behavior yields

                                         ∂fx (.; .)
                                    Px              = W,                              (2)
                                          ∂Lx


                                              3
                                            ∂fx (.; .)
                                       Px              = Rx − Skx ,                                    (3)
                                             ∂Kx
where Px denotes the price of the intermediate good, W the wage rate, Rx the rental
rate of capital in the upstream sector, and Skx a sector-specific capital subsidy in that
sector. Since capital is imperfectly mobile, the rental rate can diﬀer across industries.
The wage rate, in contrast, is the same in both industries, in keeping with the assumption
of perfectly mobile labor.
       The constant-returns-to-scale production function of the downstream industry Y is
given by
                              Y = fy (Ky , X, Ly ) = h(v(Ky ; X); Ly ),                                (4)

where Ly stands for employment engaged in production in the downstream industry and
Ky is the capital stock in that industry. Industry Y is the only source of demand for
the intermediate input X. The production function is weakly separable.5 In particular,
the marginal rate of substitution between the intermediate input X and capital Ky does
not depend on industry-specific employment Ly ; the intermediate input and capital first
yield the composite v(Ky ; X), which in turn is combined with labor to yield output Y.
We assume that capital is complementary to the intermediate input in the sense that a
rise in price of the intermediate input reduces the demand for capital at a given level of
output.
       The use of the intermediate input by the downstream industry causes pollution.
This pollution can be reduced, however, by devoting resources to end-of-pipe treatment.
Pollution emissions, E, are given by

                                        E = n(X, g(Ca ; Ya )),                                         (5)

with ∂n/∂X ≥ 0; ∂n/∂g ≤ 0 ; ∂g/∂Ca ≥ 0; ∂g/∂Ya ≥ 0. The subfunction g(., .) is
a composite of the two final goods Ya and Ca ; it is an index of resources devoted to
end-of-pipe treatment.6
       Pure profits in the downstream industry are given by (Py + S)Y − (Px + Tx )X −
Te E − W Ly − Pc Ca − Py Ya − (Ry − Sky )Ky , where Py represents the price of the final
good produced by the downstream industry Y , S a subsidy on that good, Tx an input
tax on the good produced by the upstream industry, Pc the price of the other, clean final
   5
      These separability assumptions are consistent with empirical work (see, e.g., Jorgenson and Wilcoxen
(1993a, b) suggesting that capital is a complement to energy (or fuel) inputs.
    6
      The functions n(. , .) and g(., .) exhibit constant returns to scale in their arguments. The function
g(., .) aggregates the goods C and Y also in the utility function (see (7) below).


                                                     4
good C, Ry the rental rate of capital in the downstream industry, Sky a sector-specific
subsidy to capital in that sector, and Te , the tax on emissions. As indicated below, the
various environmental policies we explore below involve a combination of the taxes Tx
and Te and the subsidies S, Sky and Skx .
    The industry producing the clean final good C employs the constant-returns-to-scale
production function
                                           C = fc (Lc , Kc ),

where Lc and Kc stand for labor and capital employed in that industry. All industries
maximize profits, taking prices as given. Since the production and emission functions
exhibit constant returns to scale, profits are zero in equilibrium.

2.1.2    Imperfect capital mobility

An important feature of the model is the imperfect mobility of capital across sectors.
This implies that the profit impacts of an unanticipated policy shock will not be uni-
formly spread across capital owners in all industries, because capital cannot costlessly
move toward the sectors with the highest returns after the shocks. To capture capital’s
imperfect mobility, we employ the following transformation function:7

                                         k(Kx ; Ky ; Kc ) = K,                                         (6)

where K represents the economy-wide stock of capital. We assume that the substitution
elasticities between the three types of capital are less than infinite. Thus, when a unit of
capital is shifted out of one industry, less than one unit is available for other industries.
This loss of eﬀective capital represents capital adjustment costs.

2.1.3    Household utility and the supply of primary factors

Households obtain utility from consumption of the two final goods Y and C. Aggre-
gate emissions E, labor supply L, and capital supply K produce disutility.8 Households
   7
     This supply function can be interpreted as a multi-product firm that employs aggregate capital as
an input to produce three outputs: namely, the three capital stocks Ki (i = x, y, c).
   8
     In a fully dynamic model, the cost of supplying capital is current consumption foregone when
resources are devoted to investment instead of consumption. We include capital in the utility function
to account for the cost of capital supply in our static model, which does not deal with investment
explicitly. An alternative interpretation of K is as highly specialized labor which, in contrast with other
labor, is imperfectly mobile across sectors.




                                                    5
maximize the utility function

                                    U = u[m(g(Yh , Ch ), z(K, L)), E],                            (7)

          ∂g    ∂g ∂m ∂m ∂u                     ∂u ∂z ∂z
with     ∂Yh , ∂Ch , ∂g , ∂z , ∂m   > 0, and    ∂E , ∂L , ∂K   < 0. Yh and Ch denote household
consumption of, respectively, the dirty and clean final goods. Since the utility function is
weakly separable in environmental quality, such quality does not directly aﬀect household
decisions.
       Households earn labor and capital income. Both types of income are taxed at the
same proportional rate T. Uniform tax rates on capital and labor income are optimal,
given that capital and labor are weakly separable in utility from consumption.9 The
household budget constraint is given by

                             Pc Ch + Py Yh = (1 − T )(W L + RK + Π),

where R denotes the ideal price index associated with the transformation function (6)
and Π represents lump-sum subsidies.

2.1.4      Government budget

The government faces the following budget constraint:

            Pc Λ + Π + SY + Sky Ky + Skx Kx = Te E + Tx X + T (Π + W L + RK),                     (8)

where Λ denotes government spending (on the clean good C).

2.1.5      Market equilibrium

Equilibrium in the markets for the two final goods requires that

                                               Yh + Ya = Y,

and
                                           Λ + Ch + Ca = C.
   9
     A more complex structure might incorporate a utility function with which uniformity of factor tax
rates is not optimal, and/or a tax system that did not include uniform rates. Such complications would
not be particularly useful in the present study, since they would not be expected to exert significant
influences on the industry-distributional eﬀects of pollution policies or the costs of compensation.




                                                     6
With perfectly mobile labor, labor market equilibrium is given by

                                         L = Lx + Ly + Lc .


2.2      Policy experiments

We explore several policies that achieve given targets for pollution abatement.                      The
emissions tax and fuel (intermediate input) tax policies involve Te and Tx , respectively.
In the absence of uncertainty, the two command-and-control policies are equivalent to
combinations of taxes and subsidies.10 In particular, the technology mandate can be
modelled as a revenue-neutral combination of a subsidy to the intermediate input (i.e.,
a negative value for Tx ) and a tax on emissions Te > 0:


                                           Tx X + Te E = 0.                                           (9)

       Similarly, we represent the performance standard as a revenue-neutral combination
of an output subsidy S > 0 and an emissions tax Te > 0:


                                           SY − Te E = 0.

       In general, these policies aﬀect tax bases and thus can have revenue impacts.11 In
order to keep a balanced budget, the government adjusts the factor tax T while leaving
real government spending Λ constant.
       For small policy shocks, the model can be solved analytically by log-linearizing it
around its initial equilibrium.12 Unless indicated otherwise, small letters will stand for
relative (percentage) changes of the variables denoted by the corresponding capital let-
ters. Greek letters will represent either elasticities or shares in the initial equilibrium.
In solving the model, we assume that the upstream and downstream pollution-related
industries X and Y are small compared to the rest of the economy. This enables us to
ignore eﬀects on the real wage rate W/Pc when solving for output and emissions in the
upstream and downstream industries. We adopt Pc as the numeraire.
  10
     Fullerton and Metcalf (2001) demonstrate this equivalence.
  11
     Even the command-and-control policies aﬀect aggregate public revenues because the revenue-
neutrality between their tax and subsidy components applies only at the level of industry Y , the targeted
industry. These policies can thus change overall revenues by aﬀecting the tax base elsewhere in the
economy.
  12
     This initial equilibrium may involve either zero abatement or a strictly positive level of abatement.




                                                    7
2.3      Eﬃciency Impacts

Our measure for the overall eﬃciency impact is the compensating variation, which for
ease of notation we express relative to the output of the downstream industry.
       As shown in the appendix, the overall marginal eﬃciency cost ψ of a small change
in environmental policy can be split into two components, with one representing an eﬃ-
ciency cost directly connected with abatement, and the other representing the eﬃciency
cost related to lump-sum compensation:


                                        ψ = −λΩ + μπ(1 − T ),                                    (10)

       We refer to the first right-hand term in (10) as the intrinsic abatement cost.              It
is the cost of pollution abatement, apart from any eﬀect directly related to lump-sum
compensation. This term applies under all of the policies considered. We refer to the
second right-hand term in (10) as the lump-sum compensation cost.                  This additional
term applies only when compensation is provided in the form of lump-sum tax credits.13
We elaborate on these two terms below.

2.3.1      Eﬃciency Costs for Policies without Compensation

Under policies with no profits constraint, the marginal eﬃciency cost involves only the
intrinsic abatement cost, -λΩ. The λ component of this impact stands for the marginal
cost of public funds — the marginal cost in terms of household income of raising one
additional dollar of government revenue. The appendix shows that in this model λ
                 1
equals    1−εu (T /(1−T )) ,   where εu denotes the uncompensated elasticity of factor supply
with respect to factor income.
       The other element in the intrinsic abatement cost, Ω, reflects the erosion of the tax
base resulting from the environmental policy.               In the case of the emissions tax, the
expression for Ω is:


                                               Ω = αye e,                                      (11a)

where αye ≡ Te E/(Py + S)Y stands for the emissions tax payment relative to the value
of output in the downstream (Y ) industry. For a reduction in emissions (i.e., emissions
abatement) Ω is negative, representing the loss of emission-tax revenue as a result of
  13
    When compensation is in the form of reductions in marginal tax rates on capital, the eﬃciency cost
of such compensation is captured within the intrinsic abatement cost, as explained below.



                                                   8
the emissions reduction. Multiplication of Ω by the eﬃciency cost of raising a dollar of
revenue (λ) yields the eﬃciency impact of a unit change in emissions.
   The loss of tax base, Ω, diﬀers under the other policies. Under the fuel tax, Ω is
given by:

                                                 Tx y
                                            Ω=     α x,                                  (11b)
                                                 Px x
where αyx ≡ (Px X)/(Py + S)Y is the share of payments to the upstream (X) industry
relative to the value of the Y industry. The right-hand side then equals the change in
fuel tax payments when the use of X is curtailed incrementally.
   Under the technology mandate, the expression for Ω amounts to:

                                                      Tx y
                                      Ω = αye e +       α x,                             (11c)
                                                      Px x
which combines the eﬀects of an emissions tax and a fuel tax. Tx < 0 represents the
subsidy component of the technology mandate.
   Finally, the expression for Ω in the case of the performance standard is:

                                                        S
                                     Ω = αye e −             y,                          (11d)
                                                      Py + S
which combines the eﬀect of an emissions tax with a revenue-neutral subsidy, S, to
output of the downstream industry.
   The intrinsic eﬃciency cost has two properties that apply under all four policy types.
First, under all policies, at initial abatement (i.e., the first unit), Ω is zero and thus the
intrinsic eﬃciency cost is zero as well.         Under the emissions tax, Ω is zero at initial
abatement because the cost share      αye   is infinitesimal as Te goes to zero. Under the fuel
                Tx y
tax, the term   Px αx x   is arbitrarily close to zero at initial abatement because Tx goes
to zero.    Under the performance standard, the emissions-tax component (first right-
hand-side term) and output-subsidy component (second right-hand-side term) of (11d)
each go to zero when abatement is arbitrarily small. Similarly, under the technology
mandate, the emissions-tax component and input-subsidy component (the Tx contained
in the second right-hand-side term) each go to zero.
   The intuition for the zero initial impact is that each channel for abatement — input-
substitution, end-of-pipe treatment, and output-demand reduction — involves infinites-
imal costs at the first unit of abatement. Firms enjoy private marginal benefits from
being able to produce pollution in the form of less expensive fuel mixes, less extensive


                                                  9
equipment, and (from lower output prices) higher output demand. A profit-maximizing
firm equates its marginal benefits of additional emissions along any of these channels
to the marginal cost of emissions.         In the absence of regulation, the marginal cost of
emissions is zero; hence, the marginal benefit from an increment to emissions along any
one of these channels is zero as well. Thus, the first unit of emissions reduction along
any of these channels involves a marginal net private cost (foregone private net marginal
benefit) of zero.
       A second common feature of the marginal intrinsic eﬃciency cost is that it rises with
the extent of abatement. Greater abatement involves increased use of some combination
of the the channels of input substitution, output-demand reductions, and end-of-pipe-
treatment.       If production functions are concave, greater input-substitution involves
increasing marginal costs.         Furthermore, convex utility (downward sloping demand
curves) implies that greater output reduction entails increasing marginal welfare costs.
Finally, our emissions function (see (23)) involves rising marginal costs of end-of-pipe
treatment.14
       Beyond incremental abatement, the intrinsic eﬃciency costs diﬀer across policies.
As indicated in prior studies15 , the emissions tax has an advantage over other policies in
terms of these costs because it yields appropriate incentives for end-of-pipe treatment,
input substitution, and output-demand reduction (from higher output prices). The tax
on the intermediate (fuel) input exploits only the channels of input substitution and
output cuts.       The command and control policies also exploit a subset of channels,
with the technology mandate primarily engaging the end-of-pipe treatment channel and
the performance standard including both end-of-pipe treatment and input substitution.
The rankings of the fuel tax, technology mandate, and performance standards in terms
of the intrinsic eﬃciency cost thus depend on the relative ease of input substitution,
end-of-pipe treatment, and output-demand reduction.                 This determines the relative
opportunity cost of neglecting one or more of these channels.                We explore this issue
numerically in Section 3 below.

  14
     Constant or even declining marginal costs for end-of-pipe treatment are a possibility, but rising
marginal costs seem most consistent with empirical cases such as the use of electrostatic scrubbers for
reducing smokestack emissions of sulfur dioxide.
  15
     See, for example, Goulder, Parry, Williams and Burtraw (1999).




                                                  10
2.3.2      Eﬃciency Costs of Policies Involving Compensation


Compensation via Tax Credits

       Compensation is required to maintain capital income or equity value to owners of the
pollution-related industries. We shall often refer to the profits constraint as the equity
value neutrality (EVN) requirement.          When policies include compensation that takes
the form of lump-sum tax credits, the second term in (10), namely μπ(1 − T ), usually
is non-zero. This term represents the lump-sum compensation cost. In this term, π
stands for the value of the lump-sum credit needed to compensate capital owners in
the polluting industries (again expressed relative to output in the downstream sector).
μ represents the marginal excess burden from the additional factor taxation needed to
provide the compensating tax credit. As shown in the appendix, μ can be written as
 εc [T /(1−T )]
1−εu [T /(1−T )]   , where εc is the compensated factor supply elasticity.
       Under the emissions tax and fuel tax policies, firms ordinarily suﬀer losses of profit
and positive compensation is required to achieve equity value neutrality. In these cases,
compensation via lump-sum tax credits introduces an extra eﬃciency cost relative to the
case without compensation. The reason is that when emissions reductions are achieved
through taxes, firms are required to pay the tax for whatever emissions they continue to
generate (under the emissions tax) or for whatever amount of fuel they continue to utilize
(under the fuel tax). Since this revenue transfer to the government is non-incremental,
the magnitude of the required tax credit is significant as well. This produces a first-
order eﬃciency cost, given by the product of the required credit (π(1 − T )) and the
marginal excess burden (μ).
       Under command-and-control policies, the lump-sum compensation cost diﬀers from
this cost under tax policies.       This reflects diﬀerences in the incidence and associated
diﬀerences in required levels of compensation. The polluting industries tend to bear
a smaller burden under the command-and-control policies (performance standard and
technology mandate) than under the tax policies. This occurs because the command-
and-control policies eﬀectively include subsidies to the use of the intermediate input or
to output of the final good Y .16 Indeed, under these policies the polluting industries
do not transfer fiscal resources to the government. Hence, they require little or no
compensation.17
  16
     See Fullerton and Heutel (2006) for an analysis comparing the long-run incidence of various
command-and-control policies.
  17
     Indeed, in some cases, certain firms can enjoy higher profits under a performance standard than


                                                11
    To illustrate, for initial abatement, the required lump-sum compensations for the
owners of the pollution-related industries under the technology mandate, the perfor-
mance standard and the emission tax, respectively, are given by

                                             π = 0,                                           (12)

                                           π = −Σp e,                                         (13)

                                           π = −Σe e,                                         (14)


where Σp ≥ Σe > 0. At initial abatement, the technology mandate does not require
any compensation at all. Whereas the performance standard requires a non-marginal
amount of compensation, the required compensation is less than with an emission tax.

    Compensation via Cuts in Marginal Tax Rates on Sector-Specific Capital

    We also explore compensation in the form of reductions in marginal tax rates on
capital employed in the polluting industries. In this case, only the intrinsic abatement
cost applies, though for a given environmental policy instrument this cost generally will
be greater than if the policy involved no compensation.             Compensation in the form
of reduced capital tax rates raises the marginal intrinsic abatement cost by increasing
the marginal costs of the output-reduction and input-substitution channels. Reduced
marginal capital taxes lower the marginal costs of production, thereby working toward
lower output prices and higher demand. Since total output is higher, greater abatement
eﬀort is needed to achieve a given reduction in emissions relative to the situation without
compensation. Similarly, lower capital tax rates work toward greater demand for the
fuel input (insofar as fuel and capital are complements in production). To the extent
that producers aim to reduce emissions by lowering the fuel input, they must counter
this positive impact on fuel use, and thus the opportunity cost of reducing emissions is
higher. Indeed, the policies necessitate greater use of the output-reduction and input-
substitution channels, which involve rising marginal costs.          The rising marginal costs
induce firms to make greater use of end-of-pipe treatment as well, to the point where
the marginal costs of each channel are equal.

    Relative Eﬃciency Cost of Alternative Compensation Mechanisms
in the absence of compensation. The numerical model obtains this result for a performance standard,
when relatively little abatement is required (see Section 3).


                                                12
   One might expect that compensation through sector-specific cuts in marginal tax
rates would always involve lower eﬃciency costs than compensation through lump-sum
transfers, since such compensation does not require the government to raise factor taxes
to finance lump-sum transfers. However, this is not the case. The relative eﬃciency cost
of achieving compensation through lump-sum transfers versus sector-specific cuts in mar-
ginal tax rates depends on the extent of abatement. At initial (low) levels of abatement,
sector-specific marginal rate cuts have a cost advantage. As discussed above, lump-sum
compensation initially has a first-order eﬃciency cost, while marginal rate cuts initially
involve no such cost. However, at higher levels of abatement, the eﬃciency advantage
of marginal rate cuts declines. As mentioned, the intrinsic abatement cost associated
with achieving a given level of abatement impact (the first term on the right-hand side
of (10)) is larger under recycling through sector-specific marginal tax cuts than under
lump-sum credits.     As the required amount of abatement becomes large, this intrin-
sic cost component becomes more important compared to the lump-sum compensation
cost. The cost of output reduction, input substitution, and end-of-pipe treatment rise
with abatement on account of convex utility functions, concave production functions
and convex end-of-pipe abatement. As a result, when required abatement is extensive,
marginal abatement costs are large and the eﬃciency with which abatement occurs be-
comes relatively more important. At suﬃciently high levels of abatement, the marginal
instrinsic abatement cost (i.e. the first right-hand term in (10)) therefore dominates the
lump-sum compensation cost (i.e. the second right-hand term in (10)).                Correspond-
ingly, at high levels of abatement, recycling through sector-specific tax cuts generates
larger overall eﬃciency costs: the higher intrinsic abatement costs from such recycling
dominate its initial eﬃciency advantage relative to lump-sum compensation.
   With compensation through sector-specific cuts in marginal tax rates, the marginal
eﬃciency costs of further abatement through emission taxes are given by

                                          ψ = −λαye e,                                      (15)

If lump-sum transfers are employed for compensation, we find

          ψ = −λαye e − rx [(1 − T )μ − λSkx σ xk Φx ] − ry [(1 − T )μ − λSky σ yk Φy ],    (16)

where σ xk (σ yk ) stands for the substitution elasticity between the industry-specific capital
services in the upstream (downstream) industry and the capital services in the rest of


                                               13
the economy, while Φi > 0, i = x, y denotes a positive coeﬃcient and ri < 0 represents
the rental losses in sector i = x, y. The terms between square brackets associated with
the rental losses indicate that a loss in capital income in a sector requires lump-sum
compensation (the term with (1 − T )μ) but also induces capital to migrate away from
the subsidized sector (if Ski > 0; i = x, y), thereby reducing public spending on capital
subsidies and enhancing eﬃciency.
    At intial abatement (i.e. αye = Skx = Sky = 0), abatement with compensation
through sector-specific tax cuts yields no first-order costs. With lump-sum compensa-
tion, in contrast, there are first-order costs −(rx + ry )(1 − T )μ > 0. Intuitively, the tax
payments on remaining emissions induce redistribution away from the polluting indus-
tries to the rest of the economy. This redistribution needs to be compensated through
lump-sum subsidies financed by distortionary taxation. At higher levels of abatement
(i.e. αye > 0 and Skx , Sky > 0 because the government uses sector-specific subsidies sub-
sidies to compensate the polluting sectors), also abatement with compensation through
sector-specific tax cuts yields first-order welfare losses. Moreover, if sector-specific cuts
have become large enough (i.e. Skx and Sky ), compensation through lump-sum subsi-
dies becomes more eﬃcient because lump-sum compensation does not attract additional
capital to the subsidized sector thereby enhancing the eﬃciency with which capital is
allocated across the sectors. To illustrate, if the sector-specific subsidy in the upstream
industry has become Skx = (1 − T )μ/(λσ xk Φx ), compensation through lump-sum sum
taxes is most eﬃcient. Intuitively, the additional costs in terms of aggregate factor sup-
ply −rx (1 − T )μ are exactly oﬀset by smaller distortions in terms of the intersectoral
allocation of capital −rx λSkx σ xk Φx .

2.3.3    Policy Rankings in Terms of Overall Eﬃciency Cost

How does the equity value neutrality (EVN) constraint aﬀect the relative eﬃciency costs
of the various environmental policies? As discussed earlier, emissions taxes have a cost
advantage in the absence of a profits constraint. Once one introduces this constraint,
however, the emissions tax’s advantage can disappear. As with the relative eﬃciency
cost of lump-sum compensation compared to compensation through sector-specific tax
cuts, the relative eﬃciency cost of emission taxes compared to command-and-control
policies depends on the level of abatement.
    Consider first the case where compensation is provided through lump-sum transfers.
At incremental abatement, the intrinsic abatement cost component is infinitesimal (un-


                                             14
der all policy instruments); hence, diﬀerences in policy costs reflect diﬀerences in the
lump-sum compensation component. Since the emissions tax requires the most com-
pensation, it involves the highest lump-sum compensation cost, and thus the highest
overall cost (compare (14) with (12) and (13)).18
       As abatement becomes more extensive, however, the intrinsic abatement cost compo-
nent gains relative importance. Intuitively, at high levels of abatement, marginal costs
of abatement are high, so that the eﬃciency with which abatement occurs becomes
important.      Since the command-and-control policies have a disadvantage in intrinsic
abatement eﬃciency (fewer channels for abatement are employed), this disadvantage
becomes magnified relative to their advantage in terms of the compensation-related eﬃ-
ciency cost. An emissions tax may thus have higher overall costs than the other policies
when the abatement target is lax, and lower overall costs when the abatement target is
stringent.
       We can illustrate this with the eﬃciency losses associated with additional abatement
due to a technology mandate:

                                      Tx y
                      ψ = −λ(αye +      (α + Γm ))e − (1 − T )μαye eΦ̄m ,                       (17)
                                      Px x

where Γm > 0 and Φ̄m > 0 are positive constants. The two right-hand terms represent
the intrinsic abatement cost and the lump-sum compensation cost respectively (see (10))
for this case. These two cost components are infinitesimal at initial abatement (i.e.
αye = Tx = 0) but become positive at non-marginal abatement (i.e. αye > 0, Tx < 0).
       At a negative input tax Tx < 0 on the good produced by the upstream industry (due
to the technology mandate), the costs of additional abatement through the emission tax
is given by
                                         Tx y
                         ψ = −λ(αye +      (α + Γe ))e − (1 − T )μeΦ̄t ,
                                         Px x
where 0 < Γe < Γm and Φ̄t > 0 are positive constants. At initial abatement (i.e. αye =
Tx = 0), the emission tax involves a positive first-order lump-sum compensation cost
(1 − T )μeΦ̄t > 0 and is thus less eﬃcient than the technology mandate, which involves
only infinitesimal compensation cost. However, if the subsidy −Tx > 0 has become large
  18
     In the present study, the higher cost of emissions taxes arises when compensation is lump-sum in
nature. This result is reminiscent of earlier studies that have shown how emissions taxes can be more
costly than other instruments when government budget balance must be achieved through lump-sum
transfers. (See Parry and Oates (2000), Goulder et al. (1999) and Fullerton and Metcalf (2001)). In
all of these studies, the use of lump-sum payments (and the associated need to finance such payments
through distortionary taxes) lies behind the higher cost of the emissions tax.



                                                 15
enough, the fact that the emission tax results in less use of the subsidized fuel input
(so that Γe < Γm ) and thus achieves the required cut in emissions in a more eﬃcient
way makes the emission tax more eﬃcient than the technology mandate. This eﬀect
of smaller intrinsic abatement costs of the emission tax is strengthened through larger
lump-sum compensation cost of the technology mandate at non-marginal abatement.
In particular, at non-marginal abatement (i.e.αye > 0),not only the emission tax but
also the technology mandate involves non-marginal lump-sum compensation (see the
last term at the right-hand side of (17)). The reason is that under the technology
mandate the abatement costs −αye e are born by the sector concerned rather than the
government budget. Hence, at larger levels of abatement, the technology mandate losses
its advantage in terms of smaller lump-sum compensation cost while its disadvantage in
terms of larger intrinsic abatement cost becomes more important.
    For similar reasons, the cost rankings of the two command-and-control policies can
change as well as abatement becomes more extensive.                    The technology mandate em-
ploys only the input-substitution channel, while the performance standard engages both
input substitution and output reduction.              As a result, the technology mandate is at
a disadvantage in terms of the intrinsic abatement cost.                  However, compared to the
performance standard, it is more eﬀective in protecting the upstream industry since it
contains the drop in demand for the intermediate (fuel) input. Thus, it involves lower
lump-sum compensation costs (compare (12) and (13) for inital abatement). This lat-
ter factor counts most heavily at low levels of pollution abatement, when the intrinsic
abatement cost is less important. At these abatement levels, therefore, the technology
mandate is less costly than the performance standard. However, the cost ranking is re-
versed at higher abatement levels, when diﬀerences in intrinsic abatement costs become
larger.
    Now consider the case where compensation is provided through lower sector-specific
marginal tax rates.        In this case, only the first right-hand term in (10) applies (the
intrinsic abatement cost), although compensation aﬀects the magnitude of this term.
At initial (infinitesimal) abatement, all policies have infinitesimal intrinsic abatement
costs. As abatement requirements become larger, the intrinsic abatement costs diﬀer.
As in policies without compensation, the rankings depend on the relative eﬀectiveness
with which the various abatement channels are exploited.19
  19
     Compensation in the form of sector-specific reductions in marginal tax rates can influence the relative
costs of the various abatement channels, and thereby influence the relative costs of the diﬀerent policies.
In our simulation experiments this impact on relative costs appears to be negligible.



                                                    16
3         A Numerical Model
Here we develop and apply a numerical model in order to obtain quantitative results.
We briefly describe the model here; a complete description is in a technical appendix,
available from www.stanford.edu/~goulder.
         The formal structure of this numerical model is the same as that of the analytical
model of Section 2, except that the numerical model does not assume that the polluting
industries are infinitely small compared to the rest of the economy.                                     Moreover, since
this model is solved numerically, its solution does not rely on linearization techniques.
Thus we can consider the impacts of large policy changes.20


3.1        Structure

3.1.1           Production and Factor Mobility

We adopt constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) functional forms for the production
functions for the intermediate input X and the final goods Y and C.                                           Each industry
employs labor and capital as inputs, and industry Y employs the intermediate input X
as well. Specifically:
                                        "                             σ y −1
                                                                               #     σy
                                                σ y −1                             σ y −1
                                                                        σy
                               Y = γ y αy v       σy
                                                         + (1 − αy )Ly                      ,                          (18)


                                   ∙    σ x −1
                                                                 ¸ σx
                                                           σ x −1 σ x −1
                                          σx                 σx
                            X = γ x αx Kx      + (1 − αx )Lx             ,                                             (19)

                                      ∙     σ c −1
                                                                     ¸ σc
                                                               σ c −1 σ c −1
                                              σc                 σc
                               C = γ c αc Kc       + (1 − αc )Lc             ,                                         (20)

         with                         ∙                              ¸ σv
                                           σ v −1              σ v −1 σ v −1
                                             σv
                               v = γ v αv Ky      + (1 − αv )X   σ v         .                                         (21)

         To capture the imperfect mobility of capital across industries, we apply a CES capital
transformation function:
                           "        σ k −1           σ k −1                             σ k −1
                                                                                                 #     σk
                                                                                                     σ k −1
                                      σk               σk                                 σk
                    K = γ k αk Kx            + β k Ky         + (1 − αk − β k )Kc                             ,        (22)

    20
    We also now consider total welfare impacts, as opposed to the marginal analysis of the previous
section.



                                                          17
The parameter σ k controls the curvature of this function. We employ negative values
for σ k so that the transformation function is bowed out from the origin.           Successive
increments to the supply of any given type of capital thus require ever-larger sacrifices
of other types of capital, in keeping with increasing marginal adjustment costs.           In
contrast to capital, labor is perfectly mobile across industries.

3.1.2     Emissions

Emissions are generated by the downstream industry Y . These are a function of that
industry’s use of fuel (X) and the resources devoted by that industry to end-of-pipe
treatment. We adopt the following emissions function:

                       ∙       µ            ¶ ¸ −1
                 E               g(Ya , Ca ) ρe ρe
                   = γe 1 + βe                     β e > 0;            0 < ρe < 1         (23)
                 X                  X

where the function g(Ya , Ca ), representing resources devoted to end-of-pipe treatment,
is a CES composite of the two final goods. The emissions ratio E/X above can be
represented as γ e f (g/X). The function f (.) has the following desirable properties:

   • f 0 (0) ⇒ −∞.       This first unit of end-of-pipe treatment is very productive in
        cutting emissions. Accordingly, end-of-pipe treatment is positive if emissions are
        constrained (implying a positive shadow price of pollution permits)

   • f (∞) = 0. Pollution is eliminated completely if end-of-pipe treatment is very
        large.

   • f (0) = 1. Without any end-of-pipe treatment, pollution remains finite.

3.1.3     Household Utility (Goods Demand and Factor Supply)

The household utility function is CES:
                                ³     σ u −1        σ u −1
                                                           ´ σu
                                                            σ u −1
                             U = αg G   σ u  + αz Z   σ u          ,                      (24)




                                               18
where G is a CES composite of Yh and Ch (the quantities of goods Y and C devoted to
household consumption21 ):

                                    Ã       σ g −1          σ g −1
                                                                     !     σg
                                                                         σ g −1
                                              σg              σg
                              G=      αgy Yh         + αgc Ch                     ,                     (25)


and Z is a CES composite of labor supply and aggregate capital supply:
                          ³            σ z −1               σ z −1
                                                                   ´ σz
                                                                    σ z −1
                       Z = αzl (L − L)   σ z  + αzk (K − K)   σ z          ,                            (26)

and where L and K represent the maximum potential labor supply (endowment of labor
time) and capital supply, respectively. Note that this utility function does not account
for the welfare impact of changes in environmental quality.                           All of the policy costs
described in the results below should therefore be regarded as gross costs: they do not
net out the benefits associated with policy-induced environmental improvements.

3.1.4    The Government

The government levies factor taxes and introduces the various environmental policies
discussed above. All revenues are returned to the private sector through marginal or
lump-sum cuts in factor taxes.          The government’s budget constraint is:



        Pg Λ + Π(1 − T ) + Skx Kx + Sky Ky = T [W L + Rx Kx + Ry Ky + Rc Kc ]
                                             |             {z             }
                                                                         factor tax revenue
                                                          +TE E + Tx Px X − SY
                                                           |        {z        }
                                                           environmental tax revenue

where, as before, Pg Λ is a fixed real government transfer to the households, Π is the
amount of tax credit given to the X and Y industries, and T , Te , and Tx are the tax
rates on factors (labor, capital in industries X, Y , and C), emissions, and output from
industry X, respectively.        Total government revenue, shown on the right-hand side,
comes from these taxes net of the subsidies used to model the command-and-control
policies.22
  21
     The parameters of the function G are the same as those in the end-of-pipe-treatment function g in
(23) above.
  22
     Households’ revenues from the tax credit are also subject to tax at the marginal capital tax rate.




                                                     19
3.2   Equilibrium Conditions

For the emissions tax, emissions permits, and fuel tax policies, the requirements of the
general equilibrium are that (1) household supply of labor must equal aggregate labor
demand by firms, (2) demand for capital by each industry i (i = x, y, c) must equal
the quantity supplied to that industry, (3) pollution emissions must equal the pollution
level stipulated by environmental policy, and (4) government revenue must equal real
transfers to households. The before-tax wage is the numeraire. The model identifies
the primary “prices” that cause these four types of equilibrium conditions to be met.
These are the equilibrium rental prices for capital, the emissions tax rate (or price of
emissions permits), and the marginal factor tax rate T . These prices determine output
prices and the real wage. Walras’s law implies that the labor market clears when all
the other markets clear.
   For the technology mandate and performance standard, a further condition is in-
troduced.    As mentioned in the previous section, a technology mandate imposed on
industry Y is equivalent to a revenue-neutral combination of an emissions tax and a
subsidy to the polluting input X, while the performance standard imposed on that in-
dustry is a revenue-neutral combination of emissions tax and subsidy to Y . We simulate
these two command-and-control policies as combinations of this sort. For these policies,
the model adds the condition that the combination of the emissions tax and a subsidy
to either X or Y is revenue-neutral.
   Table 1 lists the policies considered and summarizes how they are implemented in
the model.


3.3   Data

We apply the numerical model to the U.S., letting Y represent the electricity industry
and C the other U.S. final goods industries. X refers to the industry producing (ex-
tracting) fossil fuels — coal, crude petroleum and natural gas. The use of these fuels by
the electricity (Y ) industry leads to emissions. We focus on control of sulfur dioxide
(SO2 ) emissions.
   Table 2 indicates the inter-industry flows in our data set. These flows derive from
the U.S. Commerce Department Bureau of Economic Analysis’s Benchmark Input &
Output Tables for 1992. The emissions data come from the 1992 column of Table 12.6
of the Energy Information Agency’s Annual Energy Review 1999.
   Table 3 displays the model’s parameters.      The elasticities of substitution in pro-


                                           20
duction are taken from the disaggregated general equilibrium data set developed by
Barreto, Gurney, Xie, and Goulder (2002). For the Y industry, we calibrate the model
to generate production and abatement elasticities consistent with those from the de-
tailed “HAIKU” model of the U.S. electricity industry developed at Resources for the
Future. The substitution elasticities σ y and σ v imply that, compared to capital, labor
is a much better substitute for X.
    The capital adjustment parameter σ k is chosen so as to yield capital responses
roughly consistent with findings from a survey by Chirinko, Fazzari, and Meyer (2002)
indicating that the elasticity of investment with respect to the cost of capital is in the
range of .25-.4.
    We calibrate the model to generate uncompensated and compensated labor supply
elasticities of 0.15 and 0.4, respectively.23 This is consistent with the survey by Russek
(1996).     Together, these two elasticity targets yield the values for the elasticity of
substitution between leisure and capital and the benchmark ratio of total (labor plus
leisure) time to labor time.        These values imply a marginal excess burden of 0.24 for
labor taxes. As in the analytical model, capital supply elasticities are set equal to labor
supply elasticities.24 In this model, employing the same tax rate on both capital and
labor income implies that the marginal excess burden for capital taxes is thus the same
as that for labor taxes.


3.4     Simulation Results

3.4.1     Cost Eﬀectiveness and Incidence — No EVN Constraint

We apply the model to examine the impacts of emissions taxes, performance standards,
technology mandates, and fuel taxes.25 Our first experiments assess the eﬃciency and
incidence impacts of these instruments in the absence of compensation to achieve equity
  23
     To calibrate the model to these labor supply parameters, we numerically solve the household’s utility
maximization problem with given prices and observe the change in labor supply resulting from a change
in the after-tax wage. We solve this as a constrained optimization problem, where the amount of capital
supplied is fixed. To calculate the compensated elasticity, we also alter the household’s income so that
utility remains unchanged despite the change in the after-tax wage.
  24
     This is accomplished in calibration by setting the ratio K/K equal to the ratio L/L.
  25
     Because there is no uncertainty in this model, policies involving tradable emissions permits are
equivalent to various emissions tax policies. If permits are initially allocated through an auction, an
emissions tax of Te is equivalent to a system involving auctioned permits that yields a permit price equal
to Te . Both policies will lead to the same economic outcomes, including the extent of abatement. A
system of tradable permits in which the permits are initially allocated free is equivalent to an emissions
tax with a lump-sum rebate equal to the total tax revenues. This latter system would in fact cause
profits in the Y industry to be higher than in the unregulated status quo (see Bovenberg and Goulder,
2001).


                                                   21
value neutrality (EVN).
       Figure 1 compares the policy costs, as measured by the negative of the equivalent
variation.26 The emissions tax is the most cost eﬀective, followed by the two “command-
and-control” policies (the technology mandate and performance standard). The fuel tax
is the least cost eﬀective and is omitted from the figure for scale — its costs may be
found in Table 4.      As indicated in Section 2, the emissions tax is most cost eﬀective
because it eﬃciently exploits all three channels for abatement: input substitution, end-
of-pipe treatment, and output reduction.               The other policies fail to exploit at least
one of these channels. The performance standard — equivalent to the combination of
emissions tax and subsidy to output — leads to ineﬃciently low output prices and thus
makes relatively little use of the output-reduction channel. Similarly, the technology
mandate — equivalent to the combination of an emissions tax and a subsidy to the
fuel input — yields ineﬃciently low incentives for substitution away from the pollution-
generating fuel, as well as for output reduction (the subsidy to the input leads to output
prices that are lower than those under the emissions tax).               The fuel tax provides no
incentive for end-of-pipe treatment. The exceptionally high cost of the fuel tax in our
model indicates that, under central values for parameters, the absence of the end-of-pipe
channel is especially important.27
       Table 4 indicates the price impacts of each policy, for abatement of 10, 25, and
75 percent.      The performance standard leads to the smallest change in the demand
(consumer) price of the downstream good Y because it is equivalent to an emissions
tax and output subsidy.        Indeed, the price of that good falls (slightly) in the case of
10 percent abatement. The technology mandate (which eﬀectively subsidizes the fuel
input to the downstream good industry) also has a relatively small impact on the price
of the downstream good. The emissions tax and fuel tax yield the largest impacts on
the price of the downstream good Y . The impact is especially large in the case of the
fuel tax.     Because this policy does not exploit the channel of end-of-pipe treatment,
a very high fuel tax is needed to induce suﬃcient input-substitution to meet a given
abatement target. This high tax leads to a large increase in cost of the fuel input and
the price of the output Y .
       Table 4 also displays the incidence (i.e., profit and wage) impacts of the diﬀerent
  26
     Note that the equivalent variation does not account for welfare impacts associated with improved
environmental quality. Thus, the negative of our equivalent variation indicates gross policy costs.
  27
     In the central case, the parameter ρe (calibrated from the HAIKU model) implies fairly elastic
response of end-of-pipe treatment to the price of emissions. Hence, the fuel tax’s failure to engage the
channel of end-of-pipe treatment is a significant disadvantage in the model’s central case.



                                                  22
policies. Because of their subsidy components, the technology mandate and performance
standard have the smallest adverse profit impacts on the downstream industry Y . They
also exert the smallest adverse impacts on profits to the upstream industry, reflecting
the fact that these policies reduce only slightly the demand for the upstream good. The
impacts of these two command-and-control policies diﬀer in that the technology mandate
protects especially the upstream industry, while the performance standard oﬀers special
protection to the downtream industry, in keeping with the diﬀerent subsidy components
of the two policies. The fuel tax imposes the largest burden on the upstream- and
downsteam industries, reflecting the need to impose a relatively high tax rate to reach
given levels of abatement when the channel of end-of-pipe treatment is not employed.

3.4.2   Cost-Eﬀectiveness in the Presence of the EVN Constraint


Compensation via Tax Credits

   We now examine the relative costs when the policies must include compensation to
the pollution-related industries. These costs depend on the way that compensation is
provided. We first investigate the costs when compensation is provided in the form of
lump-sum tax payments or credits to both of the pollution-related industries, that is, to
both X and Y .
   Table 5 compares, for each policy, the aggregate policy costs in the presence and
absence of the EVN constraint. The additional costs implied by the constraint are
largest for the emissions tax and (especially) the fuel tax because these policies require
the most compensation (in the form of tax credits). To preserve budget balance, the
government must finance the tax credits by significantly increasing tax rates on factors of
production. This raises the costs of the emissions tax and fuel tax considerably relative
to the case without EVN. In contrast, under the command-and-control policies, much
less compensation is needed, so for these policies the marginal factor tax rates in the
cases with and without EVN are not much diﬀerent. Hence, the added eﬃciency cost
of the EVN constraint is smaller under command and control.
   In fact, in keeping with the analysis of Section 2, the EVN requirement reverses the
rankings of the various instruments in terms of overall costs (including the lump-sum
compensation cost).    As shown in Figure 2, the EVN constraint makes the costs of
the emissions tax higher than those of the command-and-control policies, for all except
very high amounts of abatement. The emissions tax’s need for higher compensation (at


                                            23
any level of abatement) implies large compensation-related costs relative to those of the
other policies. The relatively high compensation costs work against the emissions tax’s
advantage in terms of the intrinsic abatement cost.     Figure 2 shows that, at low and
moderate levels of abatement, the emissions tax’s disadvantage in terms of compensation
costs overwhelms its advantage in terms of intrinsic abatement costs. Only at very high
levels of abatement does the intrinsic abatement advantage dominate. When very high
levels of abatement are called for, the other policies’ neglect of at least one important
abatement channel ultimately leads to very high costs that oﬀset their advantages related
to compensation.     Economists have long considered emissions taxes as a more cost-
eﬀective instrument than command-and-control policies.       These results indicate that
the need for compensation can reverse the rankings in terms of cost eﬀectiveness.
   At low levels of abatement, the compensation requirement also reverses the rankings
between the two command-and-control policies. At less than 25 percent abatement, the
performance standard now emerges as more costly than the technology mandate. This
reflects the need for greater compensation under the performance standard, as analyzed
in Section 2. Thus, at low levels of abatement the rankings between the emissions tax,
performance standard and technology mandate are completely reversed when the EVN
contraint is imposed.

   Compensation via Industry-specific Cuts in Capital Tax Rates

   We now examine the relative costs when compensation is achieved through reductions
in the marginal rates on capital income in the X and Y industries. The bottom set of
rows in Table 5 shows the results from these experiments.
   The required levels of compensation under the various environmental policies are
very similar to those in the case where industries were oﬀered tax credits.     In terms
of overall policy cost, the choice of compensation method is more important for the
emissions tax than for the command-and-control policies. Under the emissions tax, it
is somewhat more eﬃcient to compensate through marginal rate cuts in capital taxes
than through lump-sum credits.         When compensation is provided through marginal
rate cuts, capital tax rates can be lower than would be the case under lump-sum tax
credits (particularly in industries X and Y ).    This reduces the eﬃciency costs.   For
the command-and-control policies, in contrast, the choice of compensation method has
relatively little impact on the eﬃciency cost, since the compensation requirements of
these policies are relatively small.


                                             24
       Figure 3 compares the costs of diﬀerent policies in the case where EVN is accom-
plished through marginal rate cuts.           A comparison with Figure 1 indicates that each
policy’s costs are higher than in the case without compensation, while policy rankings
are unchanged.28
       We also consider the relative costs of the two diﬀerent compensation methods, hold-
ing fixed the choice of environmental policy instrument. Marginal rate cuts are in general
better at low levels of abatement, but worse at high levels.29 As discussed in Section
2, capital tax cuts reduce the eﬀectiveness of the input-substitution and output-demand
channels and thus result in less eﬃcient pollution abatement.                  Ineﬃcient abatement
is especially important when the abatement target is stringent.                  For example, under
a fuel tax, the cost of compensation through marginal rate cuts is lower than the cost
through tax credits if the required abatement is less than 10 percent, but becomes
higher if greater abatement is called for. Similarly, under the emissions tax, the cost
with compensation through marginal rate cuts overtakes the cost through lump-sum
compensation once the abatement requirement exceeds 71 percent.


3.5      Sensitivity Analysis

Tables 6 and 7 display the sensitivity of our results to changes in key parameters. In
Table 6, which focuses on abatement levels of 25 percent, the first column of numbers
gives the eﬃciency cost of the emissions tax in the absence of compensation.                        The
remaining columns indicate the ratio of eﬃciency costs for the policy in question to the
cost in the first column. For each of the four policy instruments considered, we show
these ratios both for the no-compensation case and for the case with compensation via
corporate tax credits. Table 7 indicates the critical levels of abatement at which the
eﬃciency rankings of policies change.

       End-of-pipe treatment

       Higher values for the parameter β e imply greater ease of end-of-pipe treatment;
when β e is zero, end-of-pipe treatment is not possible (the ratio of emissions to fuel
use is fixed). Table 6 shows that the cost of abatement rises and the relative cost of
command-and-control policies increases as end-of-pipe treatment is made more diﬃcult.
  28
     As mentioned in Section 2, sector-specific tax cuts could aﬀect relative policy costs by influencing
the relative costs of the abatement channels. However, this eﬀect is negligible in our simulations.
  29
     This implies that for intermediate levels of abatement some combination of lump-sum compensation
and marginal compensation will be more eﬃcient than either instrument alone.



                                                   25
In the case without end-of-pipe treatment, where β e equals zero, the technology mandate
is no longer defined, and the fuel tax becomes equivalent to the emissions tax. For low
values of β e , the high relative cost of the performance standard means that the output-
demand channel is important in reducing emissions. Since the performance standard
omits this channel, its compensation-related advantage becomes small relative to its
eﬃciency disadvantage.     Hence, the critical abatement percentage beyond which the
emissions tax becomes more eﬃcient is lower, as indicated in Table 7.          Even in the
extreme case where β e equals zero, however, the performance standard still outperforms
the emissions tax for low enough abatement targets.

   Capital adjustment costs

   The parameter σ k controls the adjustment costs in moving capital across sectors:
higher values of σ k imply less mobile capital. With lower capital mobility, owners of
capital in the X or Y industries require greater compensation. The capital adjustment
costs have relatively little eﬀect on the intrinsic eﬃciency costs of abatement in the first
column of Table 6, but have a large eﬀect on compensation-related costs, as indicated
by the ratio of costs with and without EVN for the various policies. Since this para-
meter directly controls how much industry compensation is needed for environmental
policy, it has a large impact in Table 7.    The compensation-related advantage of the
command-and-control policies becomes more and more important as capital adjustment
costs rise.   Indeed, in the high-cost case, the performance standard is more eﬃcient
than the emissions tax until 90 percent abatement.

   Elasticity of demand for output from industry Y

   Easier substitution between C and Y in demand increases the importance of the
output-demand eﬀect.     This slightly lowers overall abatement costs and increases the
relative cost of the command-and-control policies (because they make less use of the
output-demand channel).       The higher elasticity also increases somewhat the need for
compensation, since the Y sector shrinks more under environmental policy. These two
eﬀects (higher intrinsic cost of command-and-control policies as well as greater need
for compensation) compete in their impact in Table 7.          They almost exactly oﬀset
each other for the performance standard with the crossover remaining at 79 percent
abatement.

   Factor supply elasticity

                                            26
   The elasticity in the outer nest of the utility function, σ u , controls the elasticity
with which the household supplies labor and capital. Higher values for this elasticity
mean that existing factor taxes lead to larger distortions in factor markets, and a higher
marginal cost of public funds.    A higher factor-supply elasticity raises the eﬃciency
cost of providing compensation through corporate tax credits, since this compensation
must be financed through higher factor taxes (which now have a higher eﬃciency cost).
Thus, when the EVN constraint is imposed, the relative advantage of the command-
and-control policies increases with the size of the factor supply elasticity. For example,
the first row of Table 6 shows that under central values for parameters the cost of the
emissions tax with EVN is about 24 percent higher than the cost of the technology
mandate with EVN (1.439/1.156). With the high factor-supply elasticity, in contrast,
the emissions tax’s cost is about 53 percent higher (1.889/1.232). Higher factor-supply
elasticities likewise imply higher crossover points in Table 7.

   Input substitution between capital and fuel

   The parameter σ v controls the ease of subsitution between the intermediate input
(fuel) and capital in the Y industry.    A higher value for this parameter thus reduces
the relative cost of policies that rely heavily on the fuel-capital substitution channel.
Hence, the relative cost of the fuel tax and performance standard fall when σ v takes
a higher value.   A high value for σ v is especially disadvantageous for the technology
mandate, since this policy does not exploit the fuel-capital substitution channel. Easier
fuel substitution implies greater need for compensation to the upstream industry but less
need for the downstream industry. The change in overall compensation requirements is
nearly neutral, so the eﬀects in Table 7 are driven primarily by the changes in relative
intrinsic eﬃciency. With a higher substitution elasticity, the performance standard
is more eﬃcient than the emission tax over a wider range of abatement (because of
the former policy’s heavier reliance on fuel switching), while the technology mandate
becomes less eﬃcient more quickly than the emissions tax does.

   Industries compensated

   Here we explore how results change when only the downstream industry receives
compensation instead of both the upstream and downstream industries.           Narrowing
the compensation net lowers the cost ratios for all policies, since less compensation is
needed. The eﬀect is particularly strong for the performance standard, which tends to


                                            27
hurt the upstream industry while preserving profits in the downstream industry. The
results in Table 7 are as expected, with the compensation-related eﬃciency advantage
of the command-and-control policies becoming somewhat less important when only one
industry is compensated.




4    Conclusions
The political viability of a proposed environmental policy instrument can depend on
whether it is likely to avoid significant profit losses to major industrial stakeholders.
Using analytically and numerically solved models, we investigate the incidence of various
environmental policy instruments and then explore how the aggregate costs of these
instruments change with the requirement that major pollution-related industries be
compensated for potential profit losses.
    We show that the added cost from the compensation requirement can be decomposed
into two components: (1) an increase in intrinsic abatement cost (the cost of utilizing the
channels of inputsubstitution, end-of-pipe treatment, and output cuts in order to achieve
pollution reductions), and (2) a cost directly associated with lump-sum compensation.
We explore how these cost components are aﬀected when compensation is provided either
through sector-specific tax credits or by way of sector-specific reductions in capital tax
rates. For each policy instrument, achieving compensation through tax credits raises
both cost components, while achieving compensation through reductions in capital tax
cuts raises only the intrinsic abatement cost.
    Importantly, introducing the compensation requirement has very diﬀerent impacts
on the costs of diﬀerent policy instruments. Restoring profits through tax credits, in
particular, raises the costs of emissions taxes considerably more than it raises the costs
of command-and-control policies such as performance standards and mandated tech-
nologies. This reflects the greater need for compensation under the emissions tax and
the associated larger increase in the second cost component, the lump-sum compensa-
tion cost. Thus, while emissions taxes generally are more cost eﬀective in the absence
of a compensation requirement, imposing this requirement can make the emissions tax
more costly than command-and-control policies. This result occurs when a small or
moderate amount of pollution abatement is required. When the abatement requirement
is very extensive, the emissions tax regains its status as the most cost-eﬀective instru-
ment; with extensive abatement, other policies suﬀer significant increases in intrinsic

                                            28
abatement costs, which causes overall costs to exceed those of the emissions tax, despite
lower compensation requirements.
      The potential advantage (at low or modest levels of abatement) of command-and-
control policies reflects the fact that these policies eﬀectively include subsidy compo-
nents: a performance standard is equivalent to an emissions tax and output subsidy,
while a technology mandate is equivalent to an emissions tax and input subsidy. The
implicit subsidies limit the adverse profit impacts of these policies, thereby reducing
the need for compensation. When equity value neutrality must be achieved through
tax credits, the command-and-control policies therefore have an advantage, since they
require less compensation through tax credits, which entail significant eﬃciency costs.
      The introduction of a compensation requirement can thus significantly alter the
cost-rankings of alternative environmental policy instruments. The extent to which the
rankings are changed depends on the degree of stringency of the abatement requirement.
      Some limitations in this study deserve mention. The two models do not incorporate
uncertainty, nor do they capture heterogeneity among producers within given industries.
These elements can influence the cost rankings of policy instruments.      Uncertainty is
associated with costs of monitoring and enforcement, and such costs generally diﬀer
across policies. In addition, when polluting firms have heterogeneous abatement costs
and regulators have imperfect information about such costs, incentive-based policies like
emissions taxes and fuel taxes may have an advantage over command-and-control poli-
cies in producing a cost-eﬀective allocation of pollution-reduction eﬀorts across firms.30
Despite these limitations, the present analysis reveals how the compensation requirement
aﬀects the absolute and relative costs of major environmental policy instruments.


References

Barreto, Daniel, Derek J. Gurney, Xiaoying Xie, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2002. “An
Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model for Analyzing U.S. Energy and Environmental
Policies: Data Documentation.” Working paper, Stanford University.
      Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2001. “Neutralizing the Adverse
Industry Impacts of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?” In C. Carraro
and G. Metcalf, eds., Behavioral and Distributional Eﬀects of Environmental Policy,
University of Chicago Press.
 30
      See, for example, Tietenberg (1990) and Stavins et al. (1998).



                                                    29
   Bovenberg, A. Lans, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Derek R. Gurney, 2005. “Eﬃciency
Costs of Meeting Industry-Distributional Constraints under Environmental Permits and
Taxes.” RAND Journal of Economics, Winter.
   Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1998. Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of the United
States, 1992, Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics
Administration.
   Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, Ranjit Bharvirkar, and Anthony Paul, 2002. “The
Eﬀect on Asset Values of the Allocation of Carbon Dioxide Emission Allowances.” Dis-
cussion Paper 02-15, Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C., March.
   Chirinko, Robert S., Steven M. Fazzari, and Andrew P. Meyer, 2002. “That Elusive
Elasticity:   A Long-Panel Approach to Estimating the Price Sensitivity of Business
Capital.” Working paper, Emory University, January.
   Energy Information Administration, 1999. Annual Energy Review 1999, Washing-
ton, DC: Department of Energy
   Farrow, Scott, 1999. “The Duality of Taxes and Tradeable Permits: A Survey
with Applications in Central and Eastern Europe.” Environmental and Development
Economics 4:519-535.
   Fischer, Carolyn, Ian W. H. Parry, and William Pizer, 2003. “Instrument Choice
for Environmental Protection when Technological Innovation Is Endogenous.” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 45:523-45.
   Freeman, A. Myrick, 1993. The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Val-
ues: Theory and Methods. Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.
   Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 2001.   “Environmental Controls, Scarcity
Rents, and Pre-Existing Distortions.” Journal of Public Economics 80(2):249-67.
   Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel, 2006.    “The General Equilibrium Incidence of
Environmental Mandates.” Working paper, University of Texas at Austin.
   Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W. H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Bur-
traw, 1999.    “The Cost-Eﬀectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental
Protection in a Second-Best Setting,” Journal of Public Economics 72(3):329-60.
   Parry, Ian, and Wallace E. Oates, 2000. “Policy Analysis in the Presence of Dis-
torting Taxes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(4):603-13.
   Russek, Frank S., 1996. “Labor Supply and Taxes.” Working paper, Macroeconomic
Analysis Division, Congressional Budget Oﬃce, Washington, D.C.
   Stavins, Robert N., 1996. “Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 30:218-32.

                                         30
   Stavins, Robert N., 1998. “The Choice of Regulatory Instruments in Environmental
Policy.” Harvard Environmental Law Review 22(2):313-67.
   Tietenberg, Thomas, 1990. “Economic Instruments for Environmental Regulation.”
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 6(1):16-33.




                                        31
Appendix: The Analytical Model
This appendix provides the details and derivation of the analytical results discussed in
Section 2. Part 1 derives expressions for supply and demand in the goods markets and
then solves for the equilibrium price changes resulting from environmental policy. Part
2 employs these equilibrium values to derive, for each of the four policy instruments
considered above, the overall eﬃciency costs (both abatement eﬃciency cost and lump-
sum compensation-related costs) that were presented in equations (10) through (11d) of
the main text. Finally, Part 3 decomposes the overall welfare eﬀect into the incidence
on the upstream- and downstream industries.

A.1     Equilibrium

A.1.1     Supply in the downstream industry
Competitive profit-maximizing behavior by the downstream industry yields

                                         δh(.; .) δv(.; .)                δn
                           (Py + S)                        = Px + Tx + Te    ,                                   (A.1)
                                           δV      δX                     δX
                                                      δh(.; .)
                                           (Py + S)            = W,                                              (A.2)
                                                        δLy

                                      δn δg              δn δg
                               −Te           = Pc ; − Te        = Py ,                                           (A.3)
                                      δg δCa             δg δYa
                                               δh(.; .) δv(.; .)
                                   (Py + S)                      = Ry − Sky .                                    (A.4)
                                                 δV      δKy
   Loglinearizing the production function of the downstream industry (4) and employing
the first-order conditions (A.1), (A.2), (A.3), and (A.4) (and using the fact that the
emission function (5) exhibits constant returns to scale), we find

                          y = ky + (1 − αyv )(ly − v) + (1 − αyk )(x − ky ),                                     (A.5)
where αyk ≡ (Ry − Sky )Ky /((Ry − Sky )Ky + (Px + Tx )X + Te E + Pc Ca + Py Ya ), αyv ≡
((Ry − Sky )Ky + (Px + Tx )X + Te E + Pc Ca + Py Ya )/(Py + S)Y = 1 − (W Ly /(Py + S)Y ),
and v = αyk ky + (1 − αyk )x.
    With constant-returns-to-scale production and emissions functions, the relative change
in the output price is a weighted average of the relative changes in the input prices31

                                     p̂y + s = p̂x + t̂x + t̂e + r̂y − ŝky ,                                    (A.6)
               Py                                                                                     R
where p̂y ≡   Py +S py ; p̂x   ≡     Px X
                                   (Py +S)Y   px ; t̂x ≡     XdTx
                                                           (Py +S)Y   ; t̂e ≡ αye te ; r̂y ≡ αyv αyk Ry −S
                                                                                                         y
                                                                                                           ky
                                                                                                              ry , ŝky ≡
  31
     pc = 0 because Pc is the numeraire. Also w = 0 since the downstream- and upstream sectors are
too small to aﬀect the prices on the labor market. pc = 0 implies that the costs of abatement do not
change because, in line with our assumption that the upstream- and downstream industries are small
compared to the rest of the economy, the share of abatement produced by the downstream industry (i.e.
Ya ) in aggregate abatement g(Ca ; Ya ) is only infinitely small.


                                                           32
 Ky dSky
(Py +S)Y, where αye ≡ Te E/(Py + S)Y stands for the cost shares of the emissions tax in
the final-goods industry.
   Capital supply is given by32
                                     ky = σ̂ yk r̂y ,                             (A.7)
                    σy    R −S
where σ̂ yk ≡ αy αk y yRy ky and σ yk stands for the substitution elasticity between the
                 v k
industry-specific capital services in the final-goods sector and the capital services in
the rest of the economy.
    Using (A.4), (A.2), and (A.1) to eliminate Py , and log-linearizing the results, we
arrive at the following two equations

                         x − ky = σ̂ v [r̂y − ŝky − (αyk /(1 − αyk ))(p̂x + t̂x + t̂e )],               (A.8)

                                 ly − v = σ̂ y αyk [r̂y − ŝky + p̂x + t̂x + t̂e ],                      (A.9)
                σv
where σ̂ v ≡   αyv αyk
                         and σ v stands for the substitution elasticity between the intermediate
                                                                   σ
input and capital in the composite v(.; .). σ̂ y ≡ αy αy y and σ y represents the substitution
                                                    v k
elasticity between labor and the nest v(.; .) in the production function h(.; .) (see (4)).
Substituting (A.7), (A.8) and (A.9) into (A.5) to eliminate ky, x − ky , and ly − v, and
using (A.6) eliminate r̂y from the result, we write the supply of the final good in terms
of its price, the price of the intermediate good, and the various policy instruments:

                               y = εyy p̂y + εyy s − εyx [p̂x + t̂x + t̂e ] + σ̂ yk ŝky ,             (A.10)

where
                                 εyy ≡ σ̂ yk + σ̂ v (1 − αyk ) + (1 − αyv )αyk σ̂ y ,                  (A.11)


                                                  εyx = σ̂ yk + σ̂ v .                                 (A.12)
  The assumption that capital is complementary to the intermediate input
implies that (1 − αyv )σ̂ y ≥ σ̂ v , so that εyy ≥ εyx .

A.1.2      Demand for the downstream good
Maximization of the utility function (7) yields

                                                  δg δg   Py
                                                    /   =    .
                                                  δY δC   Pc
Log-linearization of this equation gives rise to the demand function

                                                    y = −σ̄ g p̂y ,                                    (A.13)
  32
     This assumes that all households are well diversified so that income eﬀects can be ignored. Al-
ternatively, one can assume that a share γ y of capital owners in the downtream industry is completely
specialized in this sector (i.e., only derives income from capital in this sector). In that case, the elasticity
σyk in the following equation is replaced by (1 − γ y )σ yk + γ y εu , where εu stands for the uncompensated
elasticity of aggregate capital supply with respect to the rate of return.



                                                          33
                P +S
where σ̄ g ≡ σ g yPy and σ g represents the substitution elasticity between the final good
Y and other consumption goods C in the household sub-utility function g(., .) (see (7)).

A.1.3    Supply in the upstream industry
Log-linearizing the production function of the upstream industry (1), we find

                                 xs = kx + (1 − αxk )(lx − kx ),                        (A.14)
where αxk ≡ (Rx −Skx )Kx /Px X stands for the share of capital in output of the upstream
sector. With a constant-returns-to-scale production function, the relative change in the
output price is a weighted average of the relative changes in the input prices (note that
wages do not change)
                                     p̂x = r̂x − ŝkx ,                           (A.15)
where r̂x ≡ αxk αyx RxR
                      −Skx rx and ŝkx ≡
                       x                    Kx dSkx
                                           (Py +S)Y     with αyx ≡ Px X/((Py + S)Y ).
   Capital supply is given by
                                            kx = σ̂ xk r̂x ,                            (A.16)
where σ xk ≡ σ xk RxR
                    −Skx
                     x
                         /(αxk αyx ) and σ xk stands for the substitution elasticity between
the industry-specific capital services in the intermediate-goods industry and the capital
services in the rest of the economy.
    Using (2) and (3) to eliminate Px and log-linearizing the results, we arrive at

                                    lx − kx = σ̂ x (r̂x − ŝkx ),                       (A.17)

where σ̂ x ≡ σ x /((αxk αyx )) stands for the substitution elasticity between the two inputs
in the production of the intermediate good.
     Substituting (A.16), (A.17), and (A.15) into (A.14) to eliminate kx , (lx − kx ), and
rx , we write the supply of the final good in terms of its price and the demand price of
the intermediate good
                                       xs = σ̂ x p̂x + σ̂ xk ŝkx ,                   (A.18)
where σ̂ x ≡ σ̂ xk + (1 − αxk )σ̂ x denotes the supply elasticity.

A.1.4    Demand for the upstream good

By substituting (A.7) into (A.8) to eliminate ky and using (A.6) to eliminate r̂y from
the resulting expression, we can derive the impact on the demand for the intermediate
good as
                       x = εxy p̂y − εxx [p̂x + t̂x + t̂e ] + σ̂ yk ŝky + εxy s, (A.19)
where
                                      εxy ≡ σ̂ yk + σ̂ v = εyx ,

                                                         σ̂ v
                                      εxx = σ̂ yk +              ,
                                                      (1 − αyk )


                                                  34
so that εxx ≥ εxy .

A.1.5        Emissions

In order to find emissions, we write the emission function (5) as X = φ(E, g(Ca ; Ya )),
where φ(., .) is homogenous of the first degree in its arguments, and log-linearize to
arrive at
                              αyv (1 − αyk ) − αyx PxP+T
                                                       x
                                                         x
                                                            − αye
                     x=e+                                         (ca − e),    (A.20)
                                  αyv (1 − αyk ) − αyx PxP+T
                                                           x
                                                             x


where we have used the fact that Ya accounts for an infinitely small share of g(Ca , Ya ).
                                                   Pc Ca +Py Ya
Writing (A.3) in terms of φ(., .) (i.e. dφ    dφ
                                         dg / dE =       gPe    ) and log-linearizing, we arrive
at
                                        ca − e = σ e te ,                                (A.21)
where σ e represents the substitution elasticity between emissions and aggregate end-of-
pipe treatment in φ(., .). Employing (A.21) to eliminate (ca − e) from (A.20), we find
emissions in terms of the emission tax and the demand for the intermediate input33

                                                        e = x − σ̄ e t̂e ,                               (A.22)
                 αyv (1−αyk )−αyx PxP+Tx −αye
where σ̄ e ≡                          x
                                                 σe .
                 (αyv (1−αyk )−αyx PxP+Tx )αye
                                       x


A.1.6        Solution of the model
We can solve the model for py , px , rx , ry , x, e, and y most easily by writing the equilibrium
in the market for the final good (from (A.10) and A.13)) and in the market for the
intermediate good (from (A.19) and (A.18)) as follows:

                            (εyy + σ̄ g )p̂y = εyx p̂x + εyx [t̂x + t̂e ] − σ̂ yk ŝky − εyy s,


                      (σ̂ x + εxx )p̂x = εxy p̂y − εxx [t̂x + t̂e ] + σ̂ yk ŝky − σ̂ xk ŝkx + εxy s.
   These are two linear equations in two unknowns (i.e. p̂y ad p̂x ) and can be solved
by Cramer’s rule
               µ      ¶        µ x                             ¶
                  p̂y        1    σ̂ + εxx           εyx
                         =                                        ×                    (A.23)
                  p̂x       Σ         εxy        εyy + σ̄ g
                            µ                                                      ¶
                                      εyx [t̂x + t̂e ] − σ̂ yk ŝky − εyy s
                                                                                     .
                               −εxx [t̂x + t̂e ] + σ̂ yk ŝky − σ̂ xk ŝkx + εxy s

       where Σ ≡ (σ̄ g + εyy )(σ̂ x + εxx ) − εyx εxy > 0 [since Σ̄ ≡ εyy εxx − εyx εxy > 0].
  33
    Without an initial emission tax (i.e. αye = 0), the firm does not abate in the initial equilibrium (i.e.
Ca = Ya = 0) so that αyv (1 − αyk ) − αyx − αye = 0. The elasticity σ̄e remains finite in such an equilibrium.
The same holds true for αye te = (PEdT    e
                                      y +S)Y
                                               even though te goes to infinity if the initial emission tax is
zero.



                                                               35
   The changes in the key model variables are easily derived from the solutions for p̂y
and p̂x (which represent the changes in equilibrium goods prices):

                                            r̂x = p̂x + ŝkx ,                                   (A.24)

                                 r̂y = p̂y − p̂x − t̂x − t̂e + ŝky + s,                         (A.25)


                                         x = σ̂ x p̂x + σ̂ xk ŝkx ,                             (A.26)


                                             e = x − σ̄ e t̂e                                    (A.27)
                                              y = −σ̄ g p̂y .                                    (A.28)
                                              kx = σ̂ xk r̂x ,                                   (A.29)
                                              ky = σ̂ yk r̂y .                                   (A.30)

A.2     Overall eﬃciency impacts
We now analyze the non-environmental eﬃciency impacts of the policies. The welfare
impact is defined as the sum of the changes in the after-tax producer surplus in the
upstream industry (P SX), the change in the after-tax producer surplus in the down-
stream industry (P SY ), and the change in non-environmental (after-tax) consumer sur-
plus (N CS). It will be convenient to express the welfare impacts relative to (Py + S)Y ,
the initial before-tax value of the output of the downstream industry Y . In what fol-
lows, we include the relevant terms for all policies simultaneously. To calculate the eﬀect
for an emissions tax alone, for example in equation (11a) of the main text, the fuel tax
and subsidy to output would drop out of the expressions. The three components can
be written as
                    dP SX
          psx ≡             = (1 − T )(r̂x + π x ) = (1 − T )(p̂x + ŝkx + π x ),                (A.31)
                  (Py + S)Y

          dP SY
  psy ≡         = (1 − T )(r̂y + π y ) = (1 − T )(p̂y − p̂x − t̂x − t̂e + ŝky + s + π y ), (A.32)
           Py Y
                                 dN CS                Py
                         ncs ≡         = −(1 − T )[        py + (t/β)],                          (A.33)
                                  Py Y              Py + S
where we assume that all factor income is taxed at the factor tax rate T. We define
                         dΠy
π x ≡ (PydΠ
          +S)Y , π y ≡ (Py +S)Y , and t ≡ dT /(1 − T ), where Πi (i = x, y) denotes lump-sum
           x


compensation to sector i. β ≡ Py Y /Q, where Q is aggregate factor income (before tax).
This share goes to zero in our model, in which the downstream and upstream sectors
are very small compared to the rest of the economy.34
  34
    Also the relative change in the factor tax, t, goes to zero. However, the ratio t/β in (A.33) is well
defined.




                                                    36
   The overall welfare eﬀect, expressed as a cost, is then ψ ≡ −(psx + psy + ncs):

                              ψ = −(1 − T )[−(t/β) − ∆ + π],                           (A.34)

where ∆ ≡ t̂x + t̂e − ŝky − ŝkx − s and π ≡ π x + π y .
   To find a reduced form for ψ, we derive t/β from the government budget constraint.
The log-linearized version of the government budget constraint is given by

                 (1 − T )∆ + Ω + T (q/β) + (1 − T )(t/β) − (1 − T )π = 0,              (A.35)

where q ≡ [α̂k k + (1 − α̂k )l] is the change in aggregate factor supply (α̂k is the share
of capital income in aggregate value added and k and l represent aggregate capital and
labor supply, respectively), and

                    Tx y        S         Sky                   Skx
      Ω ≡ αye e +      αx x −        y−          αyv αyk ky −         αy αx kx         (A.36)
                    Px        Py + S    Ry − Sky              Rx − Skx x k

    The factor (1 − T ) in (A.35) follows from the non-profit constraint, which implies
that a higher pollution tax implies lower factor income. Ω can be computed from the
solutions for the sector-specific variables in the polluting sector. Aggregate factor supply
can be written as
                                   q = εu (−β∆ − t) + εi β,                           (A.37)
where εu and εi < 0 stand for, respectively, the uncompensated elasticity of factor supply
with respect to factor rewards and the elasticity of factor supply with respect to income.
Substituting (A.37) into (A.35) to eliminate ∆, we establish
                                    µ                       ¶
                                      εu Ω/(1 − T ) − εc π
                             q/β =                            ,                     (A.38)
                                       1 − εu [T /(1 − T )]

where εc = εu − εi > 0 represents the compensated elasticity of factor supply with
respect to factor rewards. Substitution of (A.38) into (A.34) yields

                                  ψ = −λΩ + μπ(1 − T ),                                (A.39)
            ³                 ´
where λ ≡ 1−εu (T1/(1−T )) stands for the marginal cost of public funds, which represents
the cost in terms of household income of raising one additional dollar of government
revenue
     ³ spent on public
                     ´        goods that are separable in utility from private goods, and
             εc
μ ≡ 1−εu (T /(1−T )) . The reduced expressions for Ω for each of the individual policies
explored are given in equations (11a)-(11d) of the text.
    The expressions (15) and (16) are found from (A.39) and using π = −(r̂x + r̂y ) (with
                                                          Ry
the definitions r̂x ≡ αxk αyx RxR                  y y
                                −Skx rx and r̂y ≡ αv αk Ry −Sky ry ) and (A.36) (with (A.7) and
                                 x


(A.16) to eliminate ky and kx and S = Tx = 0)




                                              37
A.3     Decomposition of welfare eﬀects
The welfare costs captured above are for the economy as a whole, but for the purposes
of compensation it is important to express the incidence on each industry individually.
In the notation, we are interested in r̂x and r̂y , the (normalized) changes in the rental
price of dirty industry capital. This determines the size of the transfer needed for
compensation. The results in this section are expressed in terms of ”forward” and
”backward” shifting. These are defined, respectively, as the amount of the total burden
on the downstream industry Y that can be shifted forward to consumers or backward
to the upstream industry. The initial burden of the policy, less the total amount that
can be shifted forward or backward, is the burden that remains on the Y industry. The
incidence on the X industry is simply defined as the amount of the total burden that is
shifted backward onto it. We examine each of the four environmental policies in turn.

A.3.1    Emissions tax
We first consider the impact of t̂e > 0, omitting all other policy instruments. This
incidence on the X and Y industries, given in (A.42) and (A.44), is shown to be first
order and proportional to the amount of abatement.

Burden on the X industry

    The downstream Y industry shifts part of the cost burden t̂e backward in lower input
prices. This represents the burden on the X industry. The first equality below follows
from (A.24) and the second follows from (A.23):
                                 µ                            ¶
                                εxx (σ̄ g + εyy ) − εyx εxy               εxx σ̄ g + Σ̄
                  r̂x = p̂x = −                                   t̂e =                 t̂e ,   (A.40)
                                            Σ                                    Σ
                                          εx σ̄ +Σ̄
The share of the overall burden 0 ≤ x Σg       ≤ 1 that can be shifted backward depends
on the composite demand elasticity for the intermediate input εxx compared to the sup-
ply elasticity σ̂ x . Backward shifting is important if supply of the intermediate good is
inelastic compared to demand.
      This expression for r̂x can be simplified further by solving for the emissions tax,
t̂e , required to achieve a certain abatement target a = −e by substituting (A.40) into
(A.26) and substituting the result into (A.27):

                                              t̂e = κe a,                                       (A.41)

where                             ∙ µ x              ¶        ¸−1
                                      x εx σ̄ g + Σ̄
                              κe ≡ σ̂                  + σ̄ e     .
                                              Σ
   Finally, substitution of (A.41) into (A.40) yields:

                                               εx σ̄ + Σ̄
                               r̂x = −    x
                                            ¡ x g ¢                a,                           (A.42)
                                         σ̂ εxx σ̄ g + Σ̄ + σ̄ e Σ


                                                  38
   With lump-sum compensation, we need to set π x = −r̂x (see (A.31)) to compensate
the capital owners in the upstream industry for their decline in rents.

Burden on the Y industry

   The downstream industry can also shift part of the cost burden t̂e forward in higher
output prices (from (A.23))           µ x y¶
                                        σ̂ εx
                                p̂y =           t̂e .                            (A.43)
                                          Σ

The overall eﬀect on the owners of the downstream industry is as follows (the first

equality follows from (A.25), while the second equality follows from substituting (A.40)
and (A.43)):
                                                 µ x                       ¶
                                                    σ̂ (σ̄ g + εyy − εyx )
                   r̂y = p̂y − p̂x − t̂e = −                                 t̂e = (A.44)
                                                              Σ
                               σ̂ x (σ̄ g + εyy − εyx )
                          − x¡ x               ¢         a.
                             σ̂ εx σ̄ g + Σ̄ + σ̄ e Σ

   With lump-sum compensation, we need to set π y = −r̂y (see (A.32)) to compensate
the capital owners in the upstream industry for their decline in rents.

A.3.2     Fuel tax
A tax on the demand for the intermediate input implies similar redistributional eﬀects
as a tax on emissions. The only diﬀerence is that such a fuel tax does not employ the
end-of-pipe channel to reduce emissions. Hence, the cost increase that is required to
achieve a given abatement target is larger. In particular, we have

                                          t̂x ≡ αyx tx = κx a,                              (A.45)

with                      ∙ µ                  ¶¸−1
                                       σ̂ x               (σ̄ g + εyy )(σ̂ x + ε̄xx )
                      κx ≡ ε̄xx                       = x                               .
                                     x
                                   σ̂ + ε̄xx           σ̂ [(σ̄ g + εyy )εxx − εxy εyx ]
We find the following distributional eﬀects:
                                           µ              ¶
                                                  ε̄xx                  a
                          r̂x = p̂x = −         x       x
                                                            t̂x = − x .                     (A.46)
                                              σ̂ + ε̄x                 σ̂
                         µ            ¶ µ              ¶        µ           ¶
                               σ̂ x           εyx                     εyx     a
                   p̂y =     x      x                y t̂x =              y      .
                           σ̂ + ε̄x       σ̄ g + εy               σ̄ g + εy ε̄xx




                                                      39
                                               µ            ¶µ                  ¶
                                                    σ̂ x       σ̄ g + εyy − εyx
               r̂y   = p̂y − p̂x − t̂x = −                                        t̂x =
                                                σ̂ x + ε̄xx        σ̄ g + εyy
                          µ                                                   ¶
                                   σ̄ g + αyk (1 − αyv )σ̂ y − αyk σ̂ v          a
                       −              y            y                 y y            .
                            σ̄ g + σ̂ k + (1 − αk )σ̂ v + (1 − αv )αk σ̂ y ε̄xx

As with the emissions tax, the expressions derived for r̂x and r̂y are not functions of αye
or Tx , but rather are proportional to the amount of abatement, a. Hence, even at low
levels of abatement, the dirty industries require compensation.

A.3.3    Technology mandate
The incidence of policy on the dirty industries under a technology mandate is in sharp
contrast to the two tax policies considered above. The key analytical result is that
incidence no longer depends in a first-order way on abatement, but rather goes to zero
as initial abatement gets small. The costs of lump-sum compensation then also vanish,
which can make this policy more attractive than the taxes from an overall eﬃciency
point of view.
    A technology mandate implies a higher implicit emissions tax (i.e. te > 0) and a
higher implicit subsidy on the intermediate input (i.e. tx < 0) such that the additional
implicit tax revenue from this combination of instruments is exactly zero:

                                   t̂e + t̂x + αye e + T̄x αyx x = 0,                     (A.47)

where T̄x ≡ Tx /Px .
   Substitution of (A.40) and (A.46) into (A.26) yields

                                         x = −σ̃ x (t̂e + t̂x ),
               x x
where σ̃ x ≡ σ̂σ̂x +ε̄
                   ε̄x
                      x . Substituting this expression into (A.47) to eliminate x, we find the
                      x
required overall cost increase t̂e + t̂x in terms of the abatement target a = −e :

                                                         αye a
                                      t̂e + t̂x =                                         (A.48)
                                                    1 − T̄xy αyx σ̃ x ,
and the impact on the demand for the intermediate input

                                         x              −σ̃ x αye a
                               x = −σ̃ (t̂e + t̂x ) =                  .
                                                      1 − T̄x αyx σ̃ x

   Substitution of the latter expression in a = −x + σ̄ e t̂e to eliminate x yields the
required increase in the price of emissions:
                                    µ                    ¶
                                             σ̃ x αye       a
                               t̂e = 1 −             y x        .                (A.49)
                                          1 − T̄x αx σ̃    σ̄ e




                                                    40
   The distributional eﬀects are then given by (where we use (A.23))
                         µ             ¶                  µ               ¶µ                   ¶
                                ε̄xx                              ε̄xx             αye a
       r̂x = p̂x = −                     (t̂e + t̂x ) = −                                        .           (A.50)
                           σ̂ x + ε̄xx                        σ̂ x + ε̄xx     1 − T̄x αyx σ̃ x
          µ             ¶µ             ¶                 µ             ¶µ             ¶µ                     ¶
                σ̂ x             εyx                           σ̂ x            εyx               αye a
   p̂y =                                  (t̂e + t̂x ) =                                                       .
            σ̂ x + ε̄xx     σ̄ g + εyy                     σ̂ x + ε̄xx     σ̄ g + εyy       1 − T̄x αyx σ̃ x

                                           µ            ¶µ                  ¶
                                                σ̂ x       σ̄ g + εyy − εyx
   r̂y   = p̂y − p̂x − t̂e − t̂x = −                                          (t̂e + t̂x )
                                            σ̂ x + ε̄xx        σ̄ g + εyy
              µ             ¶µ                                                     ¶µ                    ¶
                    σ̂ x              σ̄ g + αyk (1 − αyv )σ̂ y − αyk σ̂ v                  αye a
         = −                                                                                               .
                σ̂ x + ε̄xx    σ̄ g + σ̂ yk + (1 − αyk )σ̂ v + (1 − αyv )αyk σ̂ y       1 − T̄x αyx σ̃ x

    Without any initial environmental policy (i.e. αye = 0),environmental policy does
not yield any first-order costs. Moreover, redistributional eﬀects are completely absent.
This environmental policy yields neither eﬃciency costs nor redistributional eﬀects. This
gives rise to (12).

A.3.4     Performance standard
At initial abatement, and like the technology mandate, the performance target does not
impose any net burden when summing the eﬀect across polluting sectors and consumers
of the polluting final commodity. Specifically, we have (using (A.24) and (A.25))

                                       p̂y − r̂x − r̂y = t̂e − s = 0.                                     (A.51)

     In contrast to the technology mandate, however, the performance standard does
redistribute across the three parties involved in pollution: the owners of the downstream
sector, the owners of the upstream sector and the consumers of the polluting industry.
In particular, consumers of the polluting final good gain at the expense of the owners
of the upstream industry. The need for compensation can be written as

                                        π = −r̂x − r̂y = −p̂y > 0                                         (A.52)

Unlike the technology mandate, then, the performance standard requires compensation
even at initial abatement, and so can involve a first-order cost of raising revenue for
lump-sum compensation.
    The performance standard is an intermediate case to the emissions tax and technol-
ogy mandate, both in terms of overall eﬃciency costs and required compensation. It
uses more abatement channels than the technology mandate, but fewer than the emis-
sions tax, making the first-order abatement costs intermediate. In terms of the need
for compensation, the performance standard involves some rent shifting at incremental
abatement, which gives rise to some compensation need. We show now that the amount
of compensation needed is less than under the emissions tax.
    The performance standard implies a higher implicit emission tax (i.e. te > 0) and a
higher implicit subsidy on the final output (i.e. s > 0) such that the additional implicit


                                                       41
tax revenue from this combination of instruments is exactly zero:

                                       t̂e − s + αye e − S̄y = 0,                                   (A.53)

where S̄ ≡ PyS+S .We consider the case in which initial environmental policy is absent
(i.e. αye = S = 0) so that there are no first-order eﬃciency eﬀects. In this case, we have
t̂e = s.

Incidence on X (shifted backward from Y )

   The result for backward shifting is given by (use (A.23) with t̂e = s)
                                  µ                                           ¶
                                      σ̄ g (εxx − εxy ) + εxx εyy − εyx εxy
                  r̂x = p̂x = −                                                   t̂e = −Φp t̂e .   (A.54)
                                      (σ̄ g + εyy )(σ̂ x + εxx ) − εyx εxy

                                  xσ̄ g (εx −εx )+Σ̄
                                      y
    This shifting share Φp =        Σ      lies between zero and unity. In contrast to
the technology mandate, the performance standard hurts the upstream industry even
if we introduce the policy from an initial situation without any environmental policy.
Intuitively, the performance standard employs input substitution to cut pollution. This
reduces the demand for intermediate input and thereby harms the upstream industry.
Indeed, the abatement eﬀect is given by (the third equality follows from (A.54))

                     a = −x + σ̄ e t̂e = −σ̂ x p̂x + σ̄ e t̂e = [σ̂ x Φp + σ̄ e ]t̂e ,              (A.55)

so that we have
                                                 t̂e = κp a,                                        (A.56)
where
                                                                  Σ
                   κp ≡ [σ̂ x Φp + σ̄ e ]−1 =         ¡x
                                                                           ¢         .              (A.57)
                                                   σ̂ σ̄ g (εx − εxy ) + Σ̄ + σ̄ e Σ
                                                             x

   The increase in the shadow price for emissions is thus larger than with an emission
tax, but lower than with a technology mandate. The reason is that a performance
standard employs more channels to cut emissions than a technology mandate (namely
input substitution) but fewer channels than an emission tax (namely output cuts).
   Note that the burden on the upstream industry is larger than under the technology
mandate, but smaller than under the emission tax (note that we assume αye = 0 for
now). The impact on the upstream industry can be written as
                                       µ                ¶
                                               Φi
                         r̂x = p̂x = −                    a, i = p, e,          (A.58)
                                         σ̂ x Φi + σ̄ e

where the shifting share in case of the emission tax, Φe ≡ −(r̂x /t̂e ) is given by
                          µ x           ¶        Ã                        !
                           εx σ̄ g + Σ̄            σ̄ g (εxx − εxy ) + Σ̄
                    Φe ≡                  ≥ Φp =                            .                       (A.59)
                                 Σ                            Σ

The inequality implies that the decline in rx is larger under an emissions tax than under

                                                       42
a performance target. Intuitively, the performance standard does not cut emissions
through output substitution and thus relies more on the end-of-pipe channel, which
does not reduce demand for the intermediate input.

Fraction of burden on Y shifted forward

    Forward shifting amounts to (use (A.23) with t̂e = s)
                               µ                                      ¶
                                        σ̂ x (εyy − εyx ) + Σ̄
                       p̂y = −                                          t̂e .
                                 (σ̄ g + εyy )(σ̂ x + εxx ) − εyx εxy

    Consumers will benefit from the performance target (the change in price p̂y is gen-
erally negative since εyy ≥ εyx and Σ̄ ≥ 0). The eﬀect on quantity of output is given
by
                                             p̂y
                                        y=− ,                                   (A.60)
                                             σ̄ g
meaning that, since the change in price is negative, the output channel for abatement is
not used.

Overall burden on Y

    The eﬀect on the rental price of capital in the downstream industry is the sum of
backward and forward shifting. There is no net burden in this case since t̂e − s = 0:
                        µ                                        ¶       µ                                       ¶
                           σ̄ g (εxx − εxy ) − σ̂ x (εyy − εyx )           σ̄ g (εxx − εxy ) − σ̂ x (εyy − εyx )
r̂y = p̂y − p̂x =                                                  t̂e =                                           t̂e =
                                                                                                                 (A.61)
                           (σ̄ g + εyy )(σ̂ x + εxx ) − εyx εxy                              Σ
        ⎛            αy
                                                               ⎞
          σ̄ g σ̂ v 1−αk y + αyk σ̂ x [σ̂ v − (1 − αyv )σ̂ y ]
        ⎝                k                                     ⎠ t̂e .
                   (σ̄ g + εyy )(σ̂ x + εxx ) − εyx εxy

    A performance target thus benefits the downstream industry if σ̂ v and σ̄ g are large
compared to σ̂ y and σ̂ x . Intuitively, the implicit subsidy is shifted to the downstream
industry (i.e. supply), while the implicit tax on intermediate input is shifted to the
upstream industry. Moreover, the downstream industry finds it easy to shift away from
the dearer input (to capital) while finding it diﬃcult to shift to the cheaper input labor
(as a consequence of the output subsidy).
    We can write (substitute (A.56) and (A.57) into the third equality in (A.61) to
eliminate t̂e and κp )
                                 Ã                                         !
                                     σ̂ x (εyy − εyx ) − σ̄ g (εxx − εxy )
                        r̂y = −         ¡                        ¢           a.     (A.62)
                                   σ̂ x σ̄ g (εxx − εxy ) + Σ̄ + σ̄ e Σ

    When comparing this eﬀect with the corresponding eﬀect of the emission tax (i.e.
(A.44), we find through algabraic manipulationms (and using εxx ≥ εxy ) that the loss
in rentals in the downstream industry is larger under the emission tax than under the
performance standard. Accordingly, both the upstream and the downstream industries

                                                          43
are better oﬀ under the performance standard than under the emission tax. This implies
that Σp ≥ Σe > 0 in (13) and (14).




                                         44
                                                 Table 1
                        Policies and Their Implementation in the Numerical Model




         Policy                                         Instrument for Achieving ...


                                 Emissions Target            EVN Constraint             Government Budget
                                                                                             Balance

 Emissions Tax                tax on E

                                                         sector-specific lump-sum
                                                         tax credit
                                                                                      economy-wide
                                                                or                    equi-proportionate cuts in
 Input (Fuel) Tax             tax on X                                                capital and labor tax rates
                                                         sector-specific reductions
                                                         in capital tax rates
 Technology Mandate           revenue-neutral*
 (constraint on E/X)          combination of tax on E
                              and subsidy to X.                (all policies)                (all policies)
 Performance Standard         revenue-neutral*
 (constraint on E/Y)          combination of tax on E
                              and subsidy to Y




* Revenue-neutral at the industry level. This neutrality is gross of changes in revenues stemming from
impacts on the bases of other taxes.
                                                 Table 2

                  Benchmark Input-Output flows for the Numerical Model1




                               Use of Input by Industry ...
                                                                  Total
                          X                 Y                 C   Receipts to   Endowments3
                                                                  Each Input
Input2:
 X                       0.0             27.1              0.0        27.1
 L                       2.6             11.8         1765.3        1779.7         5249.8
 K                      13.7             44.0           712.4        770.1         2271.5
 factor taxes           10.8             48.0         1651.8        1710.6
Total Input
Payments by             27.1            130.9         4129.5
Each Industry


SO2 Emissions4                           15.2


  1
      In billions of year-2000 dollars per year except where otherwise noted
  2
    Inputs of labor and capital are net of factor taxes.
                                 _       _
  3
    Endowments correspond to L and K in equation (9) of text.
  4
      Millions of tons per year


  Sources: Except for the emissions data, these flows are based on the Department of Commerce
  Bureau of Economic Analysis=s Benchmark Input & Output Tables for 1992. The emissions data
  are from Table 12.6 of the Energy Information Agency=s Annual Energy Review 1999.
                                           Table 3
                                Central Case Parameter Values

parameters for Y industry

βe     ease of end-of pipe treatment -- scale parameter         2.0
ρe     ease of end-of-pipe treatment -- curvature parameter     0.6

σy     elasticity of substitution between
       v and L in production of Y                               0.75

σv     elasticity of substitution between
       X and K in production of v                               0.15


parameters for X and C industries

σx     elasticity of substitution between
       K and L in production of X                               1.0

σc     elasticity of substitution between
       K and L in production of C                               1.0


other production-related parameters

σk     ease of capital movement                                 -1.0


utility function parameters

σu     elasticity of substitution between
       G (C-Y composite) and Z (L-K) composite                  0.66

σg     elasticity of substitution between
       C and Y                                                  0.9

σz     elasticity of substitution between
       L and K                                                  0.9
                                                                        Table 4: Impacts of Alternative Policies
                                                                       (No Industry Compensation Requirement)


Policy Experiment                               Tax on Emissions                            Tax on Fuel               Technology Mandate             Performance Standard          Grandfathered per


Percent abatement                            10           25           75             10          25         75       10        25            75      10        25            75
Tax on E or X1                             0.10         0.26         3.87           0.54        1.93      42.52     0.11      0.29          4.99    0.10      0.27          4.44
Fraction abatement from EOP                0.88         0.89         0.76           0.00        0.00       0.00     0.99      0.98          0.89    0.93      0.93          0.83

Aggregate Cost (as % of income)          0.001         0.008        0.160          0.011       0.077      1.387    0.001     0.008         0.176   0.001     0.008      0.169

Price and Quantity Impacts
% change in supply price of X             -0.89        -2.13       -13.58           -7.52    -19.15  -61.92        -0.06     -0.32      -6.39      -0.50     -1.26      -9.70
% change in demand price of X             -0.89        -2.13       -13.58           42.15    136.29 1417.83        -5.47    -12.46     -82.90      -0.50     -1.26      -9.70
% change in quantity of X                 -1.19        -2.85       -17.89          -10.00    -25.00  -75.00        -0.08     -0.44      -8.52      -0.68     -1.71     -12.92
% change in supply price of Y              0.67         1.63        12.99            6.40     20.45  210.79         0.04      0.24       5.32       1.14      2.69      19.35
% change in demand price of Y              1.66         3.95        24.90           14.27     36.45  100.48         0.10      0.55      10.79      -0.06      0.16       7.25
% change in quantity of Y                 -0.58        -1.42       -10.40           -5.32    -15.21  -64.37        -0.04     -0.22      -4.70       0.01     -0.11      -4.21

Incidence2
Change in profit to X                    -0.14        -0.34         -2.20          -1.20       -3.04       -9.70   -0.01     -0.05         -1.07   -0.08     -0.21      -1.59
   As a % of EV                          172%          71%           22%           183%         64%         11%     10%       10%           10%     93%       41%        15%
Change in profit to Y                    -0.22        -0.54         -3.99          -2.00       -5.79      -25.81   -0.02     -0.09         -1.85    0.02     -0.02      -1.50
   As a % of EV                          265%         111%           40%           305%        121%         30%     17%       17%           17%    -20%        3%        14%
Change in profit to X and Y              -0.36        -0.88         -6.19          -3.20       -8.83      -35.50   -0.02     -0.14         -2.92   -0.06     -0.22      -3.09
   As a % of EV                          438%         182%           62%           487%        185%         41%     27%       27%           27%     73%       44%        30%
Change in profit to C                     0.05         0.03         -1.68           0.42        0.22      -19.39   -0.02     -0.12         -2.55   -0.03     -0.13      -2.57
Change in wage income                     0.23         0.36         -2.38           2.03        3.14      -41.06   -0.05     -0.26         -5.53    0.00     -0.15      -4.92

1
 Tax on emissions is in thousands of dollars per ton; Tax on fuel is in percent.
2
 Units in this panel are billions of dollars unless indicated otherwise.
                    Table 5: Effects of Policies with and without EVN Constraint
                            (Emissions reduced by 25 percent in all cases)

                                              Tax on                             Technology    Performance
                                                               Tax on Fuel
                                             Emissions                            Mandate        Standard

Aggregate Cost Without EVN1                   0.0078            0.0767             0.0084       0.0081

Compensation Needed for EVN
  for X as % of profit                         2.50              22.26                 0.40       1.51
  for Y as % of profit                         1.22              13.17                 0.20       0.04
  total as % of profit                         1.52              15.33                 0.25       0.38

EVN Via Lump-Sum Tax Credits
  aggregate cost with EVN1                    0.0112            0.1081             0.0090       0.0090
  increase in cost1                           0.0034            0.0313             0.0006       0.0009

EVN Via Cuts in Factor Tax Rates
  aggregate cost with EVN1                    0.0083            0.1633             0.0086       0.0084
  increase in cost1                           0.0005            0.0866             0.0002       0.0003
  tax rates used to achieve EVN
     capital tax rate for X2                   34.86            -281.62                39.29     35.94
     capital tax rate for Y2                   38.78             -26.58                39.82     40.65
1
 Expressed as a percent of benchmark income.
2
 Net of the subsidy used for EVN. All capital taxes are set to 40% in the benchmark.
                                                Table 6: Policy Costs under Alternative Parameter Values


                                            Equivalent
                                         Variation (EV) at                      Ratio of EV at 25% Abatement to EV in Left-Most Column
                                         25% Abatement
                                           Emissions Tax          Emissions Tax           Fuel Tax           Technology Mandate     Performance Standard
                                             No EVN            No EVN     With EVN   No EVN     With EVN     No EVN    With EVN     No EVN     With EVN

Central case                                  0.0078            1.000        1.439     9.885     13.924       1.084       1.156      1.043       1.154

βe (end-of-pipe treatment ease)
Very low (0.0)                                0.0767            1.000        1.409    1.000       1.409       n/a         n/a        2.260       2.424
Low (1.0)                                     0.0202            1.000        1.425    3.791       5.341       1.243       1.325      1.118       1.231
High (4.0)                                    0.0026            1.000        1.447   29.139      41.047       1.028       1.096      1.014       1.125

σk (capital adjustment costs)
Very low (-100.0)                             0.0074            1.000        1.037    7.298       7.551       1.119       1.130      1.066       1.082
Low (-4.0)                                    0.0075            1.000        1.188    8.060       9.485       1.106       1.141      1.058       1.111
High (-0.25)                                  0.0080            1.000        1.705   13.462      22.120       1.059       1.168      1.026       1.187

σg (elasticity of demand for Y)
Low (0.45)                                    0.0079            1.000        1.303   12.959      16.388       1.070       1.121      1.027       1.126
High (1.8)                                    0.0076            1.000        1.598    7.864      12.384       1.101       1.198      1.062       1.186

σu (factor supply elasticity)
Low (0.33)                                    0.0069            1.000        1.219     9.889     11.907       1.085       1.120      1.043       1.098
High (1.32)                                   0.0102            1.000        1.889     9.864     17.996       1.084       1.232      1.042       1.270

σv (substitutability between
   capital and fuel inputs)
Low (0.075)                                   0.0079            1.000        1.448   12.023      16.897       1.067       1.139      1.044       1.164
High (0.30)                                   0.0075            1.000        1.423    7.357      10.291       1.114       1.186      1.041       1.136

Industries compensated
Y industry only                               0.0078            1.000        1.267     9.885     12.561       1.084       1.128      1.043       1.051


* In the EVN cases, compensation is provided through lump-sum tax credits.
      Table 7: Efficiency "Crossover Points" under Alternative
                          Parameter Values



                                               Crossover Point1
                                          Technology     Performance
                                           Mandate         Standard

    Central case                             67               79

    βe (end-of-pipe treatment ease)
    Very low (0.0)                           n/a               7
    Low (1.0)                                35               54
    High (4.0)                               86               91

    σk (capital adjustment costs)
    Very low (-100.0)                         3                6
    Low (-4.0)                               35               49
    High (-0.25)                             76               90

    σg (elasticity of demand for Y)
    Low (0.45)                               61               79
    High (1.8)                               70               79

    σu (factor supply elasticity)
    Low (0.33)                               47               63
    High (1.32)                              80               90

    σv (substitutability between
       capital and fuel inputs)
    Low (0.075)                              72               77
    High (0.30)                              57               83

    Industries compensated
    Y industry only                          54               75

1
 The value indicated is the percent abatement at which the emissions
tax becomes more efficient than the policy shown when firms are
compensated via a lump-sum tax credit.
                          Figure 1: Policy Costs relative to Emissions Tax Cost
                                          --No Compensation--

           1.3




                                                                                            Technology
           1.2                                                                              mandate

                                                                                            Performance
                                                                                            standard
EV ratio




           1.1




            1




           0.9
                 0   10     20       30       40        50       60       70      80   90
                                             Abatement (%)
                     Figure 2: Policy Costs relative to Emissions Tax without Compensation
                                   --Compensation via Lump-Sum Tax Credits--

           1.6



           1.5
                                                                                                  Technology
                                                                                                  mandate
           1.4
                                                                                                  Performance
                                                                                                  standard

                                                                                                  Emissions tax
           1.3
EV ratio




           1.2



           1.1



            1



           0.9
                 0   10       20       30       40       50       60       70       80       90
                                                Abatement (%)
                     Figure 3: Policy Costs relative to Emissions Tax without Compensation
                               --Compensation via Marginal Capital Tax Rate Cuts--

           1.3




           1.2                                                                                    Technology
                                                                                                  mandate

                                                                                                  Performance
                                                                                                  standard
                                                                                                  Emissions tax
EV ratio




           1.1




            1




           0.9
                 0   10       20       30       40       50       60       70       80       90
                                               Abatement (%)
