NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CURIOUS DAWN OF AMERICAN PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Sun Go
Peter H. Lindert
Working Paper 13335
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13335

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

University of California - Davis. The authors are indebted to Stanley L. Engerman, Christopher Hanes,
Paul Rhode, Gavin Wright, and seminar participants at the University of Kansas and the All-UC Group
in Economic History for helpful comments on earlier drafts. Underlying regressions and data sets
are available on our home pages: http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/graduate/sgo and http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Sun Go and Peter H. Lindert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Curious Dawn of American Public Schools
Sun Go and Peter H. Lindert
NBER Working Paper No. 13335
August 2007, Revised June 2008
JEL No. H52,H75,I22,N11,N31
ABSTRACT
Three factors help to explain why school enrollments in the Northern United States were higher than
those in the South and in most of Europe by 1850. One was affordability: the northern states had higher
real incomes, cheaper teachers, and greater local tax support. The second was the greater autonomy
of local governments. The third was the greater diffusion of voting power among the citizenry in much
of the North, especially in rural communities. The distribution of local political voice appears to be
a robust predictor of tax support and enrollments, both within and between regions.

Sun Go
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
sgo@ucdavis.edu
Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu

Page 1

“The Curious Dawn of American Public Schools”*
Sun Go and Peter H. Lindert
University of California - Davis
Revised, May 2008
ABSTRACT
The world has long known that advances in knowledge are crucial to economic growth,
that broad mass education advances knowledge, and that the United States has had one of the
world’s highest per-capita income levels since the nineteenth century. We have also believed
that these familiar facts are linked. Ever since the British and others were struck by American
technology exhibits at the Crystal Palace Exhibition in 1851, it has been natural to give
American education much of the credit for this country’s advances in knowledge and its
prosperity.
Scholars have shown that by 1850 the Americans had roughly caught up with Prussia, the
earlier leader, in the share of GDP devoted to education and also in enrollments. 1 The
enrollment leadership relative to other countries came much earlier in mass primary education
than in higher education. The Americans were also leaders in raising public tax money to
supplement the traditional reliance on private tuition.
American leadership in public mass schooling may seem puzzling to many nonspecialists. Given the usual narrative flow, one would expect that the Founding Fathers wisely
encouraged universal primary schooling from the very start.

Yet their Constitution said

essentially nothing on the subject, and most of them were not enthusiastic about involving the
federal government in education. Jefferson’s attempts to raise tax money for schooling all
whites bore no direct fruit, either in his native Virginia or in the nation as a whole. True, the
federal government helped fund education with earmarked land grants to the states. Yet the land
grants were not heavily used for schools in the early decades, especially in the new South.2 As
Claudia Goldin and Larry Katz have emphasized, the movement was largely decentralized and
*

The authors are indebted to Stanley L. Engerman, Christopher Hanes, Ilyana Kuziemko, Thomas Mayer, Paul
Rhode, Gavin Wright, anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Duke, Kansas, Stanford, the All-UC Group
in Economic History, and the Cliometric Society’s ASSA session for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Underlying regression and data sets are available on our home pages: http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/graduate/sgo and
http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder.

Page 2
spontaneous.3 Americans at the grass-roots level often developed their primary schools some
decades before help arrived from above, and they did it largely by voting to tax themselves.
How did education arise so soon and so spontaneously in a country that resembled Russia in its
rich opportunities in agriculture, forestry, and mining? Those non-specialists who think of
America’s birth as anti-government and anti-tax may also be puzzled by the willingness of early
Americans to lead the world in shifting from private tuition toward taxes for primary schools.
America’s peculiarly high fertility makes the pattern even more puzzling. At the start of
the nineteenth century, the United States had more children per adult than did Western Europe.4
Common sense suggests that the relative abundance of children would have burdened any system
attempting to educate them. Twentieth-century experience agrees, and our own analysis will
find the expected negative effect of extra children on the schooling of the average child. How
did the Americans manage to pay for so much schooling per child when families were so large?
Fortunately, specialists in the history of American education have advanced our
understanding of these developments and the likely forces behind them. We know that the rise
of primary schooling antedated the campaigns for state school systems led by Horace Mann,
Henry Barnard, and Calvin Wiley.5 Scholars have found both private and social motivations
behind the early start. American households’ demand for educating their own children are
thought to have been reinforced by Protestant emphasis on the written Word, as well as by the
desire to prepare their children for the commercial and professional opportunities of a fastgrowing nation. The literature has given at least as much emphasis to social motivations to pay
for the schooling of other people’s children. There was widespread insistence that a literate and
numerate made better citizens and neighbors, thereby strengthening the new Republic.
Northeastern industrial areas worried greatly about the effects of immigration and the rise of
manufacturing on the social fabric. Some of these forces have looked stronger than others,
according to the careful analysis of Massachusetts experience by Carl Kaestle and Maris
Vinovskis.6 One other strand of scholarship has suggested for at least a century that something
about American democracy and political voice favored education at public expense.7
This paper offers new evidence on how, where, and why mass education spread so much
sooner in some parts of North America than elsewhere, and tests competing ideas about
underlying causes.

Our contrast between regions stresses the roles of three forces, one

unfamiliar to the past literature and two familiar. The rural North led the world in the building of

Page 3
schools, the hiring of teachers, and overall enrollments because (a) basic education was supplied
more affordably there, (b) decentralized local governments had more autonomy there, and (c)
political voice was spread more broadly within its communities.
The next section sets up the broad geographic contrasts in enrollment rates and in support
per student, starting at the better-lit map of U.S. education in 1850. We summarize what is
known about the earlier progress toward this 1850 pattern of education, describing the mixed
private-public interplay of school finance in the era of “rate bills.” Section II offers evidence on
three likely sources of the contrasts in enrollment and expenditure rates between regions and
nations. Section III presents a straightforward theory about how the political voice mechanism
interacts with parents’ private demand for schooling, to produce different degrees of public
commitment in different settings. Section IV analyzes why counties’ public commitments to
schools differed within the North and within the South as of 1840 and 1850. This analysis
assumes that voting rights and voter participation are the same thing, and that their effect on
education is exogenous. Doubts naturally arise about such assumptions, and Section V looks
more deeply inside the votes-and-schools nexus, performing different kinds of experiments
where the data permit. It will turn out that there is strong prima facie evidence for shifting the
historiography of early American education into a deeper exploration of how political voice was
distributed at the local level.

I. THE PATTERNS TO BE EXPLAINED
To summarize how the timing of the rise of primary schooling differed between
communities, let us begin with a broad international geography and with the relatively abundant
information for the mid-nineteenth century. From this initial vantage point we then disaggregate
among regions, and sketch how the geography and the style of American primary education
seems to have evolved in the late eighteenth century and the early nineteenth.
Among nations in the mid-nineteenth century, the United States was already becoming a
leader in several respects. The contrast best known to observers at the time showed up in
enrollment rates like those that Table 1 displays for 1830-1850. By mid-century white children in
the United States were already enrolled for as much primary schooling as children in any country

Page 4
other than Prussia, and most of that instruction was delivered in what were called public or
common schools. The extra enrollment did not mean crowded classrooms: The United States
may have stood out even more in its supply of teachers than in the more publicized enrollment
rates, as best we can judge from incomplete and not always comparable measures. As of 1850
this country’s elementary and secondary schools had 2.7 teachers per hundred students in public
schools and 2.9 per hundred in all schools. No other country except perhaps France seems to
have matched this rate.8 The striking supply of American teachers may have partly reflected two
features to be discussed shortly: the use of part-time seasonal teachers, and the greater
feminization of American teaching.
Antebellum America’s distinction in the numbers of pupils and teachers was attained
with a less outstanding level of expenditure on the part of its parents and taxpayers. Whether or
not the United States was a leader at mid-century depends on the measure and concept one
prefers.

If one measures tax and tuition effort by the share of income spent on primary

education, this country would again appear to have shared the lead with Prussia, both in public
and in private expenditures. Yet it did not stand out in the generosity of public primary-school
support per child as a percentage of the average income per adult. True, the United States was
well ahead of Britain, when one measures a support ratio equal to (public primary-school
expenditures per child of school age) divided by (GDP per adult). Yet it was not ahead of
France, Belgium, or Germany in this support ratio, for two reasons. First, the United States had
more children per adult than those European countries, especially France, so that our
expenditures were not outstandingly generous per child.9 Second, as we will note below, the
same education services seem to have been cheaper in America.
Within the United States, states and regions differed greatly in their commitment to
schooling. Tables 2 and 3 identify some of the striking spatial patterns revealed by the census
snapshot of 1850. What emerges, and demands explanation, is a distinctive style of the rural
North, which accounted for most of this nation’s high rates of schooling. Specifically, the rural
North had over 70 percent of the nation’s students and over 70 percent of its teachers, both
among public schools and among all schools combined -- even though the relative expenditures
on schools were not so concentrated there.10
[Tables 2 and 3 about here, on facing pages.]

Page 5

To spot these patterns within Tables 2 and 3, let us start with the expenditures supplied
and then proceeding to the teachers hired and the enrollment response. At the top of each table,
studying the total revenues per enrolled pupil yields clear contrasts. The South spent more than
the North per pupil, and the cities spent more than the rural areas per pupil, partly because the
South and the cities supplied a higher quality education through academies and colleges. The
regional contrast was driven by private expenditures, with not much contrast in public
expenditures per pupil. Cities outspent the rural areas, per pupil, both in public money and in
private money. Clearly, rural Northern pupils attracted the fewest dollars. So did rural Northern
teachers.
Yet the mirror image is just as striking: It was the rural North that had the most students
and the most teachers, per student or per child, of school age. When we count people rather than
dollars, the rural North stood out among regions in the same way that the United States stood out
among countries. The strongest contrast favoring the rural North is shown by the row reporting
the number of teachers per 100 free children of primary-school age: The rural North had twice as
many as any other area. Enrollments were highest in the northernmost tier.

Maine, New

Hampshire, and Vermont led in this respect, at least from the 1830s on. From there the high
enrollments seem to have spread west to Upper Canada and to Michigan.11
To chart the emergence of different education systems among and within states requires a
methodological shift away from reliance on legal histories, and toward more studies of how
school finance and administration actually operated at the community level. For example, one
should resist the temptation to cite the earliest colonial laws as a source of schooling progress.
True, both Connecticut and the Massachusetts Bay Colony passed laws in the 1640s and 1650s
mandating universal elementary schooling. Localities and parents were subject to various fines if
they did not comply. Yet progress was limited in the New England colonies, as in England itself,
partly because only basic literacy and religion were mandated and partly because so little funding
was provided.12
By studying the earliest history of school laws in the independent United States, without
hard numbers, one could also get the patterns wrong in two ways. One mistake would be to date
progress from the passage of states laws allowing their localities to levy taxes for local schools.
That wave of laws lagged behind actual practice by years or decades, unlike the precocious

Page 6
colonial cases just mentioned. The only such state laws before 1820 were those of Connecticut
in 1786, New Hampshire 1789, and South Carolina in 1811.13 Despite this last early law, the
whites of South Carolina remained among the least schooled in America for the next two
centuries. A more common disconnect with the law was the fact that local fiscal initiative
actually preceded the arrival of state laws enabling localities to levy taxes for schools, as James
G. Carter noted as early as 1824.14 The main exception was New York State, where the state
government led others in encouraging and monitoring schools, even though they were still
largely private, as Nancy Beadie has emphasized. 15 We suspect that the future quantitative
history of this era will agree with Carl Kaestle’s summary of the state of schooling at the time of
the Revolution: “Nowhere was schooling entirely tax supported or compulsory.... Even the oftcited Massachusetts school laws of the seventeenth century had insisted only that towns maintain
schools, not that they had to be free. No one had imagined anything as comprehensive as the
plans of the Revolutionary generation.”16
Another mistake would be to date the support of public schools from the establishment of
a state permanent school fund. The most impressive case is the large fund set up by Connecticut
in 1795, out of proceeds from selling off its Western Reserve lands in Ohio. Yet it has been
argued that the fund got poor results, partly because it crowded out local funding. More serious,
most states receiving the “permanent school fund” money either sat on it for a couple of decades
or, as in the case of Tennessee, siphoned the money away to non-education uses.17 This is not to
argue that the new state funds played no role in promoting schools, but merely that their timing is
not a reliable guide to the advance of schooling.
The contours of early American schooling can be drawn only very roughly, because
schooling was a fluid, diverse, and voluntary experience before the Civil War, in ways that
complicate our measurements. Students moved in and out of school on an irregular basis,
blending work experience with further installments of school learning. They went to school more
regularly in the winter and summer than in fall or spring, and responded to daily changes in work
and weather. Children might begin their studies at three or four, and might be resuming them
past the age of twenty, after long absences. Such student transience has probably inflated some
of the enrollment and attendance rates of Tables 2 and 3, certainly for the United States and
probably also for other countries before the late nineteenth century. There was probably some

Page 7
double counting of students who attended the separate summer and winter session, especially
when they went to different schools.18
Eclecticism also characterized the teaching and the financing of schools.

Teacher

credentials and the curriculum were not at all standardized. The primary and secondary levels
were not sharply divided from each other, even in the more public common-school system, and
unregulated academies and grammar schools played a major role.19 The state and national datacollectors coped with this diversity by grouping schools into two broad categories, the first being
“public” or “common schools” and the second consisting of academies and “private and select
schools.” We shall follow the same rough but convenient distinction here.
The early rise of schooling and its sources of funds are clearer for New York than for
other states, thanks to New York’s passing a bill in 1795 setting up a permanent school fund.
Twenty years later the state fund had accumulated enough to begin spending, and we have the
benefit of annual reports from the New York Superintendent of Common Schools starting as
early as 1815.
Who paid for the schooling? The numbers for New York reveal the kind of private-public
mix suggested by qualitative accounts for all Northern states.

Total demand for primary

schooling advanced ahead of public supply, and venture schools and academies stepped in to fill
the gap.20 Figure 1 shows the breakdown of public school funding given by the official reports
on New York’s common schools. Parents and other private sources paid more than half of the
cost of their children’s schooling up to 1838-1840, when the common schools got a fresh
infusion of public money. Of the public funds, more than half came from local taxes until midcentury.
Thus the early mix of funds was a half-empty and half-full glass, both for New York and
for the nation. One could reasonably emphasize the long persistence of private tuition. On the
other hand, there are two reasons for emphasizing the public half of the glass: The Northern
states were ahead of Europe and the South in the reliance on public money and publicly run
schools, and eventually every country that has developed universal primary schooling came to
rely primarily on taxes.

II. THREE SOURCES OF AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN PUBLIC SCHOOLING

Page 8

If the emergence of high Northern levels of primary schooling, relying largely on public
support, should be dated somewhere in the early nineteenth century, we still need to know why
the early Americans had so much demand for schooling, and why the political preference for
making it public schooling? Since the questions imply international comparisons, this section
turns to broad evidence suggesting why the rural North America seemed to differ from Europe,
from Northern cities, and from the South. The next section will test the power of the same ideas
to explain differences at the county level.
In the broad contrasts among nations and regions, three differences stand out.

More Affordable Schooling
Common folk in the northern states had higher labor incomes than their counterparts in
Western Europe and the American South, and probably also faced lower prices of schooling,
thanks largely to a more abundant supply of female teachers. We present some evidence first on
the real income differences, and then on the price of schooling.
Since parents in richer areas usually have a higher total demand for schooling, the high
enrollments would seem less puzzling if the colonial and newly independent Northerners had
been as rich as the Western Europeans and white Southerners. That appears to have been the
case, though showing it requires turning away from national income estimates toward real wage
data. Using GDP per capita to measure relative prosperity has led to an unresolved debate over
just when the United States overtook the United Kingdom. Some argue for a catch-up by the
1850s, while others argue that Britain led until the turn of the century.21 The GDP issue is not
easily resolved, given the severity of the index number problems with international comparisons
of real incomes.
A clearer trans-Atlantic contrast in real incomes appears if we turn instead to a
comparison of real wages for common occupational groups. Schooling has always been held
back most severely for parents at lower income levels, who have less creditworthiness and less
ability to invest in their children for a distant return. Economists have consistently found that the
social rate of return is higher for poorer countries than for rich, and higher for primary education
than for tertiary (e.g. university) education.22 Those in higher income ranks can afford to pay for

Page 9
schooling out of pocket or by borrowing. Their enrollment problem is not severe, even though
their demand for school quality remains sensitive to their income levels. The poor, by contrast,
often lack the ability to purchase any schooling at all. If poor white Americans were better off
than the poor in other countries, they might have spontaneously demanded more education -even if the nation as a whole had a lower real GDP per capita than Britain or the Netherlands.
What we are now learning about real wages around the world suggests that North
American white workers in standard occupations could indeed buy more of the basics of life than
workers anywhere else.23 Figure 2 offers a simple first clue, by comparing the ability of three
common kinds of workers to buy an eight-commodity bundle of consumer goods in
Massachusetts versus England, the ostensible world leader in GDP per capita. For each of the
three occupational comparisons, workers in Massachusetts could buy more of that bundle than
their counterparts in England. Carpenters in Massachusetts could buy more than English building
craftsmen, and Massachusetts common laborers could buy more than English laborers, whether
they worked in the building trades or in agriculture. Nor is this contrast sensitive to the choice of
weights in the eight-commodity bundle, since most of the commodities cost fewer days of labor
each year in America than in Europe. The Massachusetts workers probably could also pay less
for housing, though they presumably paid more for cloth. Workers who could afford more of
most basic goods than workers anywhere else in the world would also have had a better chance
to afford a few years of basic schooling for their children. Similarly, as a hint about North-South
differences, between 1800 and 1860 farm workers in Massachusetts enjoyed nearly twice the
ability to buy food with their daily wage as did farmers in Western Virginia.24 Our estimates
may be sensitive to unknown mismatches between wholesale and retail prices, or between wage
rates that don’t treat payments in kind (e.g. board and fuel) consistently. Yet the estimated realwage advantages of Massachusetts over England or Western Virginia are great enough to
withstand refinement of the measures.
Even if laborers in the northern United States could afford more basic consumer goods
than their counterparts in England or the South, their demand for schooling might have been no
greater if they had to pay more for schools and for teachers than elsewhere. Yet the few available
clues suggest that schooling, like basic consumer goods, was actually cheaper for those better-off
workers in the northern states. So say the Anglo-American data contrasts in Table 4.25 Contrasts
in the costs of schooling are complicated, of course, by differences in school quality, length of

Page 10
school year, and the generosity of public subsidy. Nonetheless, schools seemed a bit cheaper in
America than in England and Wales, both as a fee to be paid privately by parents and as a total
annual cost per student. Let us compare the costs of educating a child for 18 weeks in 1840s
New York and 1830s Manchester. The total private and public cost of that much primary
schooling in New York in 1841-42 was only 0.39 weeks of common labor earnings, with the
parents themselves paying less than half as much. By contrast, 18 weeks of primary schooling
cost 0.62 weeks of common labor earnings in Manchester 1834, and more than that later. Table
4 offers other contrasts for various types of schools. In general, school was so much cheaper in
New York than in England that we should doubt that the whole difference was explained by
school quality.
How could schooling be cheaper in one country than in another, even when we are
looking at the total costs shared by taxpayers, donors, and parents? Since school costs are
dominated by teacher pay, one immediately wonders whether teachers were paid less in America
than in England, relative to the earnings of common laborers. Panel B of Table 4 suggests an
affirmative answer. Here again, as with fees, the comparison is complicated by differences in
product, in this case the type of teacher. Still, it seems clear that on the average teachers were
more affordable for common laborers and for parents of other occupations in New York than in
England.
Teachers in the rural North might also have been cheaper than teachers in the South. For
example, around 1853 Northern rural female teachers accepted lower monthly wages from
common schools than teachers in North Carolina.26 If deeper studies agree with these early hints,
then rural Northern teachers may have been more affordable in the sense that paying for a
teacher’s services cost an ordinary Northern worker fewer days of his income than the cost faced
by working families in England or the South.
One likely reason:

The Northern states seem to have been world leaders in the

feminization of teaching, a fact that may have made teachers less scarce relative to common
laborers and other mostly-male occupations. 27 Behind the leadership in supplying female
teachers lay an early lead in female literacy as well. We can now compare the signature literacy
of brides (and bridegrooms) on both sides of the Atlantic from the seventeenth century on.
Already by mid-eighteenth century the young women of the Northern colonies were more literate
than the young women of England, Scotland, and continental Europe, the leading possible

Page 11
competitors being women in Holland and Sweden.28 Within the United States, females qualified
to teach were more abundantly supplied in the lower-paying North, a fact reflected in the rise of
Northern women as applicants for teaching jobs in North Carolina.29 A renewed exploration of
the international history of education supply is likely to feature Northern American women as
world leaders in the supply of primary school teachers.
Local Autonomy
By itself, greater affordability would only help to explain a higher private demand for
education, and would not explain why taxes would be paid. In early settings, levying new taxes
for schools was even more difficult than today, since the demand was still just emerging and
public supply could be blocked by those with property, especially by those who wanted labor to
remain unskilled and abundant. An institutional feature that made it easier to launch public
education on a limited scale was decentralization in voting on school issues. The more local the
voting mechanisms, the greater the chance that an exceptionally high-demand local population
could choose to tax itself, unblocked by opponents from other parts of the country.
Such decentralization of government was the second salient feature of the Northern
states, relative both to Europe and to the South. Even in the colonial era, British policy already
tended to give towns more fiscal autonomy in the American colonies than in Britain. The U.S.
Constitution reinforced this local autonomy, by using federalism and other safeguards to impede
the exercise of central government authority. On the schooling front, local autonomy was often
extensive even where a centralized state board kept accounts on all school districts. For New
York State before 1850, we know that state law deferred to local autonomy in most decisions
regarding funding. Even those state laws that were passed were confined to providing only
partial support and little regulation or finance at the district level, at least until 1850.
This decentralization meant that schools were both financed and controlled more locally
in the Northern states than in either Europe or the American South. The international contrast
shows up in the revenue sources for schools in Europe and North America in the 1870s. The
United States and Canada (along with Italy and the Netherlands) stood out by having schools
paid for by local governments, rather than privately or by higher levels of government. England
and Wales was the main bastion of reliance on private tuition.30 The English and Welsh were

Page 12
trapped into centralization by Parliamentary rulings that put insurmountable barriers in the way
of localities wanting to tax themselves for schools.31 Such barriers help to explain why England
and Wales lagged in enrollments and school funding until a centralized fiscal solution was
reached in 1891.
Decentralization also distinguished the North from the South. Historians have identified
two Southern institutional tendencies that stood in the way of local school development:
centralization of power throughout the region, and elitism in the laws governing membership in
Southern legislatures.

In both these institutional respects, the South resembled nineteenth-

century England.
Throughout the South, power was relatively centralized. State legislatures dominated,
and seem to have appointed judges and county officials and even governors more often than in
the North. County officials, in turn, retained power that might have devolved to townships.32
The effect was much the same as in the case of Parliament’s stifling local government taxes and
services in nineteenth-century England: Localities had little freedom to raise their own taxes for
schools or infrastructure within a larger polity that lacked their enthusiasm for such public goods.
The South also tended toward elitism in public office, though democracy was gaining
over time and was stronger in the newer states. The most elitist laws of political representation
were those in five states: North Carolina, South Carolina, pre-1851 Maryland, pre-1835 Georgia,
and pre-1845 Louisiana all had stiff property requirements for serving in the legislature. Many
Southern states also denied membership in the legislature to ministers, or bankers, or nonChristians, or duelists, or U.S. government officials. Virginia had its own gerrymandered system
of representation, explicitly designed to deny voice to the yeoman western counties and favor the
slaveholding east, with the result that state budgets were biased toward developing the eastern
lowland counties. 33 The elitism has been aptly summarized by Ralph Wooster’s studies of
legislators and county officials throughout the antebellum South. In nine states, a majority were
also slaveholders. The chances of being a state legislator were far greater for planters,
slaveholders, and realty owners than for others. While Northern legislators were presumably
also richer than the average citizen, Southern representation was impressively stacked toward
groups that would have seen little direct benefit in paying taxes for schools.34 An additional
mechanism might have translated the Southern propertied elite’s aversion to taxes into lower
votes for school funding. When the ballot was not secret, as it was not in the United States

Page 13
before around 1890, the local elite could also easily determine who its opponents were on
political issues. While we lack smoking-gun evidence that wealthy slave-owners pressured other
voters at election time, the open ballot did give them a chance to do so.35
Local government autonomy may have expanded schooling more than it raised other
kinds of government expenditure. Economists have found that economies of scale in public
goods are least evident in the case of basic education.36 There is a lower minimum-cost point for
spending on education than on, say, flood control or highways or national defense. This could
have bred schools that were local and tax-based and efficient in the township orientation of rural
northern states. Small towns might have achieved a moderately efficient scale with a single
schoolhouse, using lower tuition to assure a minimum necessary attendance in a sparse
countryside. Correspondingly, there were fewer other projects for public spending that could
have competed against schools in the small-town budget debates.

As we shall see, this

conjecture draws support from the public school patterns across the counties of the United States.

Voting and Voice
The third broad force that delivered more schooling in the American North than
elsewhere was the breath of political voice. The likelihood of voting for taxes to pay for
schooling is generally higher, the greater the political voice heard from the lower income ranks.
Here too, ordinary white Americans had an advantage over common men in the European
countries they and their ancestors came from: They had more political voice relative to local
elites, and increasingly so over the first half-century of independence. The United States led
Britain, France, and the rest of Europe, just as Stanley Engerman and Kenneth Sokoloff have
found that North Americans had more voting rights than Latin Americans.37 The earlier suffrage
of middling American white citizens seems to have accelerated the rise of public primary
schooling, through mechanisms we will model and test in the next two sections.
North and South differed in political voice, broadly defined, though this was not because
of any great difference between the two regions in white men’s legal right to vote. On the
contrary, the franchise rules were fairly similar between the two regions before the Civil War,
once one sets aside the complete lack of political rights for slaves. Rather what limited the

Page 14
political voice of ordinary white Southern men was the already-mentioned restrains on who
could serve in the state legislature.
Within each region, there were very different patterns of the franchise among counties.
Even after states had repealed their property requirements for suffrage, most of them retained
residency and citizenship requirements. These had very different effects in different counties.
Where a large share of men was just recently arrived from outside the county and state, voting
was more concentrated among those with the most potentially taxable property. Thus even in
mid-century counties differed in how far suffrage extended down the ranks, much as if the earlier
property restrictions emphasized by England and Sokoloff were still in effect. We argue that this
should have mattered to schooling in theory, and that it did matter in practice. We next present a
theory featuring a link from political voice to public schools, and later find that the predicted
political influences indeed played a role in the 1840s and 1850s.

III. HOW VOICE COULD MATTER
Explaining the patterns in primary schooling means testing a model, one that
simultaneously predicts how voting restrictions and other forces might have determined the
levels of school attendance and of school financial support.

This section sketches the

assumptions and predictions of a simple formal model presented more fully elsewhere.38
The model must start from the schooling institutions of the rate-bill world before the
1850s. In this world, the local political process chose how many weeks of schooling to fund
through local property taxes. Given that amount, parents would then decide whether to buy extra
weeks’ worth of schooling by paying rate bills, or whether to buy schooling in private
academies, where the share paid by taxes was lower and the quality of schooling generally
higher.
Within this institutional context, we model two kinds of optimizing behavior at once.
Each parental household makes private decisions about whether to enroll each child in school,
and whether to pay rate bills to length the school year for their children. Their choices are shaped
by their incomes, what the child could earn as a laborer instead of attending school, and the
supply of tax-based schooling.

Page 15
That supply of taxed-based schooling in turn is driven by the optimizing behavior of a
decisive voter. Note that the decisive voter is not just a median individual from the whole
population, but a power-weighted decisive voice among those who have any say in the local
politics of school finance. The more restrictive the access to voice, the higher the decisive voter
in the economic ranks, and the more inclined he would be to feel the burden of a higher rate of
property tax. Given his position, he chooses a tax rate corresponding to a level of subsidized
school quality. Quality manifests itself as a share of the year that children spend in school, and
an average class size.
The model predicts that extending the franchise to men lower down the wealth ranks will
increase tax support for common schools. Against this, some key negative influences would be a
larger share of school-age children in the population and a higher wage rate for child labor. The
tastes of parents and of decisive local voters are also affected by religion, urbanization, and
adults’ childhood experiences with schooling.

IV. DETERMINANTS OF SCHOOLING AT MID-CENTURY
We can exploit the diversity of conditions in antebellum communities to test our view of
what made the whole country different from Europe, and to test more general theories of
educational progress. Let us begin, however, with an explanation of why some popular ideas of
the determinants of education cannot be tested in the laboratory of early America.
Three popular insights about education fail to explain the differences among American
localities, even though they help to explain the overall demand for schools, and help to explain
why North America was different. First, economists will naturally think that the decision to
raised taxes for a local school will be driven by the durable insight published by Charles Tiebout
back in the 1950s: People can shop for the local government they want by migrating toward a
town that has an efficient mix of taxes and public goods, such as schooling. An equilibrium is
eventually established in which some towns have residents who prefer their higher taxes and
better schools, while other towns have residents that prefer their lower taxes and poorer
schools.39 But which places are which? To embody the idea in a statistical test that will separate

Page 16
one American town from another, one must think of measurable proxies for residents’ tastes for
schooling and for the efficiency of local government. The Tiebout model adds nothing here.
A second insight, that schools build national values, was as popular with writers in the
newly independent nation as it is with today’s historians of education. Surely, they thought, a
more literate and numerate citizenry would make this democratic republic more harmonious and
self-correcting. Today’s economists agree, calling this an external benefit of education. Yet
here again, as with the Tiebout model, there is no way to differentiate among American towns in
the nineteenth century, since few towns opposed education in order to breed traitors. The
national values argument cannot explain why Washington County Maine spent four times as
much per white child of school age as Washington County Georgia in 1850.
A third insight about the demand for education that fails to differentiate about American
towns is the fact that the children of richer families demand more schooling. It is true that at the
level of the individual household, the children of richer parents attended school more faithfully
and at higher expense.40 Yet the same patterns fail to show so clearly at the county level in 1850,
especially when we seek to explain public support and public school attendance rather than total
attendance in all kinds of schools. So we conclude from county-level regressions in which
IPUMS data allowed us to explore the effects of the level and inequality of real estate ownership
on school enrollments and school finance in 1850. Even if a more positive wealth effect had
shown up at the county level, it would have stirred up economists’ usual suspicions of
simultaneity bias and reverse causation that have always complicated attempts to estimate the
demand for education. It is better to accept a reduced-form approach linking education to deeper
causes that affect both income and education. Our reduced-form strategy also sets aside the use
of economic sectoral shares, such as shares of the local economy that are in agriculture or
industry, again because we anticipate economists’ traditional concerns about third forces and
reverse causation.

Forces affecting education policy may also drive the local economy’s

comparative advantage in agriculture or industry.41
If all these forces are set aside, what systematic forces will explain the wide differences
around the country, and how might we quantify the impact of these forces? While the search for
reliable numbers on very early American schools continues, we are fortunate to have usable
county-level census information from the middle of the nineteenth century. In 1840 and in 1850,
U.S. towns and counties still differed greatly in those salient features that distinguished the

Page 17
country as a whole. They particularly differed in their local distributions of political power.
While it was necessary to clean and cross-check the underlying census data in a number of ways,
we have been able to use the ICPSR county-level data files collated by Michael Haines to run
tests on cross-sections of counties in 1840 and 1850.
Having information on both public schools and private schools allows us to compare
effects on public schooling with effects on total schooling. Such comparisons reveal the extent
to which a force that creates more public schooling crowds out private schooling. On this large
issue, a clear pattern will stand out. In most cases, the effect of each featured variable on public
schooling is about the same as its effect on total schooling, with no net “crowding out.” This
striking result is possible because those who gathered our data in the early nineteenth century
took care to distinguish public and private schooling.42
Some forces that made U.S. counties so different in the scale and character of their
primary schooling are revealed in Tables 5 and 6. Noting that some of the measurable forces had
their impact mainly at the local (county or district) level, while others operated through laws and
budgets at the state level, we must take care to separate “fixed state effects” from local effects.
Accordingly, Tables 5 and 6 display only results from regressions that have controlled for fixed
state effects. We will then take the further step of explaining the state-level effects themselves, to
extract further information about the underlying structure that shaped education across the land.
Political Voice 1: Voting Rights and the Voting Rate
Our featured political voice variable has two main components: the share of free men
having the legal right to vote on local schooling issues, and local elites’ dominance over other
voters.
Measuring the first political voice variable, the share of local men having the right to
vote, is not as straightforward as it might seem. We use one main proxy measure, and test its
apparent influence against other measures. Our main proxy in the 1840 and 1850 samples is the
share of free men who actually used their vote in a presidential election.43 Later, using New York
state data, we will look more directly at the franchise itself, i.e., the shares of men entitled to
vote.

Page 18
We have chosen to focus on the share of men entitled to vote and actually voting, rather
than on the existence of state laws restricting the vote, because the latter offer less information
than other scholars have hoped. The difficulty with binary measures of vote-restricting laws is to
quantify the degree of restrictiveness. The laws themselves are too complex to summarize in a
single restrictiveness index, and historians have found that actual practice varied greatly for any
given state of the law.44 Even with consistent application of fixed franchise rules, we would still
need to know how many in each county actually met the qualifications. And in cases where the
laws were suddenly changed, the actual franchise and voting rates moved more slowly.
We use the share of free men 45 who actually voted for president as a fair, though
imperfect, proxy for the right to vote in local fights over schools and taxes. What share of a
town or county’s men actually voted on schools is the product of these three ratios:
(1) The ratio of men entitled to vote for president to those entitled to vote in local
elections and referenda on school and tax issues. Fortunately, this ratio was effectively fixed at
unity. Historians of local government find that the two rights were much the same in practice.46
(2) The share of all men enfranchised to vote for president. This key component reflected
a mixture of the restrictiveness of state franchise law, the local distribution of property holding
and of taxpaying, and transient individuals’ propensity to meet the residency requirements and to
register.
(3) The willingness to vote, or the share of franchised men that showed up on presidential
election day. This wavered, over time and across states, with the intensity of the presidential
race.
Our voting-share proxy nicely captures the first two components, but the third is more
problematic. Were variations in the turnout rate among franchised citizens largely voluntary? If
so, then the decision to vote or not vote might have been swayed by local attributes that also
affected the willingness to educate children. In this case, the voting rate is not so exogenous as
an influence on education. Alternatively, it may be that many declined to vote because they felt
marginalized by the political process or were afraid to reveal their political preferences in an age
when ballots were not secret. In this case, non-voting is akin to being denied the right to vote.
We will later deal with these concerns in a number of ways, but the tests summarized in Tables 5

Page 19
and 6 tentatively use the county-level voting rate as a measure of the distribution of voting
rights.
The influence of the voting share on support for schools could easily be non-linear. Our
tests allow for non-linearity by using a fourth-order polynomial in the voting share, with test
statistics on the effects of specific changes in voting share. Here we report the effects of extra
voting in the middle of the most common, and best-sampled range, from 60 percent of free men
voting up to 80 percent voting.
At face value, the effects of the voting rate look strongly positive in the behavior of
Northern U.S. counties in 1840 and 1850, as shown at the top of Tables 5 and 6. An increase
from 60 percent voting to 80 percent tended to raise a Northern county’s school attendance by
almost 14 per hundred school-age children in 1840, and by almost 10 percentage points in 1850.
The same extra voting raised government support by 38 cents per child in 1850, a noticeable
share of the grand average support levels reported in Table 2 above. Additional regressions on
the 1850 data confirm that all of this impact of extra voting took the financial form of extra local
taxes, rather than state funds or endowments. These effects were roughly the same for all
schools as for public schools alone, meaning that extra voting had no effect on private academies
in the North. Extra voting, in other words, meant extra local tax support that did not “crowd out”
any private support in the North.
In the South, by contrast, the voting rate had much less effect on enrollments or on
support per child. The effects look vaguely positive but not significantly different from zero.
This null result held in the South even though the shares of whites that voted were as high in the
South as in the North.

Political Voice 2: Centralized Power in the South
The South’s lack of county-level response to voting rates derived from its distinctive
political structure. To interpret the differences in educational policy between the two regions
and within the South, let us start with a simple reading of some further county-level results for
1840 and 1850, before turning to the underlying role of state-level institutions.
Looking first at the effects of slavery on white children’s school enrollments, looking at
the county-level patterns would not reveal any clear relationship of a county’s slave holding to

Page 20
its white enrollments within a Southern state (Table 5). When we shift from enrollments to
government financial support for schooling per white child, Table 6 adds an extra twist to the
influence of local slavery: Among counties within a Southern state, a county’s having more
slaves meant more government money and more teachers per white child. Perhaps slave owners
were able to divert state funds to their own children, and to supplement them with private tuition,
while cutting overall state-level support for education in a way that explains the lower
educational attainments of Southern whites as a whole.47 So far, the regression clues suggest the
sort of elitist imprint of slavery on education policy that past authors have described.48 A further
statistical clue can be found in state-level effects in the equations behind Tables 5 and 6. There is
a general pattern to the fixed state-level effects: It is among states, not among counties, that slave
holding shows up as a negative influence on the region’s schooling for white children,
presumably because the slaveholding interest exercised its power at the level of state legislatures.
A combination of statistical results and institutional history thus inclines us to the view
that centralized restraints on political voice in the South held back the schooling of Southern
white children of modest economic background. We cannot, however, give zero weight to the
demand-side counter-argument that lower-income Southern whites wanted less schooling for
their children and were politically passive for that reason.

The Age Distribution
Both in the North and in the South, the provision of schooling per child was also affected
by the age distribution of the local population, in ways that accord with our expectations. Not
surprisingly, communities with more school-age children per adult delivered less public and
private schooling per white child. Table 5 implied that, for each white man over 20, adding one
child in the 5-14 age group would cut the enrollment rate, especially in the North. A community
with more children per adult had a harder time supporting the education of the average child.49
Within the adult population, communities where the adults tend to be older might have
had two opposing differences in the schooling of their children. The more commonly imagined
negative effect turns out to have been offset by a positive effect of an older population, or rather
a positive effect of the larger environment that an older population represents.

Page 21
It is natural to imagine that older adults, who will not be sending more children into the
school system, would less favorably inclined toward raising taxes for schools. In 1851, one
commentator in the New York debate over free schools thought so: “The childless, and those
whose children have already received their education, deem it a hardship to be obliged to pay for
the instruction of the children of their neighbors, and consequently vote against any
appropriation.” 50 Yet the effect of an older adult population is not so clearly negative.
Combining the men-over-40 results of Tables 5 and 6 suggests that an older population had
higher enrollments and more teachers, but less government support per child. Overall, we
tentatively suggest only that any negative lobbying effect of oldsters was apparently offset by the
fact that an older community tended to inherit more education infrastructure, and more teachers,
because it was settled earlier.

Cities and Migrants: Cubberley vs. Cubberley?
Ellwood Cubberley’s influential classic, Public Education in the United States, pointed to
the cities as having both the greatest champions of “free schools” for all and having the greatest
social problems. In Cubberley’s view, the “new social problems in the cities,” the rise of
immigrants, crime, industrialization, pauperism, and family breakdown in the cities convinced
“two very dissimilar groups of people -- the humanitarians on the one hand and the new city
laboring classes on the other -- [to unite] in a propaganda for tax-supported schools.” By midcentury the cities had emerged as the champions of educational progress:
“[T]he substantial progress in almost every phase of public education during the second
half of the nineteenth century was made by the cities of our country, while the rural
districts, often blind to their own best interests, lagged far behind.”
At the level of propaganda, Cubberley was surely correct: Historians have had no difficulty in
quoting both urban humanitarians and labor spokesmen who favored universal education in the
cities.51
Yet the quantitative geography of education patterns at mid-century challenges us to reinterpret the demand and supply of urban schooling in the North. The regression results of

Page 22
Tables 5 and 6, along with the simple raw averages shown in Table 3, reveal these contrasts
between Northern cities and the Northern countryside:
(a) The cities spent much more government money and private money per pupil and per
teacher, possibly improving the quality of education, but
(b) they built fewer schools and hired fewer teachers per pupil,
(c) they had slightly lower enrollments than did rural school districts,
(d) rural families paid more in private tuition for their common schools than did those in
the cities, and
(e) the presence of extra foreigners did not raise either enrollments or aid per child.
What was higher in large cities was not the provision of mass public education, but rather a
greater emphasis on expensive education, involving a mixture of longer school years and fewer,
more highly paid, teachers. True, the cities subsidized minimalist schools for the very poor, but
this was a less expensive alternative than universal schooling. The rural areas “blind to their
own self interest” were ahead in the enrollment race,52 topped up their common-school subsidies
with greater private tuition payments, and hired more teachers per 100 pupils.
To reconcile these results with the view of the cities as champions of free schools for all,
one should start by replacing Cubberley’s statements about the cities with two more durable
ideas advanced by Cubberley himself in other contexts. First, he would have done better by
grouping Northern cities with Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, and state further south, in the zone he
saw as dominated by the “pauper school” idea plus subsidized education for top students. More
importantly, he should have explained the urban-rural contrasts in terms of suffrage and political
voice, a theme he sounded briefly when describing the greater sweep of nineteenth-century
educational history.53
What we know about the governance of urban school systems before mid-century helps
to explain why Tables 5 and 6 found a more durable role for the distribution of political voting
power than for the urban and immigrant variables as such. Urban school districts were large and
governed by top professionals with preferences tipped toward expensive schooling for higherlevel students. In many cities they were appointed rather than elected, and even the elected ones
answered to a smaller and more established electorate in cities than in small towns.

Page 23
Cubberley’s view that cities led the fight for free schools does not square with all his own
evidence, and he may have misinterpreted the New York State experience that introduced his
remark about urban leadership. In the key 1850 referendum, the rural vote against “free schools”
was actually a vote against an 1849 law that forced rural areas to impose high property tax rates
to replace the rate bills already being paid by parents, while the city voters faced no such
burdens.54 The countryside voted more negatively than the cities on a particular tax formula, and
not against free schools.

Religion
Communities’ demand for schooling and their willingness to pay taxes were probably
also shaped to some extent by their religion, their national origins, and whether they had a large
share of migrants from other states.
Religious communities could affect schools in at least two ways: by enrolling their
children, and by lobbying for or against school support. The census of 1850 gives us a chance to
separate these two roles for membership in 22 major sects, watching their enrollment effects in
Table 5 and implicit financial support in Table 6. The first point to note on the effect of religious
communities is that most of the 22 left no clear imprint on school enrollments or finances in
either the North or the South, despite a long literary tradition of emphasizing the written Bible as
a force for education. Perhaps this was because no religion had the chance to dominate counties,
states, or nations as much as it did on other continents.55 Some sects, however, did show general
patterns in the county-level data. Congregationalists in the North and Baptists in both regions
clearly sent their children to public schools, and seemed to hire more public school teachers, than
other sects. By contrast, Roman Catholics did not, and they clearly contributed more money to
private academies than to public schools. Other sects had mixed influences.

V. WHAT WAS BEHIND THE VOTING RATE?
A number of concerns about the large cross-sections of counties in 1840 and 1850 can be
addressed with alternative data sets, particularly state-level data and national data featuring

Page 24
changes between censuses. Here we offer three side-tests on New York state data for 1845, and
three other tests suggesting that the franchise was indeed an exogenous influence on schooling.
New York State’s county-level data offer a closer look at three forces not directly
measured in the early national censuses. Table 7 uses the New York census of 1845 to provide
three extra insights. First, it is clear in New York that the positive schooling effect of receiving
extra migrants from other states was transmitted largely by the arrival of New Englanders. On
this Yankee influence, quantitative analysis and narrative history now agree.56 Looking at the
geography of this effect finds it particularly strong in the far northeastern counties around Lake
Champlain. This corner of the state might have been an education backwater were it not for the
heavy inflows from New England.
Second, a reality check on New York data relieves some of our fears about using the
voting rate as a proxy for voting rights. Starting from 1795, New York took special statewide
censuses of the numbers of men legally entitled to vote. Table 7 uses 1845 data on the numbers
franchised and gets the same strong positive effects that the larger samples got with the votingrate proxy. Apparently, differences in counties’ voter turnout did not introduce any distortions
back in Tables 5 and 6.
A third use of the New York data takes advantage of that state’s different measures of
school attendance, as opposed to school enrollments. Table 7 confirms that the determinants are
similar for each of these alternative ways of counting students.
A remaining concern is that all the results presented thus far may have introduced
omitted-variable biases by leaning on spatial cross-sections of counties and states. Do we really
know that changing the voting laws or changing the distribution of property and income would
change schooling through their effects on the local balance of political power? Scholars rightly
seek tests in which the featured force changed suddenly and exogenously, so that any subsequent
movement in the dependent variable (here schooling) clearly reflects this sudden change. We
have tried three kinds of experiments to test the separate influence of exogenous changes in the
right to vote.
A conventional way to address the fears of omitted variables and reverse causation is to
find clearly exogenous instruments for the variable suspected of being endogenous, in this case
the voting rate. The instruments used here are the number of years of residency in the state
required for voting, these interacted with the immigrant share from other states, the same

Page 25
residency requirements interacted with the share foreign-born, and the existence of a state
property requirement for voting. Instrumenting the voting rate in this way slightly yields the
same kinds of results as in Tables 5 and 6, but only in the case of Northern enrollments are the
instrument variables fully valid..57 For Northern enrollments, at least, the influences in Table 5
re-emerged with the same signs and significance in the IV equations, and the effect of a shift if
the voting rate was marginally stronger than in Table 5.
Second, a natural experiment arises from New York’s switch to near-universal manhood
suffrage between 1821 and 1826. Property requirements for voting were repealed in 1821, and
taxpaying requirements were repealed in 1826, leaving residency as the main requirement. 58
Over that four year span the share of adult men who obtained their formal right to vote jumped
from 66 percent to 83 percent. In 1827-1828 and again in 1832 the state legislature raised its
common-school subsidies so much that by 1835 their real value per child 5-16 was more than
double that of the year 1820. We do not know which counties’ representatives in Albany voted
for these major expansion of funds, but we do know that counties where the franchise was most
extended tended to be those counties where common-school enrollments advanced fastest in this
period. The aftermath of New York’s franchise liberalization of 1821-1826 at least hints at
confirmation of the findings presented earlier on the basis of national census samples.
Finally, we were able to use changes from 1840 to 1850 in a nation-wide sample of over
800 counties to test for the effects of changes in voting rights and voting rates on changes in
enrollments, both in public schools and in all schools over that decade. This differences-indifferences approach allowed us to purge all purely fixed differences between counties and
between states. Once again the voting rate showed a strong impact on enrollment rates, both for
public schools and for all schools.

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND AGENDA
It is much easier to explain the early onset of public schooling in America if one focuses
on the link between political voice and support for funding schools. Part of that political voice
was channeled through the right to vote. On this front, our findings support the suggestion that
Engerman and Sokoloff derived from their study of state-level correlations: “The movement for

Page 26
the establishment of public schools supported by local property taxes closely and successfully
followed the expansion of the suffrage, which strongly suggests that the latter did indeed make a
difference for policy.”59 This paper has argued that the franchise, and the broader concept of
political voice, helps to explain both America’s head start in enrollments and the differences
among communities within this country.
The wider distribution of political voice inclined many counties in the rural North (and
upper Canada) toward higher enrollments, though not toward high expenditures per pupil. In this
respect the rural North differed from Northern cities, from the South, and from England, all of
which had respectable expenditures per pupil but lower enrollment rates.
If the political voice effects seem to have been so strong in the antebellum era, what has
happened to them since the Civil War? By the twentieth century they should have faded away,
as suffrage became more universal and Southern planters and slaveholders’ grip was weakened.
The differences in politics and education did indeed fade away gradually, both for the North and
for Southern whites. The lingering post-bellum exception was the effect of Jim Crow voting laws
after the Civil War. As Robert Margo has shown, differences in black voting rights helped to
explain much of the differences between Southern states in their degree of racial discrimination
in school policy.60 Only from the 1930s on did blacks’ education converge clearly and rapidly
toward that of whites.
For Southern whites, both their education and the region’s distinctive institutions
converged very slowly toward the national standard. It took a century and a half for their
enrollments to catch up. Political changes must have helped. Planters lost relative influence,
both in the aftermath of the Civil War and in the region’s industrialization across the twentieth
century. The South’s curious preference for more centralized government also faded gradually.
As of 1902, it still existed to some extent, and it still correlated with lower public spending on
education. Local school districts controlled only 13 percent of public education spending in the
South versus 35 percent in the non-South, while state governments controlled 33 percent in the
South and only 22 percent elsewhere, the remainder being controlled by county government. By
1982, the differences had nearly vanished. All states have delegated the task of spending on
primary and secondary education to local governments, though some still control that spending
with statewide regulations.

61

Thus convergence toward decentralized government and

democracy has accompanied convergence toward high enrollment rates.

Page 27
Where should the research frontier be pushed hardest in the political economy of early
American schooling? Our view is that we need more detailed research on how the decisions
were made and how they affected schooling at the town level. Part of the extra research can be
econometric, and it can include the use of town-level data, which are available but take time to
process. Our main plea, however, is for studies of how the decision-making process really
worked in town meetings and in state legislatures. We know that the issue of schooling was
hotly contested, but we still need to learn how the crucial political pressures were applied.

Page 28
REFERENCES
Beadie, Nancy. 2008a. “Toward a History of Education Markets in the United States.” Social
Science History 32, 1 (Spring): 47-73.
Beadie, Nancy. 2008b. “Tuition-Funding in Common Schools: Education Markets and Market
Regulation in Nineteenth-Century New York. 1815-1850.” Social Science History 32, 1
(Spring): 107-133.
Beadie, Nancy. In progress. Education and the Creation of Capital: The Place of Schooling in a
Transforming Political Economy, 1790-1850.
Beadie, Nancy and Kim Tolley (eds.). 2002. Chartered Schools: Two Hundred Years of
Independent Academies in the United States, 1727-1925. New York: Routledge.
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital
Theory of Protestant Economic History.” Center for Economic Studies, University of
Munich working paper.
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital
Theory of Protestant Economic History.” Center for Economic Studies, University of
Munich working paper.
Carlton, Frank Tracy. 1906. “Economic Influences Upon Educational Progress in the United
States, 1820-1850.” Doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin, reprinted in
University of Wisconsin Bulletin, Economics and Political Science Series, Vol. IV, no. 1.
Carter James G. 1824. Letters on the Free Schools of New England. Reprinted from a copy in the
Harvard Library by Arno Press, New York 1969.
Carter, Susan et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clubb, Jerome M., William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale. 2006. “Electoral Data for
Counties in the United States: Presidential and Congressional races, 1840-1972”
[Computer file]. ICPSR08611-v1. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-University Consortium for
Political and Social Research [producer and distributor], 2006-11-13.
Cremin, Lawrence Arthur, 1980. American Education, the National Experience, 1783-1876.
New York: Harper and Row.
Cressy, David. 1980. Literacy and the Social Order. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crofts, Daniel. W. 1992. Old Southampton: Politics and Society in a Virginia County, 18341869. University Press of Virginia.
Cross, Whitney. 1950. The Burned-over District: The Social and Intellectual History of
Enthusiastic Religion in Western New York, 1800-1850. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cubberley, Ellwood P. 1934. Public Education in the United States. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Dabney, Charles Wilson. 1936. Universal Education in the South, Volume 1: From the
Beginning to 1900. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Drake, William E. 1955. The American School in Transition. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Engerman, Stanley L, Elisa Mariscal. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “Schooling, Suffrage, and
the Persistence of Inequality in the Americas, 1800-1945.” Manuscript.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2005, “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in
the New World.” Journal of Economic History 65, 4, (December): 891-921.
Field, Alexander J. 1979. “Economic and Demographic Determinants of Educational
Commitment: Massachusetts 1855.” Journal of Economic History 39, 2 (June): 435-459.

Page 29
Fishlow, Albert. 1966a. “The Common School Revival: Fact or Fancy?” In Henry Rosovsky
(ed.), Industrialization in Two Systems. New York: Wiley, 40-67.
Fishlow, Albert. 1966b. “Levels of Nineteenth-Century American Investment in Education.”
Journal of Economic History 26, 4 (December): pp. 418-436.
Fox, William F. and Tami Gurley-Calvez. 2007. “Will Consolidation Improve Sub-National
Governments?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3913.
Galenson, David W. 1998. “Ethnic Differences in Neighborhood Effects on School Attendance
of Boys in Early Chicago.” History of Education Quarterly 38, 1 (Spring): 17-35.
Glazebrook, G.P. deT. 1968. Life in Ontario: A Social History. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
Go, Sun. 2008. “Free Schools in America, 1850-1870: Who Voted for Them, Who Got Them,
and Who Paid.” Paper Presented at the World Cliometrics Conference, Edinburgh, July.
Goldin, Claudia. 1998. “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of
Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century.” Journal of Economic History 58, 2
(June): 345-374.
Goldin, Claudia. 2001. “The Human Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the
Past.” Journal of Economic History 61, 2 (June): 263-292.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “Why the United States Led in Education: Lessons
from Secondary School Expansion, 1910 to 1940.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 6144, August.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2000, “Education and Income in the Early Twentieth
Century: Evidence from the Prairies,” Journal of Economic History 60, 3 (September):
782-818.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2003. “The ‘Virtues’ of the Past: Education in the First
Hundred Years of the New Republic.” NBER Working Paper 9958. September. Chapter
4 of a book in progress on The Interrelationships between the Economy and Human
Capital in U.S. History.
Green, Fletcher Melvin. 1930 (1966). Constitutional Development in the South Atlantic States,
1776-1860: A Study in the Evolution of Democracy. Chapel Hill: The University of North
Carolina Press, re-issued in 1966: New York: W.W. Norton.
Green, Fletcher Melvin. 1969. Democracy in the Old South, and Other Essays. Edited by J. Isaac
Copeland. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press. Includes his “Democracy in the Old
South” from Journal of Southern History 1946.
Griffey, Carl Hayes. 1936. The History of Local School Control in the State of New York. New
York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Haines, Michael R. 2005. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
States, 1790-2000.” [Computer file]. ICPSR02896-v2. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-University
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2005-04-29.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1978. American Colonial Wealth: Documents and Methods. 2nd edition.
New York: Arno Press.
Jones, Alice Hanson. 1980. Wealth of a Nation to Be: The American Colonies on the Eve of the
Revolution. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kaestle, Carl. 1973. The Evolution of an Urban School System: New York City, 1750-1850.
Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.
Kaestle, Carl. 1976. “‘Between the Scylla of Brutal Ignorance and the Charybdis of a Literary
Education’: Elite Attitudes toward Mass Schooling in Early Industrial England and

Page 30
America.” In Lawrence Stone (ed.), Schooling and Society: Studies in the History of
Education. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 177-191.
Kaestle, Carl. 1983. Pillars of the Republic: Common Schools and American Society, 1780-1860.
New York: Hill & Wang.
Kaestle, Carl and Maris Vinovskis. 1974. “Quantification, Urbanization, and the History of
Education: An Analysis of the Determinants of School Attendance in New York State in
1845.” Historical Methods Newsletter 8, 1 (December): 1-9.
Kaestle, Carl and Maris Vinovskis. 1980. Education and Social Change in Nineteenth-Century
Massachusetts. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, Michael B. and Paul H. Mattingly (eds.). 1975. Education and Social Change: Themes
from Ontario’s Past. New York: New York University Press.
Keyssar, Alexander. 2000. The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United
States. New York: Basic Books. (Appendix. State Suffrage Laws.)
Knight, Edgar Wallace. 1922. Public Education in the South. Boston: Ginn and Company.
Knight, Edgar Wallace. 1951. Education in the United States. Third edition. New York:
Greenwood Press.
Lewis, Frank and M.C. Urquhart. 1999. “Growth and the Standard of Living in a Pioneer
Economy: Upper Canada, 1826 to 1851.” William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd series, 56, 1
(January), 151-179.
Lockwood, Ben and Iwan Barankay. 2006. “Decentralization and the Productive Efficiency of
Government: Evidence from Swiss Cantons.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5639.
Lindert, Peter H. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the
Eighteenth Century. Two volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maddison, Angus. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. Paris: OECD.
Maddison, Angus. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. OECD, Development
Centre Studies.
Majewski, John. 2000. A House Dividing: Economic Development in Pennsylvania and Virginia
Before the Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950. Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press.
Mitch, David. 1992. The Rise of Popular Literacy in Victorian England. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Monaghan, E. Jennifer. 2005. Learning to Read and Write in Colonial America. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press.
Perlmann, Joel and Robert A. Margo. 2001. Women’s Work? American Schoolteachers, 16501920. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Porter, Kirk H. 1918. A History of Suffrage in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Prest, John. 1990. Liberality and Locality: Parliament, Permissive Legislation, and Ratepayers’
Democracies in the Nineteenth Century. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Psacharapoulos G., and H.A. Patrinos, 2002. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further
Update.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 2881.
Randall, Samuel Sidwell. 1844. A Digest of the Common School System of the State of NewYork. Albany: C. Van Benthuysen & Co.
Soltow, Lee. 1975. Men and Wealth in the United States 1850-1870, New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Page 31
Soltow, Lee and Edward Stevens. 1981. The Rise of Literacy and the Common School in the
United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Swift, Fletcher Harper. 1911. A History of Public Permanent Common School Funds in the
United States, 1795-1905. New York.
Sylla, Richard E., John B. Legler, and John Wallis. 1995. “State and Local Government [United
States]: Sources and Uses of Funds, Census Statistics, Twentieth Century [through
1982].” Computer file ICPSR 6304. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research [distributor].
Thorpe, Francis Newton. 1909. The Federal and State Constitutions, Colonial Charters, and
other Organic Laws of the State, Territories, and Colonies Now or Heretofore Forming
the United States of America. Washington: Government Printing Office. 59th Congress,
2nd session, House.
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956, “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political
Economy 64, 5 (September-October): 416-424.
Tolley, Kim and Nancy Beadie. 2006. “Socioeconomic Incentives to Teach in New York and
North Carolina: Toward a More Complex Model of Teacher Labor Markets, 1800-1850.”
History of Education Quarterly 46, 1 (Spring): 36-72.
Vinovskis, Maris. 1988. “Have We Underestimated the Extent of Antebellum High School
attendance?” History of Education Quarterly 28: 551-67.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2003. “Measuring British Decline: Direct Versus Long
Span Measures” Journal of Economic History. 63, 3 (September): 826-851.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2004. “Relative UK/US Output Reconsidered: A Reply to
Professor Broadberry” Journal of Economic History 64, 3 (September): 879-891.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux. 2005. “Relative British and American Income Levels
During the First Industrial Revolution” Research in Economic History 23 (December):
255-292.
Williamson, Chilton. 1960. American Suffrage: From Property to Democracy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1982. “The Structure of Pay in Britain, 1710-1911.” Research in
Economic History 7: 1-54.
Wilson, J. Donald, Robert M. Stamp, and Louis-Philippe Audet (eds.). 1970 Canadian
Education: A History. Scarborough: Prentice-Hall.
Wooster, Ralph A. 1969. The People in Power: Courthouse and Statehouse in the Lower South,
1850-1860. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Wooster, Ralph A. 1975. Politicians, Planters, and Plain Folk: Courthouse and Statehouse in
the Upper South, 1850-1860. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Wright, Gavin. 1986. Old South, New South. New York: Basic Books.
Wright, Gavin. 2006. Slavery and American Economic Development. Baton Rouge, LA:
Louisiana State University Press.

Page 32

Table 1. School Enrollments per 100 Children Ages 5-14
in the United States and Europe, 1830-1850

USA, whites
USA, whites in -6 Northeast states
2 Southern states
USA, all
England-Wales
Scotland
Belgium
Italy
France
Norway
Prussia

Public primary schools only
1830
1840
1850
50.5
67.1
96.4
16.6
45.3

98.7
29.9
56.7

Public plus private schools
1830
1840 1850
54.9 72.2
105.8
20.7

103.6 105.5
20.9
34.6
49.2
61.0

27.4

35.1

34.6

52.6

49.8
59.2
54.9

38.8

51.3

51.5

69.5

74.4

73.0

57.2
2.8
68.5
68.7

39.8
67.1
73.6

12.4
36.7
64.0
72.2

Sources and notes to Table 1:
The sources are the 1840 and 1850 US censuses plus Lindert (2004, vol. 2, App.
Table A.1) for non-US, and Fishlow (1966a, Table 1) for extrapolations to 1830.
The six Northeast states = ME, NH, MA, CT, RI, and NY.
The two Southern states = KY and VA.
For these eight states, we took Fishlow’s (1966a, Table 1) ratio of 1830
to 1840 enrollment rates.
The U.S. private enrollments include a small number of secondary-school
“academy” students.

Page 33

Table 2. U.S. Education in 1850, North versus South
A. Fifteen Northern States
Funds per pupil ($ per year)
Endowment (fed., state, & priv.)
Taxation (mainly local)
Public funds (mainly state)
Private tuition & other
Total

Public
schools Academies

Colleges Total

0.05
1.50
0.66
0.24
2.45

1.07
0.09
0.49
14.15
15.80

17.59
0.00
1.66
42.41
61.66

0.19
1.41
0.66
1.19
3.45

Teachers and enrollments
Funds per teacher ($ per year)
Teachers per 100 pupils
Pupils per free child 5-14
Pupils per free child 5-19

93
2.6
0.82
0.58

396
4.0
0.05
0.03

1052
5.9
0.004
0.003

127
2.7
0.87
0.61

B. Fifteen Southern States
Funds per pupil ($ per year)
Endowment (fed, state, & priv.)
Taxation (mainly local)
Public funds (mainly state)
Private tuition & other
Total

0.08
0.84
1.23
2.52
4.67

1.16
0.00
0.37
18.44
19.97

15.69
1.29
13.37
50.69
81.03

0.51
0.72
1.31
5.73
8.27

Teachers and enrollments
Funds per teacher ($ per year)
Teachers per 100 pupils
Pupils per free child 5-14
Pupils per free child 5-19

141
3.3
0.32
0.23

427
4.7
0.06
0.04

1315
6.2
0.007
0.005

231
3.6
0.38
0.28

Source and notes to Table 2:
The source is the ICPSR electronic compilation of the 1850 census.
The fifteen Northern states are CT, IL, IN, Iowa, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan,
NH, NJ, NY, OH, PA, RI, VT, and WI.
The fifteen Southern states are AL, AR, DE, FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, MS, Missouri,
NC, SC, TN, TX and VA.
The enrollments are "gross" enrollments, including all pupils of any age, not just in the
age range at which the type of school is primary targeted.

Page 34

Table 3. U.S. Education in 1850, Urban and Rural Counties
Public schools only
Urban Rural Urban Rural
North North South South
Funds per pupil ($ per year)
Endowment (fed, state, &
private)
Taxation (mainly local)
Public funds (mainly state)
Private tuition & other
Total

All primary & secondary
Urban Rural Urban Rural
North North South South

0.07
4.31
1.01
0.13
5.50

0.04
1.19
0.62
0.26
2.11

0.24
4.00
2.63
2.75
9.62

0.07
0.71
1.17
2.51
4.46

0.32
3.71
0.93
2.89
7.83

0.07
1.14
0.62
0.75
2.58

1.51
2.21
1.46
11.24
16.43

0.16
0.61
1.08
4.53
6.38

Teachers and enrollments
All funds per teacher ($
per year)
Public funds per teacher
Teachers per 100 pupils
Teachers per 100 free
children 5-14
Pupils per free child 5-14
Pupils per free child 5-19

304
294
1.8

78
67
2.7

416
286
2.3

133
56
3.4

378
224
2.1

93
63
2.8

499
112
3.3

180
48
3.5

1.0
0.58
0.39

2.3
0.86
0.61

0.5
0.22
0.15

1.1
0.33
0.24

1.4
0.67
0.45

2.5
0.90
0.63

1.3
0.39
0.27

1.3
0.38
0.27

Total expenditures ($ mill.)
Total public expend. ($ mill.)
Total teachers (1000s)
Total enrolled pupils (1000s)

1.51
1.46
5.0
275

5.26
4.51
67.7
2495

0.23
0.16
0.5
24

2.49
1.05
18.8
558

2.50
1.48
6.6
319

6.72
4.58
72.2
2606

0.70
0.16
1.4
43

4.11
1.09
22.8
644

Source and notes to Table 3:
The source is the ICPSR electronic compilation of the 1850 census.
North and South refer to the 15-state regions covered in Table 2.
The 14 urban (over 2,500 population) counties of the North:
Middlesex and Suffolk MA; Providence RI; Essex NJ; Albany,
Erie, Monroe, Kings, New York, and Rensselaer in NY;
Allegheny and Philadelphia in PA; Cook IL; and Hamilton OH.
The six urban counties of the South:
St. Louis MO, Henrico VA, Orleans LA, Charleston SC, Jefferson KY, and Baltimore MD.
All other counties are called rural here.
As in Table 2, the enrollments are "gross" enrollments, including all pupils of any age,
not just in the age range at which the type of school is primary targeted.
Public expenditures here equal taxes and "public funds", but not endowment income,
which is harder to divide between public and private sources.
The data generally refer to the school year 1849-1850.

Page 35

Table 4. The Cost of Primary Schooling and Teachers, Relative to the
Earnings of a Common Laborer in the U.S. and England,
1830s-1850s
Panel (A.) School fees: The number of weeks' earnings for a non-agricultural
laborer required to pay for a child's schooling
(1.) New York State, average common school 1841-1842
18 weeks
0.22
0.16
0.39

Public funds
Private tuition (rate bills)
Total costs
(2.) Manchester, England, 1834 (private cost = total cost)

18 weeks
0.40
0.83
0.94
0.71
0.62

In 230 dame schools (reading, needlework)
In 116 common boys' schools
In 63 common girls' schools
In 86 evening schools
School-weighted average
(3.) In 971 reporting English and Welsh schools, 1858
Government grants
Fees paid by parents
Other income of schools
Total income (cost) of schools

per ave. annual attendance
0.17
0.41
0.57
1.15

Panel (B.) Teachers' wages, relative to the earnings of common labor
(1.) Average Northern U.S. school teachers
Male teachers
Female teachers
1841
1.09
0.60
1841-1850
1.04
0.58
1851
1.07
0.61
1851-1860
1.26
0.72
1861
1.29
0.75

All teachers, weighted
0.75
0.72
0.74
0.88
0.91

Page 36

Table 4, continued
(2.) Manchester, England, 1834/1835
In 230 dame schools (reading + needlework)
In 116 common boys' schools
In 63 common girls' schools
In 86 evening schools
School-weighted average

0.45
2.14
1.39
0.66
1.00

(3.) Staffordshire and Warwickshire Charity Schools, England 1827-1861
1827
1835
1851
1861

1.59
2.08
1.81
2.12

Sources and notes to Table 4:
School fees, Northern U.S.: New York State Superintendent for Common Schools,
Annual Reports to the State Legislature, divided by the average
laborer's wage for Northern states, 1841, from Burgess (1920, p. 71).
School fees in Manchester 1834: Gt. Britain, House of Commons, "Education in England
and Wales - Select Committee Report with Minutes of Evidence."
Sessional Papers, 1835 (465), vol. VII, pp. 111-112.
Teachers' wages and laborers' wages in the Northern U.S., 1841-1861:
Burgess (1920, pp. 32-33, 71). We have weighted Burgess's separate wage rates for
rural versus urban and male versus female teachers by the 1860 non-South
employment weights in Perlman and Margo (2001, p. 21).
Teachers' wages in Manchester 1834 are from the same pages of the 1835 Sessional Papers
cited above. These are divided by the weekly earnings of non-agricultural common
laborers used by Williamson (1982, the 2L series).
Teachers' weekly wages in Staffordshire and Warwickshire charity schools are from
Williamson (1982, series 11H versus 2L).
School fees for England and Wales 1858 are from Great Britain, Report of the
Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the State of Popular Education in England.
House of Commons, Sessional Papers, 2794-I, 1861.
The 18-week school year was the typical attendance in New York State in 1841-1842.
Manchester in 1834 could have had a similar attendance, given the share of dame
schools and evening schools. The specially sampled English and Welsh public
schools in 1858 may have had an atypically long school year to qualify for
annual grants based on the number of students attending 176 days.

Page 37
Table 5. Influences on School Enrollments in U.S. Counties, 1840 and 1850
Enrollments per white child in the 5-14 age group
Public common schools
Region
North
North
South
South
Year
1840
1850
1840
1850
Raising the voting share -from 60% to 80%
0.026
-0.016
0.136 **
0.097 *
(0.051)
(0.047)
(0.015)
(0.026)
Slaves per white man
-0.0001
-0.0022
(0.003)
(0.004)
Children 5-14
-0.021
-0.341 **
-0.409 **
-0.150 **
(0.089)
(0.115)
(0.030)
(0.064)
Share of men over 40
0.197
0.113
1.208 *
1.485 **
(0.476)
(0.479)
(0.137)
(0.315)
Free coloreds per white
-0.153
-3.884 **
-2.682 *
0.320 **
(0.871)
(1.073)
(0.102)
(0.197)
Urban share
-0.0017
-0.034
-0.103
-0.042
(0.119)
(0.117)
(0.059)
(0.109)
Migrants from other
0.272
-0.068
states
(0.164)
(0.090)
Foreigners
-0.139
0.028
(0.247)
(0.254)
Church accommod’ns
bapt= + **
bapt= + *
per capita, + and cong=+ *
effects
tunk= + *
Number of counties
Number of zeroes

452
18

518
15

655
71

718
34

Enrollments per white child in the 5-14 age group
All schools (pre-tertiary)
North
North
South
South
1840
1850
1840
1850
0.143 **
(0.052)

-0.368 **
(0.090)
1.351 **
(0.484)
-3.704 **
(0.884)
0.102
(0.121)

452
17

0.095 *
(0.054)

-0.439
(0.114)
1.577
(0.474)
-2.794
(1.063)
0.063
(0.115)
0.296
(0.163)
-0.153
(0.245)
bapt= +
cong=+
tunk= +
517
13

**
**
**

0.034
(0.016)
0.009
(0.003)
-0.193
(0.033)
0.292
(0.149)
0.288
(0.112)
0.101
(0.065)

**
**
*
655
60

*
**
**

*

-0.0043
(0.026)
0.005
(0.004)
-0.081
(0.068)
0.238
(0.313)
-0.141
(0.195)
0.057
(0.108)
-0.025
(0.090)
0.226
(0.253)
bapt = + *
chris= + *

716
22

Page 38

Sources and Notes to Table 5:
The main data sources are Haines, ICPSR02896-v2, 2005; and Clubb, Flanigan, and Zingale, ICPSR08611-v1, 2006.
Our edited data sets are available at http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/graduate/sgo and
http://econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder.
Coefficient standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
The regression type is tobit, censored from below at zero. All equations are highly significant.
The South consists of all states in the band running from Missouri through Kentucky, Virginia, Maryland, and
Delaware,
plus states further south, but excluding Texas. The North consists of all states north of this band.
Children 5-14 = White children in this age band, per white male over 20.
Share of men over 40 = white males 40+ / white males 20+, a measure that reflects the age of a community and its
infrastructure. This demographic variable also tends to be a positive influence on average wealth.
Urban share = the share of the county's population living in cities of 2,500 or more inhabitants.
Religious membership = religious accommodations (seating capacity) of all kinds, per capita.
All regressions are also controlled for fixed state effects, geography variables, and (for 1850) the effects of church
accommodations (seating capacity) per white population for 22 religious groups defined by the 1850 census
and by Michael Haines's ICPSR code books.
The religious groups whose accommodations has significant effects are bapt = baptist, cong = congrationalist,
chris = Christian (not elsewhere classified), and tunk = Tunker churches.
The geography variables are binaries for: The county is on the Great Lakes, on the Atlantic
or the Gulf Coast, on the Mississippi, or on the Ohio River.

Page 39
Table 6. Influences on School Support, U.S. Counties in 1850
Teachers or dollars per white child in the 5-14 age group
Public common schools
All schools (pre-tertiary)
Teachers
Gov’t funds All funds
Teachers
Gov’t funds

All funds

Panel A. South
The effect of raising the voting share -from 60% to 80%
-0.0011
(0.0007)

Slaves per white man
Children 5-14 as a share
of pop.
Share of men over 40
Free coloreds per white
Urban share
Migrants from other
states
Foreigners
Church accommodations
per capita, + and - effects

Number of counties
Number of zeroes

0.0002
(0.0001)
-0.0001
(0.0018)
-0.0030
(0.0030)
0.0060
(0.0054)
-0.0030
(0.0030)
-0.0006
(0.0025)
-0.0004
(0.0070)

bapt = + *
free = + *
presb = + *
719
34

0.23
(0.21)

0.15
(0.24)

-0.0009
(0.0007)

0.10
(0.22)

0.43
(0.38)

*

0.40 **
(0.03)
0.62
(0.54)
-1.82
(2.59)
1.28
(1.56)
-0.61
(0.88)
1.05
(0.73)
4.90 *
(2.07)
bapt= + **
luth = + *
presb= - *

0.47 *
(0.04)
0.30
(0.60)
-2.07
(3.11)
1.61
(1.83)
0.60
(1.00)
0.09
(0.86)
3.20
(2.40)
(none)

0.0006 **
(0.0001)
-0.0026
(0.0018)
0.0181 *
(0.0090)
0.0050
(0.0056)
0.0032
(0.0031)
0.0004
(0.0026)
0.0075
(0.0072)
bapt = + **
presb = + **
unit = + **

724
136

675
34

719
22

0.42
(0.04)
0.35
(0.55)
-1.75
(2.69)
2.04
(1.63)
-0.60
(0.91)
1.51
(0.76)
6.49
(2.14)
luth = +
bapt = -

724
128

**

**

*
*

0.67
(0.06)
-1.95
(0.89)
4.39
(4.61)
3.98
(2.58)
3.34
(1.57)
0.27
(1.34)
7.81
(3.71)
(none)

581
22

**
*

**

*

Page 40

Table 6. Influences on School Support, U.S. Counties in 1850, Continued
Teachers or dollars per white child in the 5-14 age group
Public common schools
All schools (pre-tertiary)
Gov’t
All
Teachers
funds
funds
Teachers
Gov’t funds

All
funds

Panel B. North
Raising the voting share
from 60% to 80%
Children 5-14
Share of men over 40
Free coloreds per white
Urban share
Migrants from other
states
Foreigners
Church accommodations
per capita, + and - effects

Number of counties
No. of zeroes

0.0034
(0.0013)
-0.008
(0.003)
0.069
(0.014)
-0.035
(0.030)
-0.007
(0.003)

*

0.019
(0.005)
-0.0005
(0.0069)
cong = +
union = +
univs = +

**

522
15

*
**

*

**
**
*

0.38 *
(0.16)
-1.13 **
(0.39)
-1.34
(1.61)
5.33
(3.59)
0.94 *
(0.39)

0.36 *
(0.18)
-1.47 **
(0.45)
-3.68 *
(1.83)
4.26
(4.06)
0.72
(0.44)

0.40
(0.53)
-0.37
(0.83)
unit= + **

-0.16
(0.61)
-1.15
(0.99)
presb= + *
unit = + **

526
22

520
15

0.0034 *
(0.0013)
-0.010 **
(0.0032)
0.074 **
(0.014)
-0.027
(0.030)
-0.0040
(0.0033)
0.020
(0.0046)
-0.0010
(0.0070)
cong = +
union = +
univs = +

520
13

**

**
**
*

0.39 **
(0.17)
-1.28 **
(0.40)
-0.95
(1.69)
5.15
(3.75)
1.03 *
(0.41)
0.55
(0.56)
-0.67
(0.87)
rcath= + *
unit = + *

526
22

0.57 *
(0.23)
-1.81 **
(0.58)
-2.02
(2.34)
4.33
(5.11)
1.85 **
(0.55)
1.16
(0.77)
-0.62
(1.25)
episc= +
presb=+
rcath=+
unit = +
488
13

**
*
**
**

Page 41

Notes to Table 6:
See also the notes to Table 5.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
School receipts of "government funds" consisted of endowment income, local tax support, and
other public funds (subsidies), here expressed in dollars per white child 5-14 rather than per pupil.
Receipts of “all funds” include these receipts from government plus receipts from
all “other” sources, consisting mainly of private tuition.
The religious groups whose accommodations has significant effects are cong = Congregationalist,
epis = episcopalian, free = Free Churches, presb = Presbyterian, rcath = Roman Catholic,
union = Union churches, unit = Uniterians, and univs = Universalists.

Page 42

Table 7. Influences on School Participation,
the 59 Counties of New York State in 1845
Public common schools
All schools
Enrollments and attendance per 100 children 5-14
Average
Attending
Attending
daily
any
any
time in the
time in the
Enrollment attendance
year
year
Percent franchised to vote

1.69
0.83
(0.33)
(0.23)
Children 5-14 as % of pop’n
1.14
0.34
(1.12)
(0.78)
Share of men who are over 40
27.27
-20.15
(62.06)
(43.50)
Urban share
-0.075
-0.032
(0.098)
(0.069)
Percentage of New York State population that immigrated -from New England
1.08
0.80
(0.36)
(0.25)
from other U.S. states
0.81
0.65
(0.62)
(0.44)
from other countries
0.41
0.16
(0.30)
(0.21)
Constant
-107.99
-27.22
(51.70)
(36.24)
Adjusted R squared
Std. error of OLS estimate
Mean of dependent variable

.629
11.45
86.1

.455
8.03
52.8

1.88
(0.29)
1.00
(0.99)
-47.12
(54.64)
-0.011
(0.086)

1.36
(0.26)
-0.63
(0.88)
-59.43
(48.66)
0.075
(0.077)

1.20
(0.32)
0.47
(0.55)
0.42
(0.26)
-88.79
(45.52)

1.20
(0.28)
0.74
(0.49)
0.10
(0.23)
9.04
(40.53)

.674
10.09
89.9

.536
8.98
100.02

Notes to Table 7:
The source is the New York State Census of 1845.
See also the notes to Table 5.
The age-group and student denominators include free colored children, unlike Tables 5-6.
Free coloreds were 1.7 percent of the state population.
Standard errors are in the parentheses.

Page 43

Source and notes to Figure 1: The Annual Report of the New York Superintendent of Common
Schools, 1820-1855. The shares for 1796-1798 and the rate bills for 1814-1825 are from a set of
“conjectures” offered in the 1825 report.

Page 44

Sources and notes to Figure 2: All price series have been converted into metric physical units,
and both price and wage series were converted into silver money units. The Massachusetts series
are those of Carroll Wright, and the England series are those of Gregory Clark. Both sets, and
the real wage comparisons graphed here, are downloadable as Excel files from
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu. Each real wage divides the nominal silver wage for 30 days per year by
the local cost of an eight-commodity annual consumption “bundle” consisting of 135.1 kg of
wheat flour, 26 kg of beef, 5.2 kg of butter, 4.33 dozen eggs, 1.8 kg sugar, one pair of shoes, 2.6
kg of soap, and 2.6 kg of tallow candles. The bundle is patterned after the Strasbourg 1746-1754
bundle reported by Robert C. Allen and co-authors in the first working paper on the same
internet site, but with the addition of sugar based on the diets of poor English workers 17871796.

Page 45
APPENDIX A.
A Simple Model of Public School Finance,
Featuring Budget Votes
When Public Schools Get Mixed Public-Private Financing

We seek to model first a household’s schooling preferences and then a decisive voter’s
tax-and-subsidy preferences, to predict influences on tax support and school attendance. The
model is kept as simple as possible, while incorporating heterogeneous preferences and a few
essentials of school finance. The model features two kinds of decisionmakers. First, parents and
prospective parents choose how much public schooling each child should have, given the offical
length of the school year and the quality of the local public school. Second, a decisive voter
chooses not only the amount of schooling for his own child but also the school budget and the
length of the school year.
I. The Demand for Schooling in a Household with Children
A household utility function that is particularly handy in its tractability and relative
realism is the ith individual’s Stone-Geary function of the form

(1)

α

Ui = (Ci – Cio) (Si – Sio)

1-α

, where

Ci = consumption of everything but primary schooling, with Cio being its positive necessary
minimum subsistence level;
α = a preference-based coefficient for the ith household (we omit the i-subscript); and
Si = the share of the average school-age year that each child spends in public school, with Sio
being a base level of schooling that could be positive or negative, depending on
preferences. We consider a negative sign more realistic, since it is consistent with the
possibility of choosing zero public schooling, which was frequently observed in this
historical period.

Page 46
Note that the schooling demand being modeled here is a demand for public schooling. The
demand for private schooling is separate and is folded into general consumption (C) here, to
simplify the algebra.
For mathematical convenience, and without changing any aggregate implications, we
convert the Stone-Geary utility function into its logged form:
(2)

lnUi = α ln(Ci – Cio) + (1-α) ln(Si – Sio)

The consumer (couple) maximizes this utility with respect to consumption (Ci) and per-child
schooling (Si), with all children being treated equally by their parents.
The income constraint plays its usual crucial role. Full-time income (Yi) consists of wage
and property income components: Yi = Wi + r PL Li, where Wi is the family’s full-time labor
earning power, r is the current-year rate of return on “land” (representing real estate, or taxable
property), PL is the purchase price (and assessed price) of land, and Li is this ith household’s
holdings of land.
The household spends its income on consumption, on schooling above the subsidized
level, and on taxes, so that the household’s budget constraint is
(3) Wi + r PL Li - Ci - ni φ (Si – s) - ni wc Si - t PL Li ≥ 0.
There is no pc price term in front of the real consumption term Ci because we normalize the price
of consumer goods to be unity.
Here ni = the number of children of school age,1 and φ is the fee cost of a full year’s
normal public schooling, from both private and public funds. Institutionally, s was the share of
the year for which the fees were paid by taxpayers. Typically taxes covered a number of weeks
of school, say twelve weeks, and parents wanting fuller schooling during the year paid the the
rest with rate bills. The annual wage rate on child labor is wc. Having a child go to school
deducts the child’s labor time, as well as the school fees, from the family’s potential earnings.

1

This appendix views the number of children as exogenous. The model could be extended to
make fertility decisions simultaneous with schooling decisions.

Page 47
The local government also has a budget constraint. For simplicity, we will assume that
school subsidies are the only kind of local government expenditure and a proportional property
(land) tax is the only source of government revenue. Ignoring any administrative costs, the
budget constraint says that total revenue must cover total school expenditures:

(4)

t PL Lall ≥ s φ Σi ni Si = s φ N , so that the school-tax rate t =

sφN
PL Lall

where PLLall is the assessed value of all real estate (quality-adjusted price PL times quantity Lall),
and N is the locality’s total number of children attending common schools anytime during the
year. We will use Equation (4) later, to link the tax rate to the level of schooling and to model
the decisive voter’s self-interest.
We deal first with an interior solution in which the household demands more schooling
days than the subsidized share s, and buys the extra (Si – s) per child by paying rate bills
(tuition). For this interior solution, the Lagrangian is
(5) V = α ln(Ci – Cio) + (1-α) ln(Si – Sio)
+ λ [Wi + r PL Li - Ci - ni φ (Si – s) - ni wc Si - t PL Li]
and the first order conditions are

VC =
VS =

α
Ci − Ci0

−λ=0

1− α
− psλ = 0
Si − Si0

Here the private price of schooling ps is the sum of the opportunity cost of the child’s time in
school plus the private payments of any “rate bills” (tuition) beyond what is subsidized by
taxpayers:
(6) ps = ni wc + ni φ

Page 48

We use these first-order conditions to derive the Marshallian demands for schooling and
consumption in this interior-solution case where the household reaches a level of schooling that
involves some extra school days paid for by rate bills. The chosen rate of annual schooling per
child is:

(7) Si =

1− α ⎡W i + rPL Li − n iφ (Si − s) − n i w c Si − tPL Li − Ci0 ⎤
⎢
⎥ + Si0
n i (φ + w c )
α ⎣
⎦

Collecting all the Si terms yields the demand equation for public school attendance:
⎡W + rPL Li + n i sφ − tPL Li − Ci0 ⎤
(8) Si = (1− α )⎢ i
⎥ + αSi0
n i (φ + w c )
⎣
⎦
The bracketed numerator is simply the full-time income left over after the minimum subsistence
consumption has been met, and the bracketed denominator is the price of extra rate-bill
schooling per child. The equation translates thus: The share of discretionary income spent on
public schooling, at the observed real private price of that schooling, is shaped by the
individual’s relative taste for schooling (1-α and Si0 ).
The partial derivatives of public-school attendance with respect to the exogenous
parameters correspond to intuition. Raising any component of income (Wi, Li, r, or PL) has a
positive effect, meaning that being richer leads to more demand for schooling beyond what taxes
will cover. That might not be obvious at first in the case of Li, since having more property
means paying more tax as well as getting more property return. Yet the tax was less than the
return (r > t), as a positive valuation of property (PL > 0) requires, so more property means more
parental demand for schools. By contrast, the schooling level per child is negatively affected by
having more children, or by a higher local wage rate for school-age children.
Of particular interest is the effect of raising the school subsidy on different individuals’
demand for schooling. The effect is not necessarily positive, since the higher subsidy must be
paid for with higher taxes. The partial derivative of attendance with respect to the share of the
school year covered by taxes is:

Page 49

⎡φ (n i − (NLi /Lall )) ⎤
(9) ∂Si /∂s = (1− α )⎢
⎥.
⎣ n i (φ + w c ) ⎦
The sign of this effect depends on the relationship of relative family size to relative property:
sign (∂Si/∂s) = sign (ni/N - Li/Lall),
which is positive for those having relatively more children and relatively less property. That is,
raising the subsidy to schooling will raise attendance by children of families that are bigger
and/or less propertied. Those with smaller families and greater-than-average property will
experience a net loss because their taxes will be raised by more than their use of subsidized
schools, leading them to demand less public schooling for their children. Overall, a higher
subsidy will make schooling more equal.
Raising the cost of public schooling of given quality (raising φ), e.g. by having publicschool teachers become more expensive, would affect the same two groups the same way as
raising the subsidy rate. That is, it would encourage public-school attendance by children from
larger and poorer families, but discourage it among children of smaller and richer families, again
making schooling more equal.
So far we have focused on the key group with sufficient demand for schooling to pay rate
bills for extra schooling beyond what is subsidized (the interior solution with Si > s). Other
groups will behave differently. Moving down the scale of relative demand for schooling, the
next group would be those whose demand was sufficient only to utilize the tax-paid part of the
school year (Si = s), because they perceive the private benefits of extra school to be somewhere
between the opportunity cost of child labor and this plus the cost of private schooling (between
wc and (wc + φ)). This group’s attendance will not vary in response to small movements in any
parameter, except for an increase in the subsidy. A third group would be those wanting less
schooling than what taxes pay for (0 < Si < s). This group would respond to most parameters in
the same manner as the group demanding more than the subsidized share. It too would raise
attendance in response to any income variable, cut attendance either if the child wage rate rose or
if schools became more costly. There is one difference, however, between the responses of this

Page 50
lower-demand group (0 < Si < s) and the higher-demand group (Si > s). If the general subsidy (s)
is raised along with the tax rate, members of this lower-demand group having any property
would respond by cutting school attendance because the higher tax would be a pure income loss
for them. Those with no property will be completely unaffected. A fourth group is the one with
so little taste for schooling that they consume zero of it. For this group, as for the second group,
parameter shifts will do nothing to school attendance.
The aggregate responses of school attendance to changes in market and policy parameters
will be a mixture of the responses of these four groups. The functional form of the aggregate
response is uncertain, but the signs of these responses are likely to resemble the high-demand
first group, which actually paid some rate bills (Si > s).

II. Voter Preferences Regarding Public School Subsidy and Property Tax
Our portrayal of the influence of voting and political voice on the tax support for schools,
and thus on the amount and distribution of school attendance, proceeds in two main steps. First,
we show how a voter’s preferences regarding property tax rate and a school subsidy would align
with his self-interest as a taxpayer and a parent.2 This optimization closely follows the household
model just introduced, though the individual is now free to shape public school finance as well as
his own child’s education. Second, we will use the clear predictions of this optimization to
suggest how education finance would have been driven by the distribution of the extension of
political voice in such a setting where public schools mixed public and private money.
A voter’s optimization is the same problem already visited, except that the household
now chooses how to vote on s and t as well as on how much schooling their children should
have. We posit the same logged utility function as in Equation (2) above, sticking for now to the
case in which the voter of interest has children. This time, however, the household budget
constraint is different. With the freedom to set the tax rate t and the subsidized share of the
school year (s), a decisive ith voter can set s equal to his demand for schooling per child (Si), and

2

We set aside the case of the childless voter who does not care about schooling the children of
others. Clearly, the greater the share of such voters, the lower the taxes for schools, and our
econometric tests will incorporate this effect within the influence of the child/adult ratio.

Page 51
push through a result that avoids his paying any rate bills, so that Si = s. The household budget
constraint is therefore a variant of Equation (3) above, specifically
(10) Wi + r PL Li - Ci - ni wc s - s φ N Li/Lall ≥ 0.
This formulation has used the government budget balance from Equation (4) to state the tax
burden on this individual as a function of the school subsidy itself, eliminating the tax rate t.3 A
derivation like that used above implies that the voter will prefer to subsidize public primary
schools up to his own demand for public schooling. Setting Si = s slightly changes the
Lagrangian to
(11) V = α ln(Ci – Cio) + (1-α) ln(s – Sio)
+ λ [Wi + r PL Li - Ci - ni wc s - s φ N Li/Lall]
This makes the first-order conditions
VC =
Vs =

α
Ci − Ci0

−λ=0

1− α
− λ[n i w c + φNLi /Lall ] = 0
s − Si0

Solving for the subsidized share of the public school year yields
⎡W + rPL Li i − Ci0 ⎤
(12) s = (1− α )⎢ i
⎥ + αSi0
⎣ n i w c + φNLi /Lall ⎦

3

The decisive voter might consider the possible reverse influence of schooling-cum-taxes (s) on
property values, as Charles Tiebout had envisioned migrants’ doing. This effect could be
incorporated into the model by making PL an inverted-U function of s, to reflect the fact that
there is a most efficient level of tax-based schooling. We set aside such algebra here, and only
note that it would make the decisive voter choose levels of s closer to the property-value peak of
the inverted U than he would if there were no such feedback to PL.

Page 52
That is, the preferred subsidy share depends on the voter’s tastes for schooling (1-α and αSi0),
his discretionary income above a bare subsistence consumption level, and a private price deflator
specific to public schooling.
The parametric influences on the rate of public school subsidy resemble the influences on
a household’s decisions about school attendance. The greater his gross household income, the
more a voter favors a longer subsidized school year and a bigger budget. On the other hand, his
preferred budget per child would be smaller, the greater is his opportunity cost in terms of child
labor (niwc),or the total school cost per child (φ), or the average number of children in all families
(N). This last effect suggests that adding disenfranchised immigrants, or having more children
per family, lowers the budget per child.
The partial derivative of greatest interest here is the one that is the most complex
algebraically: How is the decisive voter’s choice of s affected by his owning more taxable real
estate (Li) relative to the holdings of others in the same locality? To ease the task of viewing a
quotient-rule derivative, we first gather some terms on the left in a re-defined dependent
variable:

(12) s* =

s
W + rPL Li − Ci0
− αSi0 = i
n i w c + φNLi /Lall
1− α

Calling the whole right-hand denominator ps and differentiating with respect to the voter’s
property holdings yields

(13)

∂s * psrPL − (W i + rPL Li − Ci 0 )φN / Lall
=
2
∂Li
ps

Expanding on the definition of ps in the numerator alone yields a cancellation of two terms in the
numerator, so that

(14)

∂s *
1 ∂s rPL n i w c − (W i − Ci 0 )φN / Lall
=
=
2
∂Li 1 − α ∂Li
ps

Page 53
The crucial result is the sign of the unfriendly-looking numerator on the right-hand side.
Dividing through by parts of it yields the key sign result:
(15) sign(

⎡ nw
∂s
φN ⎤
) = sign⎢ i c −
⎥
∂ Li
⎣W i − Ci 0 rPL Lall ⎦

⎡
full − timechild earning power
full − year school cos ts ⎤
= sign⎢
−
⎥
⎣ discretionary earning powerof thewhole family thelocality' s propertyincome ⎦
The right-hand term is likely to have values like ten percent. In the case of antebellum America,
this likelihood stems from the school tax rates and the rates of return on property. The school tax
rates on assessed property value tended to by around five mills (0.05), and if the rate of return
was on the order of five percent (0.05), the right-hand ratio would have been one-tenth, or ten
percent.
In today’s modern economy, or in the antebellum era, the left-hand term would have been
well below ten percent for a decisive voter. Today children have almost no earning power during
the school-age years, making the first term effectively zero. In today’s setting, therefore, the
more propertied the decisive voter (higher Li), the lower would be the tax support for schooling
(s). The result for antebellum America would already have approached this condition, to the
extent that restrictions on political voice would have put the decisive votes in the hands of those
who were rich enough that their discretionary income would not have depended at all on child
earnings. Then, too, schooling would have been limited by the property ownership of the
decisive voter.
The only setting in which greater property for key voters could have raised their support
for school taxes would have been a setting highly dependent on child labor, so that the first term
could dominate in Equation (15). Such settings would be rare. To be sure, most of human
history consisted of impoverished agricultural settings in which childrens’ labor would have been
much needed by poor parents. But in those same settings, political voice was restricted to those
owning large amounts of property. Again the reliance on child labor would have been below ten
percent for those with political voice, leaving the result that restricting voice to those with aboveaverage land holdings meant less support for schools.
III. The Implied Predictions

Page 54

Given the decisive voter’s setting the amount of tax support for schools, the individual
households would choose their enrollments (Si’s) as modeled in Part I of this appendix. Thus
does the interplay of voting power and the distribution of property influence the enrollments and
the public and private expenditures on common schools. The combined model yields the
predicted coefficients for cross-sectional regressions on antebellum U.S. counties shown in
Appendix Table A.1.
Note in particular that the featured voting variables are a mixture of constraints and voter
preferences. The main constraint is the share of all free men who are franchised. The tighter this
is, the higher is the property position of the decisive voter (Li), and the lower the predicted
support for schooling. The voter preferences are represented in the tradition of Meltzer and
Richard (1981), as well as in the present model, by skewness in the distribution of property.
More skewness would make the decisive voter favor more taxes and schools. Skewness is
represented in mirror image by the median/mean ratio in this table.

Page 55
Appendix Table A.1. Predicted Coefficients: Aligning the Model with the Regressions

Model variable
s, φ
Si

Corresponding empirical variable(s) in county samples,
with predicted signs of effect on subsidies and enrollments

Dependent variables:
public expenditures per common-school pupil, in the census
share of school-age children enrolled and attending common schools

Featured independent variables:
Decisive voter’s Li (1) franchise share (+);
(2) share owning no property (-),
in the 1850 IPUMS.

PLLall
wc
Wi
N, ni
α

Other independent variables:
real estate value per free man in that county (+)
None used here, for want of an easy proxy
None used here (could proxy with occupational mix,
but at the risk of endogeneity)
School-age share of total population (-)
Religion, urban share, etc.
(State fixed effects cannot be assigned to any one model variable.)

Page 56
APPENDIX B.
Instrumental-Variable Equations
For Northern Counties’ Enrollment Rates in 1850
As noted in the main text, the instruments used here are the number of years of residency
in the state required for voting, these interacted with the immigrant share from other states, the
same residency requirements interacted with the share foreign-born, and the existence of a state
property requirement for voting.
Equations for expenditures per child and teachers per child did not pass the tests for
instrument strength (validity) and/or exogeneity. On the criteria for instrument strength, see
Staiger, D., and J. H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,”
Econometrica, Vol.65, No.3, May 1997, pp.557-586.
Appendix Table B.1. OLS Determinants of Northern Counties' Enrollment Rates
in 1850, with Instrumented Values for Votes per White Man
Public school enrollments
per white child 5-14
coeff.
(s.e.)
Votes per white man
(instrumented)
Slaves per white man
Free coloreds per white
Children 5-14 as a pop.
share
Share of men over 40
Urban share
Migrants from other states
Foreigners
County is on the Great
Lakes
Atlantic coast
Ohio River
Mississippi River
Church accommodations per capita
Baptists
Christian n.e.c.
Congrational
Congrational orthodox
Dutch Reformed
Episcopal
Free Churches
Friends or Quakers

Total enrollments
per white child 5-14
coeff.
(s.e.)

1.31
-0.11
-4.17

(0.61) *
(24.56)
(1.20) **

1.32
2.22
-4.30

(0.61)
(24.55)
(1.20)

-0.80
2.64
0.01
-0.08
-0.09

(0.14) **
(0.47) **
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.27)

-0.85
2.71
0.11
-0.09
-0.10

(0.14)
(0.47)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.27)

0.05
0.06
0.06
-0.01

(0.06)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.13)

0.05
0.06
0.06
-0.03

(0.06)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.13)

0.41
-0.38
0.00
3.17
-0.17
-0.07
-0.10
-0.42

(0.15) **
(0.26)
(0.26)
(6.71)
(0.39)
(0.50)
(1.25)
(0.30)

0.42
-0.35
0.06
2.46
-0.18
0.05
-0.18
-0.34

(0.15)
(0.26)
(0.26)
(6.71)
(0.39)
(0.50)
(1.25)
(0.30)

Page 57
German Reformed
Jewish
Lutheran
Mennonite
Methodist
Moravian
Presbyterian
Roman Catholic
Swedenborgian Churches
Tunker Churches
Union Churches
Unitarian Churches
Universalist Churches
Minor Sects
New = 1/(years since
statehood)
Constant

-0.43
2.32
-0.17
-0.93
0.022
0.01
-0.06
-0.33
-1.45
1.94
0.94
coeff.
-0.27
0.86
0.58

(0.64)
(11.28)
(0.26)
(2.30)
(0.09)
(0.66)
(0.17)
(0.27)
(12.86)
(1.41)
(0.51)
(s.e.)
(1.09)
(0.76)
(0.63)

-0.27
0.50
-0.22
-1.15
0.028
-0.07
-0.04
-0.25
-3.55
1.87
1.07
coeff.
-0.56
0.92
0.60

(0.64)
(11.27)
(0.26)
(2.30)
(0.09)
(0.68)
(0.17)
(0.27)
(12.85)
(1.41)
(0.51)
(s.e.)
(1.09)
(0.76)
(0.63)

0.30
-0.15

(0.27)
(0.31)

0.27
-0.10

(0.27)
(0.31)

Observations
518
F
9.672
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Shea Partial R2
Partial R2
F (First Stage)
df
df_r
p(F First)
Sargan Hansen
p(S-H)
dof(S-H)

0.082
0.082
10.7
4
479
2.66E-08
0.539
0.910
3

517
10.9469

0.082
0.082
10.6
4
478
2.84E-08
0.625
0.891
3

Page 58
ENDNOTES
1

On the share of education expenditures in GDP in 1850, see Fishlow, “American Investment in Education”. On

enrollment rates, see the sources cited in Table 1 below.
2

Cubberley, Public Education 1934, pp. 82-110.

3

Goldin and Katz 1997, Goldin 2001, Goldin and Katz 2003.

4

In1830, children in the 5-14 age band were 27.5 percent of the US population, versus only 23.0 percent in England

and Wales, 18.0 percent in France, 20.7 percent in Belgium, 21.7 percent in the Netherlands, and 21.3 percent in
Norway, according to the historical statistics volumes of Brian Mitchell and the United Nations.
5

Fishlow “Common School Revival” 1966.

6

Kaestle, New York City 1973; Kaestle and Vinovskis “Quantification” 1974; Kaestle “Scylla” 1976; Kaestle and

Vinovskis Massachusetts 1980; and Kaestle, Pillars 1983.
7

Carleton, Economic Influences 1906, pp. 33-36; Cubberley, Public Education 1934; Engerman, Mariscal, and

Sokoloff 2002, Engerman and Sokoloff 2005; and again Goldin and Katz 1997, Goldin 2001, Goldin and Katz 2003.
8

Lindert, Growing Public, Vol. 2, Appendix A.

9

Fishlow, “American Investment in Education” (1966); Lindert, Growing Public (2004), Vol. 2, Appendix C.

10

We are not the first to note that the Northern countryside had higher primary school enrollment rates, even

without higher expenditures per student, than the cities. For example, Kaestle and Vinovskis underlined this pattern
for Massachusetts (Massachusetts 1980, passim).
11

Upper Canada’s enrollments seemed to have taken off only after the 1830s, though they had caught up to the

levels of the Northern United States by 1870. Their institutional evolution was also quite similar to what is
described here for the Northern states. See Glazebrook Life in Ontario 1968, pp. 82-89; Wilson et al. Canadian
Education 1970, Part Two; Katz and Mattingly Education and Social Change 1975, pp. 3-81; Lewis and Urquhart
“Upper Canada” 1999, especially pp. 168-173.
12

Probably a better starting point, one suggesting actual practice rather than law, would be the evidence of a Dutch

public schools in New Netherland starting in 1638. The schools were tiny and few, however, and their meager
funding was a variable mix of public and private funds. Kilpatrick 1912; Finegan 1971, Chapter 1.
13

Cremin 1980, p.127.

14

Carter Letters on the Free Schools 1824.

15

Beadie, “Toward a History of Education Markets;” Beadie, “Tuition-Funding in Common Schools;” Beadie,

Education and the Creation of Capital; and Beadie and Tolley (eds.) 2002.
16

Kaestle, Pillars, pp. 4, 8.

17

Swift Public Permanent Common School Funds (1911); Knight, Public Education in the South 1922, pp. 145-155,

173-177. Dabney Universal Education in the South (1936), pp. 287-295; Knight, Education in the United States
1951, pp. 255-257.
18

For more on the attendance practices, see Randall 1844, New York State Census of 1845, Annual Report of the

Superintendent of Common Schools January 1849, and Beadie, “Tuition-Funding.”

Page 59

Actual attendance was lower than the enrollments, of course. Official figures from 1845 implied that for
common schools the number in “average attendance” (averaged over several days) was 63 percent of the number of
the pupils “on teachers’ list.” Of those New York students attending at all, the average months of attendance (any
time in the month) was 4.0 for 1842/43, 4.3 for 1847/48, and 4.5 for 1851/52.
Attendance shares of those enrolled in England and Wales were similar to the shares for New York.
Specifically, David Mitch has reported an average attendance of about 68 percent of students enrolled in
government-inspected schools between 1865 and 1875. Mitch, Rise of Popular Literacy, pp. 187-188. The
Parliamentary sources cited in Table 4 add some attendance rates for Manchester 1834 and England and Wales in
1858, and The Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom gives annual rates for inspected primary schools from
1854 on.
19

The institutional variations are well sketched in Cubberley 1934, especially on Page 140; and the writings of

Nancy Beadie cited above. Kaestle and Vinoskis 1983, pp. 28-33 summarize the pitfalls of data on enrollments and
attendance.
20

Beadie, “Toward a History of Education Markets.”

21

Maddison 1995; Maddison 2001; Ward and Devereux “Measuring British Decline,” 2003; Ward and Devereux

“Relative British and American Income Levels” 2005.
22

For a convenient summary of the global literature on rates of return to education, see Psacharapoulos and Patrinos

2002.
23

This paragraph and Figure 2 are based on the real wage comparisons that are emerging in the Global Price and

Income History project. The data sets are downloadable at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
24

The real wage comparison between Massachusetts and West Virginia 1800-1860 used estimates of the ability to

buy flour, beef, butter, and sugar in the proportions used in Figure 2’s calculations. See the file “Massachusetts vs.
England, WV.xls” at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.
25

The low price of schooling in New York state has also been noted by Nancy Beadie’s research on tuition in

antebellum Lima, New York (“Tuition Funding”). Beadie suggests that parents could pay a child’s annual tuition in
the more subsidized common schools for about a dollar, which was about 1-2 day’s wage rate for common labor in
New York state. The tuition at a local private academy was about five times as much, presumably because of the
academy’s higher quality and lower subsidies.
26

As of 1853, a median monthly wage of $17.50 was paid to North Carolina’s teachers in common schools (of

whom over 91 percent were male). While Northern urban teachers and rural male teachers got that much or more at
the time, the heavily employed rural female Northern teachers only received an average of $14.57. We thank Paul
Rhode for supplying us with data from the Second Annual Report of North Carolina’s Superintendent of Common
Schools (Raleigh: W.W. Holden, 1855.) See also the comparison of Northern and North Carolina teacher wages in
Tolley and Beadie, “Socioeconomic Incentives to Teach.”
27

As of 1860, women filled 71 percent of the teaching positions in the non-South sample drawn by Perlmann and

Margo (Women’s Work? 2001, p. 22). By contrast, they had only 39 percent of the Southern teaching jobs and also
39 percent in Great Britain’s non-infant schools (46 percent if infant schools are included). At that time, French

Page 60

primary schools were just shifting toward employing more women than men: The female share of teachers in all
primary schools, public plus private rose from 37% in 1843 to 54% in 1863. Male teachers continued to dominate in
German cities as late as 1900. (U.S. Commissioner of Education, Annual Report of 1900-1901 (pp. 123-124, 1003).
See also Linda Carter and Robert A. Margo, “The Feminization of Teaching in the United States” (forthcoming).
28

Compare the clues on signature literacy in Monaghan, Learning, 2005; Cressy, Literacy, 1980, Chapter 8; and the

many studies cited there. Sweden’s high literacy meant the ability to read the Bible but probably little ability to
write or sign.
29

Tolley and Beadie, “Socio-economic Incentives to Teach.”

30

Lindert 2004, Table 5.6.

31

Prest, Liberality and Locality 1990, pp. 1-17.

32

Einhorn American Slavery 2006, pp. 104-109, 218-230.

33

Thorpe Federal and State Constitutions 1909, Green Constitutional Development 1930 (1969), Green Democracy

1946 (1966), Wooster Lower South 1969, Wooster Upper South 1975. On biased representation and public spending
in Virginia, see Majewski, House Dividing, pp. 135-138.
34

For example, slaveholders were a majority of all Southern state legislators in 1850, as were those classified as

either planters or farmers. Wooster’s tabulations show similar, though less extreme, biases in the allocation of
county offices. By contrast only 39 percent of Massachusetts legislators in 1840 were farmers (Kaestle and
Vinovskis 1983, pp. 211-212).
35

Daniel Crofts’s in-depth study of Southampton County Virginia (1992, pp. 155-169) does show that localities

tended to cluster into increasingly solid Democratic and Whig blocs as the rich and influential applied pressure
before each election. The role of the open ballot is implicit. The link to school policy is not clear, however, except
for the fact that all local government policy was in the hands of court officials not inconvenienced by electoral
competition.
36

See Fox and Gurley-Calvez 2007 on world patterns in the economies of government consolidation, and Lockwood

and Barankay 2006 on Swiss education under federalism.
37

On the Americas, again see Engerman, Mariscal, and Sokoloff 2002; and Engerman and Sokoloff 2005. The

role of democracy and the fullness of suffrage has also been emphasized by Carlton 1906, pp. 33-36; Cubberley
1934, pp. 151-154; Goldin 2001; Goldin and Katz 2003; and Lindert 2004, Chapter 5.
38

See Appendix A of the revised NBER Working Paper version of this paper.

39

Tiebout, “Pure Theory” 1956.

40

See, for example, the school attendance patterns estimated in Galenson, “Ethnic Differences” 1998, and his other

studies cited there.
41

Readers interested in possible industrial influences on schooling should consult the tests offered by Alex Field

“Massachusetts 1855” 1979 and Kaestle and Vinovskis 1980.
42

In one case, our data providers failed to design the public-private distinction correctly, and were roundly criticized

for that mistake. The 1840 census asked localities to report the number of pupils who were “at public charge.” This
question gave incurably misleading results in a setting where most schooling was financed both privately and

Page 61

publicly at the same time. Fortunately, the same 1840 census also included the clearer separate returns from public
common schools, from private academies, and from universities. The 1850 census dropped the bad question and
kept the useful ones, while also giving breakdowns of the public and private funding sources separately for publicly
managed schools and for privately managed academies.
43

The turnout for presidential elections has been consistently higher than the turnout for congressional elections in

the alternative even-numbered years. It is therefore a closer approximation to the share that was entitled to vote.
For the 1850 census regressions, we averaged each county’s voting rates in the 1848 and 1852 elections.
44

Porter 1918, Williamson 1960, Keyssar 2000, Engerman and Sokoloff 2005.

45

Free colored men were still only a small share of all free men before the Civil War. In what follows, we focus on

white men, and use the share of free coloreds as a control variable in our statistical work. It appears that the freecolored share had no clear effect on education policy behavior.
46

Randall 1844; Griffey 1936, pp. 51-55; Keyssar 2000, especially pp. 30-31.

47

Those who prefer to emphasize geography as a causal influence on institutions have a potential line of attack here.

Slaves were found in warmer places: At the interstate level, the coefficient of correlation between the mean January
temperature and slaves per white man in 1850 was highly positive (0.87). Would the warm South have had less
educated whites than the North even without slavery? Was it cold weather that kept Northern children in school?
Any such argument would have to explain why Southern whites have little education deficit today.
48

See, for example, Kaestle “Scylla” 1976 and Wright 1986 and 2006.

49

One might suspect that the share of children 5-14 in the population might be determined simultaneously with

enrollments per child, since households choose between greater fertility and greater inputs per child. Omitting the 514 age group share alters the other coefficients slightly, but leaves the general magnitudes and significance levels
consistent with the language of the text.
50

Benedict, T.H. “Report of the majority on the committee on colleges, academies and common schools” to the

New York State Assembly, February 6, 1851, as reprinted in Finegan 1971, p. 450.
51

Cubberley 1934, pp. 150 (on urban ills), 202 (on cities as champions of free schools).

52

That attendance was more universal in the Northern countryside than in the cities has also been noted by Kaestle

1983, Soltow and Stevens 1981, Vinovskis 1988, and Beadie, “Tuition Funding”.
53

Cubberley 1934, pp. 104 (on strong states versus pauper school states and indifferent states), and 150-154 (on the

role of suffrage).
54

We should note also that the 1849 and 1850 referenda was the first time that ordinary voters in New York City

were able to vote directly on school finance rather than being governed by an educational board. Furthermore, most
of the urban voters owned no taxable property. See Go, “Free Schools in America, 1850-1870” 2008.
55

On this our results echo the doubts voiced about the importance of religion in Massachusetts schooling by Kaestle

and Vinovskis 1980, p. 136 and p. 232. Note, however, that our results are based on an 1850 snapshot. Across the
first half of the century Protestant sentiments had shifted toward relatively public schools, while Catholics had
shifted toward religious academies. See Drake American School in Transition, Chapter 8.

Page 62

56

Cubberley 1934, Cross 1950, Kaestle and Vinovskis 1974. The Yankee influence was made even more explicit in

J. P. Foote’s The Schools of Cincinnati 1855, as cited by Carleton 1906, pp. 111-112:
“A majority of the legislators of our State [Ohio] were, a few years before the establishment of our school
systems, natives, or descendents of natives, of New England, and, in due time, they gave efficient aid to the
enactment of the school law. In the middle and southern portions of our State, most of the first settlers were from
Pennsylvania, and states further south... The early immigrants to Ohio from New England considered schools and
churches as among their first wants... those from Pennsylvania considered them the last... while those from New
Jersey, and the few from Maryland, Virginia, the other Southern states, had their views of education fixed upon so
high a scale that nothing less than colleges, or seminaries of the highest class could claim much of their attention, or
seem to require any extraordinary efforts for their establishment.”
57

See Appendix B of the revised working paper version for the two IV enrollment equations.

58

On New York’s political fight over suffrage reform in the 1820s, see Chilton Williamson, American Suffrage, pp.

195-207.
59

Engerman and Sokoloff 2005, pp. 908-909.

60

Margo, Race and Schooling in the South 1990.

61

The spending results for 1902 and 1982 are from Sylla, Legler, and Wallis, ICPSR file 6304, 1995. In 1902, the

share of education spending done at the local district level had an interstate correlation of + 0.25 with an educational
support ratio defined as (public expenditures per child in the 5-19 age range) / (state income per person 15-64).

