                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SMALL FAMILY, SMART FAMILY? FAMILY SIZE AND THE IQ SCORES OF
                             YOUNG MEN

                                          Sandra E. Black
                                          Paul J. Devereux
                                          Kjell G. Salvanes

                                        Working Paper 13336
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13336


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




Black and Devereux gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation
and the California Center for Population Research. Salvanes thanks the Research Council of Norway
for financial support. We would like to thank Josh Angrist and seminar participants at UCD Geary
Institute, Pompeu Fabra, CEMFI Madrid, the Society of Labor Economists, and the CEPR conference
on The Formation and Use of Human Capital and Knowledge in Bergen, Norway for useful suggestions.
We are grateful to the Medical Birth Registry for Norway for providing the birth registry data. We
are also indebted to Stig Jakobsen who was instrumental in obtaining data access to the IQ data from
the Norwegian Armed Forces. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Small Family, Smart Family? Family Size and the IQ Scores of Young Men
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 13336
August 2007
JEL No. J01,J13,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

How do families influence the ability of children? Cognitive skills have been shown to be a strong
predictor of educational attainment and future labor market success; as a result, understanding the
determinants of cognitive skills can lead to a better understanding of children's long run outcomes.
This paper uses a large dataset on the male population of Norway and focuses on one family characteristic:
the effect of family size on IQ. Because of the endogeneity of family size, we instrument for family
size using twin births and sex composition. IV estimates using sex composition as an instrument show
no negative effect of family size; however, IV estimates using twins imply that family size has a negative
effect on IQ. Our results suggest that effect of family size depends on the type of family size intervention.
We conclude that there are no important negative effects of expected increases in family size on IQ
but that unexpected shocks to family size resulting from twin births have negative effects on the IQ
of existing children.

Sandra E. Black                                       Kjell G. Salvanes
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall                                      Norwegian School of Economics & Business
UCLA                                                  Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen, NORWAY
Los Angeles, CA 90095                                 IZA and CEP
IZA, NHH, and NBER                                    kjell.salvanes@nhh.no
sblack@econ.ucla.edu

Paul J. Devereux
School of Economics
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4
Ireland
IZA and CEPR
devereux@ucd.ie
          Cognitive skills have been shown to be a strong predictor of educational attainment and

future labor market success; as a result, understanding the determinants of cognitive skills can

lead to a better understanding of children’s long run outcomes. But how do families influence the

cognitive ability of their children? Researchers across a variety of fields have attempted to

understand the determinants of IQ as a measure of cognitive ability with only limited success. In

this paper, we focus on the role of one family characteristic: the effect of family size on IQ test

scores.

          Family size has long been of interest to researchers, particularly because of the strong

empirical regularity that children from larger families tend to have poorer outcomes. There is an

extensive theoretical literature on the tradeoff between child quantity and quality within a family

that dates back to Becker (1960) and Becker and Lewis (1973). The theory is often cited and is

used as the basis for many macro growth models (see Becker and Barro (1988) and Doepke

(2003)). A key element of the quantity-quality model is an interaction between quantity and

quality in the budget constraint that leads to rising marginal costs of quality with respect to

family size; this generates a tradeoff between quality and quantity.1 But is this tradeoff real? In

particular, is it true that having a larger family has a causal effect on the “quality” (in our case

IQ) of the children? Or is it the case that families who choose to have more children are

(inherently) different, and the children would have lower IQs regardless of family size?

          This paper uses a dataset on the male population of Norway to examine the effect of

family size on children’s IQ, an outcome not previously available in datasets of this size.

Importantly, we also address the issue of the endogeneity of family size. Until recent years, the

empirical literature on the effects of family size on child outcomes generally relied on OLS


1
 Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) explicitly derive the assumptions under which an exogenous increase in family size
should have a negative effect on child quality.


                                                                                                              2
estimation and found a negative relationship between family size and child “quality” (usually

education), even after controlling for socio-economic factors.2 However, few of these findings

can be interpreted as causal; family size is endogenously chosen by parents and hence may be

related to other, unobservable parental characteristics that affect child outcomes.3 Also, the

absence of information on birth order often means that birth order effects are confounded with

family size effects. We are unaware of any studies of IQ that have attempted to deal with both of

these issues.

           There is, however, a literature on the causal effects of family size on child educational

attainment, starting with Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980). Recent papers in this literature use

arguably exogenous variation in family size induced by the sex composition of children (parents

have a preference for variety and so are more likely to have an additional child if the first two are

the same sex) and/or the birth of twins (resulting in a family size increase of two when one was

expected) and have generated very little evidence for any quantity-quality tradeoff (Conley and

Glauber 2006; Caceres-Delpiano 2006; Angrist et al. 2006). In recent work (Black, Devereux and

Salvanes 2005), we use Norwegian data on cohorts born between 1912 and 1975 and variation in

family size induced by the birth of twins to examine the effects of family size on education and

earnings. We find little evidence for any family size effect either in the OLS or IV estimates. In

this paper, we can study a more recent set of cohorts -- all individuals in our sample were born

between 1967 and 1987 -- and are able to introduce previously unavailable information on IQ and

birth endowments including birth weight.

           Given the two types of interventions the instruments represent—one (sex composition) is

a planned increase in family size based on parental preferences for variety in the sex composition

2
    See Blake (1989) and the numerous studies cited therein.




                                                                                                       3
of their children and the other (twin births) is an unplanned shock to family size resulting in two

generally lower-birth weight children with zero spacing--it is somewhat surprising that

researchers so far have found similar effects of family size on child outcomes using the twins and

sex composition instruments (for example, Angrist et al. 2006). In contrast, our estimates differ

depending on estimation method. OLS estimates using a rich set of controls suggest that there is

no strong relationship between family size and IQ. Likewise, IV estimates using sex composition

as an instrument show no negative effect of family size. However, our IV estimates using twins

imply that family size has a negative effect on IQ; unexpected shocks to family size resulting

from twin births have negative effects on the IQ of existing children.

         The question then becomes why we observe a negative effect of increases in family size

generated by the birth of twins on IQ when we found little or no effect on education and earnings

in our earlier paper. When we examine this issue, we find that this difference is largely due to the

different cohorts studied; when education is studied on a more recent cohort, we find family size

effects similar to those of IQ.

         Unlike the papers discussed above, we also have information on birth weight for all

individuals in our sample. We use this information to address the recent critique of twin studies

by Rosenzweig and Zhang (2006), who suggest that much of this literature is biased away from

finding negative effects of larger families on child outcomes due to endowment-reinforcing

parental investments in children. Interestingly, we find that taking account of endowments

actually reduces the negative effects of family size that we find using our basic 2SLS

specification, a result that is consistent with compensating rather than reinforcing parental

investments.


3
 There is also a literature examining the effect of family size on parental outcomes. See, for example, Bronars and
Grogger (1994) and Angrist and Evans (1998).


                                                                                                                      4
         The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 describes the data we use and Section 3 discusses

our empirical strategy. Section 4 presents our results and Section 5 discusses the internal and

external validity of our estimates as well as potential mechanisms. Section 6 compares the

estimates with previous estimates from Norway and Section 7 concludes.



                                                      2. Data

         Our primary data source is the birth records for all Norwegians born in the period 1967 to

1998 obtained from the Medical Birth Registry of Norway. All births, including those born

outside of a hospital, are included as long as the gestation period was at least 16 weeks.4 The

birth records contain information on year and month of birth, birth weight, gestational length, age

of mother, and a range of variables describing infant health at birth. In these data, we are also

able to identify twin births. We can measure family size by counting the number of births to each

woman. Our sample is composed of families in which the first birth took place during or after

1967. Given that we observe year of birth, we are able to construct family size and indicators for

the birth order of each child directly from the births register.

         Using unique personal identifiers, we match these files to the Norwegian Registry Data, a

linked administrative dataset that covers the population of Norwegians aged 16-74 in the 1986-

2002 period and is a collection of different administrative registers such as the education register,

family register, and the tax and earnings register. These data are maintained by Statistics Norway

and provide information about educational attainment, labor market status, earnings, and a set of

demographic variables (age, gender) as well as information on families.5



4
  The data also include stillbirths, which constitute approximately 15 per 1000 births. We exclude these from the
sample.
5
  See Møen, Salvanes and Sørensen [2004] for a description of these data.


                                                                                                                    5
        The IQ data are taken from the Norwegian military records from 1984 to 2005. In

Norway, military service is compulsory for every able young man. Before entering the service,

their medical and psychological suitability is assessed; this occurs for the great majority between

their eighteenth and twentieth birthday. IQ at these ages is particularly interesting as it is about

the time of entry to the labor market or to higher education.

        The IQ measure is a composite score from three speeded IQ tests -- arithmetic, word

similarities, and figures (see Sundet et al. [2004, 2005] and Thrane [1977] for details). The

arithmetic test is quite similar to the arithmetic test in the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale

(WAIS) [Sundet et al. 2005; Cronbach 1964], the word test is similar to the vocabulary test in

WAIS, and the figures test is similar to the Raven Progressive Matrix test [Cronbach 1964]. The

composite IQ test score is an unweighted mean of the three subtests. The IQ score is reported in

stanine (Standard Nine) units, a method of standardizing raw scores into a nine point standard

scale with a normal distribution, a mean of 5, and a standard deviation of 2.6

        We have IQ scores on about 84% of the relevant population of men in Norway.7 One nice

feature of our data is that we can construct family size and both instrumental variables for all

persons, including those with missing IQ scores. To examine whether our missing data appears to

be systematically related to our variables of interest, we have regressed a dummy variable for

whether IQ is missing on family size using both OLS and 2SLS. Our finding is that individuals

from larger families are more likely to have missing scores (for example, first-borns from 2-child

families are 4% less likely to have missing scores than first-borns from 5-child families), but that


6
  The correlation between this IQ measure and the WAIS IQ has been found to be .73 (Sundet et al., 1988).
7
 Eide et al (2005) examine patterns of missing IQ data for the men in the 1967-1987 cohorts. Of those, 1.2 percent
died before 1 year and 0.9 percent died between 1 year of age and registering with the military at about age 18.
About 1 percent of the sample of eligible men had emigrated before age 18, and 1.4 percent of the men were
exempted because they were permanently disabled. An additional 6.2 percent are missing for a variety of reasons
including foreign citizenship and missing observations. There are also some missing IQ scores for individuals who
showed up to the military.


                                                                                                                     6
this relationship disappears when family size is instrumented with the twin or sex composition

instruments.8 Thus it is unlikely that missing IQ data is causing serious bias to our later estimates.

           We exclude families in which no child is born before 1987 as no data on military

outcomes of children is available for such families. We use twins to construct our instrumental

variables but, as is standard in the literature, we drop twins from our estimating samples. Table 1

presents summary statistics and Appendix Table 1 shows the distribution of family sizes in our

sample.



                                                3. Empirical Strategy

Twins as an Instrument for Family Size

           Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) first discuss the idea of using twin births as unplanned

and therefore exogenous variation in family size. In their model, parents have an optimal number

of children N*. The birth of twins can vary the actual N from the desired N* and it is this

arguably exogenous variation that is used to estimate the effects of family size on child outcomes.

Our general estimation strategy is as follows:

                     IQ = β 0 + β 1 FAMSIZE + Xβ 2 + ε                                   (1)

                     FAMSIZE = α 0 + α 1TWIN + Xα 2 + υ                                  (2)

In this case, IQ is the IQ of the child and FAMSIZE is the total number of children in the family.

Equation (2) represents the first stage of the two stage least squares estimation, where equation

(1) is the second stage. The controls in X include indicator variables for cohort, age at test, age

of mother at birth, age of mother at first birth, years of education of mother, years of education of




8
    The 2SLS estimates are all small and statistically insignificant and vary in sign.


                                                                                                      7
father, and log birth weight of the child. We also include controls for the IQ of the father for

cases for which this is available.9

         The TWIN indicator is equal to 1 if the nth birth is a multiple birth, and equal to 0 if the nth

birth is a singleton. We restrict the sample to families with at least n births and study the

outcomes of children born before the nth birth. In practice, we estimate the specification for

values of n between 2 and 4. By restricting the sample to families with at least n births, we make

sure that, on average, preferences over family size are the same in the families with twins at the

nth birth and those with singleton births. Also, by restricting the sample to children born before

birth n, we avoid selection problems that arise because families who choose to have another child

after a twin birth may differ from families who choose to have another child after a singleton

birth.

         Our methodology avoids two possible pitfalls that can arise when twins are used as

instruments. First, by focusing on whether a twin birth occurs for the nth birth, we avoid the

problem that families that have more births are more likely to have at least one twin birth.

Second, by only using children born before a possible twin birth, we are able to avoid the

problem that a twin birth both increases family size and shifts downwards the birth order of

children born after the twins. For example, if a twin birth occurs at the second birth, the next

child born is now the fourth born-child rather than the third. Thus, any estimates using children

born subsequent to a twin birth will confound family size effects with birth order effects.



Sex Composition as an Instrument for Family Size



9
  We do this by setting father’s IQ to zero for cases in which it is missing and then interacting father’s IQ with a
dummy variable which is one if we have information on father’s IQ and zero otherwise. Both these variables are then
included in the regression. Father’s IQ is typically unavailable for men whose father was born before 1950.


                                                                                                                  8
       It has been well documented that parents have preferences for variety and so are more

likely to have a child at parity n if the previous n-1 children are all of the same sex (Angrist and

Evans, 1998). As a result, if the sex composition is random, families that randomly had two

same-sex children are more likely to have a third, all other things equal, making sex composition

a potential instrument. We utilize this instrument for n=3 and n=4, and restrict the sample to

families with at least n-1 children.

Sample of families with at least 2 children (n=3)

       When n=3, we are studying families with at least two children and the instrument is

whether or not the first two children are the same sex. Given that we only have IQ data on boys,

the relevant possibilities for the first two children are BB, BG, and GB, where G is for girl and B

is for boy. (Note that we are looking at the outcomes of the first and second children; if the first

two children are GG, we will not have IQ information on any of the existing children.). One

obvious comparison is to compare the IQ of the first born children in a sample composed of BB

and BG families – here the instrument can be interpreted simply as whether the second child is a

boy. A second comparison is to compare the IQ of second born children in a sample composed of

BB and GB families – here the instrument can be interpreted as whether the first child is a boy.

       We improve the precision of our estimates by using both comparisons in estimation. To

do this, we estimate the following equation using the first two children:

        FAMSIZE = α 0 + α 1 ALLBOYS + α 2 2nd + Xα 3 + υ              (3)

Here ALLBOYS is an indicator for the first two children being the same-sex, and 2nd is an

indicator for whether the child is the 2nd born. The controls included in X are the same ones

included when the twins instruments are used.




                                                                                                       9
         It is important to note that this approach is invalid if there are preferences for boys or girls

in addition to preferences for variety, as then the probability of a second child (and hence

selection into the at least 2 children sample) will depend on the sex of the first child. The

evidence suggests no such sex preferences in Norway. 10

Sample of families with at least 3 children (n=4)

         In the case of families with at least three children, our instrument equals one if all of the

first three children were boys. We compare the boys in these families to the boys in families

where the first two births were either both boys or both girls. In this situation, parents who have

a preference for variety either got variety in the third birth (having same sex births prior), at

which point they stopped having children, or had another child of the same sex, thereby

increasing the probability that they would have another child in order to achieve diversity.

         Thus, the only relevant sequences are BBB, BBG, and GGB; no other comparisons are

useful because sequences starting with BG or GB are not comparable to those starting with GG or

BB. This is because the probability of having a third child differs systematically depending on

whether or not the first two children are the same sex (as is exploited in the n=3 analysis).

         Analogous to the n=3 case, a simple approach is to compare the outcomes of the first two

children in BBB families to those in BBG families. Also, given there are no preferences for boys

(or girls), an additional comparison is between the outcomes of third-born children in BBB and

GGB families. In practice we implement both using families with at least 3 children whose first

two children are the same-sex. The following regression is estimated for the first three children:

         FAMSIZE = α 0 + α 1 ALLBOYS + α 2 2nd + α 3 3rd + Xα 4 + υ                          (4)




10
   There is no statistically significant relationship between the probability of having a second child and the sex of the
first born child despite the enormous sample size of 481,731 families.


                                                                                                                      10
Here ALLBOYS is an indicator for the first three children being the same-sex, 2nd is an

indicator for whether the child is the 2nd born, and 3rd is an indicator for whether the child is

third born.



                                        4. Family Size Results for IQ

        In Table 2, we show the mean IQ and the distribution of IQ scores by family size. There

are two clear patterns. First, only children have lower scores than the average child in 2 child

families. Second, from family sizes of 2 to 5, we see a monotonic relationship that greater family

size accompanies lower average scores.

        The unconditional relationship between family size and IQ is only suggestive; for

example, it could simply represent cohort effects or birth order effects.11 To better understand the

relationship, we run regressions by birth order and regress IQ of children on family size

dummies, presenting estimates from regressions both with and without additional controls to test

sensitivity. As described in Section 3, these controls include indicator variables for cohort, age at

test, age of mother at birth, age of mother at first birth, years of education of mother, years of

education of father, father’s IQ, and log birth weight of the child.

        The results are presented in Table 3. The omitted category in each case is Family with 5

or more children. The estimates suggest that the highest achieving children come from 2 and 3

child families, with lower achievement for only children and children from families with four or

more.

        However, the results are not robust to introducing additional control variables. With the

control variables, almost nothing is statistically significant and the estimates are much smaller


11
 Birth order is highly correlated with family size and has been shown to be strongly related to child outcomes in
Norway (Black, Devereux, Salvanes 2005, 2007b; Bjerkedal et al. 2007).


                                                                                                                    11
than before. There still appears to be a penalty to being an only child, but there is little indication

that family size matters otherwise. The fact that adding family background variables and log(birth

weight) as controls largely eliminates the family size effect suggests that the family size results

may be driven by unobserved family background characteristics; if unobserved factors impacting

IQ have similar correlations with family size as the observed factors, the true causal effect of

family size is not very negative.

       The IV estimates below take a more direct approach to the issue of causality.



Results Using Twins as an Instrument for Family Size

       The 2SLS estimates are presented in Table 4. We also include, for comparison, two sets

of OLS coefficients estimated on exactly the same samples as the 2SLS estimates; the first set

includes controls only for birth order, the second set includes all control variables. As was the

case in Table 3, the OLS estimates without controls suggest negative effects of increased family

size, but those with controls never provide any evidence for negative family size effects. Instead

they provide very precisely estimated family size coefficients that are very close to zero.

       The first stage coefficients using the twin instruments are very strong and suggest that a

twin birth increases completed family size by about 0.7 to 0.9. These first stage effects are a little

larger than we found in our 2005 paper, presumably because family sizes are smaller for these

more recent cohorts.12 As expected, twins at higher parity have a larger effect on family size,

presumably because they are more likely to push families above N* (the optimal number of

children). The t statistics from the first stage are typically around 40, indicating that there are no

concerns about weak instruments in this application.




                                                                                                      12
         The 2SLS estimate of the effect on the first child of changes in family size induced by the

second birth being a twin birth is -0.15 (0.05). This implies an adverse effect of increased family

size on IQ – each additional child reduces IQ of the first child by about 15% of a stanine or 8% of

a standard deviation. The equivalent estimate for families that have at least 3 births is -0.17

(0.05), and for families that have at least 4 births it is -0.12 (0.08). Taken together, these three

estimates are all more negative than the OLS estimates (the first two are statistically different

from OLS) and suggest fairly sizeable negative effects of family size on IQ of about 15 percent of

a stanine for each additional child (this is about 1.2 IQ points on a standard IQ scale). This

translates into approximately a 1% difference in annual earnings as an adult.13 Unexpected

random shocks to family size, induced by the birth of twins, lead to poorer IQ outcomes for

existing children.



Results Using Same-Sex as an Instrument for Family Size

         For the case where the instrument is an indicator of whether the first two children are the

same sex, the first stage estimate on ALLBOYS , also reported in Table 4, is 0.081 with a

standard error of 0.003. Similarly, Angrist et al. (2006) find a coefficient of .073 (.010) using

Israeli data and Conley and Glauber (2006) find that having two same-sex children increases the

probability of having a third child by about .07 in the U.S.

         For the case where the instrument is whether the first three children are the same sex, the

first stage estimate on ALLBOYS is 0.070 with a standard error of 0.005. While not directly


12
   The first stage coefficients are much bigger than those of Angrist et al. (2006) using Israeli data. For twins at
second birth, they found a first stage coefficient of only 0.44. This presumably reflects the much larger proportion of
large families in the Israeli data.
13
   We arrive at this number by regressing log earnings in 2002 on IQ scores for individuals aged at least 30 in 2002.
For both cross-sectional and family fixed effects specifications we obtain precisely estimated coefficients on IQ of
about .06, suggesting an extra stanine in IQ (about half a standard deviation) leads to about 6% higher earnings.


                                                                                                                    13
comparable, this is smaller than the Angrist et al. (2006) finding of .120 (.015) using the sample

of families with 3 or more children in Israeli data.

       In sharp contrast to the estimates using twins as an instrument for family size, the 2SLS

estimates using the sex composition as instruments are both positive. For the sample of families

with 2 or more births the estimate is .07 (.07), and for the sample of families with 3 or more

births the estimate is .08 (.17). While these family size coefficients are not very precisely

estimated, the first one does rule out large negative effects of family size on IQ and is statistically

significantly different from the family size estimates using twins. The contrast with the twins

estimates may result from the fact that, in this case, induced increases in family size are expected

and result in normally spaced singletons.



                      5. Internal and External Validity of the Instruments

Internal Validity of Instruments

Randomness

       In order for our IV estimates to be consistent, it must be that the instrument is

uncorrelated with the error term in equation (1). One concern is that the occurrence of a twin

birth may not be random and may be related to unobservable family background characteristics.

By definition, this is untestable, but we do examine whether the probability of twins is related to

observed characteristics such as mother's and father's education and father’s IQ. To do so, we

estimate three linear probability models of the probability of a twin birth at the Nth birth (for

N=2, 3, and 4), conditional on having at least N births, using the full set of control variables.

Over these three regressions, of the nine coefficients on mother’s education, father’s education,




                                                                                                    14
and father’s IQ, none is statistically significant.14 Given the enormous sample sizes, these results

strongly suggest that twinning probabilities are not related to parental characteristics.

        A concern might be that, in recent years, fertility treatments have led to an increase in the

incidence of multiple births, and these multiple births could then be related to characteristics of

the parents. However, this phenomenon did not take off in Norway until the late 1980s so, as can

be seen in Figure 1, the probability of a multiple birth is fairly constant over time for the cohorts

we are studying (persons born 1967 – 1987).

        We use a similar approach to examine the randomness of the sex composition

instruments. Once again, we find no statistically significant relationship between any of the

family background characteristics and the instrument for either the sample of families with at

least 2 children, or the sample of families with at least three children where the first two children

are the same-sex.

        In addition to examining the relationship between the instrument and the observable

characteristics of the family, there are other tests we can conduct. For example, if the birth of

twins is truly random, whether the second birth is a twin birth should have no impact on

outcomes of the first child that occur before the second birth occurs. We do not have information

on early childhood outcomes but we do know birth weight, so we use 2SLS to estimate the

“effect” of family size on the log birth weight of existing children, using the full set of control

variables used in the later regressions (obviously birth weight is excluded). If the instrument is

random, we should see no effect of family size on the birth weight of existing children. For the

twins instruments, we get an effect of family size on the birth weight of existing children of 0.013

(0.005) for twins at second birth, 0.007 (0.005) for twins at 3rd birth, and -0.008 (0.008) for twins


14
  Twin probabilities increase with parity and maternal age at birth (Jacobsen, Pearce, and Rosenbloom, 1999;
Bronars and Grogger, 1994) but this is not a problem as we condition on these variables in the 2SLS estimation.


                                                                                                                  15
at fourth birth. Only the first coefficient is statistically significant and it is not very large (a

multiple second birth is associated with the first child being about 1% heavier at birth). This

probably reflects the fact that larger, healthier women are more likely to have successful twin

births and suggests that, in the absence of a control for birth weight, we would have obtained a

family size effect on IQ that was biased towards zero. A value added of our study is that we are

able to control for birth weight in the analysis to deal with this possibility.

        When we study the effect of the second child being a boy on the log birth weight of the

first child, we get an estimate of 0.002 (0.009); the equivalent estimate for the second of our sex

composition instruments is 0.036 (0.021). Neither of these is statistically significant. The overall

conclusion from this exercise with birth weight is that, with the exception of second-birth twins,

there is very little evidence that the instruments are not randomly assigned.



Other Threats to Internal Validity

        The large first stage coefficients for the twins instrument (.7 - .9) are reassuring, as they

imply that this can be thought of as an experiment with almost perfect compliance -- the birth of

twins leads to family size increasing by one in almost all cases. This is important, as the major

possible biases using twins are that we may be capturing the effects of having closely-spaced

children, or of having low birth weight children, rather than the effects of having more children.

Given that twin births add extra children for almost all families, these possibilities are best seen

as threats to the external validity of the twins approach rather than as sources of bias. Later in this

section, we consider the external validity issues in more depth.

        Because the first stage coefficients are much lower for the sex composition instruments,

the possibility of bias due to direct effects of sex composition on child IQ is greater. Rosenzweig




                                                                                                        16
and Wolpin (2000) conjecture that there may be beneficial effects of having a sibling of the same

sex and this would tend to bias away from finding family size effects using the instrument. The

literature is mixed on whether sex composition has direct effects on child outcomes (Dahl and

Moretti, 2004, Butcher and Case, 1994; Conley, 2000; Deschenes, 2002 all find some evidence of

sex-composition effects. Kaestner (1997) and Hauser and Kuo (1998) find no evidence of such

effects).15 In our data, we find no evidence for sex composition effects on IQ when we study

situations in which the sex composition has no correlation with family size (for example whether

the 3rd child is a boy in families in which the first child is a boy and the second is a girl).



External Validity

           While it may be reasonable to view both type of instruments as being valid, they

constitute very different types of interventions to increase family size. Angrist et al. (2006)

discuss the many differences between the twins and sex composition instruments, in particular

focusing on how the two instruments affect different parts of the family size distribution and how

the ethnic composition of individuals whose fertility responds to the twins instrument differs

from that of individuals who respond to the same-sex instrument. In our case these are not issues,

as there is no significant ethnic variation in our sample, and the two instruments affect the family

size distribution in similar ways. Therefore, we concentrate on three different aspects of the twins

instrument that do differ from the same-sex one – in the case of twins, the additional family

member is smaller (the difference in birth weight between twins and singletons averages about

1000 grams), there is no space between the births, and the average age of existing children at

arrival of the marginal child is younger with twin births.




15
     However, the Butcher and Case study found no evidence that sex composition impacted the outcomes of boys.

                                                                                                                 17
Lower Birth Weight of Twins

         Recent twins studies (including this one) have estimated the effect of an extra birth at

parity N (due to the birth of twins) on the outcomes of children at parities 1 to N-1, for all women

who have at least N births. Rosenzweig and Zhang (2006, henceforth RZ) criticize this approach

by arguing that the endowments of twins are lower than those of singletons, and parents may

allocate resources differentially across their children on the basis of their endowments. Thus, the

effect of adding two twins (with lower birth weights on average) to a family may differ from the

effect of adding two singletons. 16

         As suggested by RZ, we have tried adding controls for the birth weight of the potential

twin birth (using the actual birth weight of a singleton, and the mean birth weight of twins).

Interestingly, adding the birth weight controls causes the negative reduced form effect of twin at

second birth on first child IQ to disappear. This is counter to what RZ predict if there were

reinforcing investments by parents. According to RZ, parents with low birth weight twins are

more likely to invest in the heavier first born child, thereby offsetting the negative effect of

increased family size on first children. Thus, once we control for birth weight, RZ would predict

that the negative effect of increased family size (through twin births) should increase in absolute

value. Our finding is instead consistent with compensatory investment behavior by parents.

         The RZ approach can be thought of as an attempt to create a new experiment in which

twins and singletons have the same average birth weight. Unfortunately, in the real world no such

experiment is available and their method of conditioning on birth weight may invalidate the



16
  RZ argue that parental investment is likely to reinforce endowment differences and thus bias the literature away
from finding negative effects of larger families. In addition, they provide some evidence of reinforcing parental
investments using twins data from China. Datar et al. [2005] find evidence that is generally suggestive of reinforcing
parental investments among singletons using U.S. data. However, much of the available evidence for developed
countries suggests compensatory investment behavior (Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman 1989; Ashenfelter and Rouse,
1998; Ermish and Francesconi, 2000).


                                                                                                                   18
exogeneity of twin births. While twinning may be a random event that is orthogonal to family

characteristics, birth weight is not. Therefore, conditioning on birth weight creates a correlation

between having twins and unobserved family characteristics. For example, families that have

twins may be very similar to families that have singletons, but a family that has a 2000 gram

singleton is likely to be different in some ways than a family that has two 2000 gram twins (for

example, the mother may be more likely to have smoked during pregnancy.) Thus, it can be seen

as an attempt to increase external validity that comes at the cost of reduced internal validity i.e.

potential bias. 17 Thus, while our finding here is suggestive that family size increases through

twinning have particularly negative effects on existing children because of compensatory

behavior by parents favoring twins, it cannot be conclusive.



Birth Spacing

         In the case in which we use twins at second birth to study the outcomes of the first child,

it may be that the first child is worse off if the second birth is a twin birth because he gets less

attention if his siblings are more closely spaced. To examine this, we have looked at non-twin

families and estimate the effect of the spacing between later children on earlier children’s

outcomes. In particular, to simulate the timing of twins, we create a variable for whether the gap

between the later children is less than or equal to one year. Also included are the standard set of

control variables augmented by a control for family size and a quadratic function of the time gap

between children born before the two children whose spacing is being investigated. It is



17
  Recent papers have found that the impacts of birth weight on adult outcomes are generally similar in magnitude in
the cross-section to when twin or sibling differences are used in estimation [Black et al. 2007, Oreopoulos et al.
2006]. To the extent that twin and sibling differences difference out confounding effects of other factors, this is
consistent with the notion that birth weight is not highly correlated with these unobserved factors and hence the bias
from the RZ approach may not be large.


                                                                                                                   19
important to note that spacing is not exogenous, so these results should be interpreted with

caution.

         The estimates are reported in Appendix Table 3. The reported coefficients are those

relating to the distance in years between the two children immediately after the children listed in

Column 1. For example, in the first box, the coefficient of -.26 suggests that the first child’s IQ is

lower by .26 (about ¼ of a stanine) if the gap between the second and third child is less than or

equal to one year (in families with at least 3 children).

         We find that earlier children have lower IQs when later children are more closely spaced

together -- children do better if the two children immediately after them are spaced further apart.

If this result can be extrapolated to the case of twins, in which the space is zero, it implies that the

effect of a subsequent case of twins is more adverse than the effects of having two subsequent

singletons.18 The reduced form effect of twins on IQ of earlier born children in Table 4 is about -

.1 for both twins at second and at third birth. The analogous magnitudes in Appendix Table 3 are

about -.2, suggesting that the 2SLS estimates using twins could easily arise due to spacing effects

and may not be generalizable to a situation in which one adds two singletons who are spaced

apart.



Age of Existing Children at Arrival of Marginal Birth

         A closely related issue is that, in the sample of families with 2 or more children, generally

first-borns are older when a singleton 3rd child is born (7.9 years old on average) than when the

3rd-born child is part of a twin second birth (4.4 years old on average). It is plausible that

increased family size has a more negative impact if it occurs earlier in the child’s life and this


18
  One caveat here is that, unlike with twins, the spacing of singletons can be chosen by parents and families that
closely space births are different in terms of observables than families that space out births.


                                                                                                                     20
could cause the twins 2SLS estimates to be more negative than OLS or the sex composition 2SLS

estimates. There is some evidence that this factor can account for differences in the impacts of the

family size interventions. When one uses the twin at second birth instrument using two different

samples (1) where the first child is aged at least 4 when the potential twin birth occurs and (2)

when the first child is aged less than 4 when the potential twin birth occurs, the 2SLS coefficients

on family size are .02 (.07) and -.26 (.07) respectively. This is consistent with the idea that the

exact timing of the addition of a marginal child may influence the effect on existing children and

suggests that some of the differences between the twin and sex composition estimates could be

because the extra child arrives "earlier" with twins.19



Mechanisms through Which Family Size Increases Affect Children

         Our results point to an effect of family size that depends on exactly how family size is

increased, with evidence of negative effects only from unexpected increases due to twin births.

There are many possible reasons why expected increases in family size may not have deleterious

consequences on the IQs of existing children. Younger siblings may actually play a beneficial

role for children. For example, Zajonc (1976) suggests that older children develop intellectually

through having younger children to teach. Also, parents may respond to the expense of an extra

child by reducing expenditures on items that are not beneficial to child development such as

alcohol or nights out. Additionally, Rosenzweig and Zhang (2006) suggest that there may be an

increase in the quantity of household public goods such as internet connectivity when family size

increases.



19
  It seems likely that IQ scores are also impacted by investments after the first few years of life as it has been clearly
demonstrated that scores on the AFQT test in the U.S. depend to a large extent on years of schooling of the test-taker
(for example, by Neal and Johnson, 1996).


                                                                                                                       21
         While we cannot test these hypotheses, there are two additional possibilities that we can

shed some light on using our data. First, families with more children may be less likely to suffer

from marital breakdown. We have examined this by estimating the effect of family size on the

probability that both parents are living together 20 years after the first child is born (69% are).

The only statistically significant IV estimate is -.032 (.011) using twins at 3rd birth.20 This

provides some evidence that twins may destabilize families and another reason for the large

negative effects of twins on child IQ.

         Finally, mothers may be more likely to leave the labor market and stay home when family

sizes are larger and this may be beneficial to the children. Consistent with earlier empirical work

for the U.S. (Angrist and Evans, 1998), we find negative effects of family size on labor supply of

mothers using all methodologies. When we study the effect of family size on the probability the

mother works full time 15 years after the first birth, the twin at second birth estimate is -.044

(.012) and the sex composition estimate is -.103 (.025). Interestingly, as with Angrist and Evans,

the twins estimate is smaller than the analogous sex composition one. To the extent that children

benefit intellectually from having their mother at home, this suggests another reason why

increases in family size due to twinning may have more negative effects than those due to sex

composition.21



              6. Comparison to Previous Norwegian Estimates of Family Size Effects

         Our estimates using the same-sex instrument are quite consistent with those we found

when we looked at education as an outcome in our 2005 paper. However, the estimates using the


20
   Estimates for twins at 2nd birth and at 4th birth are both also negative but statistically insignificant. Caceres-
Delpiano (2006) similarly finds evidence that twins destabilize marriage using U.S. Census data.
21
   Parents may also be more likely to increase their incomes as a result of having more children. We have found no
evidence for this using either instrument when studying earnings of fathers 15 years after the birth of the first child.


                                                                                                                       22
twin instruments are quite different from the tiny statistically insignificant family size effects we

found for education using the twins instrument in that paper. The difference was quite perplexing,

as we would expect an effect on IQ to lead to differences in education and earnings. However,

upon further investigation, the differences appear largely due to our use of different cohorts in the

two papers. When we do the education analysis on a sample as close as possible to our current

sample (individuals aged at least 21 in 2002) and use twin instruments, we find sizeable negative

IV effects of family size on the probability of high school graduation (see Appendix Table 2).

         This discovery led us to consider differences in the effect of family size on IQ over time.

In order to increase the number of cohorts in our IQ analysis, we can no longer use the birth

records, as that starts in 1967. In our 2005 study, we did not have access to the birth records and

so calculated family size primarily by counting individuals aged 16+ who are present in the

population register in 2002. We also obtained information on twin births from the population

registry. We now use this methodology to study the effect of family size on IQ for the 1950 to

1984 cohorts.22 Because the birth records include only Norwegian-borns, we exclude individuals

not born in Norway from this sample to be consistent..23

         Using this longer time series data, we have constructed a 9-year moving average (by year

of the potential twin birth) of the reduced form effect of twins at third birth on the IQ scores of 1st

and 2nd born children.24 As can be seen in Figure 2, the effect of 3rd-birth twins changed around

1970 from being approximately zero and became quite negative during the 1970s. Clearly, there

has been a true change in the effect of twinning as we move from older to more recent cohorts.



22
   The twin indicators are unavailable in the population register for all cohorts born after 1984. Given that IQ data are
generally available for cohorts starting with those born in 1950, we restrict our data to the 1950-1984 cohorts.
23
   We have found our estimates using this methodology are similar but less precisely estimated than those using the
information from the birth records. The decline in precision presumably arises because of the greater accuracy of the
birth records methodology.
24
   We chose twins at 3rd birth because it gives the largest family size effect in Table 4.


                                                                                                                      23
We are not sure why this change occurred. One possibility is that falling twin mortality rates over

this period may have meant that surviving twin pairs are weaker and hence have a more adverse

effect on existing children. However, this does not seem to be an issue as, for the multiple births

in our sample, birth weights generally increased during the decade of the 1970s. The differences

between cohorts may also relate to the very different environment concerning contraception and

childcare for later cohorts relative to earlier ones. Another plausible explanation is that increasing

labor force participation by mothers over this period has increased the cost of unexpected

multiple births, and leads to adverse child outcomes. Finally, given our finding that twin births

destabilize parental relationships, the increased incidence of family breakdown over time may

have led to a greater negative impact of twin births on child outcomes.



                                           7. Conclusions

       Understanding the determinants of a child’s cognitive ability is the first step to

understanding their longer run outcomes. In this paper, we examine the role of family size on an

individual’s IQ, attempting to isolate the causal relationship between the two. Our results point

to an impact of family size that depends on exactly how family size is increased. OLS estimates

with controls for family background suggest that there is no strong relationship between family

size and IQ. Likewise, IV estimates using the same-sex instrument also suggest no negative effect

of larger families on IQ. In contrast, our IV estimates using the birth of twins as exogenous

variation in family size imply that family size has a negative effect on IQ. However, our

investigation of the effects of the zero spacing of twins and their low birth weights suggests that

these estimates should not be generalized to other types of variation in family size. Therefore, our




                                                                                                    24
conclusion is that there are likely no important negative effect on IQ of expected increases in

family size that come through normally spaced singleton births.

       An intriguing result is that existing children suffer intellectually as a result of the birth of

twins and that this effect is only present in recent cohorts. This may reflect that fact that

unexpected shocks to family size are becoming increasingly costly as the attachment of both

parents to the labor force increases. More research will be needed to examine whether this result

generalizes to other countries and to children born after our sample period.




                                                                                                     25
References

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Cecilia Rouse, “Income, Schooling and Ability: Evidence from a New
      Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1998, 253-284.

Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans, “Children and Their Parents’ Labor Supply: Evidence
       from Exogenous Variation in Family Size.” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3,
       June, 1998, 450-477.

Angrist, Joshua D., Victor Lavy, and Analia Schlosser, “Multiple Experiments for the Causal
       Link between the Quantity and Quality of Children”, MIT Working Paper06-26. 2006.

Becker, Gary S., “An Economic Analysis of Fertility” In Becker, ed., Demographic and
       Economic Change in Developed Countries. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press
       1960.

Becker, Gary S. and Robert J. Barro. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, v103, n1, pp 1-25, 1988.

Becker, Gary S. and H. Gregg Lewis “On the Interaction Between the Quantity and Quality of
       Children” Journal of Political Economy, 1973, Vol. 81, No. 2, S279-S288.

Behrman, Jere, Robert Pollak, and Paul Taubman, “Family Resources, Family Size, and Access
      to Financing for College Education,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 1989, 398-419.

Bjerkedal, Tor, Petter Kristensen, Geir A. Skjeret, and John I. Brevik, “Intelligence test scores
       and birth order among young Norwegian men (conscripts) analyzed within and between
       families”, Intelligence (2007).

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005), “The More the Merrier? The
       Effects of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, CXX, 669-700.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2007a), “From the Cradle to the
       Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, February.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2007b), “Older and Wiser? Birth
       Order and IQ of Young Men” , NBER Working Paper #13237, July.

Blake, Judith, Family Size and Achievement, 1989, University of California Press, Berkeley and
       Los Angeles.

Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger, “The Economic Consequences of Unwed Motherhood:
       Using Twin Births as a Natural Experiment.” American Economic Review, Vol 84, No. 5.
       December, 1994. 1141-1156.



                                                                                                26
Butcher, Kristin F., and Anne Case (1994), "The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on Women's
      Education and Earnings", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CIX, Issue 3, 531-563.

Cáceres-Delpiano, Julio (2006), “The Impacts of Family Size on Investment in Child Quality”
       Journal of Human Resources, 41(4).

Conley, Dalton, and Rebecca Glauber (2006) “Parental Educational Investment and Children’s
      Academic Risk: Estimates of the Impact of Sibship Size and Birth Order from Exogenous
      Variation in Fertility.” Journal of Human Resources, 41(4).

Conley, Dalton, "Sibling Sex Composition: Effects on Educational Attainment" (2000), Social
      Science Research, Vol. 29, 441-457.

Cronbach, Lee J., Essentials of Psychological Testing, 2nd Edition, (London, UK: Harper and
      Row, 1964).

Dahl, Gordon and Enrico Moretti, “The Demand for Sons: Evidence from Divorce, Fertility, and
       Shotgun Marriage.” Working paper, 2004.

Datar, Ashlesha, M. Rebecca Kilburn, and David S. Loughran, “Health Endowments and Parental
       Investments in Infancy and Early Childhood,” RAND Labor and Population Working
       Paper No. WR-367, 2005.

Deschenes, Olivier, "Estimating the Effects of Family Background on the Return to Schooling"
      (March 1, 2002). Department of Economics, UCSB. Departmental Working Papers. Paper
      10-02.

Doepke, Matthias, “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to Growth.” Working
      Paper, UCLA, 2003.

Eide, Martha G., Nina Øyen, Rolv Skjærven, Stein Tore Nilsen, Tor Bjerkedal and Grethe S.
       Tell, “Size at Birth and Gestational Age as Predictors of Adult Height and Weight,”
       Epidemiology, XVI (2005), 175-181.

Ermish, John and Marco Francesconi. “Educational Choice, Families, and Young People’s
      Earnings,” Journal of Human Resources, 35(1), 2000: 146-176.

Hauser, Robert M., and Hsiang-Hui Daphne Kuo (1998), "Does the Gender Composition of
       Sibships affect Women's Educational Attainment?", Journal of Human Resources, Vol.
       33, No. 3, 644-657.

Jacobsen, Joyce P., James Wishart Pearce III, and Joshua L. Rosenbloom, “The Effects of
       Childbearing on Married Women’s Labor Supply and Earnings: Using Twin Births as a
       Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources, Summer 1999.




                                                                                              27
Kaestner, Robert “Are Brothers really Better? Sibling Sex Composition and Educational
       Achievement Revisited” The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 32, No. 2. (Spring,
       1997), pp. 250-284.

Møen, Jarle, Kjell G. Salvanes and Erik Ø. Sørensen, “Documentation of the Linked Empoyer-
      Employee Data Base at the Norwegian School of Economics,” Mimeo, The Norwegian
      School of Economics and Business Administration, 2004.

Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
       Differences." Journal of Political Economy 104, no. 5 (1996): 869-895.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie Roos, “Short, Medium, and Long
      Term Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings and Twins,”
      NBER Working Paper No 11998, January 2006.

Rosenzweig Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, "Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility Model: The
      Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment”, Econometrica, Vol. 48, No. 1, 227-240 (Jan,
      1980).

Rosenzweig Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Natural “Natural Experiments” in Economics”,
      Journal of Economic Literature, December 2000.

Rosenzweig Mark R., and Junsen Zhang, “Do Population Control Policies Induce more Human
      Capital Investment? Twins, Birthweight, and China’s ‘One Child’ Policy” IZA Working
      Paper 2082. April 2006.

Sundet J.M., K. Tambs, P. Magnus and K. Berg, “On the question of secular trends in the
       heritability of IQ test scores: A study of Norwegian twins,” Intelligence 12 (1988), pp.
       47–59.

Sundet, Jon Martin, Dag G. Barlaug, and Tore M. Torjussen, "The End of the Flynn Effect? A
       Study of Secular Trends in Mean Intelligence Test Scores of Norwegian Conscripts
       During Half a Century", Intelligence , XXXII (2004), 349-362.

Sundet, Jon Martin, Kristian Tambs, Jennifer R. Harris, Per Magnus, and Tore M. Torjussen
       (2005), “Resolving the Genetic and Environmental Sources of the Correlation Between
       Height and Intelligence: A Study of Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs,” Twin
       Research and Human Genetics, VII (2005), 1-5.

Thrane, Vidkunn Coucheron, “Evneprøving av Utskrivingspliktige i Norge 1950-53,”
       Arbeidsrapport nr. 26, INAS 1977.

Zajonc R. B., “Family Configuration and Intelligence” Science, Vol. 192, 227-236, 1976.




                                                                                                  28
                                              Figure 1
                                 Fraction of Twin Births Out of All Births
0.018


0.016


0.014


0.012


 0.01


0.008


0.006


0.004


0.002


    0
   1967   1969   1971   1973   1975   1977   1979   1981   1983   1985   1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997




                                                                                                                   29
                                 Figure 2
The Reduced Form Effect of 3rd-Born Twin Births on IQ of First Two Children
                         9-Year Moving Average


   0.1


  0.05


    0
           56

                 58

                      60

                            62

                                  64

                                        66

                                              68

                                                    70

                                                         72

                                                               74

                                                                     76

                                                                           78

                                                                                  80
 -0.05


  -0.1


 -0.15


  -0.2


 -0.25


  -0.3

         The year on the x-axis refers to the year of the potential twin birth.




                                                                                       30
                                          Table 1
                                      Summary Statistics
     Variable                                                   Mean
                                                         (Standard Deviation)
     Age in 2002                                                  25
                                                                  (6)
     Education                                                   12.3
                                                                 (1.9)
     IQ (stanines)                                                5.2
                                                                 (1.8)
     Mother’s Education                                          11.3
                                                                 (2.5)
     Mother’s Age in 2002                                        50.5
                                                                 (6.2)
     Father’s Education                                          11.8
                                                                 (2.9)
     Father’s Age in 2002                                        53.6
                                                                 (6.7)

Sample Size: N=388,405 male singletons.
Education is calculated for a subsample of 282,855 men aged at least 21 in 2002.




                                                                                   31
                              Table 2
                         Family Size and IQ
Family      Average IQ   Mother’s Education   Father’s Education     N
Size
1              5.2             11.1                 11.4           28,083
              (1.8)            (2.5)                (2.8)
2              5.3             11.3                 11.8           170,628
              (1.8)            (2.5)                (2.8)
3              5.2             11.4                 11.9           132,929
              (1.8)            (2.5)                (2.9)
4              5.1             11.2                 11.7           41,805
              (1.8)            (2.6)                (2.9)
5              4.9             11.0                 11.5           10,214
              (1.8)            (2.5)                (3.0)
6 or more      4.9             10.6                 11.2            4,746
              (1.8)            (2.4)                (2.8)




                                                                            32
                                                  Table 3: Effect of Family Size on Children’s IQ
                                                                       OLS
                                                 No Controls                                             Controls
                            First            Second        Third       Fourth         First       Second        Third                                    Fourth
                            Child             Child        Child        Child        Child         Child        Child                                    Child

One Child                   .099*                                                                  -.037
Family                      (.031)                                                                (.028)

Two Child                   .274*            .222*                                                 .034             -.015
Family                      (.029)           (.031)                                               (.026)           (.028)

Three Child                 .256*            .236*             .184*                              .052*             .037               -.055
Family                      (.030)           (.031)            (.035)                             (.026)           (.028)             (.032)

Four Child                  .163*            .144*             .093*             .063              .051             .037               -.028               -.045
Family                      (.032)           (.034)            (.039)           (.046)            (.029)           (.031)             (.035)              (.044)

N                          201789            134692            42042             7879            201789           134692              42042                7879
* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of errors within family. Each column represents a
separate regression. The regressions with controls include indicators for age, test year, mother’s age, mother’s age at first birth, mother’s education, father’s
education, father’s IQ, and the log of birth weight of the children studied.
Omitted Category is 5 or more children.




                                                                                                                                                                    33
                                                      Table 4
                                      Effect of Family Size on IQ of Children
                                        Instrumental Variable Estimation
                                            OLS (no           OLS       First Stage                         Second Stage              N
                                            controls)      (controls)
Instrument: Twin at Second Birth                                           .717*                                                   173706
(Sample: First child in families with                                      (.019)
2 or more births)
Number of Children in Family                 -.052*           .006                                              -.149*
                                             (.005)          (.005)                                             (.052)
Instrument: Twin at Third Birth                                            .839*                                                   135970
(Sample: First and second children in                                      (.018)
families with 3 or more births)
Number of Children in Family                 -.082*           -.002                                             -.170*
                                             (.008)          (.007)                                             (.052)
Instrument: Twin at Fourth Birth                                           .903*                                                   44695
(Sample: First, second and third                                           (.036)
children in families with 4 or more
births)
Number of Children in Family                 -.046*           .009                                               -.115
                                             (.012)          (.010)                                             (.080)

Instrument: First Two Children                                                               .082*                                 304755
Same Sex                                                                                     (.003)
(Sample: First and second children in
families with 2 or more births)
Number of Children in Family                          -.045*              .014*                                  .065
                                                      (.004)              (.004)                                (.074)
Instrument: First Three Children                                                             .070*                                 94578
Same Sex                                                                                     (.005)
(Sample: First, second, and third
children in families with 3 or more
births and first two births same-sex)
Number of Children in Family                          -.077*              .008*                                  .076
                                                      (.010)              (.009)                                (.171)

* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of errors within family. N
represents number of individuals. The regressions also include indicators for age, test year, mother’s age, mother’s age at first birth,
mother’s education, father’s education, father’s IQ, and log birth weight of the children studied.




                                                                                                                                           34
                   Appendix Table 1
              Distribution of Family Size
Family Size                            Percentage
1                                          10

2                                         47

3                                         31

4                                          9

5                                          2

6 or more                                  1




                                                    35
                                         Appendix Table 2
          Effect of Family Size on Whether Children Finished 12 Years of Schooling
                                Instrumental Variable Estimation
                                    OLS (No        OLS        First   Second          N
                                    Controls)   (Controls)   Stage      Stage
Instrument: Twin at Second                                   .726*                 150706
Birth                                                        (.021)
(Sample: First child in families
with 2 or more births)
Number of Children in Family         -.030*       -.013*                -.029
                                      (.001)      (.001)               (.015)
Instrument: Twin at Third                                    .847*                 113475
Birth                                                        (.020)
(Sample: First and second
children in families with 3 or
more births)
Number of Children in Family         -.034*       -.016*               -.039*
                                      (.002)      (.002)               (.015)
Instrument: Twin at Fourth                                   .900*                  36927
Birth                                                        (.040)
(Sample: First, second and
third children in families with 4
or more births)
Number of Children in Family         -.016*        -.007                -.040
                                      (.003)      (.003)               (.025)

Instrument: First Two                                                         .081*                           260236
Children Same Sex                                                             (.003)
(Sample: First two children in
families with 2 or more births)
Number of Children in Family                 -.028*           -.012*                           -.019
                                             (.001)           (.001)                          (.021)
Instrument: First Three                                                       .069*                           77410
Children Same Sex                                                             (.005)
(Sample: First, second, and
third children in families with 3
or more births and first two
births same-sex)
Number of Children in Family                 -.028*           -.014*                           .023
                                             (.001)           (.002)                          (.049)

* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of errors
within family. N represents number of individuals. The regressions also include indicators for age, test year,
mother’s age, mother’s age at first birth, mother’s education, father’s education, father’s IQ, and the log birth weight
of the children studied. Children are aged at least 21 in 2002.




                                                                                                                     36
Appendix Table 3: The Effect of Child Spacing on Previous Children’s IQ

                                                Effect of Gap less than or                Effect of Gap less than or
                                                     equal to 1 Year                         equal to 18 months

First Child in                                               -.26*                                     -.12*
Families of three or more                                    (.06)                                     (.02)
N = 74996

First and Second Child in                                     -.18                                     -.08*
Families of four or more                                      (.09)                                    (.03)
N = 32772

First Three Children in                                      -.55*                                     -.19*
Families of five or more                                     (.17)                                     (.06)
N = 9651

* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for correlation of errors
within family. Each box represents a separate regression. The regressions include indicators for age, test year,
mother’s age, mother’s age at first birth, mother’s education, father’s education, father’s IQ, birth order, and the log
birth weight of the child studied. Also included is a control for family size and a quadratic function of the time gap
between children born before the two children whose spacing is being investigated.

The reported coefficients are those relating to the distance in years between the two children immediately after the
children listed in column 1. For example, in the first box, the coefficient of -.26 suggests that first child IQ is lower
by .26 if the gap between the second and third child is less than or equal to one year (in families with at least 3
children).




                                                                                                                        37
