                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CHINA'S WTO ENTRY:
              ANTIDUMPING, SAFEGUARDS, AND DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

                                           Chad P. Bown

                                        Working Paper 13349
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13349


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




Thanks to Rachel McCulloch, Shang-Jin Wei, Tom Prusa, Marty Feldstein, Richard Cooper, Lee Branstetter,
Bruce Blonigen, Will Martin, and conference participants at the NBER for useful comments on an
earlier version. Matthew Niedzwiecki and Paul Deng provided outstanding research assistance. The
World Bank provided financial support for the collection of data used in this project. All remaining
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Chad P. Bown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
China's WTO Entry: Antidumping, Safeguards, and Dispute Settlement
Chad P. Bown
NBER Working Paper No. 13349
August 2007
JEL No. F13,F5

                                              ABSTRACT

This chapter assesses China's integration into the global trading system by examining areas of international
political-economic "friction" associated with its increased trade. We use a number of newly constructed
data sets to examine tensions associated with its rapidly increasing trade and the trade policy commitments
that China and its trading partners have undertaken as part of its 2001 WTO accession. With respect
to China's exports, we examine data on WTO members' use of antidumping and their discriminatory
treatment of Chinese firms prior to and following accession. We conclude that the application of antidumping
against China has become more discriminatory since its 2001 accession. Furthermore, evidence from
a regression analysis rules out the theory that pre-accession discrimination is associated with foreign
targeting of high import tariff Chinese products as a WTO accession negotiation strategy. We also
provide evidence that WTO members are also discriminating against China's exports by substituting
use of new import-restricting "China-safeguard" policy instruments. Next, with respect to China's
imports, we examine data on China's antidumping use - now the WTO's fifth most frequent user of
antidumping - by targeted sectors and countries. We also provide evidence from products within China's
largest sectoral user of a positive relationship between the size of the accession year tariff liberalization
and the subsequent resort to antidumping protection after accession. Finally, we examine China's experience
in managing frictions associated with its growing role in world trade through formal WTO dispute
settlement proceedings.

Chad P. Bown
Department of Economics, MS021
Brandeis University
P.O. Box 549110
Waltham, MA 02454-9110 USA
cbown@brandeis.edu
1       Introduction

Policymakers choose to enter into trade agreements like the WTO for many political and economic

reasons. However, economic theorists have posited two reasons central to this decision: first, that “large”

countries seek reciprocal market access commitments to neutralize the terms-of-trade effects of trade

liberalization; and second, that many countries seek an externally enforced contract in order to credibly

commit domestic sectors to policy reform.1 From the broad perspective of economic theory, China’s 2001

WTO accession might be motivated along the following lines: China agreed to undertake substantial

import liberalization in exchange for greater certainty with respect to market access for its exports; and

China’s program of reform would gain domestic credibility from trading partners’ threat and actual use of

WTO dispute settlement procedures to ensure that China was living up to its liberalization commitments.

        This chapter examines China’s political-economic experience in the face of “frictions” in the

international trading system as it transitions to full WTO membership. We use a number of newly

compiled data sources that track areas of international political-economic tensions associated with

China’s increased trade. We focus on both its own exports and the potential changes in policy treatment

they face across foreign markets as well as China’s imports, and its own changes in trade policy

associated with the market access commitments it undertook as part of its 2001 accession. While certainly

only a part of the landscape, the data characterizing the changing nature of trade policies by China and its

trading partners helps us characterize China’s actual WTO accession experience thus far.

        With respect to policies facing China’s exports, we examine data on WTO members’ use of

antidumping import restrictions against Chinese firms prior to and following its 2001 accession. While

most economists view antidumping as economically baseless and little more than an easy-to-access tool

of protectionism, there are many insights to be gained from examining its use, especially when it comes to

China’s exporters’ experience. An additional benefit to studying antidumping is that it is a measurable

and relatively transparent policy whose use has spread to many developed and developing countries.


1
 For economic theory formalizing the first argument, see Bagwell and Staiger (1999), for the second, see Maggi and
Rodriguez-Clare (1998).


                                                        1
While it is certainly not the only tool of protectionism, antidumping is increasingly one of the few WTO-

consistent instruments of protection that remains available to policymakers as more and more countries

bind their import tariffs under the WTO and take on other liberalization commitments.2

        Therefore, in section 2 of this chapter, we present data revealing the historic foreign use of

antidumping against China’s exporters. These measures reveal one contributing explanation for China’s

desire to seek WTO entry. By using a number of measures across virtually all of the major antidumping

users in the WTO system, we find that China’s exporters faced substantial discriminatory treatment

relative to other exporting country targets during the 1995-2001 period. We also introduce a regression

approach that exploits variation across China’s exported products to examine a previously unexplored

potential explanation for this feature of the data – i.e., that foreign users were more likely to target

China’s products that were benefiting from high Chinese import tariffs. The theory is that high-tariff

products may have been targeted to assist negotiators extract market access commitments from China.

Nevertheless, we rule out this explanation as we find no robust evidence of this relationship in the data.

        We also examine WTO member use of antidumping against China since its WTO accession to

assess whether there is any associated change to the pattern of discrimination it has faced. As we also

explore in section 3, any change in the use of antidumping against China by WTO members must be

viewed in light of the potential for members to substitute alternative policy instruments – such as

transitional “China safeguards” and other use of safeguards and import restrictions. Nevertheless, as a

preview to our results, while there are certainly new pressures put on foreign policymakers since 2002

that we are unable to formally control for – generated by the combination of China’s expanding exports

and the fact that policymakers can no longer funnel discrimination against China into their “normal”


2
  As further motivation on welfare-economic grounds, Gallaway, Blonigen and Flynn (1999) present evidence from
a study of the cumulative effects of U.S.-imposed antidumping that it was the second most costly trade policy
program in terms of lost U.S. economic welfare in 1993 at $3 billion, trailing only the Multi-Fibre Arrangement.
Thus, despite any given antidumping measure only covering a handful of imported products, the fact that
antidumping-using countries do not stop using the policy once they have started and that imposed measures are
infrequently revoked once implemented, the cumulative impact of the policy can be substantial for lost economic
welfare.




                                                       2
application of tariffs – there is evidence from antidumping and other new China-specific forms of

contingent protection that policymakers are increasing discrimination against China’s exporters under

these particular provisions.

          The next set of questions we explore concerns China’s own import market access liberalization

commitments associated with its WTO accession. An important question facing all countries that have

undertaken substantive, new market access commitments is whether they are subsequently able to live up

to them, despite the political-economic pressure imposed by domestic, import-competing firms that call

for the imposition of new trade restrictions. To examine this issue, we examine data on China’s own new

and growing use of antidumping as well as other import-restricting measures. In the period since its

accession, China has become one of the five most frequent users of antidumping in the WTO system. We

describe the composition of sectors and foreign countries that are the targets of China’s increasingly

important antidumping use, as well as potential explanations for these targets. Finally, in a formal

regression analysis we focus on a subsample of China’s antidumping activity and search for evidence of a

relationship between the size and timing of China’s own import-market liberalization and its subsequent

use of antidumping to re-impose trade restrictions. For products within the chemicals sector – the

dominant industrial user of antidumping within China – we find economically significant evidence that

the larger was the accession year (2001-2002) tariff reduction, the greater is the probability that the

product subsequently sought new protection from imports via antidumping during the post-accession

period.

          Finally, in section 5 of this chapter, we examine data on how China has been learning to manage

trade frictions through the formal, multilateral auspices of WTO dispute settlement proceedings. The data

indicates that, despite predictions based on its share of global trade and diversity of trading partners that

might have led to expectations that China would be a frequent litigant in WTO disputes, such activity did

not materialize in the first five years after its accession. Instead, China has stood on the sideline of other

countries’ disputes learning about the process in anticipation. Nevertheless, a flurry of recently initiated




                                                      3
disputes as well as other related policy changes and external shocks indicates that China’s role in future

WTO dispute settlement may be substantially altered going forward.



2       Foreign Use of Antidumping against China’s Exports

Prior to China’s accession to the WTO in 2001, existing members were unconstrained by WTO rules for

how to treat imports from China. I.e., while WTO members are expected to afford one another most-

favored-nation (MFN) treatment for the application of tariffs, members were nevertheless not required to

offer such treatment to nonmembers like China. Nevertheless, some countries did offer Chinese exports

reasonable access to their markets – either through voluntary MFN treatment or sometimes even

preferential treatment through programs such as the Generalized System of Preferences.3

        Despite not being bound by WTO rules with how to treat imports from China – meaning that a

country could simply unilaterally raise tariff rates applied against imports from China prior to its 2001

accession without being in violation of any multilateral rules – a number of countries nevertheless chose

to limit China’s exports by resorting to policies of administered protection. In this section we examine

how a number of WTO members treated imports from China under the most common form of

administered import protection - antidumping.

        We begin this section by documenting the growing use of antidumping across the WTO

membership over time. We then examine antidumping use from the perspective of China’s exporters –

focusing on which trading partners have been using it and against which Chinese export industries it has

been used. We then compare the use of antidumping against China to the use of antidumping against other

frequently targeted exporting countries to illustrate the discriminatory nature of the policy, and we

examine whether there is evidence that how Chinese exporters were treated under the policy prior to its

WTO accession has subsequently changed. Finally, we provide a more formal regression analysis into the


3
  For example, the United States Congress voted on a year-to-year basis during the 1990s, after floor debates over a
number of issues including its humanitarian record, on whether to continue to grant China most-favored-nation
status.



                                                         4
question of whether antidumping use against China’s exports prior to its 2001 accession might be

understood as the WTO membership strategically targeting Chinese industries with high import tariffs,

perhaps to increase the depth of China’s own import market access liberalization commitments.



2.1     Antidumping proliferation across the WTO membership

Antidumping use has proliferated across the WTO membership over the last twenty years. According to

WTO (2007a,b), 42 different WTO members initiated antidumping investigations during the 1995-2006

period, while 38 of those countries imposed at least one import restriction under their domestic

antidumping laws. The import-restricting policy has gone from one used primarily by four “historical

users” (U.S., EU, Canada and Australia) in the 1980s, to a trade policy instrument used by an increasing

share of the WTO membership, including a number of developing countries (Prusa 2001, Zanardi 2004).

        Table 1 breaks down country-level antidumping using two rough measures (new investigations

and new measures imposed) during two sub-periods of the WTO era (1995-2001 and 2002-2006) around

the date of China’s WTO accession. As the table reveals, roughly 80% of all new antidumping

investigations and measures imposed during the 1995-2001 period was the work only 10 countries – the

previously mentioned four “historical” developed-economy users, and six “new” developing-country

users (Argentina, Brazil, India, Mexico, South Africa and Turkey).4 It is worth noting the continued

importance of these particular 10 countries because they serve as the focus of our empirical analysis of

antidumping use vis-à-vis China described below. We focus on these countries’ use of the import-




4
  For a survey of the research literature on antidumping, see Blonigen and Prusa (2003). As Zanardi (2004) reports,
each of the “new user” countries had implemented antidumping legislation prior to the WTO’s inception: South
Africa (1914), Argentina (1972), India (1985), Mexico (1986), Brazil (1987), and Turkey (1989). Nevertheless, the
“historical” users (U.S., EU, Canada and Australia) were the dominant users of antidumping throughout the 1980s;
the new users did not begin intensively using antidumping to restrict imports until they undertook their substantial
trade liberalization programs of the late 1980s or early 1990s. As we will discuss in substantial detail below, China
began its use of antidumping in 1997.



                                                         5
restricting policy because we have detailed data on it from an independent source that allows us to pursue

questions that could not be addressed by assessing what countries report to the WTO alone.5

         While table 1 suggests that the developed economies have reduced their relative use of

antidumping over the period since China’s accession, the combined efforts of these 10 countries continue

to dominate global use of the policy. Together, they contributed 83% of the new investigations and 68%

of the new measures imposed even as the total antidumping use by WTO members continues to grow,

especially with the emergence of China itself as a major new user (10% of investigations, 11% of new

measures imposed by all WTO members) between 2002-2006.



2.2      Which countries use antidumping to restrict imports from China?

Next we switch perspectives from the users of antidumping to its primary target – exporting firms from

China.6 Figure 1 illustrates that the most frequent users of antidumping overall (the 10 countries from

table 1) are also the countries most frequently targeting China with antidumping. By 2001, these 10

countries were initiating roughly 60 new investigations of dumping by Chinese exporters per year. Since

1999, the number of new investigations against Chinese exports from the four historical developed-

economy users of antidumping (U.S., EU, Canada and Australia) has leveled off at roughly 20 per year.

On the other hand, with the exception of a slight drop in 2004, there has been an upward trend in the

number of new investigations per year by the new-user developing-country group – starting from a low of

8 new cases in 1995 to 30 or more new cases against China per year in the 2001-2004 period.




5
  While data reported in WTO (2007a,b) is the most up-to-date information available regarding notification of
investigations and notification that countries are imposing measures, it suffers from a number of flaws which
prevent it from being useful for detailed analysis. For example, the two columns of data for the 2002-2006 of table 1
should not be misinterpreted as yielding information on the share of investigations during that period that resulted in
measures being imposed. Countries are also not required to report to the WTO the Harmonized System (HS) product
codes of the imports facing antidumping activity as well as a number of other pieces of important information for
empirical analysis. The data appendix describes the features of the Global Antidumping Database (Bown, 2007)
which contains the detailed data that we rely on for most of the empirical analysis.
6
  For prior studies of China as target on different samples of data, see Messerlin (2004) and Liu and Vandenbussche
(2002).


                                                          6
        A comparison of this aggregated data of antidumping use against China during its pre-accession

(1995-2001) versus post-accession (2002-2006) period provides our first indicator that there is no prima

facie evidence that WTO membership has thus far limited the incidence of China exporter’s facing new

investigations of dumping behavior. In section 2.4 below, we examine other features of the data

underlying country-specific use of antidumping to focus on this question in more depth.



2.3     Which Chinese export sectors are targeted by antidumping?

Figures 2 and 3 examine foreign antidumping use against China’s exports over the 1995-2004 period via

examination of the sectors that are most frequently targeted.

        Consider first figure 2 which examines the combined data for the historical, developed economy

users of antidumping – the U.S., EU, Canada and Australia. Figure 2a presents the data for the use of

antidumping by sector, while figure 2b presents the information on these sectors' shares of Chinese

exports to these four markets during the time period. A substantial share of the investigations targeting

Chinese products have been in the steel and industrial chemicals categories which are the traditional

sectoral users of antidumping across using countries. Prior to 2004, Chinese textile and apparel exports

were not yet a substantial target of developed economy antidumping – for the most part because these

user countries were able to limit imports through other trade policy instruments such as the WTO

Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, which contained its own transitional safeguard provision during the

phase-out of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement. Furthermore, as we discuss in more detail in section 3 below,

WTO members need not resort to antidumping to limit imports of Chinese textile and apparel products

given that the terms of China’s 2001 WTO accession provide a transitional textile and apparel product

safeguard policy instrument that can be used until 2008. Furthermore, while imports of textile and apparel

products from China have risen in these countries during this time period, their share of China’s total

exports to these economies is in decline as China diversifies its export basket.




                                                      7
        Figure 3 illustrates the developing country “new user” targeting of Chinese products by sector.

How developing countries have targeted China with antidumping appears quite similar to the developed

economies’ use of antidumping during this time period. Antidumping use against China is also dominated

by the steel and industrial chemicals industries in these developing countries, and Chinese exports in these

industries are relatively stagnant (as a share of total Chinese exports to these markets) over this time

period. Nevertheless, there has been a recent increase in the share of antidumping cases in textile and

apparel products – as some countries have shifted toward the antidumping policy instrument to protect

these sectors – as well as other industries, of which other manufacturing products are also frequently

targeted. As figure 3b indicates, antidumping is increasing at the same time that these developing

countries’ imports from China in these categories has also been increasing dramatically.



2.4     How do antidumping-user countries treat China relative to other exporters?

Examining China as an antidumping target in isolation is a limiting exercise for a number of reasons. The

first is because as a discretionary trade policy, antidumping has the distinguishing feature that user

countries can vary the extent to which their particular application discriminates among targeted trading

partners. In this section we examine how China as an antidumping target compares to other countries

targeted by antidumping. Tables 2 and 3 provide summary data on how major users of antidumping treat

China in terms of various discretionary elements that affect the scope of each user’s discrimination.

        Consider table 2, where we examine first the United States’ use of antidumping over the 1995-

2001 period vis-à-vis its most targeted trading partners. By cutting the data in a variety of ways, the

evidence clearly indicates that while the policy could be applied in a relatively nondiscriminatory manner,

the U.S. exhibited considerable discrimination vis-à-vis China during this time period. China is the most

frequently investigated foreign target of U.S. antidumping, facing 13% of all investigations. It was the

largest target despite being only the fifth largest exporter overall to the U.S. market during the 1995-2001

period with 8 percent of the U.S. import market (final column), trailing Canada, the EU, Japan and

Mexico. Second, 68% of the U.S. investigations that Chinese exporters faced resulted in the imposition of


                                                     8
a final antidumping measure – a rate that is much higher than the average of 53% across all investigated

countries. Third, despite an incentive for antidumping authorities to seek to name exporters from

additional countries in investigations, China was the only country named in 42% of the investigations that

its exporters faced, while the average across all cases was 20%.7 Finally, in the investigations that resulted

in final antidumping measures being imposed, the average antidumping duty facing exporters from China

was 131.77% - almost twice as high as the average facing all exporters.8 These combined features of the

data for the U.S. use of antidumping indicate that, in practice, antidumping in the United States has

resulted in discriminatory treatment of imports from China relative to other source countries during the

1995-2001 period.9

         While these results are neither the only, nor perhaps a fundamental motivating force behind

China’s seeking WTO accession, the data does suggest a potential expected benefit associated with

China’s full membership in the organization – less discriminatory treatment in export markets relative to

other foreign competitors. One potential benefit of China’s accession could be to reign in foreign use of


7
  The option to “cumulate” imports from multiple countries in the injury investigation potentially increases the
probability of an affirmative injury decision (Hansen and Prusa, 1996), as well as heading off a potential increase in
imports from exporting countries not named in the investigation.
8
  Note that this chapter does not pursue an empirical investigation into the interesting follow-up question of how –
legally and administratively – countries “get away with” discriminating against China via application of higher
antidumping duties than those that face other foreign suppliers. First, WTO members differ in when they have
agreed to reclassify China as a market economy as opposed to be a non-market economy (NME). For example,
under the terms of the 1999 U.S.-China bilateral agreement, the U.S. is authorized to continue using the unfavorable
NME designation to evaluate Chinese dumping until 2014. NME status grants antidumping investigators the
discretion to designate surrogate countries to be used to estimate measures of Chinese firms’ costs. Second, Chinese
firms may be less likely to represent themselves in the U.S. antidumping process, which can result in investigators
using the “Best Information Available” (BIA) practices. Both NME and BIA affect the construction of the normal
value measure from which to compare the export price in the U.S. market. For an analysis of administrative
procedures in the U.S. antidumping process that influence the differential between China and other antidumping-
targeted countries, as well as how these dumping margins may be changing over time, see Blonigen (2006). See also
the discussion in Moore (2006) and Moore and Fox (2005).
9
  There are additional potentially discriminatory elements of the antidumping policy that we do not capture in the
tables. First, since antidumping is also a foreign-firm specific trade policy, the instrument can be used to
discriminate across firms within a country. The data reported in tables 2 and 3 is the average margin imposed against
all firms within that country. Second, firms across countries may differ in their likelihood of receiving offers of the
preferable outcome of “price undertakings,” relative to facing the imposition of duties. Third, foreign targets may
also be treated systematically different in sunset or administrative reviews of antidumping, affecting when a measure
that has been imposed is removed.



                                                          9
antidumping against China’s exporters so that they received tariff treatment that was closer to that

provided by a strict application of the WTO’s most-favored-nation principle.

        As we explore with greater rigor in a regression analysis described below, there are a number of

potential contributing factors behind the decision to target China during its pre-accession period. For

example, one potential explanation is that WTO members used antidumping as a policy to complement

their negotiations strategy in order to extract more import market accession concessions from China as

part of the accession. Under the assumption that this was a determinant of antidumping use prior to its

accession, an important follow-up question is whether there is evidence that the U.S. has changed its

treatment of China under antidumping after 2001 and there is nothing more to extract from China in terms

of commitments associated with its WTO accession.

        The second panel of rows in table 2 illustrates characteristics of U.S. antidumping use between

2002-2004, which is the most recent time period since China’s 2001 accession for which comprehensive

data is available across countries. Note that there is no evidence from this table that the U.S. has lessened

its discriminatory treatment of China via the antidumping policy relative to the pre-accession period. Over

26% of all U.S. investigations during 2002-2004 targeted China, up from 13% in 1995-2001. The U.S.

imposed import restrictions in 76% of the cases in which China was investigated, up from 68% in 1995-

2001. Furthermore, China was the only country named in 52% of the cases in which it was investigated

(up from 42% in 1995-2001), and it faced a conditional mean duty of 148.38% (up from 131.77% in

1995-2001). There is thus no evidence from this data that China’s WTO membership beginning at the end

of 2001 has had a disciplining effect on the U.S. use of antidumping vis-à-vis its exports.10

        The other three sets of panels in table 2 extend the analysis of cross-country use of antidumping

by breaking down the data in a similar fashion for the three other developed economy users (EU, Canada,

Australia) and examining the discriminatory application of their antidumping vis-à-vis China. While these


10
  This is not necessarily surprising for reasons we discuss in section 5. Because of the self-enforcing nature of WTO
dispute settlement and the fact that, as of the time of writing (June 2007), China had yet to take on any substantive
offensive initiatives to enforce its market access rights – by challenging U.S. use of antidumping, for example.



                                                         10
users do not appear to discriminate between China and other targeted exporters along each of the same

indicators and to quite the same degree as the United States did between 1995-2001, there is nevertheless

substantial evidence of significant differential treatment facing China’s exporters and other major targets

of antidumping. Next, with respect to whether WTO accession has curtailed these countries from

targeting China with antidumping cases, we conclude that there is also no evidence of this effect. There is

some evidence of a general downward trend in the collective use of antidumping by the EU, Australia and

Canada during the 2002-2004 time period. Nevertheless, while the overall use of antidumping by these

countries may have declined, an increasing share of these countries’ total caseload continues to target

China with new investigations: in the EU, 28% of all cases targeted China (up from 14% in 1995-2001),

in Australia it was 16% (up from 10% in 1995-2001), and in Canada it was 26% (up from 11% in 1995-

2001).

         Table 3 presents a similar breakdown of the data for the six major developing country “new

users” of antidumping (Argentina, Brazil, India, Mexico, South Africa, Turkey). Evidence from these

users also indicates a distinct pattern of a discriminatory application of the policy vis-à-vis China.11

Furthermore, the discriminatory application appears to be intensifying in the period since China’s WTO

accession – China is the most targeted foreign country in all six of these new users over the 2002-2004

period, despite being no larger than the third largest foreign supplier to any of these markets. One

interpretation of this change is that it appears that many of these developing countries are more than

simply concerned with the implications of preference erosion associated with China’s WTO accession

(and receipt of MFN treatment) and having to compete on equal terms with Chinese exporters in foreign

markets. Many industries in these developing countries are also concerned for their domestic markets and

have increasingly sought new import restrictions to prevent Chinese exports entering their markets as

well.


11
  We do not provide summary data on the average size of the measure imposed by the developing countries as it
would be nontrivial to construct. Unlike the developed economy users, developing countries are less likely to
impose antidumping in the form of simple ad valorem duties and are more likely to impose them as specific duties
(denominated in import and/or export currencies), price undertakings or other combinations thereof.


                                                      11
        While we have found no evidence that the severity of discrimination facing China’s exporters

under foreign use of antidumping has improved relative to China’s pre-WTO accession period, we cannot

make the bolder claim that the WTO accession has not had any impact on its use. As the last column in

each country panel in tables 2 and 3 indicates, China’s export share in each of these economies’ import

markets has also increased during this time period. Ceteris paribus, an export increase means more

products to potentially target with antidumping. Furthermore, there are real reasons to expect countries to

undertake more discrimination vis-à-vis China within the antidumping trade policy instrument for the

post-accession (when compared to the 1995-2001) period. Prior to 2001, if a foreign government felt

domestic political pressure to discriminate vis-à-vis imports from China it may have been able to do use

by raising tariffs directly. Now that China is a member of the WTO, in the face of China’s booming

exports, a WTO member that seeks to legally discriminate against Chinese exports must now funnel that

discrimination into a WTO-consistent policy instrument or face risk of a trade dispute. Raising trade

barriers against China alone via antidumping protection is one such mechanism – we explore other

substitute import-restricting (safeguard) policy instruments in the next section. An alternative way to

implicitly discriminate against China relative to other foreign producers in a WTO consistent manner is to

find a legal way to grant the non-Chinese producers preferential access – examples would include

offering unilateral preferences if the exporters are in developing countries under the Generalized System

of Preferences (GSP) or by forming a preferential trade agreement on a reciprocal basis.12



2.5     Did pre-accession antidumping against China target its high tariffs?

Unlike many other exporting countries that were also subject to antidumping trade restrictions imposed

during the 1995-2001 period, China stands out for one other reason: it was simultaneously negotiating the

terms of its own accession into the WTO. Thus one question to explore is whether a contributing


12
  For a discussion of examples of U.S. preferential trade agreements negotiated between 2002-2005 with exporting
countries that compete with Chinese exporters in important product categories like textiles and apparel, see Bown
and McCulloch (2007).



                                                       12
explanation for the discriminatory application of antidumping during the 1995-2001 period (illustrated in

tables 2 and 3) is that existing WTO members were using the policy to complement pressure being placed

on China to liberalize import markets under accession negotiations. We investigate this question by

asking whether Chinese goods that benefited from higher import tariff protection were more likely to be

targeted with foreign antidumping investigations, once we control for other product-level differences.

Evidence of such a relationship would be consistent with a more charitable interpretation of the

discriminatory application of antidumping – i.e., that that foreign trading partners were strategically using

antidumping to attempt to increase the tariff liberalization commitments that China was willing to

undertake under the terms of its 2001 WTO accession.13

         We formalize this inquiry by estimating a model of the determinants of a foreign antidumping

investigation over a Chinese export product i each year during the 1995-2001 period.14 We construct an

unbalanced panel for t = 1995,…, 2001 of yearly Chinese exports of 4589 different 6-digit HS products i

to an aggregated, rest-of-the-world trading partner called “Foreign.”15 For our baseline estimates, Foreign

will be the combination of 15 antidumping-using countries – the 10 major users listed in table 1 in

addition to less frequent users such as Colombia, Indonesia, Korea, New Zealand, and Taiwan.16



13
   The argument is that, in the presence of a foreign antidumping law, China implicitly assists its exporters by
liberalizing its imports of the same product. Foreign countries are more likely to use antidumping against China’s
exports if China’s imports are protected by high tariffs because it is easier for foreign competitors to show evidence
that Chinese firms “dumped” their exports if those firms are protected by high tariffs at home. A protected home
market faces less competition (from imports), resulting in higher domestic prices and thus higher dumping margins
when less than fair value determinations are constructed from price-to-price comparisons. For a discussion in the
case of China, see Messerlin (2004).
14
  Using indicators or counts of measures imposed instead of investigations is likely to give similar results, given the
results of tables 2 and 3. Furthermore, evidence dating back to Staiger and Wolak (1994) indicates that even a mere
antidumping investigation can have a destructive effect on a country’s exports, even if no trade-restricting measures
are ultimately imposed, suggesting that investigations are an important indicator with which to begin.
15
   The panel is unbalanced because we condition on there being nonzero exports of the product in that year for there
to be an observation.
16
  In the aggregate, these fifteen countries received slightly less than 50% of China’s exports during this time period.
This percentage is not larger primarily because the list of 15 countries omits two of China’s top 4 export destination
markets in Hong Kong (24.0% of exports in 1997) and Japan (17.4% of exports in 1997), neither of which used
antidumping against any exporter with any frequency during this time period.



                                                          13
         We formally estimate this relationship after controlling for a number of other factors and by using

two types of models. The first model is a binomial probit in which the dependent variable is an indicator

for whether any one of the 15 countries initiated an antidumping investigation against Chinese exports of

the product in year t. The second model is a negative binomial regression model in which the dependent

variable is the count of the number of antidumping investigations that the 15 countries cumulatively

undertook against Chinese exports of the product in year t.17 Our explanatory variable of interest is

China’s pre-accession MFN applied tariff for product i – evidence of a positive relationship between the

size of the Chinese import tariff and the event of foreign antidumping investigations against Chinese

exports would support the theory that China’s high tariffs were a contributing determinant to which of its

products were being targeted with antidumping.

         There are, of course, a number of other determinants of foreign country antidumping activity

against China’s exports that we seek to control for in the estimation. For example, we expect a positive

relationship between antidumping use in year t and two explanatory variables: the size of China’s exports

of the product (given by the aggregated value of China’s exports of the product to “Foreign” in t-1) as

well as the level of recent growth of those exports (given by the growth of the aggregated value of

China’s exports of the product between t-2 and t-1). We also control for whether there has been recent

prior antidumping activity in the same product against China’s exports with an indicator that takes on a

value of 1 if the same product was subject to an investigation in either t-2 or t-1. Next, we use year

dummies to control for year-to-year macroeconomic shocks in indicators such as exchange rates and

exchange rates, which Knetter and Prusa (2003) have shown affect aggregate filings across countries via

the business cycle. Finally, as there are certain industries that are simply more frequent users of

antidumping across countries, we include industry dummies in the estimation as well.18 The industry


17
   A closely-related framework is Knetter and Prusa (2003) which examines determinants of antidumping-using
countries’ aggregate yearly filings over time. In contrast, we examine determinants of different products within a
single country being filed against over time.
18
 The industry definitions that we use can be found in the data appendix. There are a number of potential reasons
why certain industries – such as steel and chemicals – are frequent targets of antidumping across all using countries.


                                                         14
dummies should also help control for the influence of political-economic elements that we do not control

for separately since we are using a “Foreign” aggregate.

        Table 4 presents our estimates of the binomial probit and negative binomial regression models.

The models relate potential determinants of an aggregated “Foreign” that potentially initiates new

antidumping investigations against a Chinese exported product i over t = 1995,…, 2001. Consider first the

estimates of the marginal effects of the binomial probit model reported in columns (1). The signs of the

estimated effects are broadly consistent with the underlying theory. As for the control variables, China’s

larger export product categories are more likely to be investigated than export products with lesser value.

The greater is the recent export growth of the product, the more likely it is to be targeted as well, though

this effect is not statistically significant. Products that were targets in the recent past (t-2 or t-1) are also

more likely to be targeted in t. This relationship holds even after we control for industry-level effects that

indicate it is more likely that products in industries such as chemicals, textiles and apparel, footwear,

metals, and transportation equipment are all more likely than the omitted industry category (other

miscellaneous products) to be investigated.

          Nevertheless, the key variable of interest is the effect of China’s pre-accession import tariff rate

on the probability that that export product is subject to a foreign antidumping an investigation. In column

(1), the estimate of 0.015 is positive and statistically significant, which provides preliminary evidence in

support for the underlying theory that export products with higher import tariffs face a higher probability

of being targeted with a foreign antidumping investigation. The economic effect implied by the estimate

is also sizable. The model’s predicted probability that an average Chinese export product is investigated

with an antidumping case in a given year is 0.0084. The mean applied tariff in the underlying data was

0.241 (i.e., 24.1%), so a 10 percentage point increase in this variable above the average (to 0.341)

increases the predicted probability of an investigation to 0.01.



For example, the nature of evidence required in antidumping laws may make it biased toward use by cyclical,
capital-intensive industries with high fixed costs. On the other hand, the highly concentrated nature of these
industries may make it easier for antidumping to be used in a cross-industry retaliatory manner to facilitate
internationally collusive outcomes.


                                                       15
        Despite preliminary evidence of higher tariff products being more likely to be targeted with

foreign antidumping, as a simple robustness check, we re-estimate the binomial probit model on the same

sample of 1995-2001 data except we redefine the “Foreign” aggregate of Chinese trading partners to only

include the four developed economy historical users of antidumping – the U.S., EU, Canada and

Australia. A number of reasons motivate construction of such a sensitivity analysis. First, these four

economies are relatively large destination markets for China’s exports, thus also providing much of the

variation of the key control variables. Second, the four developed economies were among the major

demandeurs during China’s WTO accession negotiations. Finally, these are the countries with historical

“experience” in using antidumping. Thus, these four countries were the most likely (of any of the

antidumping users) to have the ability to manipulate use of antidumping away from capture of domestic

industry and toward its use for strategic purposes during China’s pre-accession negotiations.

Nevertheless, as the estimates in specification (2) indicate, when we estimate the model on these four

countries’ use of antidumping against China – the positive and significant impact of the China pre-

accession tariff disappears.

        Columns (3) and (4) of table 4 present additional robustness checks on these two sets of results.

These specifications use the same explanatory variables and underlying samples of data as (1) and (2); in

them we simply redefine the dependent variable as the counts of antidumping investigations (as opposed

to a 0/1 indicator) facing product i in year t , and we estimate this relationship via a negative binomial

regression model.19 The estimates presented are the model coefficients transformed into incidence rate

ratios (IRRs) which are more straightforward to interpret. In specification (3), which is estimated on the

sample of cumulated exports to and antidumping investigations by 15 antidumping-using countries, the

estimated IRR for the pre-accession applied tariff is greater than 1 and statistically significant at 1.012.


19
   For a discussion of the negative binomial regression model see Greene (2000, pp. 880-891). Of the 28265
product-year observations in the 1995-2001 sample, there were 455 non-zero entries. While the count variable could
range between 0 and 15 in principal (the number of antidumping-imposing countries in the sample), the maximum
was 3, and only 23 products faced investigations in two different countries in the same year. Thus there is little
additional variation to be gained in using the negative binomial regression model relative to the binomial probit.



                                                       16
The IRR estimate implies that a one unit increase in the applied tariff (from 24.1% to 25.1%, as we have

rescaled this variable for the negative binomial specifications) increases the count of yearly investigations

in that product by 1.2%. Nevertheless, in specification (4), when we redefine the “foreign” aggregate in

the sample to only include cumulated exports to and antidumping use by the U.S., EU, Canada and

Australia, the positive impact of the pre-accession tariff disappears. In fact, since the estimated IRR of

0.991 is less than 1, the estimated impact of a higher pre-accession tariff is to reduce the number of

antidumping investigations in the developed economy users, though this effect is not statistically

significant.

        Therefore, we conclude that there is no robust evidence that pre-accession use of antidumping

against China was driven by strategic considerations. To the extent that there was, on average, a

propensity for Chinese exports of products with higher (Chinese) pre-accession import tariffs to be the

target of foreign antidumping, the antidumping over such products was initiated by the developing

country users. It was unlikely that these countries were targeting such products with the strategic purpose

of influencing China’s tariff liberalization commitments under its WTO accession negotiations. An

alternative explanation is that the positive correlation simply reflects a common political economy

pressure facing makers of the same product in China and these other developing countries. It is simply

that the political pressure was manifest in different policy instruments - the political pressure from

import-competing firms within the other developing countries led them to pursue import protection via

new antidumping against China’s exports, while the political pressure from import-competing firms

within China led them to pursue import protection via higher applied tariffs. This would also make sense

since China did not have an active antidumping policy in place during most of this time period.




                                                     17
3       Trade Policy Substitution? Other WTO-Consistent Policies to Restrict Imports

        from China

One expected benefit to China from WTO accession was that access to a rules-based system with

potential enforcement through effective dispute-settlement provisions would lead to nondiscriminatory

treatment for its exporters as trading partners would be required to abide by the agreement’s MFN

principle of equal tariff treatment. An additional potential benefit to accession might be to help reign in

foreign use of antidumping against China’s exports, as well as perhaps reducing the discriminatory nature

of its application. The data presented in the last section indicates little evidence through 2004 that this has

been the case. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that even if WTO members had applied a less

discriminatory antidumping policy against China’s exports since 2001, an important question is whether

there were simply other potentially substitutable import-restricting policies that members had been using

to manage China’s export growth instead.

        This section examines WTO member use of a number of other trade policy instruments to assess

the likelihood of such trade policy substitution: the transitional product-specific China safeguard, the

WTO’s “regular” safeguard policy, other negotiated safeguard-like trade restrictions such as the re-

emergence of “grey-area” measures and “voluntary” export restraints (VERs) that were banned by the

WTO in prior contexts, and finally countervailing measures under “anti-subsidy” policies. The resort to

such policies in addition to antidumping has arisen as WTO members are now otherwise required to offer

Chinese exporters MFN treatment through their tariff schedules.



3.1     The transitional product-specific China safeguard

A unique feature of China’s 2001 WTO accession is establishment of a “Transitional Product-Specific

Safeguard Mechanism” (Section 16, WTO, 2001) which any WTO importing country can use against




                                                      18
China’s exports until 2014.20 As described in Bown and Crowley (2007a), many characteristics of this

new “China safeguard” are at odds with core WTO principles and established instruments of administered

import protection available to members.21 The most radical change introduced by the new China

safeguard is the weakened evidentiary criterion – even relative to antidumping - that members must

satisfy in order to meet WTO legal requirements to impose a new barrier to Chinese trade. Not only is the

threshold domestic injury requirement lower than that required under the “regular” WTO safeguard, but a

clause in this new safeguard allows a second country to justify its own imposition of a new import

restriction after a first country has implemented a China-safeguard on the basis of a “trade deflection”

threat alone, without having to carry out its own injury investigation.22

         What countries are using the China safeguard to restrict imports from China, and what sectors are

being targeted? Table 5 provides information on 21 China-safeguard investigations that WTO members

have initiated since China’s 2001 accession. As of data reported by June 2007, seven recent cases had

been resolved with the imposition of new trade restrictions, eight of the investigations concluded with no

new measures imposed,23 and a number of others are still either unresolved or have been resolved without


20
   The question of how to accommodate the accession of a substantial new member such as China into the
GATT/WTO system is not new, as Japan’s 1955 entry into the GATT raised similar concerns. A 1987 GATT
working party pointed out that, despite the desire at the time for some existing members to introduce a new Japan-
specific safeguard,

         “Japan became a contracting party in September 1955 without any new general safeguard clause
         being added to the General Agreement. Some [13 out of 34] contracting parties invoked Article
         XXXV [“Non-Application of the Agreement between Specific Contracting Parties”] on Japan’s
         accession. In a number of cases, Japan negotiated bilateral trade agreements containing special
         safeguard clauses which were followed by the countries concerned disinvoking Article XXXV”
         (GATT 1987, p. 2).
21
  First, the allowance of a China-specific trade restriction on imports of fairly traded goods is otherwise inconsistent
with MFN treatment. Second, the use of the new China safeguard also does not require the policy-imposing country
to immediately compensate China for withdrawing trade concessions which weakens the commitment to the WTO’s
reciprocity principle as well.
22
   See Bown and Crowley (2007a) and the discussion of Article 16.8 of China’s accession terms (WTO, 2001). See
also the discussion in Messerlin (2004) and Andersen and Lau (2002). Bown and Crowley (2007b) provide evidence
of trade deflection in the context of Japanese exports being targeted with discriminatory import restrictions. See also
Durling and Prusa (2006) for evidence of trade deflection in the hot-rolled steel market.
23
  Interestingly, in at least five of the cases in the table that did not result in new measures (four for the U.S., one for
Canada) the domestic adminstering authority in charge of the domestic injury/market disruption investigation found


                                                            19
notification to the WTO. The products under investigation have some overlap with the sectors that

typically dominate antidumping investigations (steel and chemicals), though there is also use to restrict

footwear, and other manufactures. Since the January 2005 expiration of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement

(MFA) and transitional Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC), resort to the China safeguard has not

surprisingly been dominated by textiles and apparel cases. While most of the countries resorting to the

China safeguard are developing countries, some of these countries (e.g., India, Turkey) are also some of

the biggest new users of antidumping. At a basic level, there is thus some evidence of substitutability

between a country’s use of antidumping to target imports from China and use of a China-specific

safeguard since 2002, suggesting the data presented in tables 2 and 3 is understating the true level of trade

policy discrimination that China’s exports continue to face despite its accession to the WTO.



3.2        The transitional textiles and apparel China safeguard and related voluntary export

           restraints

Table 5 does not include all transitional China-safeguard measures; certain WTO members have either

imposed or threatened to impose additional safeguard restrictions on Chinese exports of textile and

apparel products that are not reported there. Such trade restrictions can be justified under a separate

transitional product safeguard mechanism and are available for WTO members to restrict imports of such

products from China through 2008.24 One distinguishing feature between the textiles and apparel China


evidence in favor of new measures and recommended that a new China safeguard import restriction be applied.
Despite this recommendation, the final policy decision in each case was not to apply measures.
24
     According to WTO’s Trade Policy Review of China (2006, p. 60, emphasis added),

           “Article 242 of China's Working Party Report permits WTO Members to request consultations
           with China if the Member believes that imports of textiles and apparel products of Chinese origin
           covered by the ATC [i.e., the 1995-2005 Agreement on Textiles and Clothing] are causing market
           disruption; during the consultation, China will hold exports of the products in question at a level
           no greater than 7.5% (6% for wool) above the amount entered during the first 12 months or the
           most recent 14 months preceding the month in which consultations were requested. The restraints
           established as a result of these consultations will be effective for a year from the date on which
           consultations were requested unless otherwise agreed. Members can not use simultaneously
           measures under this provision, and the transitional product-specific safeguard measures under
           Article 16 of China's Protocol of Accession. Article 242 covers a period up to 2008.”


                                                           20
safeguard cases that are treated separately from China-safeguard cases involving other products is that

there is much less transparency – regarding information over investigations or outcomes - in the former.

Moreover, the initiation of safeguard investigation for textile and apparel products and the imposition of

trade-restricting measures are frequently not reported to the WTO Committee on Safeguards.25

        In particular, noticeably absent from table 5 are a number of high-profile textile and apparel

China-safeguard cases initiated by the United States and the European Union. In the U.S., one important

way in which this safeguard is distinct is that its injury investigations take place outside of the U.S.

International Trade Commission’s quasi-judicial investigative process that otherwise handles the injury

investigations for antidumping, global safeguards, other China-safeguards, as well as countervailing duty

cases. Instead, the textile and apparel China safeguard injury investigations are handled internally by the

U.S. Department of Commerce’s Office of Textile and Apparel (OTEXA). Table 6 reports data from

OTEXA’s website on the textile and apparel products for which U.S. producers initiated safeguard

investigations and requested import restrictions for 2003-2005.

        A common resolution to these U.S. and EU textile and apparel investigations is China frequently

agreeing to voluntarily restrain exports and undertake other grey area measures – a practice that has been

explicitly discouraged in other WTO Agreements.26 For example, shortly after the expiration of the

MFA/ATC in January 2005, a surge in textile and apparel imports from China triggered U.S. and EU

investigations and led each trading partner to negotiate a settlement with China. In the face of the threat of

discriminatory import restrictions in each case, China instead agreed to establish an explicit mechanism to

voluntarily restrain export growth in a number of politically sensitive product categories.27


25
   It is for this reason that table 5 does not include all countries’ use of the transitional product-specific China
safeguard investigations and/or impositions.
26
  VERs were a trade-restricting policy outcome that was frequently used in the 1970s and 1980s, but one which was
banned under the WTO’s Agreement on Safeguards’ Article 11:1(b).
27
  The WTO’s Trade Policy Review of China (WTO 2006, pp. 60-61) explicitly describes the VER settlements
between the EU and China and the U.S. and China in these investigations as follows,

        “On 10 June 2005, China and the European Communities signed a Memorandum of
        Understanding (MOU), placing export restraints on ten categories of Chinese textiles and clothing


                                                        21
3.3     The use of new trade restrictions under the WTO Agreement on Safeguards

A third alternative to antidumping that is another WTO-sanctioned trade policy that a member can use to

restrict imports from China is a “global safeguard” applied under the rules set out by the WTO Agreement

on Safeguards. Admittedly, a fundamental distinction between a global safeguard measure and

antidumping (or either of the new “China-safeguards,” for that matter) is that the basic WTO conditions

require a global safeguard be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis. Nevertheless, there are a number of

exceptions to this rule. The result is that countries frequently structure the imposition of new safeguard

measures to allow for a discriminatory impact against exporters with certain characteristics, many of

which have important potential implications for a country like China.

        Discretionary elements of the Agreement on Safeguards allow a safeguard-imposing country to

potentially discriminate implicitly against exporters with certain characteristics.28 First, import-restricting

measures are frequently imposed as quantitative restrictions or tariff rate quotas, policies which require

government officials to make the secondary choice of a decision rule for how to allocate import licences

(and thus market share) across many potential exporters. When imposing such policies, the WTO rules

suggest that imposing countries allocate licences based on historical market share in a recent three year

period, a decision rule which implicitly discriminates against new entrants. Second, countries that impose

a global safeguard are encouraged by an explicit provision to exempt developing countries from the



        exports to the EC until 31 December 2007. The growth rates of these exports would be limited to
        between 8% and 12.5% per year. As a quid pro quo, the EC agreed to end its ongoing safeguard
        investigation on these products and to refrain from adopting measures as permitted under Article
        242 of China's WTO Working Party Report, in categories not covered by the MOU…..Under the
        Interim Measures, MOFCOM compiles a "Catalogue of Textiles Products Subject to Interim
        Export Administration", including exports of textiles and clothing subject to restrictions imposed
        by countries or regions unilaterally, and textile exports subject to temporary quantitative control
        under bilateral agreements. For each product listed in the Catalogue, the quota is partly assigned
        through a bidding system, and partly allocated based on the exporter's share in China's total export
        value for the previous year in the respective categories.…A similar agreement was signed with the
        United States on 8 November 2005. The restraints on certain categories of textiles and clothing
        exports from China are effective from 1 January 2006 to 31 December 2008; exports of these
        products are expected to increase by 8% to 10% in 2006, by 13% in 2007, and 17% in 2008.”
28
   Bown and McCulloch (2004) provide a discussion and empirical analysis of the following discriminatory
elements in global safeguard cases initiated between 1995 and 2000.



                                                        22
measure, provided those exporters are de minimus suppliers (less than 3% of the import market

individually, less than 9% collectively). Such exemptions obviously discriminate against even developing

countries that are non-de minimus suppliers, as they will face trade barriers under the measure that other

foreign competitors do not. Finally, many safeguard-imposing countries frequently exempt from the

safeguard’s application the imports coming in from preferential trade agreement (PTA) partners. This also

serves to implicitly discriminate against non-PTA partner foreign suppliers who face an import restriction

under the global safeguard that key foreign competitors in other trading partners do not.29

         Since the WTO’s 1995 inception, member countries have imposed over 75 new global safeguard

trade restrictions, after more than 145 safeguard investigations. Not surprisingly, many of the major users

of global safeguards are the major users of antidumping and the China-safeguard, including a number of

other developing countries, and among the major sectoral targets are chemicals and steel/metals.30

According to data on safeguard outcomes compiled in Bown (2007), roughly half of the safeguard

measures have been imposed as either a quantitative restriction or tariff rate quota, both of which require

that policymakers make the secondary decision of how to allocate import licenses and thus market share.

As China is a new entrant in many safeguard-imposing country markets in many of these products that are

being targeted, it is likely to receive a reduction in its historical market share when quantitative

restrictions are imposed that base licences on historical market shares. Furthermore, virtually all of the


29
   This does not even consider examples of global safeguards applied in clear violation of WTO MFN rules, such as
the steel safeguard imposed by the United States in 2002. This policy not only exempted entire countries from the
trade restriction (e.g., NAFTA partners Canada and Mexico), it also introduced discriminatory “product exclusions”
that the United States Trade Representative granted to exporters at the level of a foreign firm-specific product. For a
discussion and empirical analysis, see Bown (2004). A typical exclusion might be as narrowly defined as a
trademarked product that only one foreign firm could produce legally. For example, see product exclusion N454.01
granted to the UK firm Somers Forge, Ltd. on 11 June 2002, “Forged alloy steel die blocks of round or rectangular
cross section. U.S. Trademark No. 1213781, commonly known as ‘VMC’ or ‘HYTUF’,” or exclusion N408.10
granted to the Japanese firm Daido Steel on 22 August 2002, “A specialized, high grade tool steel, known as
Daido’s proprietary grade NAK 55, that is used for the construction of plastic molds.” See the USTR’s website,
“President Bush Takes Action on Steel,” http://www.ustr.gov/sectors/industry/steel.shtml , last access date of 29
February 2004.
30
  According to WTO (2007d), between 1995 and April 2007, the WTO members with the most global safeguard
measures imposed were India (8), Turkey (7), Chile (7), the U.S. (6) and Jordan (6). The most targeted sectors were
chemicals (17), prepared foodstuffs (11), and steel/metals (10).



                                                          23
global safeguard measures that WTO members have imposed have also carved out explicit country

exemptions for certain trading partners – PTA members and/or de minimus developing country suppliers.

Given that China is not a member of many PTAs and it is a relatively large supplier of many products that

are subject to the trade restrictions, it is also likely to suffer discriminatory treatment under these

discretionary elements as well.31 Thus, it is likely that the pattern of trade policy discrimination we

detected via member application of antidumping (as well as the China-specific safeguards) has carried

over to the application of global safeguard measures as well.



3.4     Countervailing measures and anti-subsidy policies

A final WTO-sanctioned policy with the potential to result in discriminatory import restrictions is the

second major unfair trade provision of countervailing duties. The WTO Agreement on Subsidies and

Countervailing Measures permits WTO members to impose country-specific import restrictions in the

face of evidence of 1) injury to a domestic petitioning industry that has requested an investigation, and 2)

receipt of WTO-inconsistent subsidies that have caused the injury.

        According to the WTO (2007e), many fewer countries have imposed countervailing measures

since 1995 than have imposed antidumping or safeguard measures. Of the seventeen countries that

cumulatively imposed 191 different countervailing measures between 1995 and April 2007, the major

users were the U.S. (75), EU (46), Canada (20) and South Africa (11). Nevertheless, of the 191 country-

specific import-restrictions that were imposed, in only two instances (both by Canada in 2004) was the

target China.

         While China has not historically been a major target of countervailing measures, that may

nevertheless be changing. The United States, for example, imposed no definitive countervailing measures

on imports from China between 1984 and the time of writing (June 2007). This stemmed from a 1984


31
  Indeed, rather than list the developing countries exempted from the safeguard, many safeguard-imposing countries
have resorted to a system in which they exempt all developing countries except China plus one or two others. See
the safeguard data on country exemptions available in the Global Antidumping Database at
www.brandeis.edu/~cbown/global_ad/data_files/SG-WTO-v2.1xls .


                                                       24
decision by the U.S. Department of Commerce decision (upheld by the 1986 Georgetown Steel case)

which implemented a policy not to consider anti-subsidy investigations of exports from non-market

economies like China and the former Soviet Union. Nevertheless, in March 2007 the Department of

Commerce changed its policy stance on this issue in the context of a countervailing duty investigation

over coated free sheet paper imports from China, Indonesia and Korea (Department of Commerce, 2007).

Commerce is now willing to entertain countervailing duty petitions against China, and the first such

definitive U.S. CVD on Chinese products in over twenty years could be imposed as early as summer

2007. As the United States is by far the largest current user of countervailing measures in the WTO

system, this decision could signal a fundamental shift that might result in the U.S. complementing its use

of antidumping and China-safeguards with substantial resort to this additional policy tool.



4       China’s Imports and Its Own Use of Antidumping and Safeguards

China implemented and began using its own antidumping law to restrict imports in 1997 prior to its WTO

accession (Jung, 2002). It initiated its first (and as of June 2007, only) safeguard investigation in 2002

shortly after its accession. Before examining the data relating to China’s use administered import-

protection policies, we review a number of the main political-economic theories reasons why China may

have implemented such legislation a priori and once it has been implemented, which industries are more

likely to seek resort to the measures ex post.

        Economists have developed a number of theories behind why a country implements legislation

allowing for the re-application of import restrictions after it has agreed to upper limits on its import tariffs

(i.e., tariff bindings) through a trade agreement, as China did when it acceded to the WTO in 2001.

Hoekman and Kostecki (2001) refer to these as the “escape valve” and “insurance” motives. Bagwell and

Staiger (1990), for example, use a repeated-game setting to show that allowing such trade restrictions to

be imposed at times of increased trade volumes (when there is a strong terms-of-trade gain motive for a

country to impose a new tariff) allows trading partners to sustain lower cooperative tariffs. Once a




                                                      25
safeguard or antidumping provision is in place, there is then a substantial body of research examining

political-economic explanations for which industries seek and receive protection under its provisions.32

Until recently, for reasons related to both data availability and the frequency with which the policy was

used, research into determinants of use of antidumping and safeguards has focused almost exclusively on

historical users such as the U.S. and EU.

        In presenting a first empirically-oriented examination of China’s own use of antidumping, this

section proceeds in two steps. First, much like the approach we took for the other major users of

antidumping presented in section 2, we characterize the data by focusing first on how China has been

using antidumping over time, which exporting sectors and trading partners it has targeted, as well as the

discriminatory nature of its use. Then we focus on one particular Chinese import-competing sector’s use

of antidumping and present a more formal regression approach in which to examine whether there is a

relationship between China’s post-accession use of antidumping and the pattern and timing of tariff

liberalization it took on as part of its WTO accession commitments.



4.1     China’s adoption and use of import-restricting antidumping and safeguards

Figure 4 illustrates China’s growing use of antidumping between 1997 and 2005 over time and across

sectors. As shown in figure 4a, Chinese industries initiated only 3 investigations in 1997, the year it

implemented its antidumping provision. However, since 2002, the number of new requests for

antidumping import restrictions has grown to between 20 and 30 per year.33 In a more formal regression

framework in the next section, we examine whether there is evidence of a relationship between the post-




32
   Blonigen and Prusa (2003) provide a detailed survey of the political-economic literature on antidumping, while
Bown and Crowley (2005) survey the literature on safeguards. Examples of important determinants include a) the
standard political-economy explanations (e.g., Grossman and Helpman, 1994; Mayer 1994) for differential provision
of import protection across industries, b) use by industries with imperfectly competitive market structures so as to
segment markets internationally, and c) the potential retaliation threat explanation (e.g., Blonigen and Bown, 2003).
33
  According to Kennedy (2005), China reformed its 1997 antidumping law in November 2001 to bring it into
conformity with WTO obligations.


                                                         26
accession use of antidumping and the level and timing of market access commitments that China

undertook as part of its 2001 accession to the WTO

        Figure 4 also documents the sectoral distribution of China’s antidumping investigations, revealing

that they have been dominated by the industrial chemicals sector, with only a small fraction of use by the

steel, textile and apparel, and other import-competing industries. Figure 4b illustrates the share of these

particular industries’ imports in China’s total imports received over the 1995-2005 period. Not

surprisingly, there is nothing apparent in the raw trade data that would appear to justify why these

particular Chinese industries have become the predominant users of antidumping within China.

        Table 7 provides more detail as to the outcomes of the Chinese antidumping investigations across

exporting country targets broken down by its pre-accession (1997-2001) versus post-accession (2002-

2004) use. When we compare this data to similarly broken out data for the other major users of

antidumping illustrated in tables 2 and 3, these data indicate that China may be using antidumping quite

differently. Not only are Chinese cases dominated by a particular sector (chemicals, see figure 4), data on

the overall caseload of Chinese investigations and outcomes (table 7) indicates that there is much less

differentiation or discrimination across targeted exporting countries. Each of the targeted countries is a

major source of Chinese imports, and they each lose a similar proportion of investigations so that the

result is that their exporters each face new trade restrictions with similar frequency. China also rarely

names only one country in an antidumping investigation over an imported product, which is another

potential means of discriminating across exporters that other antidumping-using countries have used.

Furthermore, unlike many other new users of antidumping, China almost exclusively applies import

restrictions as ad valorem duties, and the duties imposed do not appear be radically different across

countries either. To summarize the implications of this table – unlike the evidence for other country users

in tables 2 and 3 – China applied antidumping in a relatively nondiscriminatory manner during this time

period - i.e., for China there is no country that it treats like others treat China.

        Next, since so much of the antidumping caseload within China is focused on industrial chemicals,

we illustrate in figure 5 additional information on the exporting targets involved in these cases. Consistent


                                                       27
with the features of its overall nondiscriminatory application of the policy documented in table 5, it

appears from figures 5a and 5b that the vast majority of the chemicals industry requests for new

antidumping protection target what appear to be China’s major sources for its chemical imports over the

1997-2005 period – the U.S., EU, Korea, Japan, Russia and Taiwan.

        Finally, we point out that Chinese industries have only pursued one safeguard investigation since

the 2001 WTO accession. This occurred during the global steel crisis of 2002 and is associated with a

cross-country surge in steel safeguard investigations – led by the United States and followed by at least

eight other WTO members. The result of this particular Chinese safeguard investigation was that it

followed the U.S. lead and imposed definitive safeguard restrictions on steel imports that lasted between

May 2002 and December 2003.34



4.2     What explains China’s use of antidumping?

Given that China’s use of antidumping is concentrated almost exclusively in the industrial chemicals

sector, there is little to be gained by an attempt to exploit across-industry variation to explain this newly

imposed protection. Kennedy (2005, 423) conjectures that chemicals (and steel) are the primary industrial

users of antidumping within China for a number of reasons: they are large, concentrated and state-owned,

and they are less involved than other industries in international production sharing or joint ventures, and

they primarily produce for the domestic market. Thus, in this section, we provide a more formal empirical

investigation into the potential within-sector determinants of which chemical products sought post-WTO

accession protection under China’s antidumping law. While such an approach obviously limits our

insights to one industry, focusing on the chemicals sector alone does simplify our data collection work in

that we will not need to construct measures to control for between-sector differences in political-

economic determinants of demands for import protection.


34
  According to WTO (2006, p. 87) China imposed a preliminary safeguard in the form of tariff quotas in May 2002
for 180 days. It then imposed definitive safeguard “on five of the eleven products investigated on 20 November
2002. Although the measures were expected to remain for three years , they were terminated on 26 December
2003.”


                                                      28
        The time series features of figures 4 and 5a provide anecdotal evidence that there is a surge in

industrial-chemical products that sought antidumping protection immediately after China’s WTO

accession in 2001. Below we provide a regression approach in which we examine more formally whether

there is a link between the size and timing of the trade liberalization undertaken and the subsequent resort

to antidumping protection in this industry.35 Our approach is to focus on roughly 450 different 6-digit

industrial chemical products in chapters 28 (Inorganic Chemicals) and 29 (Organic Chemicals) of the

Harmonized System classification system, 19 of which were produced by Chinese industries that sought

protection under antidumping at least once between 2001 and 2005. These chemical products alone

formed the basis of nearly 60% of all new antidumping investigations initiated by China during the 2001

and 2005 period.36

        Before turning to the formal regression analysis, consider first figure 6 which motivates our

approach by plotting over the 1996-2005 period the product-level average of two different data series –

MFN applied tariff and import values - associated with two different categories of chemical products –

those products that sought post-accession antidumping protection versus those that did not. First, both

product categories indicate a similar time trend – applied MFN tariff rates are falling over the period, and

Chinese imports are increasing dramatically over the period. One apparent difference from the raw data,

however, is that products facing antidumping during the 2001-2005 period were also those that

experienced a sharper reduction in China’s applied MFN tariff rate in the accession year of 2001-2002.

One explanation consistent with this figure is that products that delayed tariff liberalization until 2001




35
   Feinberg and Reynolds (2007) present evidence of this relationship on a different sample of data. They examine
the 1995-2003 period and the link between trade liberalization and the subsequent use of antidumping on a cross-
country sample of data at a much higher level of disaggregation – i.e., 21 different HS section level heading
industries based on WTO-provided antidumping filings data. Our approach exploits more disaggregated data and
also focuses only the within-sector, product-level variation within one sector within one country.
36
  According to the data collected in Bown (2007), 70 of the 123 Chinese antidumping investigations initiated
between 2001 and 2005 (aggregating investigations of firms from different EU-member countries consistently into
one EU observation) contained products in Chapters 28 or 29 of the HS system.



                                                       29
were the products that subsequently felt the pressure to re-implement protection in the form of new

antidumping import restrictions quickly thereafter.37

         Table 8 provides a more formal econometric analysis of the link between tariff liberalization and

subsequent antidumping use. There we report marginal effects estimates of the binomial probit model of

determinants of whether each of roughly 450 particular 6-digit HS products in the chemical industry

sought antidumping protection (=1) in China during the 2001-2005 period.38 After controlling for the size

of imports of the product (0.117), evidence from column (1) indicates that a larger reduction in applied

tariffs in 2001-2002 is associated with a higher probability of seeking antidumping protection from

imports at some point over the subsequent period. The size (-0.017) of the marginal effect is also

economically significant – the implication is that an additional 1 percentage point reduction in the applied

MFN tariff leads to an additional 1.7 percentage point increase in the predicted probability of an

antidumping investigation when the model is evaluated at the means of the data.39

         In the remaining columns we add additional controls as robustness check on the sensitivity of this

result. In column (2) we add a control for the size of the overall tariff liberalization commitment the

product has to undergo between 1996 (the first year for which we have disaggregated tariff data) and

2005. Perhaps surprisingly, the size of the overall tariff reduction commitment undertaken between 1996

and 2005 is negatively related to the decision to seek antidumping protection, though the estimate is not


37
  A second interesting feature of the data series in figure 6 is that imports in products targeted with antidumping
appear to be growing more rapidly since 2001. And this is despite the combination of two factors - they face on
average higher levels of applied MFN tariff rates than products not subsequently targeted with antidumping and
many of the products also subsequently faced additional Chinese antidumping import restrictions.
38
   By choosing the product as the unit of observation, as opposed to a product-foreign exporter pair, we abstract
from potential partner-specific (e.g.., retaliatory) considerations that have been shown to affect antidumping use for
other countries (e.g., Blonigen and Bown, 2003). While this a potential limitation of the current approach, given the
evidence from table 6 that China appears to apply antidumping is a relatively nondiscriminatory manner, eliminating
this potential source of variation may not come at as great a cost as might be the case for other antidumping-user
countries.
39
  When evaluated at the means of the data, the model’s predicted probability of an investigation is 0.032. Thus an
additional 1 percentage point reduction in the reduction in the applied MFN tariff (e.g., from the mean reduction of -
2.24 percentage points to -3.24 percentage points) leads to an increase in the predicted probability of an
investigation by 1.7 percentage points to 0.049. Note that this tariff reduction is well within one standard deviation
of the applied tariff reduction in the sample, which is 1.23 percentage points.


                                                         30
statistically significant.40 Furthermore, the size of the impact of the accession-year tariff liberalization

commitment impact increases to -0.023. Next, in column (3) we also control for the product’s post-

accession “tariff overhang” defined as the difference between the 2005 applied MFN tariff rate and the

2005 MFN bound tariff rate commitment. The smaller this difference (i.e., the closer is the applied rate to

the binding), the higher is the probability that the product seeks additional protection via antidumping,

perhaps because it has no other WTO-consistent form to implement additional protection.41 Finally, in

column (5) we control for whether the product experienced a pre-accession surge in imports. While we

expect this to be positively related to requests for antidumping protection between 2001-2005, there is no

evidence of this relationship from this specification. Nevertheless, the sign and estimated size of the

coefficients on the other variables of interest remain unchanged.

         In summary, there is some evidence from examination of Chinese chemical products – by far the

dominant user of antidumping within China during its immediate post-accession period – that there is a

relationship between the size of the tariff liberalization undertaken between 2001-2002 (the year of its

WTO accession), and China’s subsequent use of antidumping between 2001 and 2005. In particular, an

additional 1 percentage point reduction in the MFN applied tariff rate during 2001-2002 is associated with

a 1.7 to 2.3 percentage point increase in the probability that a given chemical product seeks an

antidumping investigation over the subsequent 5 year period. This is a large effect given that the predicted

probability of the average product seeking antidumping protection during the period is only 2.9 to 3.2

percent. It is also apparent that it may be the timing of the effect that matters, as there is no statistically



40
   One explanation for a potential positive estimated effect is that it could instead be picking up the effect of the
underlying ability of producers of certain products to organize politically – i.e., domestic producers of products
unable to maintain (applied MFN) tariff protection over the 1996-2005 period (in the face of WTO accession) are
also unable to organize politically and convince Chinese government authorities that they should receive special
import protection under antidumping. Note finally that, in unreported results, we have ruled out the possibility that
this result is driven by collinearity between the 2001-2002 tariff change and the broader 1996-2005 tariff change.
41
  Though statistically significant and consistent with what theory would predict, economically, this effect is quite
small as there is actually quite little difference in the underlying data between the applied rates and bound rates (-0.2
percentage points) and which could be a statistical anomaly associated with averaging the actual tariff bindings
(made at the 8-digit level) to the 6-digit level required for the empirical analysis.



                                                           31
significant relationship between the probability of a post-accession antidumping investigation and the size

of the overall trade liberalization commitment made for the 1996-2005 time period.



5       China in WTO Dispute Settlement

Negotiating a successful accession into the WTO is itself an important achievement. Nevertheless, it does

not automatically follow that, upon becoming a member of the organization, an acceding country

necessarily receives equal treatment under WTO rules. Furthermore, becoming a member does not by

itself imply that the country’s own policymakers continue to live-up to the trade liberalizing commitments

that they or their predecessor agreed for the country to take on. An implication of this for the WTO is

that, as a self-enforcing agreement, it is sometimes through resort to formal dispute settlement litigation

and threats (and follow-through) of retaliation that the bargain of countries exchanging a balance of

market accession concessions “works” and the benefits of WTO membership are conferred.

        Therefore, an import source from which to track China’s transition to full WTO membership is its

experience in formal WTO dispute settlement. Upon receiving entry into the organization in 2001, it

would not have been surprising to observe an almost immediate onslaught of formal China-centered

disputes, simply because the country is involved in a substantial share of global trade in many sensitive

product categories with dozens of different trading partners.42 This includes disputes both in which China

would be a respondent (defendant), with its policies being challenged by other WTO members who may

have been biding their time until 2002 China would finally also face the discipline of international rules,

and also in which China would be a complainant (plaintiff) going on the offensive to enforce the market

access commitments that the existing WTO members had promised.

42
   Horn, Mavroidis and Nordström (2005) provide evidence from a 1995-1998 sample of data that the pattern of
actual disputes compares favorably to that predicted from a simple probabilistic model that links the frequency of
disputes simply to the amount of trade a country undertakes as well as the diversity of its trading partners. The
implication from such a model for a country like China is that, simply because it is a country that is involved in a
substantial amount of international trade with many it countries, it would likely see itself involved in many formal
WTO trade disputes, even when abstracting from the likelihood that certain traded products may be more likely to
face disputes than others. This idea is also supported by the evidence provided in Bown (2005a,b) which examines




                                                        32
         Instead, as we illustrate in the next two sections, China has been largely and conspicuously absent

from major WTO litigation in the initial period following its 2001 accession. Nevertheless, there are

increasing signs that this grace period may be coming to an end which may foreshadow a major shift in

China’s role in formal WTO dispute settlement going forward.



5.1      China as complainant

The top half of table 9 presents an up-to-date breakdown of China’s formal participation in WTO trade

dispute proceedings as a complainant (plaintiff). Perhaps surprisingly, China has filed thus far only one

formal dispute of its own as a complainant – participating as a co-complainant (along with eight other

countries) in the formal challenge to the U.S. use of a safeguard to restrict steel imports in 2002.43 While

China ultimately benefited from the successful resolution to this case – the U.S. complied with WTO

legal rulings and removed the steel safeguard measure in December 2003 – this outcome was arguably a

by-product of the legal efforts undertaken by more active WTO members in the case such as the EU,

which successfully identified politically sensitive U.S. export products to target for retaliation threats.44

         There are a number of complementary reasons to indicate some surprise that China has not played

a more active offensive role as a complainant in WTO trade disputes thus far. First, the most common

measure to challenge under formal WTO dispute settlement is increasingly another country’s antidumping



trade dispute data from the period prior to China’s WTO accession and finds that the decision of a WTO member to
actively participate in a potential trade dispute is positively related to the country’s market access interest at stake.
43
   Indeed, some countries immediately take part in formal trade disputes upon entry into the WTO. For example,
almost immediately after acceding in 1996 and 1997, respectively, Ecuador and Panama joined (as co-complainants)
the ongoing, U.S.-led trade dispute against the EU’s import-restricting banana regime, as bananas are an important
export sector for both of these economies.
44
   Despite its lack of prior experience in such cases, there is nevertheless some evidence from the case that China put
itself in the position to take appropriate retaliatory action if the EU’s efforts were not successful at getting the U.S.
to comply. According to WTO (2006, pp. 87-88, emphasis added) “In response to a safeguard measure imposed by
the United States, China notified the Committee on Safeguards in May 2002, its proposed suspension of concessions
and other obligations, in accordance with Article 12.5 of the Agreement on Safeguards. The proposed suspension,
which would have taken effect from March 2005 or from the fifth day following a DSB decision that the measures
adopted by the United States were inconsistent with the WTO Agreement, would have taken the form of an increase
in duty of 24% on selected products originating in the United States.”



                                                           33
import restrictions.45 When combining the feature of frequent WTO filings over antidumping measures

with evidence from the data presented in section 2 regarding the discriminatory treatment of China under

foreign antidumping (even after its 2001 accession), it would not have been surprising to see China begin

to start filing disputes over this issue. This also suggests the potential scope for a substantial number of

Chinese disputes over this issue going forward.

        There are a number of potential contributing explanations worthy of discussion, even though they

are not empirically testable at this stage, given the lack of data on Chinese disputes. One contributing

explanation is certainly China’s continued non-market economy designation, which allows policymakers

in certain trading partners substantial discretion with how they can construct estimates that China’s

exporters have dumped.46 Nevertheless, in the case of the United States, the 2007 U.S. decision to now

consider countervailing duty investigations against China - i.e., implicitly treating China as a market

economy under one law – while continuing to treat China as an NME under another trade law

(antidumping), does raise the possibility of China pursuing a dispute in this area.

        A second potential explanation for China’s failure to challenge other country’s use of

antidumping through formal WTO disputes is if it had decided instead to take matters into its own hands

by using its own antidumping trade policy to retaliate in order to lessen the likelihood of future

discriminatory. However, this appears to be an unlikely explanation for China’s failure to challenge other

countries’ use of antidumping. The data presented in section 4 indicates that China’s use of antidumping

has been fairly limited – i.e., dominated by the chemicals industry – and its own application of




45
  Bown and Hoekman (forthcoming) report that over 25% of all formal WTO disputes between 1999-2006 related
to antidumping. This is likely because of a number of factors including a) the increasing resort to antidumping
globally, b) its relative transparency, and c) the fact that an antidumping measure is foreign country-specific so
successful removal (via formal WTO litigation) will not necessarily generate positive spillovers to other trading
partners, which limits the free-rider problem associated with organizing to pursue a WTO dispute in the first place.
See also Bown (2005a).
46
   The argument is, even if China filed a WTO dispute and won a case against an antidumping-imposing country,
because of China’s continued NME status, the using country would still have substantial discretion to identify an
alternative means of imposing a WTO-consistent trade restriction that would leave China’s exporters no better off
than if it had not pursued the case to begin with.


                                                        34
antidumping has been relatively nondiscriminatory across foreign export targets in rough proportion to

the size of their chemical exports to China.



5.2     China as respondent

The lower half of table 9 presents information on the formal WTO trade disputes that China has been

involved in as a respondent (defendant) country. Just as China has been infrequently on the offensive in

WTO litigation, it has also infrequently had to defend itself from foreign challenges thus far. 47 Prior to a

flurry of formal disputes filed in 2006-2007, China has only been challenged in one dispute in 2004 – a

value-added tax on integrated circuits in a case the U.S. brought that China quickly settled.

        Since 2006, WTO have filed a number of new disputes against China, perhaps signaling an end to

the no-litigation standoff in the initial period following China’s 2001 accession. In 2006, the U.S., EU and

Canada initiated a challenge over China’s alleged discriminatory treatment of imports of auto parts.

Through June 2007, the U.S. had initiated three additional disputes against China. The first dispute

initiated along with Mexico, accuses China of offering tax refunds and industrial subsidies in violation of

its WTO commitments. The other two complementary disputes involve the U.S. challenging China’s

treatment of intellectual property (IP)-intensive industries such as movies, music and books. The first

alleges that China has failed to sufficiently legislate and enforce laws protecting the IP of U.S. firms (thus

failing to live up to its commitments under the TRIPs Agreement), the second alleges that U.S. firms face

discriminatory barriers when attempting to distribute their IP-intensive products and services within

China (a violation of the GATS).




47
   It is somewhat surprising, for example, to have seen the United States actively pursuing WTO disputes against
China sooner than it ended up doing so, given the political pressure imposed by many domestic constituencies. I.e.,
protectionist sentiment in the U.S. Congress vis-à-vis China that focused on the growth of China’s bilateral trade
surplus with the United States and calls for the yuan to be revalued long preceded the eventual flurry of new U.S.
disputes against China in 2006-2007.



                                                        35
        As the issues at stake under these disputes are fundamental to China’s continued efforts at reform,

it will be important to watch how both sides choose to proceed in these – as well as other impending

WTO challenges to China’s policies – going forward.



5.3     China as an interested third party

While China has been infrequently the main litigant – as either a complainant or respondent – in WTO

trade disputes thus far, table 10 indicates that China has substantial experience following WTO disputes

as an interested third party in cases involving another complainant and respondent country. In 40

different disputes, China has been extremely active in observing the WTO dispute settlement process

through this manner.

        WTO members have many reasons to observe and weigh in on such disputes in this third party

role. One economically-motivated reason to closely follow a dispute is the country’s own market access

interests over a disputed product – e.g., China may want to make sure that any settlement or resolution to

the case between the two disputing parties does not involve a negotiated outcome in which market access

between the two disputants is restructured in a way that discriminates against its exporters. Second, a

country without a market access interest at stake in a particular case may still have a systemic interest if it

affects an interpretation of a WTO rule or procedure affecting its economic interests somewhere else.

Third, countries may also choose to participate via this route as it provides them with a lower (resource

and political) cost of learning about the WTO litigation experience in a way that will likely pay off in

future disputes that they are involved in as complainants or respondents.

        What is clear from the table is that China has chosen to participate in many different types of

disputes over a range of traded products – import restrictions and export promotion, contingent protection,

intellectual property, etc. China is likely using this strategy in part to keep abreast of how the rules are

slowly adjusting as the WTO case law and judicial interpretations begin to fill out some of the missing




                                                      36
areas not explicitly covered by WTO rules.48 Furthermore, China is also likely using this opportunity to

learn about how the interplay between law, political posturing and economics in WTO litigation plays

out. China must certainly recognize the inevitability as a larger trader that it will be a frequent target of

formal dispute settlement activity, and likely sooner rather than later.



5.4     China in future WTO dispute settlement

Our discussion of China’s future in WTO litigation is mere speculation, of course. It is also likely that

China may find itself involved in future WTO trade litigation over issues that have not yet arisen. One

feature of China’s trade is that a new controversy over Chinese export products appears to surface in

media headlines almost every day – whether it be recent allegations of melamine in pet food, diethylene

glycol in toothpaste, lead paint in children’s toys, banned antibiotics in farmed seafood, etc. In each of the

instances thus far, importing countries have imposed trade restrictions that appear, if the prima facie

evidence in news reports is accurate, to be justifiable under WTO provisions. Thus, it is not likely that

any of these product bans would be subject of future trade dispute challenges.49

        Nevertheless, the increasing frequency of such incidents suggests that sooner or later a

policymaker will face domestic political pressure to impose an import restriction over some new concern

that ultimately will be determined to not be based on sound scientific evidence, and in such a case China

may seek to file a dispute to protect its market access rights.50 Perhaps more importantly, the changing




48
 While no strict stare decisis in WTO case law, nevertheless, decisions made in Panel Reports and by the Appellate
Body are frequently based on prior decisions, suggesting that precedent matters at least implicitly.
49
  While under the GATT, imposing import restrictions to protect human, animal or plant health was justified under
Article XX, much of this has been expanded under the WTO to be covered under the Agreement on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary (SPS) measures as well as the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT).
50
   There are a number of examples in WTO cases in which one country imposes an import ban on a product which it
claimed was based on health (or environmental protection) purposes but which another trading partner challenged.
These include U.S. challenges to EU bans on hormone-treated beef and genetically modified foods, as well as
foreign challenges to U.S. measures to restrict tuna and shrimp imports that it alleged were necessary to protect the
lives of dolphins and sea turtles, respectively.



                                                         37
nature of trade and many of these controversies over the impact of imported products is likely to affect

future institutional arrangements over consumer protection, health and safety.



6   Conclusion

This chapter examines a number of different newly compiled dataset to assess issues surrounding China’s

2001 accession to the WTO. We use data from the foreign use of antidumping during the 1995-2001 to

document the discrimination that China faced under this one particular trade policy, identifying one of the

potential benefits its exporters may have expected to receive with WTO membership. Nevertheless, while

a number of other factors were also changing during the time period – including WTO members being

required to otherwise offer China MFN treatment and China’s own rising exports – since 2001, there is no

evidence that foreign discrimination vis-à-vis China via antidumping has improved. Furthermore, there

are a number of additional trade policy instruments (e.g., China safeguards) that have also developed

since 2001 that countries are also resorting to so as to continue to discriminate against Chinese exports in

certain products. Finally, we also are able to find no robust evidence that there is a strategic relationship

between China’s own high import-tariff products and which export products foreign users were targeting

with antidumping.

        Regarding its own introduction of new import-restricting measures, we find that while China is

now in the top five, in terms of the countries that most frequently implement new antidumping trade

restrictions, the post-2001 surge in Chinese use is dominated by its industrial chemicals industry. Unlike

the other major users of antidumping that are each increasingly applying their measures in a

discriminatory fashion, we also provide evidence that China applies such new trade restrictions in a much

less discriminatory (i.e., non-MFN) fashion. Finally, we also provide some evidence from a sample of

Chinese chemical industry data that the cross-product variation in demands for new antidumping

measures during the post-accession is related to the severity of the accession year tariff liberalization

undertaken in 2001-2002.




                                                     38
        Lastly, while it is somewhat surprising that China was not a frequent litigant in formal WTO

dispute settlement activity in the early years after its accession, it is currently confronted by a number of

WTO disputes. Furthermore, given its share in world trade and the political sensitivity of the sectors

involved in many of its traded products, it is likely to be involved in many more disputes going forward.




                                                     39
References

Andersen, Scott and Christian Lau (2002) “Hedging Hopes with Fears in China’s Accession to the World
       Trade Organization: The Transitional Special-Product Safeguard for Chinese Exports,” Journal of
       World Intellectual Property 5(3): 405-476.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (1990) “A Theory of Managed Trade,” American Economic Review
       80(4): 779-795.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (1999) “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American Economic
       Review 89(1): 215-248.
Blonigen, Bruce A. (2006) “Evolving Discretionary Practices of U.S. Antidumping Activity,” Canadian
       Journal of Economics 37(3): 874-900.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and Chad P. Bown (2003) “Antidumping and Retaliation Threats,” Journal of
       International Economics 60(2): 249-273.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and Thomas J. Prusa (2003) “Antidumping,” in E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan
       (eds.) Handbook of International Trade Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
Bown, Chad P. (2004) “How Different Are Safeguards from Antidumping? Evidence from U.S. Trade
       Policies toward Steel,” mimeo, July.
Bown, Chad P. (2005a) “Trade Remedies and World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement: Why Are
       So Few Challenged?” Journal of Legal Studies 34(2): 515-555.
Bown, Chad P. (2005b) “Participation in WTO Dispute Settlement: Complainants, Interested Parties and
       Free Riders,” World Bank Economic Review 19(2): 287-310.
Bown, Chad P. (2007) “Global Antidumping Database,” [Version 1.0 published as World Bank Policy
       Research Paper No. 3737, October 2005. Current version 3.0, June, updated data available at
       http://www.brandeis.edu/~cbown/global_ad/ ].
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley, (2005) “Safeguards,” in Patrick F.J. Macrory, Arthur E.
       Appleton, and Michael G. Plummer (eds.), The World Trade Organization: Legal, Economic and
       Political Analysis. Springer: New York.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley (2007a) “China’s Export Growth and the China Safeguard:
       Threats to the World Trading System?” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No.
       2004-28 (revised), June.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley (2007b) “Trade Deflection and Trade Depression,” Journal of
       International Economics 72(1): 176-201.
Bown, Chad P. and Bernard M. Hoekman (forthcoming) “Making Trade Agreements Relevant for Poor
       Countries: Why Dispute Settlement Is Not Enough,” Journal of World Trade.




                                                    40
Bown, Chad P. and Rachel McCulloch (2004) “The WTO Agreement on Safeguards: An Empirical
        Analysis of Discriminatory Impact," in Michael G. Plummer (ed.), Empirical Methods in
        International Trade. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Department of Commerce (2007) “Press Release: Commerce Applies Anti-Subsidy Law to China,”
        http://www.commerce.gov/opa/press/Secretary_Gutierrez/2007_Releases/March/30_Gutierrez_C
        hina_Anti-subsidy_law_application_rls.html , 30 March.
Durling, James P. and Thomas J. Prusa (2006) “The Trade Effects Associated with an Antidumping
        Epidemic: The Hot-Rolled Steel Market, 1996-2001,” European Journal of Political Economy
        22(3): 675-95.
Feinberg, Robert M. and Kara M. Reynolds (2007) “Tariff Liberalization and Increased Administered
        Protection: Is there a Quid Pro Quo?” The World Economy 30(6): 948-961.
Gallaway, Michael P., Bruce A. Blonigen, and Joseph E. Flynn (1999) “Welfare Costs of the U.S.
        Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Laws,” Journal of International Economics 49(2): 211-
        244.
GATT (1987) “Negotiating Group on Safeguards: Work Already Undertaken in the GATT on
        Safeguards.”      Geneva,    GATT       document        MTN.GNG/NG9/W/1,         available   at
        http://www.worldtradelaw.net/history/ursafeguards/W1.pdf.
Greene, William H. (2000) Econometric Analysis. (4e) New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1994) “Protection for Sale,” American Economic Review
        84(4): 833-850.
Hansen, Wendy L. and Thomas J. Prusa (1996) “Cumulation and ITC Decision-Making: The Sum of the
        Parts is Greater than the Whole,” Economic Inquiry 34(4): 746-769.
Hoekman, Bernard M. and Michael M. Kostecki (2001) The Political Economy of the World Trading
        System: The WTO and Beyond (2nd edition) New York: Oxford University Press.
Horn, Henrik, Petros C. Mavroidis and Håkan Nordström (2005) “Is the Use of the WTO Dispute
        Settlement System Biased?” in Petros C. Mavroidis and Alan Sykes (eds.), The WTO and
        International Trade Law/Dispute Settlement, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Jung, Youngjin (2002) “China’s Aggressive Legalism: China’s First Safeguard Measure,” Journal of
        World Trade 36(6): 1037-1060.
Kennedy, Scott (2005) “China's Porous Protectionism: The Changing Political Economy of Trade
        Policy,” Political Science Quarterly 120(3): 407-432.
Knetter, Michael M. and Thomas J. Prusa (2003) “Macroeconomic Factors and Antidumping Filings:
        Evidence from Four Countries,” Journal of International Economics 61(1): 1-17.




                                                  41
Liu, Xiang and Hylke Vandenbussche (2002) “European Union Anti-Dumping Cases Against China: An
        Overview and Future Prospects with Respect to China’s World Trade Organization
        Membership,” Journal of World Trade 36(6): 1125-1144.
Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (1998) “The Value of Trade Agreements in the Presence of
        Political Pressures,” Journal of Political Economy 106(3): 574-601.
Mayer, Wolfgang (1984) “Endogenous Tariff Formation,” American Economic Review 74(5): 970-985.
Messerlin, Patrick A. (2004) “China in the World Trade Organization: Antidumping and Safeguards,”
        World Bank Economic Review 18(1): 105-130.
Moore, Michael O. (2006) “U.S. Facts-available Antidumping Decisions: An Empirical Analysis,”
        European Journal of Political Economy 22(3): 639-652
Moore, Michael O. and Alan Fox (2006) “Why Don't Foreign Firms Cooperate in U.S. Antidumping
        Investigations?: An Empirical Analysis,” mimeo, June.
Prusa, Thomas J. (2001) “On the Spread and Impact of Antidumping,” Canadian Journal of Economics
        34(3): 591-611.
Staiger, Robert W. And Frank A. Wolak (1994) “Measuring Industry-Specific Protection: Antidumping in
        the United States,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 51-118.
WTO (2001) “Accession of the People’s Republic of China.” available on-line at http://www.wto.org/,
        document number WT/L/432, 23 November.
WTO (2006) “Trade Policy Review Body - Trade Policy Review - Report by the Secretariat - People's
        Republic of China - Revision.” available on-line at http://www.wto.org/, document number
        WT/TPR/S/161/Rev.1, 26 June.
WTO      (2007a)    “AD       Initiations:   By    Reporting     Member”       available      on-line   at
        http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/adp_e/adp_stattab2_e.xls , last accessed on 22 June.
WTO      (2007b)     “AD      Measures:      By    Reporting     Member”       available      on-line   at
        http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/adp_e/adp_stattab7_e.xls , last accessed on 22 June.
WTO      (2007c)     “AD      Initiations:   By    Exporting     Country”      available      on-line   at
        http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/adp_e/adp_stattab1_e.xls , last accessed on 22 June.
WTO       (2007d)      “Statistics     on    Safeguard      Measures,”        available    on-line      at
        http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/safeg_e/safeg_e.htm , last accessed on 22 June.
WTO (2007e) “Statistics on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures,” available on-line at
        http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/scm_e/scm_e.htm , last accessed on 22 June.
Zanaradi, Maurizio (2004) “Antidumping: What are the Numbers to Discuss at Doha?” The World
        Economy 27(3): 403-433.




                                                  42
Data Appendix


Antidumping data
What governments report to the WTO, regarding their use of antidumping is limited and frequently
inconsistent with what is reported in official national government publications. We rely on data reported
to the WTO (e.g., WTO, 2007a,b,c) only infrequently in this chapter, and we use it primarily to
supplement information from our other sources of data that may not be available in the most recent years
(e.g., table 1 and figure 1).
        The source of the data on antidumping use for the empirical analysis is the Global Antidumping
Database, a cross-country data collection project funded by the World Bank and Brandeis University,
which contains more detailed data including dates associated with the investigation, countries targeted,
measures imposed, Harmonized System products affected, etc. The database derives from data hand-
collected from official national government publications, and it covers 19 policy-using countries which
account for roughly 90% of the antidumping activity undertaken by all WTO members over the 1995-
2004 period. Bown (2007) provides a users manual describing the source of the underlying country of the
major users described in the text.
        Data collected on China’s use of antidumping, as reported in the Global Antidumping Database
and Bown (2007), is translated to English from official Chinese government websites. China’s dumping
determination data is taken from the Bureau of Fair Trade for Imports and Exports (MOFCOM,
http://dcj.mofcom.gov.cn/ ), its injury investigations are handled by the Bureau of Industry Injury
Investigation (MOFCOM, http://gpj.mofcom.gov.cn/ ). Additional information was collected from the
China Trade Remedy Information website (http://www.cacs.gov.cn/DefaultWebApp/index.htm ).


Import and export data
Product-level import and export data at the 6-digit Harmonized System level is from Comtrade, taken
from World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database.


Tariff data
China’s applied MFN tariff rates (available for years 1996, 1997, 2001-2005) and its final WTO tariff
binding schedule (submitted in 2001) are available at the 8-digit product-level from the WTO Integrated
Database, taken from WITS. We use simple averaging to aggregate the tariff rates from the 8-digit to the
6-digit level to match them with the 6-digit Chinese import and export data.




                                                    43
Industry Categories
We allocate products from Harmonized System chapters into broad industry categories according to the
following


                 Harmonized System
                                          Description
                 (HS) Chapters

                      01-05               Animal and animal products
                      06-15               Vegetable products
                      16-24               Foodstuffs
                      25-27               Mineral products
                      28-38               Chemicals and allied industries
                      39-40               Plastics / rubber
                      41-43               Leather
                      44-49               Wood and wood products
                      50-63               Textiles and apparel
                      64-67               Footwear / headgear
                      68-71               Stone / glass
                      72-83               Metals
                      84-85               Machinery / electrical
                      86-89               Transportation
                      90-97               Miscellaneous




                                                 44
Figure 1. WTO Member New Antidumping Investigations against Chinese Exports, 1995-2006


                            80
   New AD investigations
  against Chinese exports
                            70


                            60


                            50

  Other User                40
  (WTO Members)
  New User
  Developing Country        30
  Historic User
  Developed Country
                            20
-- WTO Data Set Total
                            10


                            0
                                 1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006



Notes: Data in the bars is compiled from Bown (2007) and is only available through 2004. Aggregate data on total
       investigations against China’s exporters by year from an alternative data source (WTO, 2007c) is represented by
       the dotted line. “Historic User” includes the four developed economies of U.S., EU, Canada and Australia; “New
       User” includes the six developing economies of Argentina, Brazil, India, Mexico, South Africa, and Turkey.
       “Other User” is all other WTO members, including Taiwan (even prior to its WTO accession). The 1996 “Other
       User” surge is due to 29 initiations by Peru against China’s textile and footwear products.




                                                             45
Figure 2. Antidumping by Four “Historic User” Developed Countries by Export Sector, 1995-2004

                           a. New Antidumping Investigations against Chinese Exports

 New AD investigations         25
against Chinese exports



                               20




                               15




                               10

      Other
      Chemicals
                                5
      Textiles/apparel
      Metals/products


                                0
                                     1995     1996     1997          1998          1999     2000    2001   2002   2003    2004



                               b. Chinese Exports to Historical User Countries by Sector

China's exports,         250
 $U.S. billions


                         200




                         150




                         100

     Other
     Chemicals
                          50
     Textiles/apparel
     Metals/products


                           0
                            1995      1996      1997          1998          1999          2000     2001    2002    2003      2004



     Notes:        Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007), HS system export data from Comtrade. “Historic User” includes
                   the U.S., EU, Canada and Australia; “New User” is Argentina, Brazil, India, Mexico, South Africa, and Turkey.
                   “Metals/products” are HS chapters 72-83, “Textiles/apparel” are 50-63, “Chemicals” are 28-38.




                                                                     46
   Figure 3. Antidumping by Six “New User” Developing Countries by Export Sector, 1995-2004

                              a. New Antidumping Investigations against Chinese Exports

 New AD investigations           45
against Chinese exports
                                 40

                                 35

                                 30

                                 25

                                 20

                                 15
      Other
      Chemicals                  10
      Textiles/apparel
      Metals/products            5

                                 0
                                      1995   1996    1997      1998          1999      2000    2001   2002   2003    2004



                                  b. Chinese Exports to New User Countries by Sector

China's exports,         25
 $U.S. billions



                         20




                         15




                         10


     Other
     Chemicals
                         5
     Textiles/apparel
     Metals/products


                         0
                          1995        1996    1997      1998          1999          2000      2001    2002    2003      2004



     Notes:        Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007), HS system export data from Comtrade. “New User” is
                   Argentina, Brazil, India, Mexico, South Africa, and Turkey. “Metals/products” are HS chapters 72-83,
                   “Textiles/apparel” are 50-63, “Chemicals” are 28-38.




                                                               47
                     Figure 4. Antidumping by China and Imports by Sector, 1995-2005

                        a. New Antidumping Investigations against Chinese Imports

New Chinese AD            35
 investigations
against imports
                          30


                          25


                          20


                          15


Other                     10
Chemicals
Textiles/apparel
                          5
Metals/products


                          0
                                      1997           1999      2000     2001       2002          2003          2004     2005

                                                    b. Chinese Imports by Sector

  China's imports,       1,000
   $U.S. billions
                          900

                          800

                          700

                          600

                          500

                          400

     Other                300
     Chemicals
                          200
     Textiles/apparel
     Metals/products
                          100

                               0
                               1995          1996       1997    1998   1999    2000       2001          2002     2003   2004   2005



Notes:      Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007), HS system import data from Comtrade. “Metals/products” are
            HS chapters 72-83, “Textiles/apparel” are 50-63, “Chemicals” are 28-38.




                                                                  48
Figure 5. China’s Chemical Industry Antidumping Use and Imports by Target Country, 1997-2005

                         a. China’s Chemical Industry New Antidumping Investigations


    New Chinese AD investigations          25
          against imports



                                           20




                                           15




                                           10
        Other
        Taiwan
        Russia
        Japan                              5
        Korea
        European Union
        USA
                                           0
                                                   1997   1998   1999     2000          2001          2002    2003   2004   2005



                                                b. China’s Chemical Industry Imports


   China's imports,           60
    $U.S. billions

                              50



                              40



                              30


    Other
    Taiwan                    20
    Russia
    Japan
    Korea                     10

    European Union
    USA
                               0
                                    1997         1998     1999     2000          2001          2002          2003    2004     2005

    Notes: Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007) and HS system import data is from Comtrade. “Chemicals” are HS
             chapters 28-38.




                                                                 49
Figure 6. China’s Tariff Liberalization, Imports and Antidumping Use over Chemical Products,
                                           1996-2005

Average applied   12.00                                                                         500   Index value of imports,
MFN tariff (%)                                                                                              1996=100
                                                                                                450
                  10.00
                                                                                                400

                                                                                                                 Applied MFN tariff,
                                                                                                350
                   8.00                                                                                          products targeted
                                                                                                                 with AD 2001-2005
                                                                                                300

                                                                                                                 Applied MFN tariff,
                   6.00                                                                         250
                                                                                                                 products not targeted
                                                                                                                 with AD 2001-2005
                                                                                                200
                   4.00
                                                                                                150              Imports, products
                                                                                                                 targeted with AD
                                                                                                                 2001-2005
                                                                                                100
                   2.00
                                                                                                50               Imports, products not
                                                                                                                 targeted with AD
                                                                                                                 2001-2005
                   0.00                                                                         0
                          1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005


    Notes: Data compiled by the author based on averages from 19 (432) different 6-digit HS products in HS chapters 28 and
             29 that China targeted (did not target) with new antidumping investigations over the 2001-2005 period.




                                                               50
               Table 1. Use of Antidumping by WTO Members, 1995-2001 and 2002-2006


                                    New Antidumping Investigations           New Antidumping Measures Imposed

                                     1995-2001             2002-2006           1995-2001             2002-2006
Country

“Historical” Developed Economy Users
    Australia                       139                         34                  41                   30
    Canada                          102                         35                  67                   17
    European Union                  246                         96                 161                   70
    United States                   256                         82                 165                   74
  (Share of total)                 (0.39)                     (0.29)              (0.40)               (0.22)

“New” Developing Country Users
    Argentina                           165                     40                  95                   57
    Brazil                               96                     30                  51                   15
    India                               252                    124                 152                  179
    Mexico                               49                     33                  51                   31
    South Africa                        156                     40                  93                   27
    Turkey                               35                     56                  22                   85
  (Share of total)                     (0.40)                 (0.39)              (0.43)               (0.46)

China                                    20                     83                   0                   92
  (Share of total)                     (0.01)                 (0.10)              (0.00)               (0.11)

Other WTO Members                       377                    186                 187                  179
  (Share of total)                     (0.20)                 (0.22)              (0.17)               (0.21)


Total                                   1893                   839                1085                  856


Note: Data for the initiations and measures used in this table compiled by the author from WTO (2007a,b). Note
      that ‘New Antidumping Measures Imposed’ implies measures imposed that year – i.e., not necessarily
      measures from investigations that started in that year. This explains why there were more measures imposed
      over the 2002-2006 period (856) than there were new investigations initiated during that period (839).




                                                         51
                         Table 2. Historical User Antidumping against China, 1995-2001 and 2002-2004

                                                         Investigations         Only country          Mean        Share of AD-
  AD-
                                     Antidumping           resulting in           named in         margin (%),      imposing
  imposing      Exporting
                                     investigations    measures (share of   investigation (share    cond’l on        country
  country,      country target
                                    (share of total)    target country’s     of target country’s    measures         import
  years
                                                         investigations)       investigations)      imposed       market (rank)

  U.S.,          1   China            31     (0.13)     21         (0.68)       13       (0.42)       131.77       0.08     (5)
  1995-          2   Japan            24     (0.10)     16         (0.67)       7        (0.29)       65.23        0.13     (3)
  2001           3   EU               24     (0.10)     12         (0.50)       5        (0.21)       18.07        0.19     (2)
                 4   Korea            19     (0.08)      9         (0.47)       2        (0.11)       17.73        0.03     (7)
                 5   Taiwan           16     (0.07)     10         (0.63)       2        (0.13)       12.55        0.03     (6)
                     All other       124     (0.52)     57         (0.46)       18       (0.15)       68.62        0.54
                     Total           238     (1.00)     125        (0.53)       47       (0.20)       66.16        1.00


  U.S.,          1   China            25     (0.26)      19        (0.76)       13       (0.52)       148.38       0.13      (3)
  2002-          2   India             9     (0.09)       3        (0.33)        2       (0.22)       40.43        0.01     (14)
  2004           3   EU                8     (0.08)       2        (0.25)        0       (0.00)       15.09        0.19      (1)
                 4   Japan             6     (0.06)       2        (0.33)        3       (0.50)       91.29        0.09      (5)
                 5   South Africa      5     (0.05)       0        (0.00)        3       (0.60)         .          0.00     (27)
                     All other        43     (0.45)      16        (0.37)       8        (0.19)       36.10        0.58
                     Total            96     (1.00)      42        (0.44)       29       (0.30)       88.83        1.00


  EU,            1   China            36     (0.14)     19         (0.53)       16       (0.44)       59.52        0.06      (4)
  1995-          2   India            24     (0.10)     15         (0.63)       6        (0.25)       52.88        0.01     (20)
  2001           3   Korea            21     (0.08)      9         (0.43)       6        (0.29)       27.51        0.02      (9)
                 4   Thailand         14     (0.06)     10         (0.71)       1        (0.07)       33.83        0.01     (21)
                 5   Taiwan           13     (0.05)      8         (0.62)       6        (0.46)       26.15        0.03      (7)
                     All other       142     (0.57)     91         (0.64)       13       (0.09)       40.80        0.87
                     Total           250     (1.00)     152        (0.61)       48       (0.19)       42.40        1.00


  EU,            1   China            16     (0.28)      15        (0.94)       10       (0.63)       61.99        0.10      (2)
  2002-          2   Russia            6     (0.11)       3        (0.50)        1       (0.17)       30.70        0.05      (5)
  2004           3   Vietnam           4     (0.07)       2        (0.50)        1       (0.25)        7.70        0.00     (40)
                 4   U.S.              3     (0.05)       2        (0.67)        2       (0.67)       98.50        0.16      (1)
                 5   Norway            3     (0.05)       2        (0.67)        2       (0.67)       31.25        0.04      (6)
                     All other        25     (0.44)      11        (0.44)       4        (0.16)       23.59        0.64
                     Total            57     (1.00)      35        (0.61)       20       (0.35)       43.18        1.00


Note:     Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007). HS system import data from Comtrade. †EU import data is extra-EU imports only.
          *For consistency, this table only allows for one “EU” entry for each product-specific investigation, hence total number of
          investigations and imposed measures may differ from table 1 due to aggregation of EU member cases per investigation.




                                                                   52
                    Table 2. (cont) Historical User Antidumping against China, 1995-2001 and 2002-2004

                                                       Investigations         Only country          Mean        Share of AD-
  AD-
                                   Antidumping           resulting in           named in         margin (%),      imposing
  imposing     Exporting
                                   investigations    measures (share of   investigation (share    cond’l on        country
  country,     country target
                                  (share of total)    target country’s     of target country’s    measures         import
  years
                                                       investigations)       investigations)      imposed       market (rank)

  Australia,    1   EU             23      (0.18)       4        (0.17)       11       (0.48)          .         0.23      (1)
  1995-         2   Indonesia      14      (0.11)       2        (0.14)       5        (0.36)          .         0.03     (10)
  2001          3   China          13      (0.10)       2        (0.15)       7        (0.54)          .         0.07      (4)
                4   Korea          11      (0.09)       5        (0.45)       2        (0.18)          .         0.04      (6)
                5   Thailand        9      (0.07)       5        (0.56)       3        (0.33)          .         0.02     (11)
                    All other      55      (0.44)      18        (0.33)       11       (0.20)          .         0.62
                    Total          125     (1.00)      36        (0.29)       39       (0.31)          .         1.00


  Australia,    1   EU              6      (0.24)       2        (0.33)       3        (0.50)          .         0.23      (1)
  2002-         2   Korea            5     (0.20)       4        (0.80)       2        (0.40)          .         0.04      (7)
  2004          3   China           4      (0.16)      3         (0.75)       2        (0.50)          .         0.11      (4)
                4   Canada           2     (0.08)       1        (0.50)       2        (1.00)          .         0.01     (13)
                5   Thailand         2     (0.08)       1        (0.50)       0        (0.00)          .         0.03     (10)
                    All other       6      (0.24)      4         (0.67)       0        (0.00)          .         0.57
                    Total           25     (1.00)      15        (0.60)       9        (0.36)          .         1.00


  Canada,       1   EU              11     (0.12)       5        (0.45)       3        (0.27)       45.90        0.10      (2)
  1995-         2   U.S.            10     (0.11)       7        (0.70)       8        (0.80)       42.80        0.67      (1)
  2001          3   China           10     (0.11)       6        (0.60)       5        (0.50)       45.17        0.03      (5)
                4   Brazil           5     (0.06)       3        (0.60)       1        (0.20)       28.00        0.00     (11)
                5   Taiwan           5     (0.06)       3        (0.60)       0        (0.00)       49.90        0.01      (6)
                    All other       49     (0.54)      31        (0.63)       3        (0.06)       35.76        0.17
                    Total           90     (1.00)      55        (0.61)       20       (0.22)       39.12        1.00


  Canada,       1   China            7     (0.26)      5         (0.71)       3        (0.43)       49.96        0.06     (3)
  2002-         2   Taiwan           3     (0.11)       1        (0.33)       0        (0.00)       68.94        0.01     (8)
  2004          3   Korea            2     (0.07)       2        (1.00)       0        (0.00)       135.00       0.02     (6)
                4   U.S.             2     (0.07)      1         (0.50)       1        (0.50)       165.00       0.61     (1)
                5   Mexico           1     (0.04)      1         (1.00)       0        (0.00)       98.00        0.04     (5)
                    All other       12     (0.44)      6         (0.50)       0        (0.00)       76.18        0.26
                    Total           27     (1.00)      16        (0.59)       4        (0.15)       81.80        1.00


Note:   Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007). HS system import data from Comtrade. †EU import data is extra-EU imports only.
        *For consistency, this table only allows for one “EU” entry for each product-specific investigation, hence total number of
        investigations and imposed measures may differ from table 1 due to aggregation of EU member cases per investigation.




                                                                 53
                 Table 3. New User Antidumping against China, 1995-2001 and 2002-2004

                                                         Investigations           Only country       Share of AD-
 AD-
                                     Antidumping           resulting in             named in           imposing
 imposing      Exporting
                                     investigations    measures (share of     investigation (share      country
 country,      country target
                                    (share of total)    target country’s       of target country’s      import
 years
                                                         investigations)         investigations)     market (rank)

 Argentina,     1   China            32      (0.21)      28        (0.88)        22        (0.69)     0.04      (5)
 1995-2001      2   Brazil            30     (0.20)      20        (0.67)        17        (0.57)     0.23      (2)
                3   EU               19      (0.13)       9        (0.47)        10        (0.53)     0.27      (1)
                4   Taiwan             9     (0.06)       9        (1.00)        0         (0.00)     0.01     (11)
                5   South Africa      9      (0.06)       5        (0.56)        1         (0.11)     0.00     (23)
                    All other        50      (0.34)      35        (0.70)        18        (0.36)     0.44
                    Total            149     (1.00)      106       (0.71)        68        (0.46)     1.00


 Argentina,     1   China              6     (0.22)      5         (0.83)        6         (1.00)     0.05      (4)
 2002-2004      2   Brazil             3     (0.11)       2        (0.67)         2        (0.67)     0.33      (1)
                3   U.S.               2     (0.07)      2         (1.00)        0         (0.00)     0.17      (3)
                4   Korea              2     (0.07)       2        (1.00)         0        (0.00)     0.01     (10)
                5   Mexico             2     (0.07)      2         (1.00)        0         (0.00)     0.03      (7)
                    All other         12     (0.44)      9         (0.75)        3         (0.25)     0.42
                    Total             27     (1.00)      22        (0.81)        11        (0.41)     1.00


 Brazil,        1   China             15     (0.16)      12        (0.80)        14        (0.93)     0.02      (7)
 1995-2001      2   EU                13     (0.14)      8         (0.62)        3         (0.23)     0.27      (1)
                3   U.S.              13     (0.14)      6         (0.46)        5         (0.38)     0.23      (2)
                4   South Africa       4     (0.04)      3         (0.75)        1         (0.25)     0.00     (25)
                5   Mexico             3     (0.03)      3         (1.00)        0         (0.00)     0.02     (12)
                    All other         45     (0.48)      22        (0.49)        10        (0.22)     0.45
                    Total             93     (1.00)      54        (0.58)        33        (0.35)     1.00


 Brazil,        1   China             9      (0.28)      6         (0.67)        8         (0.89)     0.05      (4)
 2002-2003      2   India              5     (0.16)       4        (0.80)         2        (0.40)     0.01     (17)
                3   EU                5      (0.16)      3         (0.60)        2         (0.40)     0.25      (1)
                4   U.S.              5      (0.16)      1         (0.20)        2         (0.40)     0.20      (2)
                5   Romania            1     (0.03)       1        (1.00)         1        (1.00)     0.00     (73)
                    All other         7      (0.22)      4         (0.57)        0         (0.00)     0.49
                    Total             32     (1.00)      19        (0.59)        15        (0.47)     1.00


Note: Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007). HS system import data from Comtrade. *For consistency, this table
      only allows for one “EU” entry for each product-specific investigation, hence total number of investigations and
      imposed measures may differ from table 1 due to aggregation of EU member cases per investigation. **Brazil and
      Mexico only contain detailed information on antidumping investigations completed through 2003.




                                                         54
             Table 3. (cont.) New User Antidumping against China, 1995-2001 and 2002-2004

                                                        Investigations           Only country        Share of AD-
  AD-
                                    Antidumping           resulting in             named in            imposing
  imposing     Exporting
                                    investigations    measures (share of     investigation (share       country
  country,     country target
                                   (share of total)    target country’s       of target country’s       import
  years
                                                        investigations)         investigations)      market (rank)

  India,        1   China             41     (0.18)     38         (0.93)        24        (0.59)     0.03      (9)
  1995-         2   EU                33     (0.15)     26         (0.79)        6         (0.18)     0.23      (1)
  2001          3   Taiwan            17     (0.08)     14         (0.82)        2         (0.12)     0.01     (20)
                4   Korea             16     (0.07)     14         (0.88)        2         (0.13)     0.02     (14)
                5   Japan             16     (0.07)     13         (0.81)        2         (0.13)     0.05      (5)
                    All other        102     (0.45)     87         (0.85)        8         (0.08)     0.66
                    Total            225     (1.00)     192        (0.85)        44        (0.20)     1.00


  India,        1   China            25      (0.20)      22        (0.88)        12        (0.48)     0.05      (4)
  2002-         2   EU               13      (0.11)       9        (0.69)         2        (0.15)     0.18      (2)
  2004          3   Taiwan            11     (0.09)       8        (0.73)         1        (0.09)     0.01     (17)
                4   Korea             9      (0.07)       7        (0.78)         1        (0.11)     0.03      (6)
                5   Singapore         8      (0.07)       5        (0.63)         0        (0.00)     0.02     (11)
                    All other        56      (0.46)      34        (0.61)        5         (0.09)     0.70
                    Total            122     (1.00)      85        (0.70)        21        (0.17)     1.00


  Mexico,       1   U.S.             14      (0.30)      11        (0.79)        13        (0.93)     0.73      (1)
  1995-         2   China             6      (0.13)      5         (0.83)        5         (0.83)     0.02      (6)
  2001          3   EU                5      (0.11)      2         (0.40)        4         (0.80)     0.09      (2)
                4   Russia            4      (0.09)      3         (0.75)        0         (0.00)     0.00     (31)
                5   Taiwan            3      (0.07)      3         (1.00)        2         (0.67)     0.01      (7)
                    All other        14      (0.30)      10        (0.71)        8         (0.57)     0.15
                    Total            46      (1.00)      34        (0.74)        32        (0.70)     1.00


  Mexico,       1   China            6       (0.25)      6         (1.00)        6         (1.00)     0.06      (3)
  2002-         2   U.S.             6       (0.25)      5         (0.83)        6         (1.00)     0.60      (1)
  2003          3   Russia            2      (0.08)       2        (1.00)         1        (0.50)     0.00     (27)
                4   Ukraine           2      (0.08)       2        (1.00)         1        (0.50)     0.00     (33)
                5   Romania           2      (0.08)       2        (1.00)         0        (0.00)     0.00     (54)
                    All other        6       (0.25)      3         (0.50)        3         (0.50)     0.34
                    Total            24      (1.00)      20        (0.83)        17        (0.71)     1.00


Note: Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007). HS system import data from Comtrade. *For consistency, this table
      only allows for one “EU” entry for each product-specific investigation, hence total number of investigations and
      imposed measures may differ from table 1 due to aggregation of EU member cases per investigation. **Brazil and
      Mexico only contain detailed information on antidumping investigations completed through 2003.




                                                         55
              Table 3. (cont) New User Antidumping against China, 1995-2001 and 2002-2004

                                                         Investigations           Only country        Share of AD-
   AD-
                                     Antidumping           resulting in             named in            imposing
   imposing     Exporting
                                     investigations    measures (share of     investigation (share       country
   country,     country target
                                    (share of total)    target country’s       of target country’s       import
   years
                                                         investigations)         investigations)      market (rank)

   South         1   EU               24     (0.18)       14        (0.58)        12        (0.50)     0.43      (1)
   Africa,       2   India            18     (0.13)       13        (0.72)        10        (0.56)     0.01     (15)
   1995-         3   China            15     (0.11)       13        (0.87)        2         (0.13)     0.04      (5)
   2001          4   Korea             11    (0.08)       11        (1.00)        3         (0.27)     0.02     (10)
                 5   Hong Kong         7     (0.05)       6         (0.86)        0         (0.00)     0.01     (12)
                     All other        61     (0.45)       36        (0.59)        5         (0.08)     0.50
                     Total            136    (1.00)       93        (0.68)        32        (0.24)     1.00


   South         1   China            5      (0.28)       1         (0.20)        1         (0.20)     0.07      (4)
   Africa,       2   Taiwan            3     (0.17)       0         (0.00)        0         (0.00)     0.02     (10)
   2002-         3   Indonesia         2     (0.11)       1         (0.50)        2         (1.00)     0.01     (21)
   2004          4   EU               2      (0.11)       0         (0.00)        2         (1.00)     0.41      (1)
                 5   India             2     (0.11)       0         (0.00)        2         (1.00)     0.01     (12)
                     All other        4      (0.22)       3         (0.75)        2         (0.50)     0.49
                     Total            18     (1.00)       5         (0.28)        9         (0.50)     1.00


   Turkey,       1   China             9     (0.29)       8         (0.89)        6         (0.67)     0.02      (8)
   1995-         2   Korea             4     (0.13)       4         (1.00)        1         (0.25)     0.02      (6)
   2001          3   Taiwan            3     (0.10)       3         (1.00)        1         (0.33)     0.01     (15)
                 4   EU                2     (0.06)       1         (0.50)        0         (0.00)     0.50      (1)
                 5   Thailand          2     (0.06)       1         (0.50)        0         (0.00)     0.00     (29)
                     All other        11     (0.35)       8         (0.73)        0         (0.00)     0.44
                     Total            31     (1.00)       25        (0.81)        8         (0.26)     1.00


   Turkey,       1   China            35     (0.52)       32        (0.91)        27        (0.77)     0.04      (5)
   2002-         2   Taiwan            8     (0.12)        7        (0.88)         0        (0.00)     0.01     (15)
   2004          3   Thailand          6     (0.09)        5        (0.83)         0        (0.00)     0.00     (28)
                 4   India             5     (0.07)        4        (0.80)         0        (0.00)     0.01     (16)
                 5   Vietnam           4     (0.06)        4        (1.00)         0        (0.00)     0.00     (56)
                     All other        9      (0.13)        6        (0.67)         2        (0.22)     0.93
                     Total            67     (1.00)       58        (0.87)        29        (0.43)     1.00


Note: Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007). HS system import data from Comtrade. *For consistency, this table
      only allows for one “EU” entry for each product-specific investigation, hence total number of investigations and
      imposed measures may differ from table 1 due to aggregation of EU member cases per investigation. **Brazil and
      Mexico only contain detailed information on antidumping investigations completed through 2003.




                                                         56
            Table 4. Determinants of Foreign Antidumping Investigations Across China’s Exported Products

                                                               Binomial Probit Model:
                                                                                                       Negative Binomial Regression Model:
                                                        Dependent variable is indicator for
                                                                                                        Dependent variable is count of new
                                                         whether Foreign initiated any new
                                                                                                        Foreign AD investigations over i in t
                                                            AD investigations over i in t
                                                          Foreign is          Foreign is                   Foreign is              Foreign is
                                                        aggregate of 15   aggregate of U.S.,             aggregate of 15        aggregate of U.S.,
Explanatory Variables [expected sign]                     AD-using          EU, Canada or                  AD-using              EU, Canada or
                                                           countries        Australia only                  countries             Australia only
                                                              (1)                 (2)                          (3)                     (4)
Size [+]
                                                            0.021***                0.008***                5.036***                 3.462***
   Value of Chinese exports of i to Foreign in
                                                             (0.004)                 (0.002)                  (4.92)                   (2.85)
   t-1 ($U.S.)†
China’s Pre-Accession Tariff Rate [+]                       0.015***                  -0.001                1.012***                   0.991
  1996 MFN applied tariff rate‡ over i                       (0.004)                 (0.002)                  (3.35)                   (1.32)
Prior Antidumping Target [+]
                                                            0.053***                0.089***                6.432***                18.537***
  Indicator for Chinese exports of i facing
                                                             (0.007)                 (0.016)                 (15.06)                 (17.07)
   prior Foreign AD investigation in t-1 or t-2
Recent Export Growth [+]
                                                              0.001                  0.000*                   1.063                  1.094**
  % difference between t-1 and t-2 value of
                                                             (0.000)                 (0.000)                  (1.49)                  (2.29)
   Chinese exports of i to Foreign
                                                             0.007*                   0.001                  1.827**                   1.266
Chemicals
                                                             (0.004)                 (0.002)                  (2.20)                   (0.52)
                                                             0.007**                  0.000                 2.089***                   1.082
Textiles and Apparel
                                                             (0.003)                 (0.001)                  (3.04)                   (0.17)
                                                             0.010*                  0.019*                  2.162**                 6.339***
Footwear
                                                             (0.007)                 (0.010)                  (2.04)                   (3.51)
                                                            0.040***                0.015***                  6.144*                 6.485***
Metals
                                                             (0.009)                 (0.006)                  (1.85)                   (4.54)
                                                             0.010*                   0.003                  2.074**                   1.865
Transportation Equipment
                                                             (0.007)                 (0.004)                  (1.97)                   (0.99)
Other Industries°                                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Year Dummies                                                   Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Observations                                                  28265                  28264                    28265                    28264

Pseudo R2                                                      0.14                   0.23                     0.13                     0.23

Predicted probability (at means)                             0.0084                  0.0024                      --                      --

Notes: Sample is an unbalanced panel of 4589 6-digit HS products i China exported to the aggregated “Foreign” between t = 1995,…,2001. The
 fifteen antidumping-using countries of “Foreign” in specifications (1) and (3) are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, EU, India,
 Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa Taiwan, Turkey, and the U.S. Rescaled by $1 billion. ‡Rescaled by 100 (i.e., so 25% =
 0.25) in the probit regression. Estimates for the probit model are transformed into marginal effects, robust standard errors in parentheses.
 Estimates for the negative binomial model are transformed into incidence rate ratios, with t-statistics in parentheses. In each model, ***, **, and *
 denote variables statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. °Other industry category estimates available upon request.
 The omitted industry category is “Miscellaneous products” (HS Chapters 90 through 97).




                                                                          57
      Table 5. WTO Members’ Transitional Product China Safeguard Investigations, 2002-2006†


      Investigating                                    Year of
      Country         Product                          Investigation    Outcome of Investigation


1.    U.S.            Pedestal actuators               2002             No measure imposed*
2.    U.S.            Steel wire garment hangers       2002             No measure imposed*
3.    India           Industrial sewing machine        2002             Unresolved**
                      needles
4.    Peru            Textile products and clothing    2003             Definitive safeguard as specific duty
5.    U.S.            Brake drums and rotors           2003             No measure imposed
6.    U.S.            Ductile iron waterworks          2003             No measure imposed*
                      fittings
7.    Poland          Footwear                         2004             No measure imposed
8.    U.S.            Uncovered innerspring units      2004             No measure imposed
9.    Canada          Barbeques                        2005             No measure imposed*
10.   Colombia        Certain textile products         2005             Definitive safeguard as ad valorem duty
11.   Colombia        Stockings and hosiery            2005             Definitive safeguard as ad valorem duty
12.   Colombia        Made-up textile products         2005             Preliminary safeguard as ad valorem duty
                                                                        (Definitive safeguard decision unresolved)
13.   U.S.            Circular welded non-alloy        2005             No measure imposed*
                      steel pipe
14.   India           Industrial sewing machine        2005             Unresolved**
                      needles
15.   Colombia        Made-up textile products         2006             Unresolved
16.   Ecuador         Textile products                 2006             Unresolved
17.   Ecuador         Taps, cocks and valves for       2006             Unresolved
                      domestic use
18.   Turkey          Float glass                      2006             Definitive safeguard as quantitative
                                                                        restriction
19.   Turkey          Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)         2006             Definitive safeguard as specific duty
20.   Turkey          Porcelain tiles                  2006             Definitive safeguard as specific duty
21.   Taiwan          Towelling products               2006             Unresolved


Notes: Data compiled by the author from reports to the WTO Committee on Safeguards, available at www.wto.org,
      as well as national government sources. †Not inclusive of all textile and apparel safeguard investigations, as
      China’s 2001 WTO Accession terms allowed for a separate transitional safeguard that countries can use for
      such products until 2008 (e.g., see table 6). *Indicate cases in which the domestic investigating agency found
      evidence of injury/market disruption but the country nevertheless decided against imposing measures. **India
      re-notified the WTO Committee on Safeguards of the request for consultations with China in 2005.




                                                        58
          Table 6. U.S. Textile and Apparel Safeguard Investigations of Chinese Exports, 2003-2005

OTEXA                                                    OTEXA
                Product                                                  Product
Category                                                 Category

2003 Investigations                                      2005 Investigations (cont)

222             Knit fabric                                341/641       Women's and girls' cotton and man-made fiber
                                                                           woven shirts and blouses
349/649         Cotton and man-made fiber brassieres       342/642       Cotton and man-made fiber skirts

350/650         Cotton and man-made fiber dressing        345/645/646    Cotton and man-made fiber sweaters
                   gowns
                                                           347/348       Cotton trousers
2004 Investigations
222             Knit fabric                                349/649       Cotton and man-made fiber brassieres and other
                                                                            body supporting garments
301             Combed cotton yarn                         350/650       Dressing gowns and robes

447             Wool trousers                              351/651       Cotton and man-made fiber nightwear

620             Other synthetic filament fabric            352/652       Cotton and man-made fiber underwear

338/339         Cotton knit shirts and blouses             359/659       Cotton and man-made fiber swimwear

340/640         Men's and boys' cotton and man-made        363           Cotton terry and other pile towels
                  fiber shirts not knit
347/348         Cotton trousers                           369/666        Curtains and drapery

349/649         Brassieres and other body supporting       443           Men's and boy's wool suits
                  garments
350/650         Dressing gowns and robes                   619           Polyester filament fabric, light weight

352/652         Cotton and man-made fiber underwear        620           Other synthetic filament fabric

638/639         Man-made fiber knit shirts and blouses     634/635       Other men's and boy's man-made fiber coats and
                                                                            women's and girls' man-made fiber coats
647/648         Man-made fiber trousers                    638/639       Knit man-made fiber shirts and blouses

2005 Investigations                                        647/648       Man-made fiber trousers

226             Cheeseclothes, batistes, lawns/voiles

301             Combed cotton yarn

332/432/632     Cotton wool and man-made fiber socks

338/339         Cotton knit shirts and blouses

340/640         Men's and boy's cotton and man-made
                  fiber woven shirts


  Note: Requests for China Textile Safeguard Action, downloaded from the Office of Textile and Apparel’s website,
        http://otexa.ita.doc.gov/safeguard_all.htm, last accessed 29 September 2006.



                                                         59
                            Table 7. China’s Use of Antidumping, 1997-2001 and 2002-2004

                                                    Investigations             Only country           Mean          Share of AD-
                                Antidumping           resulting in               named in          margin (%),        imposing
          Exporting
Years                           investigations    measures (share of       investigation (share     cond’l on          country
          country target
                               (share of total)    target country’s         of target country’s     measures           import
                                                    investigations)           investigations)       imposed         market (rank)

1997-      1   Korea             8      (0.30)       7          (0.88)         3         (0.38)        28.43         0.10      (5)
2001       2   Japan             4      (0.15)       3          (0.75)         0         (0.00)        31.50         0.20      (1)
           3   U.S.              4      (0.15)       3          (0.75)         0         (0.00)        60.17         0.11      (4)
           4   EU                3      (0.11)       3          (1.00)         0         (0.00)        44.47         0.15      (2)
           5   Russia            2      (0.07)       2          (1.00)         1         (0.50)        22.75         0.03      (7)
               All other*        6      (0.22)       4          (0.67)         0         (0.00)        36.38         0.41
               Total             27     (1.00)       22         (0.81)         4         (0.15)        36.29         1.00


2002-      1   Japan             16     (0.21)       14         (0.88)         0         (0.00)        70.72         0.19      (1)
2004       2   Korea             16     (0.21)       13         (0.81)         0         (0.00)        35.92         0.11      (4)
           3   U.S.              14     (0.18)       12         (0.86)         0         (0.00)        67.57         0.09      (5)
           4   EU                 8     (0.11)        6         (0.75)         1         (0.13)        75.58         0.13      (2)
           5   Taiwan             7     (0.09)        5         (0.71)         1         (0.14)        28.42         0.13      (3)
               All other*        15     (0.20)       13         (0.87)         0         (0.00)        42.94         0.35
               Total             76     (1.00)       63         (0.83)         2         (0.03)        54.34         1.00


 Notes:    Antidumping data compiled from Bown (2007) and is based on investigations initiated by 2004 for which complete
           information on the case’s resolution is available. HS system import data from Comtrade. †In some cases China
           investigates firms from “the EU” while in other cases it investigates firms from subsets of one or more EU member
           countries only. For consistency, this table only allows for one “EU” entry for each product-specific investigation. *Other
           countries investigated twice include India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand; and other countries
           investigated once include Canada, Iran, Kazakhstan, Mexico, and Ukraine.




                                                                60
    Table 8. Marginal Effects Estimates of Probit Model of China’s Chemical Industry Choice to
                          Initiate Antidumping over an Imported Product


                                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                                     Indicator that the 6-digit Chemical product faced at least
                                                       one Chinese antidumping investigation between 2001
                                                                              and 2005
Explanatory Variables [expected sign]                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)


Size [+]
                                                        0.117**          0.136**        0.163***       0.162**
   Value of Chinese pre-accession imports of the
                                                        (0.059)          (0.061)         (0.063)       (0.063)
   product ($U.S., in 2000)†

Accession Year Tariff Reduction [-]
                                                       -0.017***        -0.023***       -0.022***     -0.023***
  Difference between 2001 MFN applied tariff rate
                                                        (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.006)       (0.006)
  and 2002 MFN applied tariff rate

Tariff Liberalization Commitment [-]
                                                                          0.008           0.008          0.008
  Difference in 1996 MFN applied tariff rate and            --
                                                                         (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)
  2005 MFN bound tariff rate commitment

Post-Accession Tariff Overhang [-]
                                                                                         -0.047*        -0.047*
  Difference between 2005 MFN applied tariff rate           --              --
                                                                                         (0.027)        (0.027)
  and 2005 MFN bound tariff rate commitment

Pre-Accession Import Growth [+]
                                                                                                         0.000
  % difference between 2000 value of imports and            --              --              --
                                                                                                        (0.003)
  1996 value of imports

Observations                                                457            457             457            454

Pseudo R2                                                 0.09             0.11            0.12          0.12

Predicted probability (at means)                         0.032            0.030           0.029          0.029

Notes: The unit of observation is 6-digit product in Chapter 28 (Inorganic Chemicals) or 29 (Organic Chemicals) of
       the Harmonized System. †Rescaled by $1 billion. In parentheses are robust standard errors, with ***, **,
       and * denote variables statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                       61
       Table 9. China as Complainant and Respondent in Formal WTO Dispute Settlement, 2002-2007*


       WTO
       Dispute(s)   Respondent    Complainant    Issue under Dispute               Year Initiated, Resolution


                                              China as Complainant

  1.   DS252        U.S.          China†         Safeguard on Imports of Certain   2002, U.S. removed safeguard in
                                                 Steel Products                    2003 after adverse Panel and
                                                                                   Appellate Body ruling


                                               China as Respondent

  1.   DS309        China         U.S.           Value-Added Tax on Integrated     2004, China agreed to amend or
                                                 Circuits                          revoke the measures at issue

  2.   DS339,       China         EU, U.S.,      Imports of Automobile Parts       2006, ongoing*
       DS340,                     Canada
       DS342
  3.   DS358,       China         U.S.,          Refunds, Reductions or            2007, ongoing*
       DS359                      Mexico         Exemptions from Taxes and
                                                 Other Payments
  4.   DS362        China         U.S.           Protection and Enforcement of     2007, ongoing*
                                                 Intellectual Property Rights
  5.   DS363        China         U.S.           Trading Rights and Distribution   2007, ongoing*
                                                 Services for Certain
                                                 Publications and Audiovisual
                                                 Entertainment Products


Notes: Data compiled by the author from the WTO website, www.wto.org,. *Through 30 June 2007. † Eight other
      countries (EU, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, Korea, Taiwan, and Brazil) also filed formal WTO
      disputes over the 2002 U.S. steel safeguard.




                                                        62
        Table 10. China as an Interested Third Party in Formal WTO Dispute Settlement, 2002-2007*


      WTO Dispute(s)    Respondent     Complainant             Issue under Dispute


1.    DS108             U.S.           EU                      Tax Treatment for “Foreign Sales Corporations”
2.    DS174, DS290      EU             U.S., Australia         Trademarks and Geographical Indications
3.    DS207             Chile          Argentina               Price Band System and Safeguard Measures for Agriculture
4.    DS212             U.S.           EU                      Countervailing Measures Concerning Certain Products
5.    DS243             U.S.           India                   Rules of Origin for Textiles and Apparel Products
6.    DS245             Japan          U.S.                    Measures Affecting the Importation of Apples
7.    DS248, DS249,     U.S.           EU, Japan, Korea,       Safeguard on Imports of Certain Steel Products
      DS251, DS253,                    Switzerland, Norway,
      DS254, DS258                     New Zealand
8.    DS257             U.S.           Canada                  CVD Determination on Softwood Lumber
9.    DS264             U.S.           Canada                  Dumping Determination on Softwood Lumber
10.   DS265, DS266,     EU             Australia, Brazil,      Export Subsidies on Sugar
      DS283                            Thailand
11.   DS267             U.S.           Brazil                  Subsidies on Upland Cotton
12.   DS269, DS286      EU             Brazil, Thailand        Customs Classification of Frozen Boneless Chicken Cuts
13.   DS270             Australia      Philippines             Imports of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables
14.   DS273             Korea          EU                      Measures Affecting Trade in Commercial Vessels
15.   DS276             Canada         U.S.                    Exports of Wheat and Treatment of Imported Grain
16.   DS277             U.S.           Canada                  USITC Investigation on Softwood Lumber
17.   DS280             U.S.           Mexico                  Countervailing Duties on Steel Plate
18.   DS281             U.S.           Mexico                  Anti-Dumping Measures on Cement
19.   DS282             U.S.           Mexico                  Anti-Dumping Measures on Oil Country Tubular Goods (OCTG)
20.   DS287             Australia      EU                      Quarantine Regime for Imports
21.   DS291, DS292,     EU             U.S., Canada,           Approval and Marketing of Biotech Products
      DS293                            Argentina
22.   DS294             U.S.           EU                      Calculating Dumping Margins (Zeroing)
23.   DS295             Mexico         U.S.                    Definitive AD Measures on Beef and Rice
24.   DS296             U.S.           Korea                   CVD Investigation on DRAMS
25.   DS299             EU             Korea                   Countervailing Measures on DRAMs
26.   DS301             EU             Korea                   Trade in Commercial Vessels
27.   DS302             Dominican      Honduras                Importation and Internal Sale of Cigarettes
                        Republic
28.   DS308             Mexico         U.S.                    Tax Measures on Soft Drinks and Other Beverages
29.   DS312             Korea          Indonesia               AD Duties on Imports of Certain Paper
30.   DS315             EU             U.S.                    Selected Customs Matters
31.   DS316             EU             U.S.                    Trade in Large Civil Aircraft
32.   DS317             U.S.           EU                      Trade in Large Civil Aircraft
33.   DS320             U.S.           EU                      Continued Suspension of Obligations in the EC — Hormones
34.   DS321             Canada         EU                      Continued Suspension of Obligations in the EC — Hormones
35.   DS322             U.S.           Japan                   Zeroing and Sunset Reviews
36.   DS323             Japan          Korea                   Import Quotas on Dried Laver and Seasoned Laver
37.   DS331             Mexico         Guatemala               AD Duties on Steel Pipes and Tubes
38.   DS332             Brazil         EU                      Imports of Retreaded Tyres
39.   DS347             EU             U.S.                    Trade in Large Civil Aircraft (Second Complaint)
40.   DS353             U.S.           EU                      Trade in Large Civil Aircraft (Second Complaint)


Notes: Data compiled by the author from the WTO website, www.wto.org,. *Through 30 June 2007.




                                                          63
