NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF CREDIT CONSTRAINTS ON THE COLLEGE DROP-OUT DECISION:
A DIRECT APPROACH USING A NEW PANEL STUDY
Todd R. Stinebrickner
Ralph Stinebrickner
Working Paper 13340
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13340

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

The paper has benefitted from the comments of John Bound, Chris Avery, Tom Crossley, David Green,
Lance Lochner and numerous seminar participants including those at NBER and the IRP summer research
workshop. The work was made possible by generous funding from The Mellon Foundation, The Spencer
Foundation, The National Science Foundation, The Social Science Humanities Research Council and
support from Berea College. We are very thankful to Anne Kee, Lori Scafidi, Dianne Stinebrickner,
Pam Thomas, and Albert Conley who have played invaluable roles in the collection and organization
of the data from the Berea Panel Study. Comments from Derek Neal on an earlier paper motivated
us to add the financial module used in this paper to the Berea Panel Study. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Todd R. Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Credit Constraints on the College Drop-Out Decision: A Direct Approach Using
a New Panel Study
Todd R. Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner
NBER Working Paper No. 13340
August 2007
JEL No. I2,I21,I3,J01,J24
ABSTRACT
A serious difficulty in determining the importance of credit constraints in education arises because
standard data sources do not provide a direct way of identifying which students are credit constrained.
This has forced researchers to adopt a variety of indirect approaches. This paper differentiates itself
from previous work by taking a direct approach for providing evidence about this issue which is made
possible by unique longitudinal data that have been collected specifically for this type of purpose.
Our results suggest that, while credit constraints likely play an important role in the drop-out decisions
of some students, the large majority of attrition of students from low income families should be primarily
attributed to reasons other than credit constraints.
Todd R. Stinebrickner
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
trstineb@uwo.ca
Ralph Stinebrickner
Dept. of Mathematics
Berea College
Berea, KY 40404
ralph_stinebrickner@berea.edu

“I’m tired of living survey to survey.”
A participant in the Berea Panel Study describing a lack of spending money
when asked why he was dropping out of college.

I. Introduction
Children from low income families are much less likely than other students to attend and graduate
from college (Manski, 1992). Recent literature has emphasized the importance of understanding the extent
to which “short-run” credit constraints that are present during college contribute to this reality. These types
of credit constraints could play an important role by making it difficult for students to pay tuition or other
direct costs of college attendance. These types of credit constraints could also operate by making it difficult
for students to find money to pay for consumption during college, in which case constrained students may
not be able to smooth consumption as much as they would like between the schooling and working portions
of their lives. The potential importance of the former avenue has been frequently discussed by policymakers.
The potential importance of the latter avenue arises because, while grant, loan, and work-study programs exist
to help students pay the direct costs of college, these types of programs are not typically designed to help
students replace consumption that may be lost when individuals forego earnings during college.1
As described in Cameron and Taber (2004), a serious difficulty in determining the extent to which
access to credit influences educational outcomes arises because standard data sources do not provide a direct
way of identifying which students are credit constrained. This has forced researchers to suggest and explore
a variety of indirect approaches (Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998),Card (1995), Lang (1993), Cameron
and Heckman (1998, 2001), Carneiro and Heckman (2005), Kane (1996), and Keane and Wolpin (2001)).
Given that these indirect approaches rely on different underlying assumptions, it is not surprising that the
approaches have produced different conclusions and uncertainty about the importance of credit constraints
remains (Kane, 2005).
1

While this paper examines the importance of short-run (binding) constraints that may be present during college, there
exist other types of credit constraints that could influence higher educational attainment. For example, family
constraints during a child’s youth could influence higher educational attainment of the child by affecting his/her human
capital accumulation at the time of high school graduation (Cameron and Heckman, 1998, Restuccia, 2004). In
addition, the possibility that an individual may have difficulty borrowing money after college if he/she has difficulty
finding employment quickly could influence both decisions about college attendance, and, for reasons analogous to
those in Deaton (1991), whether the person wishes to borrow money during college. Nonetheless, the focus in this
paper on (binding) constraints that are present during college is natural since these types of constraints receive almost
exclusive attention from policymakers concerned with higher education.

1

This paper differentiates itself from previous work by taking a direct approach for providing
evidence about this issue. Motivated by work such as Manski (1992), which finds that the well-known
differences in college completion rates by family income can largely be attributed to differences in college
drop-out rates by family income, we study the college drop-out decision of students from low income
families. We provide evidence about the importance of credit constraints by examining how much college
attrition would remain even if credit constraints were removed; our question of interest can be formulated as
follows: “how important are factors other than credit constraints in determining the substantial drop-out rates
of students from low income families?” More specifically, we provide evidence about whether substantial
attrition would remain for low income students under perhaps the most generous policy that might
conceivably be considered by policymakers to address credit constraints - one in which all direct costs are
removed and students are given access to loans that can be used to finance additional consumption during
school. Note that, for ease of exposition, in the remainder of the paper we often use phrases such as “the
amount of attrition that is unrelated to credit constraints” when it would be more precise to use “the amount
of attrition that would be present if direct costs were removed and students were given access to loans to
finance additional consumption during school.”
Our ability to provide direct evidence about this issue is made possible by our examination of the
drop-out decision at Berea College. Berea College is located in central Kentucky and operates under a
mission (providing opportunities to students of “great promise but limited economic resources”) that leads
to the admission of students from low income backgrounds that are of specific concern to policymakers
interested in understanding the impact of liquidity constraints in higher education.
Our approach takes advantage of both a unique institutional detail at the school and detailed
longitudinal data that we have collected specifically for the purpose of understanding the drop-out decision.
With respect to the former, the school is unique in that direct costs for students are approximately zero (and
perhaps negative) due to the presence of a full tuition subsidy (and large room and board subsidies) for all
matriculating students. Given this institutional detail, the finding in Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2003a)

2

that approximately fifty percent of matriculating students fail to graduate (and few transfer) strongly suggests
that factors other than direct costs are very important in determining the drop-out decision.
With respect to the latter, the data come from the Berea Panel Study (BPS). This paper takes
particular advantage of two specific features that are unique to these data. First, the BPS contains a financial
module that, among other uses, allows us to identify which students would like to borrow money to increase
consumption while in school (and also are not able to borrow from other sources), and, therefore, satisfy a
theoretically appealing definition of being credit constrained. This information is used to generate a lower
bound on the percentage of the substantial amount of attrition at Berea that would remain even if students
were given access to loans that allowed them to purchase additional consumption during school and even
though direct costs are zero. This bound leads to the conclusion that the large majority of attrition would
remain even under very generous policies aimed at relaxing credit constraints. Second, because we designed
this longitudinal survey with an explicit theoretical model of the drop-out decision in mind, the data provide
substantial detail about whether students who are constrained differ from students who are unconstrained in
other ways that would influence the drop-out decision directly. This allows us to examine whether we can
credibly move away from the bound and estimate the percentage of attrition that would remain if loans were
made available to allow students to increase consumption.
In Section II we discuss a simple theoretical model of the drop-out decision that guided much of our
data collection in the BPS and guides much our empirical work in this paper. In Section III we describe the
BPS and present a descriptive view of students at Berea. Our main empirical work takes place in Section
IV. Section V contains our conclusion that, although credit constraints likely play an important causal role
in the drop-out decisions of some students at Berea, the large majority of attrition at Berea would remain even
under very generous policies aimed at addressing credit constraints.
II. A simple theoretical model
Let I(t0) be an indicator variable that is equal to one if the student decides at the time he completes
high school, t0, that he will not attend college. Then, defining Et0(VS) to be the expected present value of

3

lifetime utility at time t0 of entering college and Et0(VN) to be the expected present value at time t0 of not
entering college,
(1) I(t0) =1 iff I*(t0)=Et0(VN)-Et0(VS)>0.
A person’s total lifetime financial resources play a central role in determining lifetime utility. For
students from low income backgrounds, these resources will be determined primarily by lifetime earnings
while in the workforce. Individuals who enter the workforce without a college degree work in unskilled jobs.
Earnings in these jobs depend on a person’s unskilled human capital which are likely to be largely determined
and known at the time of the college entrance decision. Individuals who enter the workforce with a college
degree work in skilled jobs. Earnings in these jobs depend on a person’s skilled human capital which is
accumulated during college. Skilled human capital is accumulated more efficiently by individuals of high
academic ability, and, as a result, is likely related to college grade performance. Hereafter, we refer to
academic ability simply as ability.
Unconstrained students allocate lifetime financial resources across periods in a standard manner that
depends on, for example, the person’s discount factor, intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and risk
aversion. However, the credit constrained student is faced with the additional reality that he cannot borrow
against future earnings so that during school he must rely on his personal savings at the time of college
entrance, contributions from parents during school, and labor income during school to purchase consumption
and pay the net direct costs of schooling. The reality that a constrained person would like to borrow to
increase his consumption during school implies that his lifetime consumption path will not be “smooth
enough” in the sense that the marginal utility of consumption during school is higher than the discounted
marginal utility of consumption during his working years. In this case, some constrained individuals do not
enter college even though they would enter if they were not constrained.
Given particular levels of consumption, how happy a person will be in school relative to being out
of school will depend, in part, on the types of general preference parameters mentioned above which
influence the curvature of the utility function in consumption. However, it also seems likely that there exist
large amounts of heterogeneity in how much individuals will enjoy being in school relative to being out of

4

school that are largely unrelated to the amount of consumption a person can afford per se. For example, some
students may be particularly gifted at forming new relationships, have a particular taste/distaste for campus
living arrangements, or have a particular attachment to their hometowns.
Given the sample of college attendees used in this paper, there is no variation in I(t0) in our data.
Thus, our work examines the effect of credit constraints on the drop-out decision. Defining I(t1) to be an
indicator variable that is equal to one if the student decides at the time he finishes his first year of college,
t1, that he will not return for his second year of college, the drop-out decision can be written analogously to
equation (1),
(2) I(t1) =1 iff I*(t1)=Et1(VN)-Et1(VS)>0
where Et1(VS) is the expected present value of lifetime utility at time t1 of returning to college and Et1(VN)
is the expected present value of lifetime utility at time t1 of entering the workforce.
Differences between the expectations in equation (2) and the expectations in equation (1) primarily
reflect learning that has taken place since a student enters school (Manski (1989), Altonji (1993), Carneiro
et al. (2005), Cunha et al. (2005)). Credit constraints can have a causal effect on the drop-out decision if, after
matriculation, individuals learn about their constraint status (e.g., because they learn about unexpected fees,
textbooks costs, or other components of the net direct costs of schooling) or the effect that being constrained
has on how enjoyable it is to be in school. However, it is important to note that credit constraints can also
have a causal effect on the drop-out decision even if no uncertainty exists about credit constraints at the time
of college entrance. This would be the case if being constrained causes an individual to be closer to the
margin of indifference at the time of entrance so that he is more likely to leave school when he learns about
other factors, such as ability, that influence VS and VN. This establishes a very direct connection between the
effect of credit constraints on the college drop-out decision studied here and the effect of credit constraints
on the college entrance decision which has received much of the previous attention in the literature. This
relationship is examined in more detail in an earlier version of this paper (S&S, 2005).
Equation (2) suggests that a probit, or, alternatively, a linear probability model, which includes a
person’s constraint status as an explanatory variable is a natural choice for providing evidence about whether

5

being credit constrained influences the drop-out decision. However, such a specification will only be useful
if it is also possible to take into account potential non-financial differences between constrained and
unconstrained students. Our data are well-suited for this task because, as discussed in much more detail later,
they have been collected specifically with the goal of providing detailed information about the factors
described above that theory suggests could influence the expected values of VN and VS.
III. An overview of the Berea Panel Study and a descriptive view of students at Berea
The BPS consists of two cohorts. Baseline surveys were administered to the first cohort (the 2000
cohort) immediately before it began its freshman year in the fall of 2000 and baseline surveys were
administered to the second cohort (the 2001 cohort) immediately before it began its freshman year in the fall
of 2001.

In addition to collecting detailed background information about students and their families, the

baseline surveys were designed to take advantage of recent advances in survey methodology (see e.g., Barsky
et al., 1997, Dominitz, 1998, and Dominitz and Manski, 1996 and 1997) in order to collect information about
students’ preferences and expectations towards uncertain future events and outcomes (e.g., academic
performance, labor market outcomes, non-pecuniary benefits of school, marriage and children) that could
influence decisions. Substantial follow-up surveys that were administered at the beginning and end of each
subsequent semester were designed to document the experiences of students and how the various factors that
might influence decisions change over time. Shorter surveys that were administered at multiple times each
year were designed to provide information about how students were using their time. Student identifiers allow
survey data to be merged with detailed administrative data, including information from the Free Application
for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA))
The financial module was administered for the first time during the 2001-2002 academic year, after
undergoing pre-testing by students from non-BPS cohorts at Berea.2 Thus, while the 2001 cohort answered
the financial questions during their first year at Berea, the 2000 cohort did not answer these questions until

2

Our survey design involved having students return completed surveys to us in person. This allowed us to ensure that
each student had completed each survey conscientiously and to debrief students regarding any difficulties that they may
have had understanding survey questions. We found no evidence that students had difficulty understanding any
questions on the financial module.

6

their second year at Berea. Given our specific interest in college attrition and the reality that much attrition
takes place during the first year, we concentrate here on the 2001 cohort.
The 2001 cohort was surveyed ten times during its first year with six of these surveys being shorter
time-use surveys. The total amount of compensation received by a student who answered all surveys in his
freshman year was $133.

The financial module, which is shown in Appendix A.1, appeared on the sixth

survey of the year which was collected at the beginning of the second semester. As a result, we focus on
individuals who returned for the second semester, and, therefore, answered the financial questions while still
enrolled at Berea. The 2001 cohort had a response rate on the baseline survey of .87 with 375 out of the 433
entering students at Berea participating. Participation on the baseline was a necessary condition for further
participation while at Berea. We concentrate on domestic students and exclude the 21 foreign students.
Twenty-seven of the remaining students (.076) left school before the beginning of the second semester. This
leaves 327 students who were eligible to complete the sixth survey. Our sample consists of the 307 eligible
students (.939) who completed this survey.
Some basic demographics of this sample are shown in the first column of Table 1. Forty-four percent
of students are male and 19% of students are black. As expected given the mission of Berea, students at the
school are quite poor with an average family income of $26,510. Although not shown in Table 1, the first
quartile, median, and third quartile are $12,500, $27,000, and $39,500 respectively. In addition to having low
income, students’ families have little wealth. On average, a student’s family has total cash, savings, and
checking account balances of $1241 and total investments (excluding the family residence) of $1855.
Roughly half of the students do not have at least one parent that graduated from college.
From the standpoint of thinking about whether the types of non-financial factors that influence
students at Berea also tend to influence students elsewhere, it seems particularly useful to think about college
entrance exams, which past work has found to be perhaps the strongest predictor of college performance. The
average score on the American College Test (ACT) is 23.2 in our sample. In earlier versions of this paper we
show that this average implies that students at Berea are at least as academically gifted as students from
similar income backgrounds who attend schools nationally or attend the flagship state universities (The

7

University of Kentucky and The University of Tennessee) in the region. This is important for our conclusions
because, if this were not true, the amount of attrition that is unrelated to constraints would be expected to be
higher at Berea than elsewhere.
In terms of outcomes, many students do not graduate. The drop-out rate before the second year for
the individuals in our sample (who all started the second semester) is .169. Taking into account the drop-out
rate in the first semester, the overall first-year drop-out rate from Berea for the 354 domestic participants in
the BPS survey is .228.3 As discussed in detail in S&S (2003a), the drop-out rates of students at Berea are
generally similar to those of students with comparable backgrounds who attend other schools. Stinebrickner
and Stinebrickner (2003a) discuss the reality that very few students who left Berea during 1989-1997
transferred to other four year schools.
Some information about current consumption levels is obtained by Question A.2 in Appendix A.1:
Question A.2 (partial): How much money do you expect that you will spend this year (September
2001 - August 2002) not including college related costs? $________
where Question A.1 informs student to include “expenses for things such as clothing, travel, telephone, cars,
recreation, entertainment, and food and snacks not included in the college food plan” and college related costs
are described in Question A.1 to include term bills (which include campus room and board), books, and classrelated supplies.
While this question is undoubtedly answered with substantial error and includes both the academic
year and the summer after the first academic year, the answers leave little doubt that these low income
students spend little on consumption during college outside of academic expenses and the room and board
they pay to live on campus. The average answer to this question at the beginning of the second semester was
$957 and the median response is less than $600. This evidence is entirely consistent with what we informally
observed during survey collection when individuals regularly stressed that the survey compensation
represented an important source of consumption spending. Thus, there seems to be substantial scope for

3

The overall first-year drop-out rate for non-participants in the BPS is .293. However, given the small number of nonparticipants, a test of the null that the drop-out rate is the same for participants and non-participants is not rejected at
traditional significance levels (p-value=.286).

8

short-term constraints to operate. In the remainder of the paper we examine whether there is evidence that
this is indeed the case.
IV. An analysis of the importance of factors unrelated to credit constraints
IV.1. Are students at Berea credit-constrained?
We identify student i as being credit-constrained and set the dummy variable CONSTRAINEDi equal
to one if he/she answers in the affirmative to the first part of Question E.1 from the financial module:
Question E.1 Suppose that someone offered to loan you money this year so that you could increase the
amount of money that you would have for spending money during this year. Suppose that the loan is made
at a fair interest rate and that you would not have to begin repaying the loan until after you leave Berea.
Would you accept the loan? YES
NO
Question E.2 If you answered YES,
You would like to borrow money to increase your spending at Berea during this year.
Remember, you will have to pay back the loan and any interest after leaving Berea. How
much money would you choose to borrow this year in order to increase your spending money
this year?
$ ______________.
Despite our Section III finding that students at Berea have very little spending money, only 62 of
307 (.202) students in our sample are identified as being credit constrained using this criteria.4 In absolute
terms, constrained students do not wish to borrow particularly large amounts of money; the average
constrained person indicates that he would like to borrow only $889 for the current academic year and the
median amount is only $500. At the same time, it seems quite possible that the loans might make a
substantial difference to constrained students since these amounts are only slightly smaller than the total
expected spending amounts for the year from Question A.2 above.
Financial resources by constraint status
Some confidence in the responses to the survey question can be obtained indirectly by examining
whether constrained students differ from unconstrained students in ways that might be generally consistent
with the presence of a constraint. As shown in the Additional Financial Variables section of Table 1, we

4

Although designed independently, this question is similar in spirit to a question that is included in the 1995 Canadian
Out of Employment Panel and is examined by Crossley and Low (2004). They find that 19% of primary wage earners
are constrained three quarters of a year after a job loss.

9

find that, while neither constrained or unconstrained students are particularly wealthy, constrained students
have remarkably few resources that could be used for consumption in the second semester. Perhaps most
noteworthy, constrained students report having, on average, personal savings of only $246 and the median
constrained student has less than $50 in savings at the beginning of the second semester. In contrast,
unconstrained students report having, on average, savings of $940 and the median unconstrained student has
approximately $300 in savings.

The null hypothesis that the average savings of constrained and

unconstrained individuals is identical is rejected at all traditional levels of significance with a t-statistic of
5.405. Interestingly, the average difference in savings between constrained and unconstrained students is
similar to the average amount that constrained students wish to borrow.
The last five entries of the Additional Financial Variables section of Table 1 show results from
Question B.2 of the financial module which asks students about possible sources that could be used to
increase consumption. Consistent with the findings above related to savings, unconstrained individuals in
the sample are roughly five times as likely as constrained individuals to report that they could use personal
savings to increase consumption above what they currently are planning to spend during the year.
Constrained students, who receive slightly less money from their parents, are only half as likely to report that
they could increase spending through grants from parents, friends, or relatives (.14 vs. .27). Neither
constrained or unconstrained students tend to believe that they could increase consumption by borrowing
money from either family or formal sources. The last financial entry in Table 1 indicates that constrained
students are only half as likely to report that they could increase spending through any source (.21 versus .41).
Evidence of financial differences also appear on the Free Application for Student Financial Aid
(FAFSA). For example, the first entry in the financial section of Table 1 shows that the average savings of
parents of constrained students in our sample is smaller than the average savings of parents of unconstrained
students in our sample by a factor of 3.7, and this difference is statistically significant at a 5% level.
Some additional issues related to using Question E.1 to identify constrained students
With respect to our definition of being constrained, there are several other things to note. First, an
ideal definition of being constrained may be that a person wants to borrow and has no other resources that

10

will allow him to do so. In practice, this is very close to the definition we use since, as just discussed, only
21% of constrained individuals say that they have any financial resources that could be used to increase
consumption and it seems reasonable to believe that some of these 21% would not be able to increase
consumption as much as they would like using these sources. Regardless, the main conclusions of the paper
become even stronger and other results change very little if the 21% are excluded from the constrained group.
Second, because we do not explicitly specify an interest rate in Question E.1, it is natural to imagine
that students may have in mind a “fair” interest rate that is lower than what might be “reasonable” to actually
receive. Similarly, the answers to our survey questions might not exactly mirror what would happen if a loan
was actually made available if students tend to have a mentality that “of course I want more money” and do
not fully internalize certain costs (e.g., time costs of applying or future consumption costs of borrowing) that
would likely become quite apparent during the application process. However, these kinds of reporting errors
would seem to imply that, if anything, we would tend to overstate the amount of students that would accept
a loan if it was actually offered, and this is not problematic given that it would imply that our bound in
Section IV.2 is even more conservative.
Third, it is not clear whether a non-trivial number of students are dropping out because they are not
able to borrow money to help parents or family members. If there are such people and these people would
not answer in the affirmative to our constraint question, our results pertain to the amount of attrition that
would remain under a policy in which all direct costs are removed and students are offered loans that allow
them to increase their own consumption during school. If there are not such people or these people would
answer in the affirmative to our constraint question, then our results pertain to an even more generous policy
in which students can also borrow money to help finance the consumption of parents. What is important is
that, in either case, the lower bound described below is a lower bound for the former (less generous) policy
which is informative because this policy is arguably the most extensive policy that might currently be given
serious attention by policymakers.5 Further, we have two ways of providing some information that this issue
5

While required participation in the work-study program at Berea described in S&S(2003b) might imply that the
situation being studied is not quite the most generous policy that could be imagined, a couple of institutional details
might mitigate concerns about the costs of working. First, work hours in the first year are tightly regulated with little
variation around the required ten hours of work per week. Second, the fact that jobs are on-campus may alleviate certain

11

may not be overly important. First, to the extent that this issue is likely to be of particular relevance for
students whose parents lose jobs, it is informative that a parental job loss question in Appendix A.2 indicates
that only 6.6% of the drop-outs in our sample and 6.1% of the non-drop-outs in our sample have either a
mother or father that “lost a job without being able to find a similarly paying replacement job” between the
beginning of the academic year and the end of the academic year. Second, as described in Section IV.4, data
from an exit-reason module indicate that few people are leaving school for financial concerns related to their
families.
IV.2 The proportion of attrition at Berea due to factors other than credit constraints
The outcome we examine is whether students who start the second semester drop out before the start
of the second year. The proportion of the attrition at Berea that should be attributed to credit constraints is
found by dividing the proportion of all students at Berea who drop out because they are constrained by the
proportion of all students who drop out for any reason. Our parameter of interest, the proportion of the
attrition that is unrelated to credit constraints, P, is one minus this ratio and can be written as

(3)

P'1&

p1p2
p3

,

where p1 is the proportion of students that are constrained, p2 is the increase in the drop-out probability of
constrained students that is caused by the constraint, and p3 is the proportion of all students who drop out for
any reason.
A primary contribution of this paper is that our survey efforts described in Section IV.1 allow us
to provide an estimate, .202, for p1. From the first row of Table 1, we obtain an estimate of .169 for p3.
Given the availability of these estimates, the remaining difficulty is that p2 is not observed. We begin by
constructing an upper bound for p2 which implies a lower bound for P. We then discuss whether we might
be able to credibly estimate p2 , and, hence, P, using additional information from the BPS.

typical costs (e.g., fixed travel costs) of working. Finally, the fact that all students must work may imply that the work
policy does not have a large effect on relative (or possibly absolute) grades. In addition, the work-study program
undoubtedly has generous aspects in that many jobs allow students to gain human capital that is marketable in the
workplace, although this may be particularly true for types of jobs held by upper year students.

12

The upper bound for p2, .274, is found by making the conservative assumption that all of the
attrition of constrained students shown in the first row of Table 1 is caused by constraints. From equation
(3), we then obtain an upper bound on the proportion of attrition at Berea that should be attributed to
constraints of .327 (Row 1, Column 4 of Table 2) so that our lower bound on P indicates that at least 67%
of all attrition at Berea is caused by factors unrelated to short-term liquidity constraints (Row 1, Column 5
of Table 2) . Thus, even under the extreme assumption that all of the attrition of constrained individuals
should be attributed to credit constraints, our bound is informative in the sense that it indicates that the large
majority of attrition at Berea is due to factors unrelated to short-term constraints during college.
This bound is likely to be quite conservative because some constrained students who drop out
undoubtedly do so for reasons other than credit constraints. As a result, it seems worthwhile to examine
whether it is possible to compute a credible estimate of p2. The simplest possibility is to estimate p2 using
a linear probability model of the form
(4) I(t1)i =α + p2 CONSTRAINEDi + ui
where the unobservable u captures all of the non-constraint factors discussed in Section II that influence the
drop-out decision. As shown in Column 1 of Table 3, the estimate of p2 from this specification is .131.
As shown in Row 2 of Table 2, using this estimate in equation (3) results in an estimate of P which
implies that 84% of attrition should be attributed to factors unrelated to credit constraints. While this
conclusion relies on an assumption that constrained and unconstrained students are identical in all dimensions
that are unrelated to the constraint, the result is also informative if CONSTRAINED is negatively correlated
with u since, in this case, the estimate of p2 would continue to represent an upper bound on the true value.
Consistent with a non-positive correlation between CONSTRAINED and u is the general notion that students
with less personal and family wealth generally also suffer from other disadvantages such as inferior academic
ability/preparation. However, it is worth noting that selection issues related to the college entrance decision
could, in isolation, generate a positive correlation. For example, if all students who entered Berea were at
the margin of indifference between entering and not entering college, then, by definition, students who knew

13

that they were constrained at the time of entrance would have other advantages that positively influence the
drop-out probability.
In reality, the school is selective in its admissions, and, in addition, the importance of the selection
issue would be mitigated if many constrained students do not anticipate the constraint at the time of entrance,
a possibility suggested in Section IV.3 and by recent data collection at the time of entrance.6

Regardless,

because we cannot guarantee that CONSTRAINED has a non-positive correlation with u, it seems worthwhile
to treat the question of whether substantial non-constraint differences exist between constrained and
unconstrained individuals as an empirical issue. Roughly speaking, our theoretical discussion in Section II
suggests that, in addition to being potentially influenced by credit constraints, the drop-out decision is
determined by 1) ability, 2) beliefs about earnings conditional on particular levels of completion and
academic performance, and 3) preferences which indicate how much utility a person would receive over his
lifetime given particular schooling and earnings paths. The detailed data in the BPS allow us to directly
examine each of these dimensions. In Appendix B we describe the information that we collected in detail.
We find that constrained and unconstrained individuals are very similar in non-financial respects; while seven
out of fourteen variables related to a student’s financial situation at the time of entrance are found in Table
1 to vary in a statistically significant way by constraint status, only one of thirty-nine variables related to the
three non-constraint factors above is found in Appendix B to vary by constraint status.
A more formal approach is taken in Table 3 by adding covariates to equation (4). The variables that
we utilize in Table 3 are defined in Table 1 and described in detail in Appendix B. In Column 2 of Table 3
we add the set of Traditional variables in Table 1 to the specification in Column 1 of Table 3. In Column
3 of Table 3 we augment the specification in Column 2 of Table 3 by adding a variety of Additional variables
related to ability and motivation at the time of college entrance shown in Table 1. In Column 4 we augment
the specification in Column 2 by adding the variable in Table 1 that describes a student’s Belief about
6

While we cannot examine whether the students in our sample anticipated being constrained at the time of entrance, we
recently examined beliefs about constraint status at the time of entrance for a new cohort of Berea students. We found
that the proportion of people in our new sample who anticipated being constrained at the time of entrance was even
smaller (55/308=.176) than the proportion of individuals who were constrained in our sample. Thus, if at the time of
entrance some students make type II errors related to their constraint status, then a non-trivial number of constrained
students in our current sample likely did not anticipate the constraint.

14

financial return to schooling at time of college entrance. In Column 5 we augment the specification in
Column 2 by adding the Table 1 Variables related to preferences at time of college entrance.7 In Column
6 we include all variables that appear in the specifications in Columns 1-5. We find that adding variables
leads to an increase in the value of R2 , but that, as expected given the evidence from the previous paragraph,
the estimate of p2 changes relatively little across specifications. The estimates of P obtained by using the
estimates of p2 from Columns 2-6 of Table 3 in equation (3) are shown in Rows 3-7 of Table 2 and range from
.853 to .872. Thus, the additional results continue to suggest strongly that the majority of attrition at Berea
should be attributed to reasons that are unrelated to credit constraints. Further, the fact that the estimate of
P increases slightly as more variables are added suggests that, if one was willing to make the strong
“observables are like unobservables” assumption in the general spirit of Altonji et al. (2005), the results
would, if anything, be strengthened slightly further.
IV.3 The effect of the constraint on constrained students
The finding that attrition should be attributed primarily to reasons other than credit constraints arises
primarily because relatively few students are constrained. Indeed, the evidence from Table 3 suggests that
credit constraints may have a non-trivial effect on the relatively small number of people who are constrained;
the CONSTRAINED variable is significant and quantitatively important in all columns of Table 3 and the
estimates indicate that between 40% and 48% of the drop-out rate of constrained students should be attributed
to the constraint.
It is worthwhile to provide some additional evidence in support of this possibility that credit
constraints play an important causal role in the decisions of some students. The effect of liquidity constraints
should operate most directly through how much a person enjoys school.

The Table 1 variables

Sch_enjoyable and Sch_unenjoyable, which were constructed from question 1.A. in Appendix B.3.c, indicate
that beliefs about how enjoyable school will be relative to being out of school are very similar by constraint
status at the time of entrance. This finding is consistent with a situation in which students do not tend to
7

Information about the discount factor and intertemporal elasticity of substitution are not included in the regressions
because, as discussed in Appendix B, for a non-trivial of students we could not ascertain values of these variables.
However, using all available observations, Appendix B finds no differences in these variables between constrained and
unconstrained students.

15

anticipate their constraint status (or the effect of the constraint) at the time of entrance and constrained and
unconstrained students are indeed similar in non-financial ways that influence the drop-out decision.
However, if constraints are having a causal effect on exits, differences should be revealed after the time of
college entrance, and we find some evidence that this is the case. At the end of the first semester, .561 of
unconstrained individuals but only .387 of constrained indicate that being in school is much more enjoyable
than not being in school. A test of the null hypothesis that the difference in the population proportions is
zero has a t-statistic of 2.25. Similarly, .075 of unconstrained students and .184 of constrained students
indicate that being in school is less enjoyable than not being in school, and a test of the null hypothesis that
the difference in the population proportions is zero has a t-statistic of 1.88. The results at the end of the year
are virtually identical.8 Related to this, although we find that both constrained and unconstrained students
are in very good health at the beginning of the year, we find differences at the middle and end of the year.9
Given that individuals of college age are unlikely to suffer major medical problems in a year conditional on
being in good health at the beginning of the year, it seems likely that the health problems reported by the
constrained students at the middle and end of the year may be of the nature that could be caused by problems
such as stress that would potentially be related to how enjoyable school is in general and worries about
financial problems in particular.
IV.4 Why do so few students want to borrow?
An open question is why 80% of students do not wish to borrow money given the low levels of
consumption found in Section III. If students are unhappy with their consumption profiles but do not wish
to borrow for, say, reasons related to religious beliefs, then certain alternative policies (e.g., offering subsidies

8

The proportions for the “much more enjoyable” category are .363 (constrained) and .541 (unconstrained) with a tstatistic of 2.22. The proportions for the “less enjoyable” category are .182 (constrained) and .077 (constrained) with
a t-statistic of 1.72.
9

At the beginning of the year, .901 of constrained and .941 of unconstrained students report being in good or excellent
health. At the end of the first semester, .873 of unconstrained but only .720 of constrained individuals report being in
good or excellent health. At the end of the academic year, .884 of unconstrained and .750 of constrained individuals
report being in good or excellent health. A test that the population proportions of constrained and unconstrained
individuals that are in good or excellent health is not rejected at traditional significance levels in the first case, is rejected
at significance levels of greater than .007 in the second case, and is rejected at significance levels greater than .019 in
the last case.

16

to increase consumption) may have a substantial effect even if the type of loan policy studied here does not.
We are able to provide some information about this issue using Question E.3 (Appendix A.1). We find that
the majority of individuals are happy with their current consumption amounts. Sixty-four percent of
unconstrained students answer that they do not want to borrow money because they are “happy with the
amount I am currently spending and would not choose to increase spending now because I would have less
to spend later when I had to repay the loan and interest .” Further, many of the remaining answers to this
question that fall into an open ended “other” category can also loosely be interpreted in this way. Thus, our
findings suggest that, even in an entirely unconstrained world, individuals would choose to spend
substantially less money during school than they would after leaving school. One possible explanation for
this result is that the college environment may be one where many services and recreational activities are
either provided by schools or are of a low cost nature and where it may be acceptable to go without
consumption goods, such as televisions and cars, that might be deemed necessary or more important later.
IV.5 Some additional evidence from an exit module
The theory in Section II suggests that, in order to provide evidence about the percentage of attrition
that would remain even if access to credit was made available, it is necessary to consider two avenues through
which credit constraints can have a causal effect on the drop-out decision. First, credit constraints can have
a causal effect if, after matriculation, an individual learns that he/she is constrained or learns that a constraint
will make it less enjoyable to be in school than expected. Second, even if no learning about credit constraints
takes place after college entrance, constraints can have a causal effect if a person knows at the time of college
entrance that school will be less enjoyable than it would otherwise be due to the presence of a constraint.
We can provide evidence about the former using an exit-reason module which is shown in Appendix
A.3 and was sent to all drop-outs from the 2001 cohort soon after they left Berea. We focus on individuals
who left Berea before the start of their third year. The total drop-out rate before the third year was 31% for
our sample of 354 domestic students with 109 of 354 students leaving. Our sample used for the exit-reason
analysis includes the 76 (71%) of the drop-outs who responded to the exit survey and had usable information
on all questions need for our analysis.

17

Motivated by a learning model of decision-making, Question G (Appendix A.3) lists an exhaustive
set of 14 possible reasons (including an “other” category) that students could have learned after college
entrance that school was less beneficial or less enjoyable than expected at the time of college entrance. Two
closely related reasons in the exit module (g and h) involve situations where a student has learned that school
is less enjoyable for reasons related to his own financial situation:
g. Worries about my own personal financial situation made school less enjoyable than expected
h. Concerns about not having enough money for items that would make my life more pleasant (for example,
a car, entertainment, dates, and social activities) have made school less enjoyable than expected.
We find that 57% of drop-outs found reason g to be true, 53% of drop-outs found reason h to be
true, and 67% percent of drop-outs found either reason g to be true or reason h to be true. We find that 25%
of drop-outs found reason g to be very important, 12% of drop-outs found reason h to be very important, and
28% percent found either reason g or reason h to be very important. However, because the average drop-out
indicates that many reasons are true and many reasons are very important, these results do not directly answer
the question of interest - what percentage of the drop-outs would have left school even they had not found
that g and h were true? One way to provide evidence about this question is to use an additional component
of the survey question which appears as Question H (Appendix A.3) For each person, Question H elicits a
set R={R1,...,RN} where Ri is the reason that the person believes was the ith most important in pushing him
over the margin of indifference and out of school, R is a set of reasons that would have been sufficient to push
the person over the margin and out of school, and the set {R1,...,RN-1} would not be sufficient to push the
person over the margin and out of school.
This question is useful because it implies that, if reasons g and h are each not included in R, then
the person would have left school even if he had not learned that g or h were true. We find that most
individuals indicate that a small number of reasons would have been sufficient for them to leave school and

18

these reasons typically do not include g or h.10 Our results indicate that at most 8% of the attrition arose
because people learned about constraints after arriving at school.
In Section IV.1 we noted that it was not clear whether our conclusions take into account the
possibility that some students drop out because they are not able to borrow money to help parents or family
members. Reason f in our exit module pertains directly to that possibility:
f. Worries about financial problems related to my family made school less enjoyable than expected.
When we examine whether f, g, or h are elements of R, we find very little change in our results.

The new

results imply that at most 9% of the attrition arose because people learned about constraints after arriving
at school. Of relevance for the interpretation of the results in Section IV, the results suggest that concerns
about the financial situation of families do not tend to be a primary driving force in attrition.
In an earlier footnote we mentioned that only 18% of a recent cohort of students anticipated, at the
time of entrance, that they would be constrained during college. When combined, our finding that the large
majority of students do not anticipate being constrained at entrance and our finding that little drop-out is
caused by students learning that they are constrained during college are consistent with the notion that the
large majority of attrition should be attributed to factors other than constraints.
V. Conclusion
Our results suggest that there exists a group of students at Berea whose outcomes are likely to suffer
because their ability to purchase consumption during school is constrained. Further, because constrained
students do not wish to borrow much in absolute terms, the results suggest that a policy to help these students
would not be particularly expensive. Nonetheless, the results here suggest that the large majority of attrition
would remain under the generous policy in which direct costs are zero and students are given access to loans
which could be used to purchase additional consumption during college. Further research is needed to
provide a comprehensive view of how students from low income families decide whether to remain in school.

10

Fifty-six of the 76 students indicate that a single reason was important enough that it would have been sufficient for
them to leave school (N=1). Of these students, only three indicate that this reason was either g or h. Eleven students
indicate that their two most important reasons would have been sufficient for them to leave school (N=2). Of these
students, only one indicates that either g or h was one of these two reasons. The remaining nine students have N=3 or
N=4. Three of these students list either g or h in R.

19

References
Altonji, Joseph. “The Demand for and Return to Education When Education Outcomes are Uncertain,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 1993, vol. 11, no. 1, 48-83.
Altonji, Joseph, Elder, Todd, and Taber, Christopher, “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing
the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2005), 151-184.
Barsky, Robert, Kimball, Miles, Juster, F. Thomas, and Shapiro, Matthew. “Preference Parameters and Behavioral
Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Survey,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May 1997, 537-579.
Cameron, Stephen V and Heckman, James J. “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias: Models and
Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males.” Journal of Political Economy, April 1998, pp. 262-333.
Cameron, Stephen V and Heckman, James J. “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and
White Males,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 109, pp. 455-99, 2001.
Cameron, Stephen V and Taber, Christopher. “Borrowing Constraints and the Returns to Schooling.” Journal of
Political Economy, 112, Feb. 2004.
Card, David “Earnings, Schooling and Ability Revisited,” Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 14, 1995, pp. 23-48.
Carneiro, Pedro and Heckman, James, “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-Secondary Schooling,” The
Economic Journal, 112, October, 2002.
Carneiro, Pedro, Hansen, Karsten, and Heckman, James, “Estimating Distributions of Counterfactuals with an
Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of the Effect of Uncertainty on Schooling Choice,”
International Economic Review, 2005
Cunha, Flavio, Heckman, James, and Navarro, Salvador, “Separating Uncertainty from Heterogeneity in Life Cycle
Earnings,” Oxford Econoic Papers, 2005, 57(2), 191-261.
Crossley, Thomas and Low, Hamish, “When Might Unemployment Insurance Matter? Credit Constraints and the
Cost of Saving,” Working Paper 2004-04, McMaster University.
Deaton, A. “Savings and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 1991, 59:1221-48.
Dominitz, Jeff. “Earnings Expectations, Revisions, and Realizations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
August 1998, 374-388.
Dominitz, Jeff and Manski, Charles. “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income Expectations,” Journal
of American Statistical Association, September 1997, 855-867.
Dominitz, Jeff and Manski, Charles. “Eliciting Student Expectations of the Returns to Schooling,” Winter 1996, 1-26.
Heckman, James, Lochner, Lance, and Taber, Chris, “General-Equilibrium Treatment Effects: A Study of Tuition
Policy,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 88(2) May 1998: 381-386.
Kane, Thomas “College Cost, Borrowing Constraints and the Timing of College Entry,” Eastern Economic Journal
(1996) Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 181-194.
Kane, Thomas, “Public Intervention in Postsecondary Education,” in Eric Hanushek and Finis Welch (eds.)
Handbook on the Economics of Education (Amsterdam: Elsevier/North Holland), forthcoming 2005.

Keane, Michael, and Wolpin, Ken, “The Effect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints on Educational
Attainment,” The International Economics Review, 42(4), 2001.
Lang, Kevin, “Ability Bias, Discount Rate Bias and the Return to Education,” Discussion Paper, Boston University,
Dept. of Economics, May, 1993.
Manski, Charles, “Schooling as Experimentation: a reappraisal of the post-secondary
phenomenon,”Economics of Education Review, Volume 8 number 4, 1989, 305-312.

drop-out

Manski, Charles. “Parental Income and College Opportunity.” Democratic Study Center Report, Washington, DC.
August, 1992.
Restuccia, Diego and Urrutia, Carlos. “Intergenerational Persistence of Earnings: The Role of Early and College
Education,” American Economic Review, 94(5), December 2004, 1354-1378.
Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Ralph Stinebrickner. “Understanding Educational Outcomes of Students from Low
Income Families: Evidence from a Liberal Arts College with a Full Tuition Subsidy Program,” Journal of Human
Resources, Summer 2003a, 591-617.
Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Ralph Stinebrickner. “Working During School and Academic Performance,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 21(2), April 2003b, 473-491.
Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Ralph Stinebrickner. “Credit Constraints in Higher Education: Direct Approaches Using
a New Panel Study, Unpublished Manuscript, 2005.

Table 1 Demographic and parental characteristics for entire sample and by constraint status
Entire Sample
mean
(std. dev.)
n=307

Not Constrained
mean
(std. dev.)
n=245

Constrained
mean
(std. dev.)
n=62

See
note
below

.169

.142

.274

.014

Male

.442

.416

.548

.062

Black

.188

.171

.258

N

ParentEd - at least one parent has college degree

.511

.534

.419

N

Faminc - total family income from FAFSA

26510 (17153)

27146( 16895)

24006(18056)

N

ACT - American College Test

23.24 (3.606)

23.551 (3.717)

22.822(3.118)

N

total parental savings from FAFSA
(cash, savings, and checking accounts)

1241
(3671)

1460
(4077)

392
(658)

.046

total parental investments from FAFSA

1855 (6680)

2117 (7106)

857 (4629)

N

total student savings as of second semester

800 (1589)
median 200

940 (1734)
median300

246 (510)
median 50

.0000

first-year grants from parents

874 (1305)

930 (649)

649 (1087)

.097

have a loan from parents or friends

.033

.036

.016

N

have a credit card

.250

.249

.258

N

credit card balance won’t be paid this month

78

47

201

.003

labor income second semester

453 (72)

453 (72)

450 (81)

N

could increase spending money using savings

.263

.314

.064

.0001

could increase spending money using new
grants from parents, friends, relatives

.247

.273

.145

.036

could increase spending money through loans
from parents, friends, relatives

.114

.118

.096

N

could increase spending money through loans
from other sources at fair interest rates

.045

.049

.032

N

could increase spending money from one or
more source in previous 4 rows

.371

.412

.209

.003

Outcome
I(t1) - drop-out by beginning of second year
Traditional Variables

Additional Financial Variables

Additional variables related to ability and
motivation at time of college entrance

HSGPA - high school grade point average

3.301 (.753)

3.323 (.720)

3.215 (.698)

N

StudyHS - hours studied per week in high
school

10.584
(10.471)

10.339
(11.576)

11.576
(11.556)

N

StudyC - expected study hours per weekday
during college

3.605
(3.644)

3.644
(1.594)

3.449
(1.555)

N

Pr_GPA3.5 - percent chance that 1st semester
grade point average will be 3.5 or higher

39.178
(25.606)

38.474
(25.341)

41.959
(26.660)

N

GPA_study3 - expected grade point average if
study three hours a day during college

3.106
(.660)

3.13
(.642)

2.987
(.723)

N

Pr_forced_leave - percent chance of being
forced to leave school at some future point
because of bad academic performance

7.453
(13.041)

6.887
(13.501)

9.679
(10.859)

N

.685
(.373)

.682
(.377)

.698
(.358)

N

Health_bad - health fair or poor at time of
college entrance

.067

.059

.099

N

Bfriend/Gfriend - boyfriend or girlfriend at
home at time of entrance

.322

.314

.354

N

Home_grad - grad Probability of living within
100 miles of home if graduate

.487

.495

.458

N

Home_dropout - Probability of living within
100 miles of home if do not graduate

.672

.676

.655

N

Sch_enjoyable Believe that school will be
much more enjoyable than being out of school

.688

.699

.645

N

Sch_unenjoyable Believe that school will be
less enjoyable than being out of school

.056

.025

.064

N

Belief about financial return to schooling
at time of college entrance
Return_to_schooling Log(median earnings age 28 if graduate with
3.0 GPA)
-Log(median earnings at age 28 if leave school
immediately)
Variables related to preferences at time of
college entrance

Risk_aversion_low - risk aversion < 2.0
.393
.400
.366
N
The last column shows the p-value from a test that the average value of the variable in a particular row is the
same across constrained and unconstrained groups if this p-value is less than .1 and shows an “N” if the p-value is
greater than .1.

Table 2 Bounds and estimates of P - the proportion of attrition that is unrelated to credit constraints
p̂1

p̂2

p̂3

p̂1p̂2
p̂3

P̂'1&

p̂1p̂2
p̂3

(1)

Using upper bound for p̂2
n=307

.202 (.022)

.274 (.025)

.169 (.021)

.327 (.064)

.673 (.064)

(2)

Using estimate for p̂2
from Column 1 of Table 3,
n=307

.202 (.022)

.131 (.052)

.169 (.021)

0.156 (.072)

.844 (.072)

(3)

Using estimate for p̂2
from Column 2 of Table 3,
n=307

.202 (.022)

.123 (.053)

.169 (.021)

0.147 (.073)

.853 (.073)

(4)

Using estimate for p̂2
from Column 3 of Table 3,
n=283

.194 (.023)

.118 (.056)

.166 (.022)

0.137 (.073)

.863 (.073)

(5)

Using estimate for p̂2
from Column 4 of Table 3,
n=284

.194 (.023)

.116 (.054)

.159 (.021)

0.141(.080)

.859 (.080)

(6)

Using estimate for p̂2
from Column 5 of Table 3,
n=291

.203 (.023)

.112 (.056)

.179 (.022)

0.127 (.076)

.873 (.076)

.191 (.024)
.110 (.059)
.163 (.023)
Using estimate for p̂2
0.128 (.088) .872 (.088)
from Column 6 of Table 3,
n=252
As described after equation (3),
p̂1 is an estimate of the proportion of students that are constrained
p̂2 is an upper bound (row 1) or an estimate (rows 2-7) of the increase in the drop-out probability of constrained students
that is caused by the constraint.
p̂3 is an estimate of the proportion of all students that drops out for any reason.
The fourth column shows an upper bound (row 1) or an estimate (rows 2-7) of the proportion of the attrition that is due to
credit constraints.
The fifth column shows a lower bound (row 1) or an estimate (rows 2-7) of P, the proportion of the attrition that is unrelated
to credit constraints.
Sample sizes vary across rows depending on how many observations were available to estimate corresponding models in
Table 3. See note in Table 3.
Standard errors in Columns 4 and 5 are computed using bootstrap techniques.

(7)

Table 3 Regression of drop-out indicator, I(t1), on variables of relevance given theoretical model
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(n=307)

(n=307)

(n=283)

(n=284)

(n=291)

(n=252)

CONSTRAINED

.131 (.052)**

.123 (.053)**

.118 (.056)**

.116 (.054)**

.112 (.056)**

.110 (.059)*

Constant

.142 (.023)**

.204 (.166)

.925 (.300)**

.275 (.171)

.226 (.202)

1.15 (.327)

Male

.054 (.043)

.025 (.047)

.060 (.043)

.055(.045)

.013 (.049)

Black

-.029 (.061)

-.107 (.064)*

-.056 (.064)

-.036 (.065)

-.126 (.069)

Faminc

.008 (.003)**

.009 (.003)**

.008 (.003)**

.008 (.003)**

.008 (.003)**

ParentEd

-.066 (.043)

-.089 (.045)*

-.046 (.044)

-.061 (.045)

-.052 (.048)

ACT

-.003 (.006)

-.005 (.007)

-.008 (.006)

-.004 (.007)

-.013 (.008)*

HSGPA

-.151 (.053)**

-.149 (.057)**

StudyHS

-.003 (.005)

-.005 (.005)

StudyHS*StudyHS

.0001 (.0001)

.0002 (.0001)

StudyC

.014 (.063)

-.012 (.066)

StudyC*StudyC

-.004 (.006)

-.001 (.007)

Pr_GPA3.5

-.0003 (.0009)

-.0001 (.0009)

GPA_study3

-.018 (.040)

-.036 (.042)

Pr_forced_leave

-.002 (.001)

-.0022 (.001)

Ret_to_schooling
<sample median

.091 (.045)**

.074 (.049)

Health_bad

.056 (.091)

.073 (.094)

Bfriend/Gfriend

.050 (.047)

.015 (.048)

Home_grad

-.002 (.001)

-.002 (.001)

Home_dropout

.001 (.001)

.001 (.001)

Risk_aversion_low

.065 (.045)

.045 (.045)

Sch_enjoyable

.065 (.045)

.014 (.053)

Sch_unenjoyable

.207 (.127)*

.192 (.121)

R2=.088

R2=.185

R2=.020

R2=.052

R2=.080

R2=.070

*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Sample sizes vary across columns because some variables cannot be constructed for some individuals in the sample, due, to , for
example item non-response or non-valid response.

Appendix A Survey questions
Appendix A.1. Financial Module from Survey 6
Question A. We are interested in how much spending money you have compared to what you thought you would have
when you arrived at Berea.
A.1 When you arrived at Berea in September, approximately how much money did you expect that you would spend
during the next year (September 2001-August 2002) not including college related costs (term bills, books, class-related
supplies)? Please include expenses for things such as clothing, travel, telephone, cars, recreation, entertainment, and
food and snacks not included in the college food plan. $______________________
A.2 You may have found out that you would like to spend more or less spending money than you expected when you
arrived at Berea. You may also have found out that the amount of spending money that you have available after paying
for college costs is more or less than you expected when you arrived. How much money do you now expect that you
will spend this year (September 2001-August 2002) not including college related costs?
$_________________________

Question B. After taking into account what you need to pay your term bill and other college costs in the future, do you
have savings or other financial resources that would allow you to increase the amount of spending money that you have
during the current academic year beyond the amount you have written in Question A?
B.1

YES (could increase spending if wanted)

NO (cannot increase spending)

B.2. If you circled YES, please check any of the following ways that you could increase your spending money at the
present time if you decided that you wanted to.
1.
2.
3.
4.

I have personal savings that I could use to increase spending money _____________
Parents, friends, or relatives would be able and willing to give me more spending money _____________
Parents, friends, or relatives would be able and willing to loan me money _______
I am able to borrow money from other sources at fair interest rates ________

Question C. How much savings do you personally have? Include money in savings accounts, checking accounts, or
other investments. $___________________
Question D. Do you have one or more credit cards? YES

NO

If YES, how much money do you owe on your credit cards? Please include any current balances that you will
not pay off this month. $___________________
Question E. Suppose that someone offered to loan you money this year so that you could increase the amount of money
that you would have for spending money during this year. Suppose that the loan is made at a fair interest rate and that
you would not have to begin repaying the loan until after you leave Berea.
E.1 Would you accept the loan? YES
NO
E.2

If you answered YES,
You would like to borrow money to increase your spending at Berea during this year. Remember, you will have
to pay back the loan and any interest after leaving Berea. How much money would you choose to borrow this
year in order to increase your spending money this year? $ ______________

E.3

If you answered NO,

Why would you not accept the loan?
1. I am happy with the amount I am currently spending and would not choose to increase spending now since I
would have less to spend later when I had to repay the loan and interest______
2. I don’t like the idea of borrowing money _________
3. Other (please explain)_________________________
Question F.
Approximately, what is the total amount of money that your parents, relatives, and friends are paying towards your
college costs and the spending money described in question A for the current school year. Please do not include loans.
$___________________
Approximately, what is the total amount of money that you are currently borrowing this year to help pay for your college
costs and the spending money described in question A for the current school year? $__________
If you are borrowing money, please describe who you are borrowing it from.

Appendix A.2 Parental Job Loss Question from the end of year Survey 10
1) In the last 12 months did your father lose his job without being able to find a similarly paying replacement job? Note:
Please answer NO if your father did not lose his job, lost his job but found a similarly paying new job, did not work at a
job for pay, you do not know the work status of your father, or your father is deceased.
YES

NO

If yes, approximately in what month did this occcur?____________

2) In the last 12 months did your mother lose her job without being able to find a similarly paying replacement job?
Note: Please answer NO if your mother did not lose her job, lost her job but found a similarly paying new job, did not
work at a job for pay, you do not know the work status of your mother, or your mother is deceased.
YES

NO

If yes, approximately in what month did this occur?____________

Appendix A.3. Exit-Reason Module

Question G. We are interested in how certain factors may have influenced your decision to leave Berea. For
each letter, first indicate whether you found the given factor to be True or False. Then, indicate the extent to which the factor
influenced your decision to leave Berea.
a. Classes were more difficult than I expected. This made being in school more stressful or made school less enjoyable
because I had to spend more time studying and less time relaxing or doing other things. True False
Importance of (a) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important
b. Given academic difficulties, I felt it was unlikely that I would eventually graduate and this made staying in
school less worthwhile. TRUE
FALSE
Importance of (b) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important
c. I realized that my grades were probably going to be lower than what I expected and this made me realize that the
type of jobs I would get if I graduated would be worse than what I had expected. True False
Importance of (c) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important
d. It was harder to meet new friends than expected, I missed my family/old friends/boyfriend/girlfriend more than
expected, or I found that activities available at Berea College and in Berea were less exciting than expected. True False
Importance of (d) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important
e.

Physical or emotional harassment made me feel uncomfortable at Berea. True
False
If True, please circle any that contributed to this feeling: roommate teacher college staff other students
Importance of (e) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

f. Worries about the financial matters related to my family made school less enjoyable than expected. True False
Importance of (f) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important
g.

Worries about my own personal financial situation made school less enjoyable than expected.
True
Briefly explain why you needed more money (for example, to pay term bill, for spending money etc.)
_______________________________________________________
Importance of (g) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

False

h.

Concerns about not having enough money for items that would make my life more pleasant (for example, a car,
entertainment, dates, and social activities) have made school less enjoyable than expected.
True
False
Importance of (h) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

i.

Non-financial problems or health difficulties among family or friends at home made school less enjoyable. True False
Importance of (i) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

j.

Personal health problems or illness made school less enjoyable. True False
Importance of (j) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

k.

I realized that I wasn’t as interested as I expected in the type of material that was being covered in classes. True False
Importance of (k) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

l.

Berea wasn’t academically challenging enough.
True
False
Importance of (l) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

m.

Berea didn’t provide the types of majors or career opportunities I was interested in. True
False
Importance of (m) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important

n.

In the space below, comment on any other things that have influenced how you feel about remaining at Berea.
Importance of (n) in your decision to leave Berea. (circle one below)
1. Not important at all 2. Not particularly important 3. Somewhat important 4. Very important
______________________________________________________________________________

Question H. In Question G above, write (1) in front of the reason that was the most important reason in your
decision to leave Berea, write (2) in front of the reason that was the second most important, and write (3) in front of the
reason that was third most important.
H.1 Consider only the reason you labelled (1).
By itself, would this have been enough to cause you to leave school? YES NO
If YES, continue with question (I). If NO, continue with question H.2
H.2 Consider both the reason you labelled (1) and the reason you labelled (2).
Would these two reasons together have been enough to cause you to leave school? YES NO
If YES, continue with question (I). If NO, continue with question H.3
H.3 Consider the reasons you labelled (1), (2), and (3).
Would these three reasons together have been enough to cause you leave school? YES NO
If YES, continue with question (I). If NO, continue with question H.4
H.4 In question H.3 you indicated that the reasons that you labelled (1), (2), and (3) in question G would not
have been enough together to cause you to leave school. In question G above, now please write a (4) next to the fourth
most important reason in your decision to leave Berea. If reasons (1), (2), (3),and (4) together would have been enough
to cause you to leave school, please skip to question (I). If not, write a (5) next to the reason in question G that is
the fifth most important reason in your decision to leave Berea. If reasons (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) together would
have been enough to cause you to leave school, please skip to question (I). If not, continue adding numbers in this
manner until the group of reasons that you have numbered would have been enough together to cause you to leave school.

Appendix B. Details of other sources of heterogeneity between constrained and unconstrained students
In the next three subsections (B.1, B.2, B.3) we examine whether differences exist by constraint status in
1) ability, 2) beliefs about earnings conditional on particular levels of completion and academic performance, and
3) preferences which indicate how much utility a person would receive over his lifetime given particular schooling
and earnings paths. The implicit assumption is that the variables being compared are not influenced by the constraint.
B.1. Differences in academic ability by constraint status
Given previous evidence that a student’s cumulative grade point average is often the strongest predictor of
whether a person stays in school (S&S, 2003a), it seems particularly important to pay careful attention to whether
differences exist in determinants of college grade point average such as ability and motivation.
In Columns 1 and 2 of Table Suppl.1 we regress a student’s first semester college grade point average on ACT and
HSGPA, respectively.

The coefficients (tstats) are .065 (5.338) and .736 (7.854) respectively in the two

specifications and these two variables explain .082 and .172 of the variation in college GPA respectively when
included separately. Although not shown in the table, the two variables explain .193 of the variation when included
in a specification together.
We have used the BPS to collect a variety of additional information at the time of college entrance that helps
to characterize a person’s academic ability, motivation, and beliefs about the importance of college. For example,
with respect to academic ability at the time of college entrance, the BPS asks a student what grade point average he
would expect to receive conditional on particular amounts of study time during college. The answer conditional on
studying three hours a day determines the GPA_study3 variable in Table 1. With respect to questions of motivation
and work ethic, the BPS asks a student how many hours he spent studying per week in high school (StudyHS) and
how many hours he plans to spend studying per day in college (StudyC). With respect to questions that combine
motivation and work effort with ability, the BPS includes the following two questions which, respectively, ask an
individual to express his beliefs about the probability that his grade point average in the first semester will fall into
each of a set of mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive intervals and asks an individual about the probability
that he will be suspended from school at some point because of poor grade performance.
We realize that you do not know exactly how well you will do in classes. However, we would like to have you describe your
beliefs about the grade point average that you expect to receive in the first semester. Given the amount of study-time you
indicated in question H, please tell us the percent chance that your grade point average will be in each of the following intervals.
That is, for each interval, write the number of chances out of 100 that your final grade point average will be in that interval.
Note: The numbers on the six lines must add up to 100.
Percent Chance (number of chances out of 100).
Interval
[3.5, 4.00]
[3.0, 3.49]
[2.5, 2.99]
[2.0, 2.49]
[1.0, 1.99]
[0.0, .99]

____________
____________
____________
____________
____________
____________

What do you think is the percent chance (number of chances out of 100) that you will be forced to leave school (that
is, suspended by the college) in the future due to poor academic performance? _____________
The answer on the first line of the former question determines the variable Pr_GPA3.5 in Table 1. The answer

to the second question determines the variable Pr_forced_leave.
In Columns 3-7 of Table Suppl.1 we regress first semester college grade point average on the new variables
separately and find that four of the five new variables are statistically related to grade performance. The ninth and
tenth columns show that adding these additional variables jointly increases the R2 of the linear specification by
approximately 30% over a specification which contains HSGPA and ACT as well as MALE, BLACK, PARENTED,
and FAMINC. Although not shown, adding these variables increases the R2 by approximately 50% over the
specification that contains only HSGPA and ACT. A test of the null hypothesis that the effects of the new variables
are jointly zero is rejected at significance levels greater than .019.
Thus, the evidence suggests that we have access to a variety of traditional and non-traditional variables that
are related to ability and motivation at the time of entrance. What is important for this study is that the descriptive
statistics in Table 1 indicates no evidence of a systematic relationship between any of the new variables and a
person’s constraint status.
B.2. Differences in beliefs about earnings conditional on particular levels of completion and academic
performance by constraint status
At the time of college entrance and at the end of the first year, we elicited beliefs about distributions of
earnings using a survey approach that follows in the general spirit of the work by Dominitz (1998), and Dominitz
and Manski (1996 , 1997). Specifically, for each of a number of schooling scenarios, we ask each individual to report
the first, second, and third quartiles associated with the future earnings he would earn at several future ages given
the scenario. Here we concentrate on answers associated with earnings at the age of 28.
At the time of college entrance, one of the schooling scenarios involves leaving school immediately. The
first row of Table Suppl.2 shows that, on average, the median income associated with this scenario is $29,576 and
$29,626 for the constrained and unconstrained groups respectively. Although not shown, the average first quartile
and third quartile are also similar across the constrained and unconstrained groups. At the time of college entrance,
other schooling scenarios involved graduating from college (unconditional on grade performance) and graduating
with a 3.75 grade point average, a 3.0 grade point average, and a 2.0 grade point average, respectively. The latter
three scenarios provide information about the distribution of earnings conditional on ability. Rows 2-5 of Table
Suppl.2 indicate that, on average, the median earnings associated with these scenarios are also similar across
constrained and unconstrained individuals. We reach the same conclusions when we examine, in the second part of
Table Suppl.2, the answers to these questions at the end of the first academic year.
Thus, if the answers to our questions truly reflect beliefs, the evidence suggests that constrained and
unconstrained individuals do not differ in their beliefs about the financial returns to college. Given the newness of
the types of questions being used here, it makes sense to look for evidence of whether the answers are related to the
drop-out decision. For the earnings questions that are answered at the time of college entrance, we construct two
measures of the returns to schooling.
R1=Log(Median earnings age 28 if graduate)-Log(Median earnings age 28 if leave school immediately)
R2=Log(Median earnings age 28 if graduate 3.0 GPA)-Log(Median earnings age 28 if leave immediately)

We compute the same two measures using data from the end of the school year and call these measures R3 and R4.
As expected given the previous results in Table Suppl.2, the measures R1, R2, and R4 are similar across constrained
and unconstrained individuals.11
Column 1 of Table Suppl.3 shows the results obtained by regressing the drop-out indicator on a dummy
variable which has a value of unity if R1 is less than a median value, and, therefore indicates that a person’s beliefs
about the returns to schooling are “small.” Columns 2-4 of Table Suppl.3 are similar but include dummy variables
that are constructed using R2-R4 respectively.

We find evidence that individuals that believe that the returns to

schooling are small are significantly more likely to drop-out of school; the t-statistics associated with the dummy
variables constructed from R1-R4 are 1.40, 2.06, 2.35, and 2.30 respectively. In addition, the effects are quantitatively
large; the estimates of having beliefs that the returns to schooling are small increases the mean drop-out probability
by 44%, 75%, 122%, and 121%, respectively relative to the case where the returns to schooling are large. We use
the variable R2 as our Return_to_schooling variable in Table 1.
B.3. Differences in preferences which indicate how much utility a person would receive over his lifetime given
particular schooling and earnings paths
In Section B.3.a we take advantage of recent innovations in survey methodology by Barsky et al. (1997)
to directly examine whether some of the basic properties associated with utility, such as risk aversion, intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, and rate of time preference, differ across constrained and unconstrained individuals.12 In
B.3.b we take an indirect approach of examining whether differences in particular personal or family situations,
which might make school less enjoyable relative to being out of the workforce at a given level of consumption, exist
between constrained and unconstrained individuals. In B.3.c we take a final, direct approach.
B.3.a. Risk aversion, intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and the discount rate
Risk Aversion
The first general property of utility functions that we examine is risk aversion. We are able to provide some
direct evidence using a set of survey questions suggested by Barsky et al. (1997) which involve asking individuals
about hypothetical gambles involving income. At the beginning of the year, individuals were asked the following
question:
Suppose in the future you have a job which is guaranteed to give you a certain amount of income every year for life.
You are given the opportunity to take a new and equally good job, with a 50-50 chance it will double your income
and a 50-50 chance it will cut your income by one-third (33%). Would you take the new job? YES NO
If the answer to the question was YES, the person was asked whether he would still accept the job if “The
chances were 50-50 that the new job would double your income, and 50-50 that it would cut it in half (50%).” If the
answer to the question was NO, the person was asked whether he would take the new job if “The chances were 50-50
that the new job would double your income, and 50-50 that it would cut it by twenty percent (20%).” Thus, each

11

A test of the null hypothesis that the population value of R1 is the same for constrained and unconstrained individuals
has a pvalue of .952. p values for R2 and R4 are .807 and .292 respectively. It does not make sense to compare R3 across
constraint status because the constraint may influence a person’s grades by influencing their effort.
12

We thank the authors of Barsky et al. (1997) for providing the questions that we used in the survey.

person answers two questions and the two answers separate respondents into four risk preference categories. These
categories can be ranked in order of risk aversion without making a functional form assumption for the utility
function. Bounds on the risk aversion associated with each of the categories can be obtained with a functional form
assumption. For example, if one is willing to assume a constant relative risk aversion form for the utility function,
an answer sequence of NN would imply that a person has risk aversion greater than 3.76, an answer sequence of NY
would imply that a person has risk aversion between 2.0 and 3.76, an answer sequence of YN would imply that a
person has risk aversion between 1.0 and 2.0, and an answer sequence of YY would imply that a person has risk
aversion less than 1.0.
Table Suppl.4 indicates that individuals are quite risk averse and that constrained and unconstrained
individuals have similar levels of risk aversion. For example .60 and .63 of constrained and unconstrained
individuals respectively fall into one of the 2 most risk averse categories (risk aversion greater than 2.0 under the
CRRA assumption).
As some evidence that these experimental questions contain some useful information, Barsky et al. (1997)
find that answers to these types of questions are related to risky activities for respondents in the Health and
Retirement Study. Unfortunately, our data do not contain information about risky activities that would be useful
for examining the explanatory power of these questions. However, we do find that sample members in the two least
risk averse classes (Risk_aversion_low) are more than 50% more likely to leave school than sample members in the
two most risk averse classes (.220 vs. .143). A test of the null hypothesis that the two population proportions are
equal is rejected at significant levels greater than .087.
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution and the discount factor
Our survey questions eliciting time preference and intertemporal substitution were provided by the authors
of Barsky et. al (1997). As in their work, the behavioral equation motivating the design of the questions is
(B.1)

∆log(c)=γ (r-β)

where c is consumption, r is the real interest rate, and β is the subjective discount rate. γ is the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution which can be written as
(B.2) γ=dlog(c)/dlog(1+r).
Equation B.1 shows that a person’s consumption path depends on both γ and β. This motivates our
identification strategy which is the same as described in Barsky et. al (1997):
“...we first posed a hypothetical set of circumstances that are meant to control for heterogeneity in economic and
demographic conditions... Then the respondents were shown charts with different profiles of consumption with
constant present value at a zero interest rate and were asked to choose the preferred path. In subsequent questions
they were asked to choose among constant present value consumption paths with interest rates of 12% and 24%. From
the slopes of the preferred paths and how the slopes change when the interest rate changes, one can estimate the rate
of time preference and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.”13

13

The interest rates used in Barsky et al. (1997) are different than those used here.

A practical issue that arises because the number of consumption profiles is finite is that a person’s optimal
consumption path may lie somewhere between the paths offered. One option is to note that the person’s choice
implies bounds on the person’s optimal consumption profile and to use this information to construct bounds for a
person’s γ and β. Given that our primary interest is to examine whether constrained and unconstrained individuals
are similar, the approach we follow here is to use the zero and twelve percent interest rate questions and to assume
that the chosen profile in each case is the person’s optimal profile. The responses of 30 of the 307 respondents are
inconsistent with theory because they indicate that the slope of the consumption profile would decrease when the
interest rate is increased. Two other respondents have unusable responses. Table Suppl.4 shows the distribution of
γ for the remaining 275 students in the sample. Consistent with the findings of Barsky et al. (1997), the modal (and
in our case median) person chose consumption paths at the zero interest rate and the twelve percent interest rate that
had the same slope. Under the assumption that the person’s choice is his optimal choice, this would imply that γ=0.
It is probably most reasonable to simply interpret these patterns as evidence that the elasticity of substitution is low
for these people. This is what we find more generally; consistent with Barsky et al. (1997) we find that most people
have elasticities of intertemporal substitution close to zero and very few people have elasticities as high as one (i.e.,
consistent with log utility). Of particular interest to this paper, we find no evidence of differences between
constrained and unconstrained individuals.
Equation B.1 indicates that it is not possible to compute the discount factor for the 158 individuals who do
not vary the slope of their consumption profile when the interest rate changes. This implies that the number of
constrained students for which a discount factor can be computed is small when only the zero and twelve percent
interest rates are used. In an effort to increase this number, we examined the consumption profile associated with
the twenty-four percent interest rate for the 158 individuals who did not vary the slope of their consumption profile
between the zero and twelve percent interest rates. Forty-five of the 158 increased the slope of their profile at
twenty-four percent, while 6 of the 158 violated economic theory by decreasing their profiles. Thus, we were able
to compute discount factors for 127 unconstrained and 29 constrained individuals and the results are shown in Table
Suppl.4. The responses indicate that people care a lot about the future in the sense that many would choose an upward
sloping consumption profile at a zero interest rate (i.e., β<0). While the sample sizes of constrained and
unconstrained individuals are much smaller than ideal, we find no evidence of differences by constraint status.
B.3.b. Differences in personal characteristics/situations potentially related to enjoyment of school
Information on certain other family and personal factors that might influence how much a person enjoys
being in college relative to not being in college is shown at the end of Table 1. One personal factor that seemingly
could influence the drop-out decision is personal health or the health of individuals in a person’s family. We ask
specifically about student health on the initial survey and find no evidence of a difference between constrained and
unconstrained individuals with .099 of the former and .059 of the latter indicating at the time of college entrance that
they are in poor or fair health (Health_bad) .

Another factor that could influence whether a student leaves school is whether he (she) has a boyfriend
(girlfriend) that does not attend Berea. As seen at end of Table 1, although we find that beginning college with a
boyfriend/girlfriend elsewhere is quite common (Bfriend/Gfriend), we do not find differences between constrained
and unconstrained individuals in this respect. To some extent, this variable measures a student’s attachment to
his/her hometown. We can measure this directly using two survey questions in the BPS. The first question is
“Assume that you graduate from Berea. What is the percent chance (number of chances out of 100) that in 10 years
you will be living within 100 miles of your hometown.” The second question asks person to assume that he does
not graduate from Berea. As can be seen in Table 1, we find no evidence of a difference between constrained and
unconstrained individuals in the resulting variables Home_grad and Home_dropout.
B.3.c. A direct approach
The final approach we take to examine the third factor is more direct. At the beginning of the academic
year, we asked individuals the following question about their beliefs regarding how enjoyable school will be relative
to being out of school.
Question 1.A. Circle the one answer that best describes your beliefs at this time:
1. I believe that being in college at Berea will be much more enjoyable than not being in college.
2. I believe that being in college at Berea will be somewhat more enjoyable than not being in college.
3. I believe that I will enjoy being in college at Berea about the same amount as I would enjoy not being in
college.
4. I believe that being in college at Berea will be somewhat less enjoyable than not being in college.
5. I believe that being in college at Berea will be much less enjoyable than not being in college.
At the time of college entrance, we reject the null hypothesis that beliefs about how enjoyable school will be are
different for constrained and unconstrained individuals. For example, .645 of constrained students and .699 of
unconstrained students indicate that being in school will be much more enjoyable than not being in school
(Sch_enjoyable), and test of the null hypothesis that the difference in the population proportions is zero has a tstatistic of less than one. Similarly, .064 of constrained students and .025 of unconstrained students indicate that
being in school will be somewhat less enjoyable or much less enjoyable than not being in school (Sch_unenjoyable),
and a test of the null hypothesis that the difference in the population proportions is zero has a t-statistic of
approximately .8.14

14

We are interested in whether differences in answers to this question would exist by constraint status if constrained and
unconstrained students had the same consumption. Our answers deviate from this “consumption held constant” situation
if constrained individuals believe at the time of entrance that they will have less money for consumption and believe
that having less money for consumption will make them less happy in school relative to being out of school. However,
if this was the case, the effect of comparing the answers to this question across constraint groups would be to understate
how enjoyable constrained students would find school relative to the unconstrained students if the feasible consumption
set were the same across groups.

Table Suppl.1: Regressions of first semester grade point average on measures of ability and motivation
.478
(.440)

.132
(.585)

Male

-.172
.090

-.181
(.092)

Black

-.225
(.124)

-.169
(.126)

Faminc

.005
(.007)

.002
(.007)

ParentEd

.084
(.087)

.107
(.089)

.021
(.014)

.015
(.014)

.561*
(.104)

.582*
(.103)

Constant

ACT

1.296*
(.289)

.330
(.319)

2.703*
(.090)

2.869*
(.361)

2.685*
(.084)

2.172*
.219

2.893*
.0529

1.794*
(.428)

.065*
(.012)

HSGPA

.736*
(.093)

StudyHS

.029*
(.012)

.032*
(.012)

.037*
(.011)

StudyHS*StudyHS

-.0009*
(.0003)

-.0009*
(.0003)

-.0009*
(.0002)

StudyC

-.005
(.211)

.122
(.130)

-.001
(.125)

StudyC*StudyC

.0001
(.028)

-.015
(.013)

-.003
(.013)

.004*
(.001)

.001
(.001)

.181*
(.081)

.080
(.078)

-.008*
(.003)

-.006*
(.003)

-.003
(.003)

.020

.10

Pr_GPA3.5

.004*
(.0018)

GPA_study3

.210*
.069

Pr_forced_leave
R-squared

* significant at 5%

.085

.172

.031

.000.

.012

.030

.215

.280

Table Suppl.2 Earnings expectations for entire sample and by constraint status
Entire
Sample
mean
(std.
dev.)

Not
Constrained
mean
(std. dev.)

Constrained

pvalue
if <.10

mean
(std. dev.)

See
note

Survey 1 - Time of College entrance

n=307

n=245

n=62

1. Median earnings age 28 if leave school immediately

29.586
(19.253)

29.576
(18.512)

29.626
(22.118)

N

2. Median earnings age 28 if graduate

51.795
(21.576)

51.100
(20.948)

54.601
(23.932)

N

3. Median earnings age 28 if graduate GPA=3.75

55.463
(22.828)

55.300
(23.253)

56.145
(21.147)

N

4. Median earnings age 28 if graduate GPA=3.0

49.598
(21.000)

49.807
(21.342)

48.739
(19.684)

N

5. Median earnings age 28 if graduate GPA=2.0

43.753
(20.415)

43.571
(19.885)

44.487
(22.587)

N

Survey 2 -End of First year

n=249

n=205

n=44

6. Median earnings age 28 if leave school immediately

27.883
(14.154)

27.927
(14.237)

27.681
(13.924)

N

8. Median earnings age 28 if graduate GPA=3.75

53.375
(23.362)

53.896
(24.276)

50.904
(18.475)

N

9. Median earnings age 28 if graduate GPA=3.0

50.418
(22.214)

50.901
(22.973)

48.119
(18.234)

N

10. Median earnings age 28 if graduate GPA=2.0

46.181
(22.020)

46.483
(22.302)

44.779
(20.849)

N

R1 - Return to schooling - measure 1

.623
(.365)

.623
(.372)

.619
(.332)

N

R2 - Return to schooling - measure 2

.685
(.373)

.682
(.377)

.698
(.358)

N

R3 - Return to schooling - measure 3

.461
(.499)

.476
(.505)

.599
(.391)

N

R4 - Return to schooling - measure 4

.776
(.417)

.763
(.420)

.832
(.405)

N

7. Median earnings age 28 if graduate

The last column shows the p-value from the test that the average value of the variable in a particular row is
equal across constrained and unconstrained groups if this p-value is less than .1 and shows an “N” otherwise.

Table Suppl.3
Linear Probability Model - The relationship between drop-out and beliefs about returns to schooling.

Constant

.138 (.028)*

R1 Low

.061 (.043)

R2 Low

.126 (.026)*

.084 (.031)*

.094 (.045)*

R3 Low

.103 (.043)*

R4 Low
Goodness of Fit
R2

.085 (.029)*

.103 (.043)*
.007

.015

.022

.022

Linear probability model of dropout on discretized versions of beliefs about returns to schooling variables R1,
...,R4
* significant at 5%

Table Suppl.4 Other information related to preferences for entire sample and by constraint status
Entire
Sample
mean
(std. dev.)

Not
Constrained
mean
(std. dev.)

Constrained

pvalue
if <.10

mean
(std. dev.)

See note
below

Risk Aversion

(n=307)

(n=245)

(n=62)

Risk Aversion Category 1 - Least Risk Averse

.150

.154

.133

N

Risk Aversion Category 2 - 2nd Least Risk Averse

.244

.246

.233

N

Risk Aversion Category 3- 3rd Least Risk Averse

.270

.252

.333

N

Risk Aversion Category 4 - Most Risk Averse

.334

.343

.300

N

Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution

(n=275)

(n=217)

(n=58)

0.0

.574

.566

.603

N

.333

.309

.318

.275

N

.667

.086

.078

.086

N

1

.025

.032

.000

N

>1

.109

.046

.344

N

The Discount Factor, β

(n=156)

(n=127)

(n=29)

<0

.429

.440

.379

N

=0

.237

.252

.172

N

>0

.327

.308

.448

N

The last column shows the p-value from the test that the average value of the variable in a particular row is the
same across constrained and unconstrained groups if this p-value is less than .1 and shows an “N” if the p-value
is greater than .1.

