                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE WRONG SIDE(S) OF THE TRACKS:
ESTIMATING THE CAUSAL EFFECTS OF RACIAL SEGREGATION ON CITY OUTCOMES

                                     Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat

                                        Working Paper 13343
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13343


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




*Email eoananat@duke.edu. I would especially like to thank David Autor and Jon Gruber. In addition
I am grateful to: Daron Acemoglu, Michael Anderson, Josh Angrist, Martha Bailey, Charlie Clotfelter,
Phil Cook, Josh Fischman, Michael Greenstone, Sunny Ladd, Joanna Lahey, Byron Lutz, Bob Margo,
Justin McCrary, Guy Michaels, Jim Poterba, Phil Oreopoulos, Jacob Vigdor, Ebonya Washington,
participants in the MIT Public Finance and Labor and the Harvard Economic History workshops, and
seminar participants at Bocconi University, UC-Irvine, Brown, Wisconsin, BU, Carnegie-Mellon,
Syracuse, and UIUC, all of whom provided helpful comments and advice. Thanks also to Daniel Sheehan
and Lisa Sweeney of GIS Services at MIT and David Cobb and Patrick Florance of the Harvard Map
Library for creating the digital map images and teaching me how to use them. A Health and Aging
Pre-Doctoral Fellowship, Grant #T32-AG00186, from the National Bureau of Economic Research,
provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Wrong Side(s) of the Tracks: Estimating the Causal Effects of Racial Segregation on
City Outcomes
Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat
NBER Working Paper No. 13343
August 2007
JEL No. I0,J15,J61

                                               ABSTRACT

At the metropolitan level there is a striking negative correlation between residential racial segregation
and population characteristics -- particularly for black residents -- but it is widely recognized that this
correlation may not be causal. This paper provides a novel test of the causal relationship between segregation
and population outcomes by exploiting the arrangements of railroad tracks in the 19th century to isolate
plausibly exogenous variation in cities' susceptibility to segregation. I show that, conditional on miles
of railroad track laid, the extent to which track configurations physically subdivided cities strongly
predicts the level of segregation that ensued after the Great Migration of African-Americans to northern
and western cities in the 20th century. At the start of the Great Migration, though, track configurations
were uncorrelated with racial concentration, ethnic dispersion, income, industry, education, and population,
indicating that reverse causality is unlikely. Instrumental variables estimates demonstrate that segregation
leads to lower incomes and lower education among blacks. For whites, there is a mix of positive and
negative effects: segregation decreases the probability of being a college graduate or a high earner,
but also decreases the probability of being poor or unemployed. Segregation could generate these effects
either by affecting human capital acquisition of residents of different races and socio-economic groups
('production') or by inducing sorting by race and SES into different cities ('selection'). This paper provides
evidence that is most consistent with a combination of both production and selection.

Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat
Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
eoananat@duke.edu
I.     Introduction

       Residential segregation by race is one of the most visible characteristics of many

American cities. Although African-Americans represent just over one-tenth of the U.S.

population, the average urban African-American lives in a neighborhood that is over half

black (Glaeser and Vigdor 2003). Cities vary in the extent to which their black

populations live in black enclaves, and more segregated cities on average have worse

characteristics than less segregated cities on measures ranging from infant mortality to

educational achievement (Massey and Denton 1993).1

       Segregation holds a longstanding position as one of the prime suspects in

explaining the persistent gap in human capital between blacks and whites. A number of

papers have attempted to measure the effects of segregation on individual outcomes (e.g.

Massey and Denton 1993, Wilson 1996, Cutler and Glaeser 1997, Card and Rothstein

forthcoming). Cutler and Glaeser (1997), among others, have expressed skepticism about

this type of measure, however, for two reasons: omitted variable bias and endogenous

migration.

       In the first case, that of omitted variable bias, some unmeasured economic,

political, or other attribute may lead certain cities to both have more segregation and have

more negative characteristics than other cities. For example, stereotypical “struggling”

U.S. cities, such as Detroit, are highly segregated and their residents have low human

capital, but other characteristics—such as political corruption or the legacy of a

manufacturing economy—may be a cause of both. Failure to entirely capture such

attributes will cause omitted variable bias in OLS estimates of the relationship between

segregation and city characteristics.




                                             3
           Instrumenting for a city’s level of segregation can solve this problem of omitted

variable bias, thereby allowing the net effect of segregation on population outcomes of

cities to be estimated. In this paper I address concerns about omitted variable bias by

using a function of 19th-century railroad configurations, conditional on total length of

railroad, to instrument for the extent to which cities became segregated as they received

inflows of African-Americans during the 20th century. I formalize the widely observed

phenomenon of the “wrong side of the tracks” by showing that cities that were

subdivided by railroads into a greater number of physically defined neighborhoods—

which arguably serves as a technology for creating segregation—became significantly

more segregated during the Great Migration than did other cities. This instrumental

variable strategy allows me to identify the causal effect of segregation on net city-level

outcomes.

           I present evidence showing that there is little possibility of contamination of this

instrument. Railroad division satisfies the instrumental variable validity requirements

outlined in Angrist and Imbens (1994). Unlike variation used in other work on

segregation (Cutler and Glaeser 1997), it strongly and robustly predicts metropolitan

segregation and does not separately predict confounding metropolitan outcomes. It does

not predict outcomes in times or in places where there was negligible black presence, and

it does not predict segregation on other dimensions, including income and ethnicity. It

does not predict pre-period characteristics, including the structure of industry and the

segregation of groups that were stigmatized prior to the arrival of blacks. And, after the

Great Migration, railroad division does not predict outcomes in places that were too far

from the South to receive large black inflows. These results provide evidence that

1
    Throughout the paper I use the term “city” to refer to a metropolitan area.

                                                        4
railroad division drives current city outcomes through racial segregation, rather than

through some other mechanism.

        Using railroad division and its interaction with proximity to the South to

instrument for segregation, I examine the effect of segregation on human capital

outcomes separately by race. These outcomes include education (both high-school

dropout share and college-graduate share), income (both share of residents in poverty and

share with income above $150,000), and employment. I find that exogenously increasing

segregation causes cities to have significantly fewer white and black residents who are

high-income or have completed college. The African-American populations of such

cities are also significantly more likely to be poor, and less likely to have finished high

school. The share of the white population at risk for especially negative outcomes,

however, appears to be diminished in more segregated cities: whites in more segregated

cities are significantly less likely to be poor and more likely to be employed than whites

in less segregated cities.

        These results do not themselves demonstrate that segregation determines

individual human capital outcomes, because endogenous migration may produce such

differences between cities. That is, people may respond to segregation by systematically

sorting between cities in ways that alter average city demographic characteristics. With

non-random migration, segregation can affect aggregate city outcomes, such as share of

the population with college degrees, without actually altering the outcomes of residents

directly. For example, stereotypically “struggling” cities might have low numbers of

college graduates because segregation directly leads to inefficient education funding and

lowers educational achievement (a direct effect on individuals), or because people dislike



                                              5
segregation and those with college degrees and high wages are willing to pay to go

elsewhere (an indirect effect on cities). Direct production and indirect compositional

mechanisms are both of economic interest, but only the direct effect can be considered a

causal effect of segregation on the outcomes of individual people. The combination of

direct and indirect effects, which is easier to observe, must be considered the aggregate

effect of segregation on the average outcomes of the populations of places. Throughout

the paper, I refer to these direct effects as “production” effects, these indirect effects as

“selection” effects, and the combination of the two as “aggregate” effects.

        In order to understand the implications of the differences that I find between

human capital outcomes in more versus less segregated cities, it is important to

distinguish between production and selection as contributors to the aggregate effects.

Evidence of production effects supports models (e.g. Benabou 1996) that propose that

segregation directly changes the aggregate production of human capital through

neighborhood-level externalities.2 Evidence of indirect effects on sorting between cities

can help us understand what underlies the migration trends that are making some cities

experience a population explosion while others are shrinking (Vigdor 2006). In

particular, as cities increasingly become concerned with attracting the “creative class”

(Moretti 2004), the demand among the highly educated for city characteristics such as

low levels of segregation could have significant implications for city government

behavior.

        In section II.C, I present a model of the processes of production and selection and

discuss how the two might be distinguished from each another. To examine whether the




                                               6
effects I observe result from production or selection, in section IV.D I perform several

additional analyses using railroad division as an instrument. Looking at rents and

population flows, I find evidence that demand for more segregated cities is lower among

both blacks and whites; this result implies that some of the negative effects on segregated

cities’ populations may be due to selection. Looking at outcomes for young adults who

have had little time to move, I find similar relationships between segregation and human

capital as in the population overall; this result suggests that at least some of the effect of

segregation may be a direct production effect on individual outcomes. In other words, I

find evidence supporting arguments that segregation has both “production” and

“selection” effects on city outcomes.

         The paper proceeds as follows. In section II, I discuss the historical and

conceptual framework, and provide theoretical motivation for the instrumental approach.

In section III, I summarize the data. In section IV, I present the main results and conduct

robustness and falsification checks of my results. In section V, I conclude.



II. Framework and instrument

A. Historical framework

        The history of residential racial segregation in the non-Southern urban United

States can be roughly divided into three periods:

        Pre-segregation. In the 19th century, very few African-Americans lived outside of

the South. Even as late as 1910, 90 percent of the country’s African-Americans still lived



2
  I use the term “neighborhood-level externalities” very broadly here, to denote anything that depends on
the population of the neighborhood and affects individuals. Relevant neighborhood characteristics might
include group political capital, economic resources, social networks, etc.


                                                     7
in the former slave states.3 This observation is particularly relevant to this analysis,

because the bulk of railroad tracks were laid prior to 1900 (Atack and Passell 1994); this

timing makes it implausible that railroads in the North and West were laid with the intent

of segregating African-Americans.4

         The creation of segregation. During the Great Migration (roughly 1915 to 1950),

large numbers of African-Americans migrated into Northern and Western cities from the

South. Cities that had tolerated small black populations (Massey and Denton 1993,

Weaver 1955) became highly segregated as their black populations grew (Cutler et al.

1999). Black segregation generally resulted largely from deliberate government policies

and from collective action by white residents, not from market forces (Massey and

Denton 1993). Put in economic terms, the Great Migration stimulated collective demand

for segregation, and that demand was increasing with the level of in-migration. In the

context of collective demand generated by black inflows, technology to ease the

coordination of segregation (such as railroad division, I will argue) should have increased

equilibrium segregation.



3
  Author’s calculation from 1910 IPUMS data. I define “slave states” as those where slaveholding was
legal at the onset of the Civil War. These include Delaware, Maryland, the District of Columbia, Virginia,
West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana,
Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, Texas, and Arkansas. My analysis throughout the paper excludes MSAs in
these states.
4
  There were other stigmatized groups in those cities in the 19th century; however, there is no evidence that
railroads were laid with the intent to segregate those groups. First, it appears that despite popular images of
“Little Italy” and the like, ethnic segregation in the U.S. was never very high. Massey and Denton (1993)
provide qualitative evidence for this claim:
    “[European ethnic] immigrant enclaves in the early twentieth century…differed from black ghettos in
    three fundamental ways. First, unlike black ghettos, immigrant enclaves were never homogeneous and
    always contained a wide variety of nationalities, even if they were publicly associated with a particular
    national origin group…A second crucial distinction is that most European ethnics did not live in
    immigrant ‘ghettos,’ as ethnically diluted as they were…The last difference between immigrant enclaves
    and black ghettos is that whereas ghettos became a permanent feature of black residential life, ethnic
    enclaves proved to be a fleeting, transitory state in the process of immigrant assimilation.” (32-33)
Second, to the extent that there was ethnic segregation, it does not appear related to railroads; in Section IV,
I show that there is no relationship between measures of 1910 ethnic dispersion and railroad configuration.


                                                          8
         Post-civil rights movement. Government policy towards residential segregation

changed gradually during the civil rights era, and a clear break in housing policy came in

1968 with the Fair Housing Act and its outright prohibition of discrimination. High

levels of segregation nonetheless have persisted in most American cities up to the present

day (Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 1999). At the same time, the gap between black and

white human capital, which showed signs of narrowing during the civil rights era, has

persisted, particularly in more segregated cities. Many commentators (e.g. Massey and

Denton 1993, Wilson 1996) have hypothesized that persistent segregation is partly

responsible for this racial disparity in outcomes.

B.       Previous research

         Persistent segregation could affect outcomes through production (causal effects of

segregation on the attributes of those living in segregated cities), and/or selection (non-

random migration of individuals with those attributes into or out of segregated cities).

Most previous research has focused, implicitly, on one or the other of these channels.

         Wilson (1996) argues that racial segregation increases skill segregation within the

black community, thus causing negative outcomes for low-skilled blacks through peer

effects. That is, he claims that segregation produces a black “underclass.” Collins and

Margo (2000) find evidence consistent with Wilson’s story for the post-civil rights

period. Similarly, Card and Rothstein (forthcoming) argue that, controlling for student

background, residential segregation during high school produces lower test scores for

black students relative to whites.5



5
 In theory, the direct production effects of segregation could cause either better or worse outcomes for the
segregated group, and in fact Borjas (1995) finds positive relationships between segregation and outcomes
for U.S. immigrants; there does not appear to be any such evidence for African-Americans, however.


                                                      9
       A separate branch of the literature has focused on selection. Bayer, Fang, and

McMillan (2005) and Baum-Snow (2007) argue that, through neighborhood choice,

individuals reveal preferences for areas that are racially and economically homogeneous;

Boustan (2006) argues that racial segregation is partly the result of efficient Tiebout

sorting based on tastes for public good spending. In contrast, other research finds that

many whites and blacks have stated tastes for neighborhood integration (Bobo et al.

1994), as well as revealed preferences for integrated cities (Cutler et al. 1999). Either

tastes in regard to integration/segregation or concerns about the production effects of

segregation could generate selective migration; the implied direction and magnitude of

population flows might differ by race and skill. For example, Vigdor (2002) finds that in

recent years African-Americans with above-median education were less likely to migrate

into segregated cities than were less-educated African-Americans.

       Little empirical research has considered the direct production and indirect

selection effects together. A partial exception is Cutler and Glaeser (1997), whose model

assumes that all whites are high-skilled, so that segregation can have no effect on white

human capital. Under this assumption, whites have no production motive for preferring

segregation—implicitly, they simply have tastes for segregation. Cutler and Glaeser

assume that blacks, by contrast, are concerned about production but do not have tastes

regarding segregation. Finally, they address the selection channel by attempting to

eliminate it; they do so by limiting their empirical strategy to questions for which they

believe migration will not be important.

       In this paper, I assume instead that segregation can produce variation in white as

well as black outcomes, and that both blacks and whites may have tastes for either




                                             10
segregation or integration. I then assume that migration (selection) among high-skilled

and low-skilled whites and blacks can be motivated by concerns about human capital

(production) and/or by tastes. Finally, I assume that the aggregate effects of segregation

on the characteristics of both the black and the white populations may result from a

combination of selection and production effects.

C. Model of causal link

       The above literature review motivates the following formalization of how the

production and selection effects of segregation may be distinguishable in equilibrium. In

particular, the model will illustrate how segregation may have different implications for

individual measures of economic success (education, employment, income) and for

aggregate measures of demand for places (rent, migration). However, the empirical

results presented in the later part of the paper do not depend on the specific assumptions

of this model.

1. Static model

       Assume two small open-economy cities that exist for two generations. City I has

technology such that it will have two perfectly racially integrated tracts, while city S has

technology such that it will have two perfectly racially segregated tracts. In all other

ways, these two cities are identical (Figure 1a). At time zero, corresponding to the Great

Migration, each city is randomly assigned the same population of measure one, β of

which is black and 1 − β white. We can infer from the historical record that at the time

of the Great Migration the average human capital of the black population, μ Hb , is lower

than the average among the white population, μ Hw .




                                             11
       Consider the following human capital production function for an individual’s

offspring:

                                  (1)   E [λ 2 ] = f (λ1 )μ Hα 1 ,

where λ1 is the individual’s human capital level; μ H 1 is the average human capital in the

individual’s neighborhood; α ≥ 0 ; and E [λ2 ] is the expected value of one’s offspring’s

human capital.6 According to equation (1), the production of offspring human capital

depends not only on an individual’s own human capital but also the average human

capital of neighborhood residents. This implies that average human capital is a

neighborhood-level public good. Moreover, it implies that the production of human

capital is affected by racial segregation, since racial composition determines the average

human capital in the neighborhood. In city I, blacks and whites experience the same

neighborhood average human capital, βμ Hb + (1 − β )μ Hw , because each of the two

neighborhoods is a microcosm of the city. In city S, blacks are exposed to average

human capital μ Hb , while whites are exposed to μ Hw > μ Hb .

       Human capital might depend on the neighborhood in which one grows up in

because of a literal “peer effect” (Benabou 1996) or because of neighborhood

characteristics proxied by peers (Card and Rothstein, forthcoming). Such characteristics

would include anything that affects the development of human capital at the individual

level and that might depend on the human capital in a neighborhood’s elder generation.

These characteristics could include: school or health services funding, the political power

of the neighborhood, whether a chemical dumping ground is sited in the neighborhood,

how connected residents are to job networks, the neighborhood crime rate, etc. In related




                                              12
work (Ananat and Washington 2006; Ananat, La Ferrara, and Mele, in progress),

coauthors and I explore which of these mechanisms appear to be most important; the goal

of this paper is simply to capture the reduced form effects of segregation on outcomes.

           If we assume that residents cannot move between cities, then it is clear from the

model that the skill gap between blacks and whites will persistently be weakly larger in S

than in I (Figure 1b). Over time, the μ H of blacks and whites in I will weakly converge,

as blacks and whites are exposed the same average human capital generation after

generation (Figure 1c). In S, on the other hand, white offspring will be consistently

exposed to neighborhoods with higher average human capital than will blacks, leading to

weakly greater aggregate inequality in S than in I (Figures 1d and 1e). Further, if α is

nonzero, these relationships will not be weak: whites in S in each generation will have

strictly higher μ H than whites and blacks in I, who in turn will have strictly higher μ H

than blacks in S. However, it is theoretically ambiguous whether overall average human

capital will be higher in I or in S (Figure 1e); that will depend on whether α > 1 or

α < 1 .7

           We can identify empirically which is higher by observing whether there are more

residents with high human capital in segregated or in integrated cities. We can define


6
  For a discussion of other possible permutations of the peer-effects equation, see Cook and Ludwig (2006).
7
  If own human capital and neighborhood average human capital are substitutes in the production of next
generation human capital, then integration—the exposure of all individuals to equal human capital—will
result in higher human capital than segregation. If own human capital and neighborhood average human
capital are complements, then segregation—which exposes the offspring of the racial group with the greater
human capital to neighborhoods with greater human capital— will result in higher human capital than
integration.
          Note, however, that the expected value of the human capital of one’s offspring is always
increasing with the neighborhood average human capital, so that it is always productive, from any
individual’s perspective, to be in a neighborhood with higher average human capital. In the absence of
perfect markets, (e.g. coordinated payments by the black community to the white community to
compensate for integrating neighborhoods), city S may not integrate even if integration is more efficient
overall (Schelling 1971).


                                                    13
various levels of human capital (e.g. share who are high school graduates, share who are

college graduates, or share who earn more than $150,000) to estimate the effects of

segregation at different margins of the skill distribution. Taken together, the differences

in these observed shares will reflect the effect of segregation on individual economic

success and also will answer the question first posed by Cutler and Glaeser (1997), “are

ghettoes good or bad?”, for society as a whole.

2. Model with city choice

       If moving costs are low enough that migration between cities occurs, then

observed differences in the skill distribution cannot be interpreted simply as resulting

from the production effects of segregation, for two reasons. First, concerns about

production effects might cause differential migration between cities by skill and race, so

that the actual production effects of segregation are obscured by sorting. For example,

high-skilled blacks who live in S may move to I to take advantage of the higher human

capital mix available to blacks in integrated neighborhoods; this would raise the average

type in I and make integration appear more productive than segregation. Second, when

moving is possible, tastes for integration σ (positive or negative) may affect city

composition, and could cause differences in observed skill distribution by city even if in

fact α = 0 . For example, if high-skilled people tend to have positive tastes (σ > 0) for

integration, then city I actually might end up with more high-skilled whites than S. That

process would overturn the ordering in the static model that whites in S will have higher

p H 2 than whites in I (Figure 1f).

       It may be possible to differentiate empirically between city differences generated

by production and by selection by examining indicators of relative demand for cities I



                                             14
and S. Differential demand by city will cause rents to change in order to clear the

housing market. With equal initial population of measure 1 in each city, the initial price

of housing in city I relative to city S can be normalized to 0, but as aggregate demand tilts

toward one city or another, the rent premium or discount for living in city I will change

(Figure 1g).8

         If both α and σ are nonzero, then an individual deciding whether to move will

have to weigh the importance of his taste in neighborhood composition and the

(discounted) expected skill of his offspring against the price of living in his preferred

city.9 This implies that, within race and skill, individuals will sort by preference σ for

integration, so that the individual of race R and skill λ with preference σ Rλ* is

indifferent between the two cities, while those with σ >σ Rλ* choose city I and those with

σ <σ Rλ* choose city S.

         This discussion has two important empirical implications. First, if in equilibrium

rents are lower in cities with more exogenous segregation, then either α < 1 (segregation

is less productive than integration), or the average σ is large (most people have tastes for

integration), or both. Second, as long as taste and type are not perfectly inherited, then

migration will persist even in equilibrium, as offspring who find themselves with

different tastes or skills from their parents (and thus with different willingness to pay)

will re-sort between cities. We can therefore observe equilibrium rents and population

8
  If we assume that in the segregated city the share of the city occupied by each race can grow or shrink
based on the its proportion of the population, and that the housing market is competitive, then we can make
the simplifying assumption that the housing market clears on the city level. In Section IV.A, I find that rent
differentials are similar for blacks and whites, suggesting that in fact the housing market does clear on the
city level.
9
  It is possible—indeed likely—that in city S, high-skilled blacks, with no access to neighborhoods with
high average skill, will want to separate from low-skilled blacks in order to “catch up” with white




                                                     15
flows in order to make inferences about the production and selection processes at work

(Figure 1h).

        For example, if people pay higher rents in more integrated cities and have positive

net migration rates to more integrated cities, then the demand for integration is clearly

high. As long as preferred racial composition is a normal good, the high demand for

integration will tend to lead to selection of those with higher average human capital into

integrated cities. If both high demand for, and high average human capital in, integrated

cities are observed among a population group, then it will be difficult to tell whether the

group demands integration because it is more productive than segregation for that group’s

human capital or simply because of tastes for integration. In other words, in this scenario

indirect selection will be impossible to distinguish from direct production effects; the

strongest possible conclusion is that at least one of the tastes for, or human capital effects

of, integration must be positive.

        Conversely, however, if a group is observed demonstrating high demand for

integrated cities, but has better average characteristics in segregated cities, then it is

possible to distinguish between production and selection explanations for observed

human capital levels. This set of results would imply that segregation is more productive

than integration for that group, but that the group on average has tastes for integration.

For example, Figure 1f depicts an equilibrium in which blacks have better outcomes in I

than in S—consistent with either the static model or with city choice, under the

assumption that blacks do not have a strong distaste for integration. Meanwhile, whites

are less likely to have very negative outcomes in S than in I, but also less likely to have


neighborhoods’ average values (Wilson 1996; Cutler and Glaeser 1997). They might more easily do so,
however, by moving to integrated cities than by attempting coordinated moves within cities.


                                                 16
very positive outcomes—the distribution of skills is more spread out in I than in S. This

result for whites is not consistent with the static model. It is, however, consistent with a

city choice model in which high-skilled whites prefer I to S. To test this explanation, we

can examine the population flows of whites between S and I—if whites pay higher rents

in I and are moving towards I, then the skill distribution in Figure 1f can be accounted for

by the assumption that integration is a normal good among whites. If higher rents and

positive population flows hold among both the low- and the high-skilled white

populations, then we can conclude from the lower rate of very negative outcomes for

whites in S that segregation is indeed more productive for whites than is integration—it

protects them from negative outcomes—and thus migration must be caused by positive

tastes for integration.

D.      Instrumental approach

        In order to test for these or other patterns of outcomes, empirical variation

approaching a randomized experiment is required. In the ideal experiment, one would

test for the potential effects of segregation implied by the model described above using

two initially identical cities with small open economies:

1) At time zero, one city would be assigned perfect residential segregation, the other

     perfect residential integration.

2) Each city would be randomly assigned black residents from the initial black skill

     distribution and white residents from the initial white distribution.

3) Then, the relationship between segregation and the economic outcomes (education,

     employment, income) of the offspring generation would be measured. This is the

     production effect of segregation.




                                              17
4) Finally, residents would be allowed to move and aggregate demand for cities (rent,

     migration) by race and skill would be measured to determine tastes for segregation

     and for its consequences. This is the selection effect of segregation.

        The instrumental approach that I use approximates part 1) of this ideal experiment

by providing plausibly exogenous variation in the ease with which cities could segregate.

I argue that it also approximates part 2) because, as I will demonstrate, this variation

appears not to be confounded with initial differences in the characteristics of residents

and in-migrants, nor do there appear to be significant observable initial differences in the

cities, other than railroad configuration, that would be likely to drive some sort of

unobserved sorting.10 The variation I exploit is created by idiosyncrasies in the layout of

railroad tracks that eases the collective definition of neighborhoods.

        In many cities it is self-evident that railroads tend to define neighborhood

boundaries. Although explicit explanations for why railroads per se do so are not

available in the literature, the use of a standardized marker such as railroads is exactly

what would be predicted by a “coordinated expectations” model of conflict with limited

communication (Schelling 1963). A railroad provides a clear demarcation that facilitates

collective agreement on neighborhood boundaries by residents, real estate agents, police,

and others. Moreover, unlike roads (of which there are too many) or rivers (of which

there are too few), railroads often cover the landscape at the proper intervals for defining

neighborhoods. When a community is interested in remaining separate from a particular

group, railroads can facilitate collective action in enforcing segregation by reducing

coordination costs. As Schelling (1963) describes the function of an obvious landmark


10
  The quasi-experimental design I exploit does not allow the clean separation of 3) from 4). However,
empirically I attempt to distinguish between the effects of production (3) and selection (4).


                                                   18
for an army, railroad tracks become for the white community “one spot to which they can

retreat without necessarily being expected to retreat further” (p.71).11

            As the black population of a city grew during the Great Migration, the city’s

ghetto areas had to expand if segregation was to be maintained. Once railroad tracks

were used as a focal point for coordinating expectations in a specific instance, it was

likely that they would be used again throughout the city if available. Cities that were

subdivided by railroads into many small insular neighborhoods could use those

boundaries to redefine the enclave areas of the city, one neighborhood at a time, and still

practice “containment,” whereby the black population remained concentrated and

isolated. On the other hand, in cities where railroads were not configured in such a way

as to define many neighborhoods, expanding an enclave meant breaching a major divide.

Once the black population increased enough that spillover was inevitable, segregation no

longer could be maintained as easily in the open area on the other side.

            Figure 2 illustrates this concept. Binghamton, NY, and York, PA, were similar in

the total quantity of railroad tracks laid by 1900 (shown in heavy lines, circumscribed by

a four kilometer-radius circle). They also had similar industrial bases and experienced

comparable, substantial changes in African-American population (these characteristics

are discussed in detail later in the paper). However, York’s railroads were configured

such that they created many insular neighborhoods, particularly in the center of the city.

In the year 2000, its Census tracts show its black population relatively concentrated in

this set of small, railroad-defined neighborhoods (tract-percent-black is represented by

the heaviness of tract shading). In Binghamton, on the other hand, railroads are tightly

clustered, leaving some areas too long and narrow to encompass neighborhoods and

11
     Thanks to Glenn Loury for pointing me towards this reference.

                                                      19
others too wide open to create meaningful population restrictions. In contrast to York,

Binghamton’s year 2000 Census tracts show its black population relatively evenly

dispersed throughout much of the city.

E. Instrumental measurement and validity

1. Defining railroad division

        Formally, I approximate the ideal randomized experiment for places by exploiting

the configuration of tracks into shapes that define uniform subunits of land (details follow

later in this section) in a city’s historical center, conditional on total track length. The

process of extracting railroad data from a city map is explained in detail in Appendix A;

briefly, I collected from 19th-century maps information about the railroads that covered a

50-square kilometer circular area centered on the historical city. The choice of this area

size provides the advantage that, while all the cities studies exceed this perimeter today,

about 75% of the cities were smaller than that area when mapped, and many were much

smaller. So, for most cities, this measure includes railroads that were laid on unoccupied

land without any need to consider human occupants.

        Visual examination reveals that the historical city center created in this way is

typically quite close to what would be identified as the current city center if using a

current map. Within this four-kilometer-radius circle, every railroad track was identified

and its length measured, and the area of the “neighborhoods” created by its intersections

with each other railroad was calculated. Historical railroads do quite well at predicting

the borders of current neighborhoods as identified by the Census (Figure 2). The actual

land area within the circle also was calculated, so that measurement could be adjusted for




                                              20
available observed land when working with maps that truncated city observations or

included substantial bodies of water.

            From the data generated this way, I create a measure of a city’s railroad-induced

potential for segregation. I define a “railroad division index,” or RDI, which is a

variation on a Herfindahl index that measures the dispersion of city land into subunits.
                                                        2
                                ⎛ areaneighborhoodi ⎞
            (2)    RDI = 1 − ∑ ⎜⎜                   ⎟
                             i ⎝     areatotal ⎟⎠

The RDI quantifies the extent to which the city’s land is divided into smaller units by

railroads. If a city were completely undivided by railroads, so that the area of its single

neighborhood was 100% of the total city area, then the RDI would equal 0. If a city were

infinitely divided by railroads, so that each neighborhood had area near zero, then the

RDI would equal 1. The more subdivided a city, the more “sides” there are to its tracks,

and the more possible boundaries between groups are available to use as barriers

enforcing segregation. In particular, if railroads created many small neighborhoods (high

value of RDI), then it would have been possible during the Great Migration to relieve

pent-up housing demand by allowing an enclave to expand into another neighborhood,

while still maintaining a new railroad barrier between the enclave and the rest of the city.

This high RDI should have facilitated persistent segregation even as the black population

increased. As shown in Figure 3, a scatterplot of these cities, with RDI on the x-axis and

segregation index12 on the y-axis, demonstrates a positive relationship between RDI and

segregation.

2. Interaction between RDI and proximity to the South



12
     This index, called the index of dissimilarity, is described in the next section.


                                                            21
       In addition to a generally positive relationship with segregation, RDI should

interact positively with increasing demand in determining equilibrium segregation.

Figure 4a depicts the way in which the relationship between demand for segregation and

equilibrium segregation should depend on the cost of segregation. Because segregation is

bounded at 0 and 1, there should have been low segregation regardless of cost at very low

demand. At extremely high demand, segregation should have been high even if cost was

high. But at intermediate levels of demand, the places that faced a lower cost of

segregation should have experienced rapidly rising segregation as soon as demand

became non-zero, while the places that faced a high cost of segregation should have seen

little change in segregation even when demand rose significantly.

       The demand for segregation is difficult to measure directly; moreover, it probably

varies endogenously. However, one consistent driver of the demand for segregation,

regardless of other city characteristics, has been the size of the black population. From

the historical evidence it appears that, across cities with varying underlying

characteristics, the demand for segregation always goes up as the percent black in the city

goes up (Massey and Denton 1993, Weaver 1955). The percent black per se also may be

endogenous, but the fact that the Great Migration originated from the South meant that on

average black inflows were higher in cities that were closer to former slave states. Thus,

proximity to the nearest former slave state, which varies greatly between cities, even

within states such as Michigan and California and regions such as New England, strongly

predicts black inflows and therefore demand for segregation.

       If RDI truly predicts the cost of segregation, and proximity to the South predicts

demand for it, then in places where RDI is high (low cost of segregation), proximity to




                                             22
the South should have a concave relationship with segregation; in places where RDI is

low (high cost of segregation), segregation should be lower, and its relationship with

proximity to the South convex. As shown in Figure 4b—a quadratic estimate of the

relationship between proximity to the South and equilibrium segregation for cities with

above- and below-median RDI—the empirical relationship is indeed consistent with the

proposed relationship.

       I therefore proxy for demand using expected black inflows as predicted by

proximity to the nearest former slave state. By exploiting proximity and its interaction

with RDI as additional sources of variation, I can increase the strength of my quasi-

experiment. Moreover, this additional instrument creates another falsification test for the

quasi-experiment, because if RDI only affects outcomes through segregation, then it

shouldn’t have any effect in cities that are too far from the South to have substantial

demand for segregation, such as Seattle, or Lansing, MI.



III. Data and Empirical Measures

A.     Segregation measures

       In addition to the maps described in Appendix A, the major data sources are U.S.

Census Bureau reports on metropolitan demographics (various years), measures of

metropolitan segregation from Cutler and Glaeser (1997) and Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor

(1999), and proximity of the city to the nearest former slave state.

       Segregation is captured by a dissimilarity index. Dissimilarity is defined as

                                              N
                                                     black i           nonblack i
       (3) Index of dissimilarity =   1
                                          2   ∑ black
                                              i =1
                                                                  −
                                                                      nonblack total
                                                                                     ,
                                                          total




                                                     23
where again i = 1K N is the array of census tracts in the area. It can be considered the

answer to the question, “What percent of blacks (or non-blacks) would have to move to a

different census tract in order for the proportion black in each neighborhood to equal the

proportion black in the city as a whole?” By construction, the index can range from zero

to one. Note that an index of zero is improbable in the absence of central planning.

         I use the Cutler/Glaeser/Vigdor segregation data provided online by Vigdor

(http://trinity.aas.duke.edu/~jvigdor/segregation/). These data come from various

decennial Censuses, and include 19th and 20th century segregation indices as well as

metropolitan characteristics from Cutler and Glaeser (1997) and additional data from the

2000 Census from Glaeser and Vigdor (2003). In addition, the data include four other

measures of segregation from the 1990 Census reported in Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor

(1999), all of which also are based on measures developed in Massey and Denton (1988).

These include clustering, concentration, and centralization (which rely on geographical

data about the proximity, size, and location of a city’s census tracts that only become

available in 1990), and isolation, which is another way of aggregating neighborhood

composition that is highly correlated with dissimilarity.13

B. Additional RHS variables

         In every first-stage regression I control for kilometers of railroad track per square

kilometer in the historical city (described further in Appendix A). Using this control

assures that RDI does not simply capture the amount of railroad track in the city14, but


13
   Clustering is a measure of the extent to which the neighborhoods that are primarily home to blacks adjoin
each other. Concentration is a measure of the extent to which blacks are located in the most physically
dense neighborhoods. Centralization is a measure of the extent to which blacks are located in the
neighborhoods closest to the center of the city. Isolation is a measure of the extent to which the average
black person lives in a neighborhood that has more blacks than the overall city share.
14
   The density of railroads might be directly correlated with city outcomes for many reasons, such as
industrial composition or physical attractiveness.


                                                    24
rather represents the configuration of track conditional on total track. I propose that

configuration drives variation in the supply curve for segregation at the city level.

         As motivated by Figure 4, I use proximity to the South as an additional instrument

that proxies for each city’s expected black inflows. Cities in my sample that are 100

miles closer to the South averaged half a percentage point higher black population by

1940 (the t-statistic for the correlation is 5.26), a gap that had nearly doubled since

1910.15 I propose that variation in expected black inflows drove demand for segregation.

         Finally, I include in my set of instruments the interaction between supply and

demand, i.e. the product of proximity and RDI. It might be preferable to use only the

interaction as an instrument, leaving the main effects of proximity and RDI out, but doing

so would result in a weak instrument problem, given my small sample size. Moreover,

the specification and falsification checks detailed below suggest that the proximity and

configuration main effects also generally meet the requirements outlined in Angrist and

Imbens (1994).

C. Outcome measures

         For the main outcomes, I measure aggregate city16 characteristics by race, using

data from published Census reports. These outcome measures include the proportions of

15
   Alternatively, I have used a city’s WWII military contracts per capita as a predictor of black inflows
(Dresser 1994), and found results consistent with those in the paper. Since subsequent literature has raised
concerns about the excludability of that measure (Collins 2001), I do not include them here.
16
   I collect city outcomes from published Census reports (U.S. Census Bureau 2005). Although at the time
that tracks were laid each of these cities was physically separated by open space from other cities, over the
last century urban growth has meant that many once-distinct metropolitan areas are now conglomerates.
To surmount this problem, I collect data for the reporting area which best centers on the original city center
without containing other original city centers. Thus I use MSA-level data for the 64 cities that have
remained independent MSAs. For MSAs in which multiple city centers are each in a separate county, I
assign to each city the characteristics for the county that holds that city’s original urban center. Doing so
allows me to differentiate between the effect of an original center on its county level outcomes and the
combined effect of several centers on MSA-level outcomes (e.g. outcomes for the New York-Northern
New Jersey-Long Island Consolidated MSA). Fifty-three cities are in unique counties but share an MSA




                                                     25
a city’s blacks and whites who are poor, unemployed, high-school dropouts, college

graduates, or who have household incomes above $150,000. I choose these measures

because my focus is on the effect of segregation on basic human capital outcomes of both

blacks and whites, and on how that effect may differ at the top versus the bottom of the

distribution of outcomes. The first three measures should reflect the effects of

segregation on the relatively disadvantaged segment of the population, who might be on

the margin of poverty, unemployment, and dropping out of high school. The last two

measures should reflect the effects of segregation on the population at risk for very

positive outcomes, high education and high income.

         In order to assess to what extent these aggregate population impacts can be

attributed to either (or both) production or selection, I also look at two other sets of

outcomes: housing demand and the human capital of young adults. First, to test the

hypothesis that selective migration between more and less segregated metropolitan areas

drives human capital differences between cities, I examine measures of aggregate

demand for Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) by race. These measures include

percent of the black and white populations that are new to the MSA, median rent by race,

and crowding. Second, following Cutler and Glaeser (1997), I examine the human

capital of individual young adults, aged 22 to 30, based on their MSA of residence five

years prior to the Census, as reported in the 1990 IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2004). These

data should reflect the relationship between exposure to segregation as a child and

eventual human capital as an adult. When looking at young adults, I shift my outcome

measures, again following Cutler and Glaeser (1997). I substitute idleness (i.e., not


with at least one other city. Finally, for the 17 cities that share a single county with another city, I assign
the characteristics of the politically-defined city itself to the observation.


                                                       26
employed and not in school) for unemployment. I also include never-married mother as

an outcome (never-married is a rare characteristic in the overall population of mothers,

but occurs with reasonable frequency among young mothers).



IV. Results

       To motivate the empirical work, Table 1a reports the 1990 characteristics of cities

with 19th-century railroad division indexes above and below the median. The segregation

index is 20 percent higher in cities with above-median railroad division than in cities

below the median. Moreover, outcomes by race in more versus less segregated cities

follow a pattern that is consistent with the disparate resources that might result from

segregation: in cities with greater railroad division, the white population appears to have

better characteristics for some but not all outcomes, while the black population appears to

have worse characteristics in all cases. Many of the differences are statistically

significant, even using this crude approximation of the variation in railroad division.

       Table 1b further motivates my estimation strategy by showing the relationship

between railroad division and outcomes, measured separately by proximity to the South

(divided here into above versus below 400 miles from the nearest slave state). Railroad

division is much more strongly, consistently, and significantly correlated with outcomes

in cities that are close enough to the South to have had significant black inflows during

the Great Migration than it is in cities that are far from the South. Together, Tables 1a

and 1b lend evidence that the combination of latent supply of segregation (railroad

division) and latent demand for segregation (expected black inflows) is necessary to




                                             27
generate exogenous segregation as required for a valid natural experiment. Next, I

explore this relationship further using two-stage least squares.

A. First stage

       Because RDI-induced segregation is virtually randomly assigned, the relationship

between segregation and outcomes can be captured using simple equations. Segregation

can be modeled as a classic endogenous regressor affecting outcomes at the city level,

       (4) Seg = α 1 Z + α 2 X + μ

       (5) Y = β1 Seg + β 2 X + ε ,

and then estimated using two-stage least squares analysis. The right-hand side variable of

interest in equation (4), Seg , represents a city’s current level of segregation. Z is a vector

of instrumental variables. In this vector, I proxy for the supply of segregation technology

with the RDI. I also proxy for the demand for segregation technology, as determined by

black inflows, by using proximity to the South. Finally, I proxy for the interaction of

supply and demand by using the product of RDI and proximity. X is a vector of control

variables including total railroad length and, in some specifications, region dummies.

       The first panel of Table 2 shows that the first assumption required by my strategy

(that the railroad division index must induce meaningful variation in the degree of racial

segregation, i.e. there must exist a strong first stage) holds. Controlling for track per

square kilometer in the historical city center, the neighborhood RDI generated by the

configuration of track strongly predicts the metropolitan dissimilarity index in 1990. An

increase of one standard deviation in the RDI (0.141) predicts a highly significant

increase in dissimilarity of one-third of a standard deviation (0.050, t-statistic=4.07). It




                                              28
also strongly predicts three of the other four aspects of segregation provided in Cutler,

Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999).

       In addition, the assumption that RDI should matter more where there are greater

expected black inflows also is upheld, as shown in the second panel of Table 2. RDI

remains highly significant, and the interaction between RDI and proximity to the South is

also positive and highly significant in predicting 1990 dissimilarity. The F-statistic for

the joint significance of the two main effects and their interaction in predicting

dissimilarity is 17.72, well above the Stock and Yogo (2002) threshold for three

instruments and a single endogenous regressor.

B. Robustness of first stage

       For my instrumental variable strategy to be valid, it must be the case not only that

railroad configuration leads to segregation; it must also be the case that both railroad

configuration and people were each assigned to cities quasi-randomly, not in ways that

reflect other underlying city characteristics. Two obvious concerns about endogeneity

would, if true, undermine this assumption and invalidate the instrumental strategy I

employ: 1) railroads developed in ways that reflected existing 19th-century characteristics

of cities, and/or 2) people sorted themselves into cities based on railroad configuration.

Next I investigate these possibilities.

1. Evidence that railroad configuration was assigned quasi-randomly

       What if, rather than having developed their configuration in the 19th century by

happenstance, railroads were laid to intentionally segregate other groups, such as white

ethnics or the poor, or in ways that reflected existing characteristics of cities? This would

mean that the treatment was systematically correlated with other aspects of cities that also




                                             29
might drive current outcomes; thus the effect of RDI-induced segregation would be

impossible to isolate and identify.

        To check for evidence supporting these concerns, I test the hypothesis that RDI

has no relationship to city characteristics prior to the Great Migration. The most obvious

way that RDI would relate to city outcomes is if the 19th-century choice of railroad

configuration itself were driven partly by local economic or social characteristics.

Historical accounts of the reasons for railroad configuration, summarized in Appendix B,

provide no support for that possibility. Moreover, Table 3 presents evidence that the

instruments do not strongly predict population characteristics in 1910, a full decade after

the end of major railroad construction, at the last Census prior to the Great Migration.

The left-hand panel of Table 3 shows tests of the predictive power of the RDI, proximity

to the South, and the interaction between them, for a variety of characteristics of cities

prior to the start of the Great Migration. These include, for 1910, physical size,

population, dissimilarity and isolation measures for the foreign-born versus native-born

population,17 and percentage black, and for 1915, streetcars per capita.18 None of the

RDI or track length, and only one of the interaction coefficients, are significant at

conventional levels. Proximity to the South is significant for physical size and for 1910

immigrant dissimilarity, but the coefficients on immigrant dissimilarity run in the

opposite direction of those for later racial dissimilarity, suggesting that immigrant

segregation is not a proxy for later racial segregation.



17
   European ethnic immigrant segregation was at its historical peak in 1910, according to Massey and
Denton (1993). Its historical peak, and even the peak segregation of particularly stigmatized immigrant
ethnic groups, was quite low relative to the historical peak of black segregation. The maximum recorded
isolation index was 0.39 for Italians in Worcester, MA in 1910 (Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 2005); by
contrast, the median isolation index for blacks in 1970 was .37.
18
   Provided in Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999) for 13 cities in this sample.


                                                   30
         Even if railroad configuration and proximity to the South do not predict pre-

period outcomes, it is still possible that they reflect other local characteristics that drive

current outcomes. As shown in Table 1b, RDI has little impact on outcomes in cities

where low black inflows were expected; this suggests that RDI has no direct relationship

with current urban characteristics. Nonetheless, I also test directly for two of the most

obvious ways that RDI might reflect present-day underlying differences between places.

First, RDI might reflect regional geographic variation, and region may affect current

outcomes for other reasons. However, in the main results section I replicate the results

with dummies for Census region included; while the standard errors of the estimates

increase, the results remain essentially the same. Second, railroad configuration could

reflect the value of land in the local area (although the historical record indicates that land

prices were of minor concern; see Appendix B). Low or variable property values could

lead to residential segregation by income, which, because of the correlation between race

and income, could appear as racial segregation. However, the last column of Table 3

demonstrates that, even in the current period, RDI does not predict income segregation.19

Moreover, the positive relationship between RDI and the characteristics of the at-risk

white population that I demonstrate in the main results section suggests that RDI acts

through race rather than through income.

2. Evidence that people were assigned quasi-randomly

         If people sorted themselves into cities based on railroad configuration, or some

pre-characteristic associated with railroad configuration, then the makeup of the

treatment and control groups would be systematically correlated with other aspects of the

19
 Income segregation is insignificant in the U.S. relative to racial segregation; the highest of any
metropolitan dissimilarity index for income in 1990 is .28, while the lowest 1990 dissimilarity for African-


                                                     31
cities. Such a correlation would, again, make the effect of RDI-induced segregation

impossible to isolate and identify.

        In the ideal experiment, this would not be a concern because residents initially

would be randomly assigned to cities. Of course, actual random assignment did not

occur, but for my instrumental strategy to be valid residents merely must have been

assigned to cities in a way that was uncorrelated with railroad configuration.

        The fact that cities did not differ observably in economic or social characteristics

based on RDI prior to the Great Migration makes a zero correlation plausible. However,

migrants still might have sorted between cities based on RDI itself, or based on

something unobservable that was correlated with RDI. The right-hand panel of Table 3

tests for the possibility of initial selection by examining the human capital characteristics

of cities in 1920, after the first wave of the Great Migration but before segregation could

begin to have any noticeable direct effects on human capital. These characteristics

include percentage black, literacy rate, labor force participation, and the share of

employment in trade, manufacturing, and railroads. None of the coefficients for RDI,

proximity to the South, or their interaction are significantly different from zero. These

results provide a stronger test that cities did not vary on pre-characteristics and also

provide evidence against initial sorting between cities.

        In total, three assumptions are necessary in order to postulate that the quasi-

experiment generated by railroad configuration and proximity to the South approximates

the ideal experiment, and therefore that it is a valid instrumental strategy for measuring

the effects of segregation on places. First, RDI and proximity must induce meaningful

variation in degree of racial segregation; i.e. there must exist a strong first stage. This


Americans is .33.

                                              32
requirement is supported in Tables 1a and 1b and borne out by the first stage estimation,

as shown in Table 2. Second, it must be the case that railroad configuration and

proximity affected city outcomes through segregation, not through some other channel.

The fact that the interaction of RDI and proximity predict segregation and outcomes

much more strongly than does either on its own lends credibility to this assumption.

Third, people must have been assigned to cities quasi-randomly; i.e., during the Great

Migration people must not have self-selected into cities in any way that is correlated with

the interaction of RDI and proximity. Table 3 provides evidence that this assumption

holds as well.

       In sum, railroad division does not predict outcomes in times or places where there

were not large black inflows, and it does not predict segregation on other dimensions,

including income and ethnicity. It does not predict pre-period characteristics, including

the structure of industry and the segregation of groups that were stigmatized prior to the

arrival of blacks. It does not predict the initial characteristics of city in-migrants. These

results taken together provide evidence that railroad division, while predicting racial

residential segregation, is not correlated with other early city or population characteristics

that might also affect cities today. It therefore meets the requirements for a valid

instrument (Angrist and Imbens 1994) for use in two-stage least squares estimation. The

next section details the two-stage estimation.

C. OLS and two-stage least squares estimates for MSAs

       In this section, I analyze the effect of RDI on the demographic characteristics of

city residents. These characteristics reflect the aggregate impacts of RDI-induced

segregation on city populations; they incorporate the impacts of both direct production




                                              33
effects on individuals and indirect selection effects on cities’ populations through

migration. In section IV.D, I analyze migration, housing demand, and the human capital

of young adults in order to assess to what extent these aggregate impacts can be attributed

to either production or selection effects, or both.

        Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of the relationship between segregation

and outcomes by race are shown in the top panel of Table 4. The OLS results show strong

negative relationships between segregation and black outcomes across the board.

However, the OLS results do not show strong correlations between segregation and white

outcomes; only the findings of an improved white poverty rate and a lower white college

graduate share are statistically significant.

        The middle panel of Table 4 shows two-stage least squares estimates of the

relationship between segregation and outcomes by race. The first three outcomes

measured in Table 4 demonstrate that RDI-induced dissimilarity reduces the extent to

which very negative outcomes are observed for a city’s white population. A 10-

percentage point increase in dissimilarity predicts a 1.4-percentage point decrease in the

white poverty rate, a 0.2-percentage point decrease in the white high-school dropout rate,

and a 0.9-percentage point decrease in the white unemployment rate. The first and last of

these effects are statistically significant at conventional levels. In contrast, RDI-induced

dissimilarity increases the extent to which very negative outcomes are observed for a

city’s black population. A 10-percentage point increase in dissimilarity predicts a 2.9-

percentage point increase in the black poverty rate, a 2.8-percentage point increase in the

black high-school dropout rate, and a 0.2-percentage point increase in the black




                                                34
unemployment rate. The first two effects are statistically significant at conventional

levels.

          The right-hand columns in Table 4 show that RDI-induced segregation decreases

the extent to which very positive outcomes for both blacks and whites are observed in a

city. A 10-percentage point increase in dissimilarity lowers the fraction of a city’s whites

who are college graduates by 2.3 percentage points and the fraction of blacks by 3.2

percentage points. Similarly, it lowers the fraction of whites with household incomes

above $150,000 by 0.8 percentage points and the fraction of blacks by 0.5 percentage

points. The negative effects on these characteristics are highly significant for blacks and

are significant or marginally significant for whites.

          The bottom panel of Table 4 tests for the possibility that RDI variation is

correlated with region, and thus that the relationship between RDI and outcomes simply

reflects regional differences. All of the regressions in the bottom panel include dummies

for Census region. Because of the small sample size, these regressions are less precise

and are only sometimes statistically significant. Nonetheless the results are qualitatively

similar for poverty, high school dropout, unemployment, and college graduation with and

without region dummies. The sole exception is the result for the share of the population

earning more than $150,000, which remains negative for both blacks and whites but

moves close to zero. It appears that the relationship between segregation and the share of

residents with very high earnings exists mostly between regions.

          Despite the evidence that RDI is uncorrelated with pre-characteristics of people

and places, but strongly predicts segregation and current city characteristics, there still

remains one threat to the interpretation of RDI as an instrument for segregation. That is




                                               35
the possibility that something about railroad configuration affects city growth directly

rather than through racial residential segregation only. For example, railroad

configuration might somehow alter the available investment opportunities directly. It

might make transportation difficult or it might separate people from each other generally,

which could cause income segregation or make the city unpopular. The cumulative

evidence, however, weighs against this possibility. As shown in Figure 4b, the RDI

predicts segregation much more strongly in cities close to the South than in those that are

farther away; thus, if it is true that RDI affects human capital only through segregation,

then it also should predict human capital much more strongly in cities within 400 miles of

the South than in those that are farther away. Table 1b shows the reduced-form effects of

railroad division on outcomes separately by whether cities are within 400 miles of the

South. Because the total sample size is reduced in each regression, the standard errors of

the estimates increase. Nonetheless, it is clear that, overall, the relationships reported in

Table 4 persist in those cities within 400 miles of the South, and are uniformly weaker in

cities more than 400 miles away. This result suggests that in the absence of black

inflows, RDI does not have its own effect on city outcomes.

       In sum, railroad division predicts worse outcomes for blacks and a narrowed

range of outcomes (fewer very positive or very negative) for whites, but this is only true

in times and places where segregation had been made salient by large black inflows.

Railroad division does not predict segregation on other dimensions, including income and

ethnicity, and does not predict pre-period characteristics, such as the structure of industry

or the characteristics of early in-migrants. These results provide evidence that railroad




                                              36
division does drive differences in city characteristics that we observe today, and that it

does so through racial segregation rather than through some other mechanism.

       A comparison of the OLS estimates with estimates that use RDI as an instrument

reveals that OLS makes segregation appear worse for low-end outcomes and better for

high-end outcomes than it is, particularly for the white population. That is, OLS appears

to be biased downward for negative outcomes and biased upward for positive outcomes,

especially for whites. These biases imply that places with a lot of economic inequality,

particularly within the white population, are endogenously segregated. By contrast, two-

stage least squares estimates make it clear that segregation does not cause inequality—

rather, it worsens black outcomes across the board while actually reducing economic

inequality among whites. These results suggest that other, unobserved factors that cause

inequality have resulted in omitted variable bias in estimates of the effects of segregation

on city populations using OLS. For example, one possible cause of bias might be that

some cities have lower tastes for economic and social equality than do others, and thus

end up both more economically unequal within race and more physically separate

between races.

       Comparing OLS and IV can help us to understand how cities differ when they

select into segregation rather than having segregation exogenously assigned. Such

comparisons can't, however, help us to understand how exogenously assigned segregation

causes individual people to select between cities. For that we need another analysis,

which follows.

D. Tests for selection and production mechanisms

1. Selection




                                             37
       Table 5 shows migration and housing market characteristics by race reported at

the urban level from the 1990 Census. Cities with more RDI-induced segregation have

significantly fewer new residents, either black or white. A 10-percentage point increase

in segregation leads to 1.3 percentage points fewer new white residents and 3.0

percentage points fewer new black residents.

       Unfortunately, because the Census does not include data on city-level out-

migration, I cannot distinguish between low demand and low supply as explanations for

the relationship between segregation and lower rates of in-migration. It may be that there

are fewer new residents because out-migration is lower, leading to few vacancies.

However, the evidence on housing values shown in Table 5 suggests that segregated

cities are in fact in less demand. First, more segregated places have significantly lower

median rents for both blacks and whites (results are similar for mortgage costs and home

values, which are not shown). These effects do not appear to be driven by a lower cost of

living in more segregated cities, since rents are also lower as a fraction of income

(significantly lower for whites). Second, lower expenditures on housing do not seem to

reflect less consumption of housing in more segregated cities; blacks and whites are

significantly less likely to live in crowded homes (that is, homes with more than one

person per room) in more segregated cities.

       The fact that migration appears to differ in observable ways between more and

less segregated cities means that selection is a plausible explanation for at least part of the

variation in human capital. In other words, at least some of the negative effect of

segregation on the characteristics of blacks, and on the share of the population with high

income and education, may come indirectly through selective migration. Low demand,



                                              38
in general, will reflect the sorting away of better-off blacks, and of the well-off in general

(as those who can best afford to leave do), and should lead to negative selection and to

worse average characteristics among those who remain behind. As shown in Figure 1h,

the combination of worse outcomes and lower city demand implies that a group dislikes

segregation, and/or that segregation is unproductive for that group. The lower frequency

of negative characteristics among whites, on the other hand, suggests that whites have

distastes for segregation but that segregation reduces their risk of negative outcomes.

2. Production

       When I follow Cutler and Glaeser’s (1997) approach to focus on young adults

aged 22 to 30, I find results that are consistent with those shown in Table 4 for aggregate

city characteristics among all ages. These estimates, shown in Table 6, use 1990 Census

individual data (Ruggles et al. 2004) on 22- to 30-year-olds, include single-year-of-age

dummies. The regressors also include: MSA-level RDI, proximity to the South,

RDI*proximity, and the interaction of each of these with an indicator for whether the

individual is African-American.

       The main effects of RDI, and the interaction of RDI and proximity to the South,

which can be interpreted as the reduced form effect of segregation on whites, include

both reduced probabilities of very negative outcomes for whites (significant for idleness

and for never-married mother) and very positive outcomes (significant for college

graduate). The net effect of RDI, RDI*proximity, and the interactions of those with the

individual indicator for black predict negative effects across the board for African-

Americans (significant for poverty, idleness, never-married mother, and college




                                             39
graduate). The results using my instrumental variables strategy, therefore, are robust to

an individual-level specification.

       Under the assumption used in Cutler and Glaeser (1997) that the characteristics of

22- to 30-year-olds did not significantly drive their migration earlier than five years prior

to observation, these results imply that segregation directly causes worse outcomes for

blacks and reduced inequality of outcomes for whites. These implications are consistent

with the conclusions implied by Tables 1a, 1b, and 4, which suggest that segregation is

productive in reducing very negative outcomes for whites, but is unproductive on other

margins.



IV.    Discussion

       In sum, segregation creates places where whites are less likely to be either very

badly-off or very well-off, and where blacks are worse-off across the board, compared to

places that are less segregated. These equilibrium characteristics may reflect differences

in the effect of segregation on people—for example, segregated cities may transfer

resources to at-risk whites at the expense of blacks and the well-off. Alternatively, they

could strictly reflect the effect of segregation on places through differential migration—

for example, blue-collar whites could prefer segregated cities, while other groups prefer

less segregated cities. Moreover, these effects could reinforce each other, so that in

equilibrium both are at work. The empirical results are most consistent with the

hypothesis that both of these effects are at work.

       Ordinary least squares estimates do not differ significantly from two-stage least

squares estimates for individual characteristics, such as educational outcomes and black




                                             40
unemployment. However, the OLS estimates appear to significantly understate

segregation’s role in reducing white poverty and unemployment. In addition, OLS

significantly understates the negative effects of segregation on black poverty and on the

share of both whites and blacks with high education and income. Overall, the

correlations between segregation and outcomes seem to understate the extent to which

segregation drives better outcomes for relatively disadvantaged whites at the expense of

the average characteristics of other groups.

       Previous research on this topic has failed to identify these effects of segregation

on places, because researchers have lacked a good instrument for metropolitan

segregation. They have therefore been unable to separate the effect of segregation on

aggregate city outcomes from reverse causality and omitted variables. My results suggest

interpreting findings by Boustan (2006), Bayer et al. (2005), and Baum-Snow (2007) on

segregation-reinforcing moves by individuals as coping strategies that are relevant within

segregated urban areas. As modeled by Schelling (1971), segregated equilibria may be

difficult to change through individual market action. Given the limited choices available

in segregated MSAs, people may prefer to live in neighborhoods with others like

themselves rather than in neighborhoods where they are in the minority. Thus, within

MSAs they may make decisions that reinforce segregation, yet still move out of those

cities when possible (Vigdor 2006). The implication for cities is that actions to reduce

aggregate segregation may help to correct the type of market failure outlined in Schelling

(1971) and to increase demand for the MSA.

       The implication that segregation may improve outcomes for some whites is

consistent with work by Card and Krueger (1992), who argue that racial division




                                               41
increases the ability of local government to transfer resources from the black to the white

community. As argued by Vigdor (2006), smaller racial achievement gaps in some cities

than in others can be attributed partially to smaller resource disparities in those cities.

Collins and Margo (2000) have argued, however, that segregation only became bad for

black outcomes after the civil rights movement. Although that question is beyond the

scope of this paper, the results of ongoing research are consistent with such a hypothesis:

Ananat and Washington (2006), using railroad division to predict segregation, show that

the post-civil rights development of black political power has been weaker in more

segregated cities. In future research, I will explore in more detail the mechanisms

through which segregation appears to affect city characteristics. Besides political power,

some plausible channels for these effects include the location of metropolitan amenities

and disamenities, economic redistribution, and school finance.

       To answer the more general question posed by Cutler and Glaeser (1997),

ghettoes appear to be good for the human capital of some groups but are likely bad for

others. Moreover, aggregate demand implies that segregation is a metropolitan

disamenity. In other words, and in what is perhaps the most important finding of this

paper, revealed preferences suggest that the average American, when choosing a city,

considers ghettoes to be bad.




                                              42
Appendix A. Extracting the Railroad Division Index from Maps

       Figure A illustrates the process of extracting railroad data through the example of

Anaheim, CA. For each city, its map or maps were used to first identify its physical size,

shape and location at the time its map was drawn. A Geographic Information Systems

program, ArcGIS, was used to create a convex polygon that was the smallest such

polygon that could contain the entire densely inhabited urban area. Dense habitation,

defined as including any area with houses and frequent, regular cross-streets, was

identified by visual examination. ArcGIS then was used to identify the centroid of this

polygon, and this point was defined as the historical city center. A four-kilometer radius

circle around this point became the level of observation for the measurement of railroads.

This approach meant that differences in initial city area would not distort the

measurement of initial railroads: cities that were, at the time, very small still would be

coded with railroads that affected later development, after the population had expanded;

cities that were already large would have only those railroads in their center cities

included. It should be noted, however, that about 75% of the cities were smaller than 16π

square kilometers when mapped, and many were much smaller, so for most cities this

measure includes railroads that were laid on unoccupied land without need to consider

habitation.

       Visual examination reveals that the historical city center created in this way is

typically quite close to what would be identified as the current city center if using a

current map. Within this four-kilometer circle, every railroad was identified, its length

measured, and the area of the “neighborhoods” created by its intersections with each

other railroad calculated. Historical railroads predict quite well the borders of current




                                             43
neighborhoods as identified by the Census. The actual land area within the circle also

was calculated, so that measurement could be adjusted for available observed land when

working with maps that truncate city observations or include substantial bodies of water.

         The final sample of 121 cities is derived as follows: Cutler and Glaeser (1997)

provide data for all MSAs with at least 1000 black residents. Of these, I include only

those MSAs in states that were not slave-owning at the time of the Civil War, because

those states had few African-Americans prior to the Great Migration.20 Further, my

sample was limited by the set of historical maps held by the Harvard Map Library.21 The

library depends on donations and estate purchases, etc., to collect maps, and therefore

there are gaps in its collection. I have compared the full Cutler and Glaeser (1997)

sample to the sample available from the Harvard Map Library. The cities for which the

library could not provide maps appear quite similar in both historical and current

characteristics measured by Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (shown in Table A), differing at

the 5-percent significance level on only 4 of 46 measures.

         Ideally, my sample would include all places outside the South that were

incorporated prior to the Great Migration, so that they were potential destinations for

African-Americans leaving the South. Then the growth of the place into an MSA could

20
   Specifically, I exclude Delaware, Maryland, Washington, DC, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, Texas,
and Arkansas. Nearly 90% of African-Americans resided in one of these states in 1910 (author’s
calculation from 1910 IPUMS data).
21
   The maps that provide railroad placement information were created by the U.S. Geological Survey as
part of an effort to document the country’s topography, beginning in the 1880s.21 These maps display
elevation, bodies of water, roads, railroads, and (in many cases) individual representations of non-
residential buildings and private homes.21 The edges of a 15-minute map are exogenously defined in round
15-minute units, so that, for example, a map will extend from -90°30’00’’ longitude and 43°45’00’ latitude
(in the southeast corner) to -90°45’00’ longitude and 44°00’00’ latitude (in the northwest corner).
    Because the Harvard Map Library collection is incomplete, there are 77 cities in non-South states
available in the Cutler and Glaeser data for which I do not have the necessary map observations. In
addition, in 15 cities I observe only some fraction of the four-kilometer-radius land area I wish to observe,



                                                     44
itself be treated as an outcome of its potential segregation. Because the Census only

provides data for large places, though, it is not possible to get information for places that

are still small. Note that if segregation reduces economic development, then more towns

will fail to achieve MSA status and thus be censored in the treatment group than the

control group. This will cause an upward bias in the treatment effect estimate of

segregation on growth, attenuating it towards zero. Alternatively, if segregation increases

economic development, then the bias will run in the other direction; since the sign of the

coefficient is now reversed, it is again an attenuation bias. Thus censoring on eventual

MSA status should bias, if at all, towards a finding of no result.



Appendix B. The History of U.S. Railroad Construction

        My instrumental variables strategy requires that tracks were not initially laid in

order to define neighborhoods, or for any other reason that might eventually affect urban

outcomes. In addition to testing for such relationships mathematically, which I do in

section IV of the main text, it is useful to refer to the historical record indicating the

primary drivers of track configuration. Doing so allows me to identify any possibility

that first-order considerations in laying track included some that were likely to have

independent effects on current outcomes. The record indicates three main drivers of

railroad placement in the United States.

1. Slope. Throughout the main period of railroad construction, land was plentiful while

both labor and capital were scarce (Atack and Passell 1994). Therefore, land was the

marginal input into American railroads in the U.S. (contrary to the experience in Europe).


since the cities overlap two or more 15-minute areas and I have maps only for some subset of those areas.
Finally, in 40 cases the city overlaps multiple areas and I observe all of the areas.


                                                    45
Hence, microvariation in ground slope, which was the primary challenge in railroad

construction (Wellington, Economic Theory of the Placement of Railways, 1911), drove

elaborate surface configurations. “American railroads avoided topographic obstacles

rather than level them, bridge them, or tunnel through them” (Atack and Passell 1994, p.

444).

2. Competition. The first practical railroads, in the early 19th century, were a product of

pre-capitalist mercantilism. Typically, a city and its leading businessmen would fund the

building of a line from an agricultural area to its downtown as an incentive to farmers to

choose it as a shipping destination (Taylor and Neu 1956).22 To insure that other cities

did not benefit from their railroad investments, cities deliberately constructed railroads in

ways that made them incompatible with each other.23

3. National security. During the Civil War, it became clear that having hundreds of

short unconnected roads rather than a national network inhibited military activities. After

the Civil War, Congress imposed a standard gauge on all railroads and subsidized private

companies to create a single network throughout the country. Much of the placement of

railroads, both to connect existing roads in settled areas 24 and to cover unsettled areas,

was determined by this goal of a national network.



22
   For instance, the Boston and Worcester line was designed by Boston merchants to divert trade between
Worcester and Providence (Taylor and Neu 1956, p. 4).
23
   In Portland, Maine, the developers of a through line to Montreal consciously chose a gauge incompatible
with existing Portland-Boston lines, for fear that otherwise “Boston would capture their trade and make
them merely a satellite city” (Taylor and Neu, 1956, p.18). The Maine legislature forbade existing lines to
change their gauges in response.
24
   Many people resisted the movement to standardize and connect railroads in towns that had these
discontinuities. A clear threat to the independence between railroad placement and other town
characteristics would exist if differential resistance was based on concerns about city topography—that
citizens objected that railroads would divide neighborhoods or cause other disamenities. In fact, however,
the historical record makes no mention of railroads’ use and effects as a social barrier at the time they were
being laid (one reason may be that most towns were small enough that such barriers or local disamenities
didn’t have significant meaning). The main objection instead was to connection per se. Businesses


                                                     46
        The most obvious factor missing from this list is the price of land. An obvious

objection to the assumption of independence between the initial positioning of railroads

and other neighborhood characteristics is that railroads systematically should have been

built on land with depressed prices because it was less desirable. At the time, however,

land in the U.S. was so plentiful that Congress literally was giving it away under the

Homestead Act and other public land liberalizations. In fact, government gave land to

railroad companies just to get them to build, and in many cases had to give massive

amounts—up to 40 miles on alternating sides of the road—because the land was worth so

little when undeveloped (Atack and Passell 1994, chapters 9 and 16). Thus, it made poor

business sense to emphasize land cost over the cost of materials, labor, and energy

consumption, a point emphasized by Wellington (1911).

        From this evidence on the history of railroad placement, I argue that relative

railroad subdivision of a city’s topography was incidental. It was driven plausibly by the

initial placement of unrelated tracks and the later need to connect them via the flattest and

most direct route. It was thus plausibly uncorrelated with other relevant city

characteristics. This qualitative evidence complements the quantitative evidence that I

present in section IV supporting a zero correlation.




complained because towns with disconnected trains had developed an economy of middlemen, such as
handlers for freight and service establishments for waiting crew and passengers (Taylor and Neu 1956).


                                                   47
References

Ananat, Elizabeth O.; Washington, Ebonya L. (2006). “Segregation and Black Political
Efficacy.” Under review.

Ananat, La Ferrara, and Mele (2007). Untitled working paper.

Angrist, Joshua; Imbens, Guido (1994). “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects.” Econometrica. 62(2): 467-75.

Atack, Jeremy; Passell, Peter (1994). A New View of American Economic History, 2nd
Edition. New York, NY: W.W. Norton and Company.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel (2007). “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(2):775-805.

Bayer, Patrick; Fang, Hanming; McMillan, Robert (2005). “Separate When Equal? Racial
Inequality and Residential Segregation.” NBER Working Paper no. 11507.

Bobo, L.; Johnson, J.; Oliver, M.; Farley, R.; Bluestone, B.; Browne, I.; Danziger, S.;
Green, G.; Holzer, H.; Krysan, M.; Massagli, M.; C. Charles, C.; J. Kirschenman, J.;
Moss, P.; Tilly, C. (1994). Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Research Study #2535.
http://data.fas.harvard.edu

Boustan, Leah Platt (2006). “Inside the Black Box of ‘White Flight’: The Role of
Suburban Political Autonomy and Public Goods.” Working paper.

Benabou, Roland (1996). “Education, Income Distribution and Growth: The Local
Connection.” NBER Working Paper no. 4798.

Card, David; Krueger, Alan (1992). “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
A Direct Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 151-201.

Card, David; Rothstein, Jesse (forthcoming). “Racial Segregation and the Black-White
Test Score Gap.” Journal of Public Economics.

Collins, William (2001). “Race, Roosevelt, and wartime production: Fair employment in
World War II labor markets.” The American Economic Review. 91(1): 272-187.

Collins, William; Margo, Robert (2000). “Residential Segregation and Socioeconomic
Outcomes: When Did Ghettos Go Bad?” Economics Letters. 69(2): 239-43.

Cook, Philip; Ludwig, Jens (2006). “Assigning Youths to Minimize Total Harm,” in
Kenneth Dodge, Thomas Dishion, and Jennifer Landsford (eds.), Deviant Peer Influences
in Programs for Youth: Problems and Solutions, Guildford Press.



                                           48
Cutler, David M.; Glaeser, Edward L. (1997). “Are Ghettoes Good or Bad?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112( 3): 827-72.

Cutler, David M.; Glaeser, Edward L.; Vigdor, Jacob L. (1999). “The Rise and Decline of
the American Ghetto.” Journal of Political Economy, 107(3): 455-506.

Cutler, David M.; Glaeser, Edward L.; Vigdor, Jacob L. (2005).“Is the Melting Pot Still
Hot? Explaining the Resurgence of Immigrant Segregation.” NBER Working Paper no.
11295.

Dresser, Laura (1994). “Changing Labor Market Opportunities of White and
African-American Women in the 1940s and the 1980s.” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Michigan.

Glaeser, Edward L.; Vigdor, Jacob L. (2003). “Racial Segregation: Promising News.” In
Redefining Urban & Suburban America: Evidence from Census 2000, Volume 1, B. Katz
and R. Lang, eds., pp.211-234. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Hoxby, Caroline M. (2000). “Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students
and Taxpayers?” American Economic Review 90(5): 1209-38.

Massey, Douglas S.; Denton, Nancy (1993). American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Massey, Douglas S.; Denton, Nancy (1988). “The Dimensions of Residential
Segregation.” Social Forces 67(2):281-316.

Moretti, Enrico (2004). “Human Capital Externalities in Cities, ” in Henderson,J. Vernon;
Thisse, Jacques Francois, eds. Handbook of regional and urban economics. Volume 4.
Cities and geography. Handbooks in Economics, vol. 7. Amsterdam; San Diego and
Oxford: Elsevier, 2243-91.

Ruggles, Steven; Sobek, Matthew; Alexander, Trent; Fitch, Catherine A.; Goeken,
Ronald; Hall, Patricia Kelly; King, Miriam; Ronnander, Chad (2004) Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0. [machine readable database] Minneapolis, MN:
Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor].
http://www.ipums.org.

Schelling, Thomas C. (1963). The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
Univ. Press, 1963, c1960.

Schelling, Thomas C. (1971). “Dynamic Models of Segregation.” Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 1(1971):143-186.




                                           49
Stock, James H.; Yogo, Motohiro (2002). “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression.” NBER Technical Working Paper: 284.

Taylor, George Rogers; Neu, Irene D. (1956). The American Railroad Network, 1861-
1890. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

U.S. Census Bureau (2005). “American Factfinder” database, generated by author using
American Factfinder software, August 2005.
http://factfinder.census.gov.

Vigdor, J.L (2006). “The New Promised Land: Black-White Convergence in the
American South, 1960-2000.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
#12143.

Vigdor (2002). “The Pursuit of Opportunity: Explaining Selective Black Migration.”
Journal of Urban Economics 51(3): 391-417.

Weaver, Robert C. (1955). “The Effect of Anti-Discrimination Legislation upon the
FHA- and VA-Insured Housing Market in New York State.” Land Economics, 31(4):
303-313.

Wellington, Arthur Mellen (1911).The Economic Theory of the Location of Railways, 6th
Edition. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons.

Wilson, William Julius (1996). When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban
Poor. New York, NY: Vintage Books.




                                          50
                              Figure 1. The Ideal Experiment

Figure 1a. City I is perfectly integrated; city S is perfectly segregated.




                     I                              S

Figure 1b.

                         Blacks in I           Whites in I

 Blacks in S                                                            Whites in S




                                                                    PDF of human capital


Figure 1c.
                                Overall in I




                         Blacks in I           Whites in I




                                                                    PDF of human capital




                                               51
Figure 1d.
                        Overall in S



 Blacks in S                                                 Whites in S




                                                          PDF of human capital
Figure 1e.

                      Overall in I



                                                    Overall in S




                                                          PDF of human capital


Figure 1f.
                                            Whites in S

               Blacks in I


 Blacks in S
                                                    Whites in I




                                                          PDF of human capital



                                       52
Figure 1g.
                                        Relative rent in I




                                                     rent>0


                                                                           % population in I
                                  0%            50%            100%



                                      rent<0



                                   ⎛ 12 − pop I         ⎞
A basic rent function, rent I = η ⎜⎜                    ⎟⎟ , describes the relative rent in city I.
                                   ⎝ pop I ( pop I − 1) ⎠
Note that the parameter η will determine for what range of populations rent will rise less
than population (housing supply is elastic) and at what threshold level rent will begin
rising faster (housing supply is inelastic). A smaller η implies elastic housing over a
broader range of populations.


Figure 1h. Implications of outcome-demand pairs

                OBSERVED:                                           IMPLIED:
                                                                          Production effect of
   rent/migration in      outcomes in city S        tastes for           segregation on human
      city S vs. I               vs. I             segregation                    capital
         Lower                  Better                   -                          +
        Higher                  Worse                    +                           -
         Lower                  Worse                              at least one -
        Higher                  Better                             at least one +
Figure 1h shows the implications of outcome-demand pairs in segregated city S relative
to integrated city I. For example, if the group has low demand for segregated cities in
spite of the fact that segregation is productive for that group, then that implies that the
group must on average have distastes for segregation.




                                                53
                                                                    Figure 2.

                         Binghamton, NY                                                                       York, PA




19th century railroads, shown in red within the 4-kilometer radius historical city center, divide York,
PA into a larger number of smaller neighborhoods than do the railroads in Binghamton, NY. Thus,
even though the two cities had similar total lengths of track, similar African-American population
inflows, and similar manufacturing bases (in fact, Binghamton was somewhat more industrial than
York), York became more segregated, as can be seen from the smaller, more concentrated area of
African-Americans near the railroad-defined neighborhoods at the city’s center. Rivers in blue.

                                     Figure 3. Final sample of MSAs
       1




                                                                                                                        detro

                                                                                    flintmi
                                                                                       buffalny                   saginami
       .8




                                                glensfny               newarknj                           muskegmi
                                                                                   johnstpa harrispa philadpadaytonoh
                                                                                                                youngsohcincino
                                                                                                    bentonmi
                                                                                              toledooh  syracuny
                                                                                              grandrmi
                                                                                            kankakil rockfoil
                                                       peoriail                                hartfoct
                                                                                                      omahane
                                                                                                      jacksomiyorkpa
                                                                                     janesvwi
  Segregation




                                                                                          jolietil
                                                                                          mansfioh  akronoh
                                                                                              williapa
                                                                bridgectnewhavct          uticany niagarny
                                                                                                   desmoiia portlaor
                                                                                                           rochesny
                                                                                                  trentonj
                                                                                                   springma  limaoh springil
                                                                                                         lancaspa
                                                                            eriepa
                                                                                battlemi
                                                                          atlantnj        losangca
                                                                                           steubeoh scrantpa    cantonoh
                                                    oaklanca              albanynybeaverpa
                                                                              waterbct              minneamn
                                                                                                          readinpa
      .6




                                                                            salinaca    hamiltohoklahook
                     duluthmn           sanfraca                                      poughkny             decatuil
                                                        seattlwa norwalct grandfnd
                                                                 pittsfma
                                                            jamestny                   elmirany lorainohlansinmi
                                                                                   lawrenma
                                             newbedma                  statecpa
                                                               worcesma                 portsmnh kalamami
                                                                                   altoonpa
                                                                                binghany                     aurorail
                                 brocktma                          danburct
                                                                       newlonctfortcocoportlameannarbmi stocktca
                                                  lascrunm           chicoca   visalica
                                                                                   fallrima salemma
                              yakimawa                                      middlect
                                                                           champail phoeniazspokanwa
                                                                                   olympiwa         manchenh
                                                                                                    salemor
                                                          lowellma               santacca
                                                                                      coloraco
       .4




                                                 eugeneor              riversca                    yubacica
                                                                                    burlinvt puebloco
                                           santabca   fitchbma
                                                      tucsonaz
                                                  bouldeco       renonv             santarca vancouwa
                                                                vinelanj
                                                           boiseid         anaheicabloomiin
                                                                      mercedca
                                                                   iowaciia
                                                                reddinca
                                                                      lawtonok
       .2




                .2                     .4                   .6               .8                                         1
                                             Costliness of Segregation (RDI)




                                                                         54
                    Figure 4. Relationship of cost, demand, and equilibrium segregation


Figure 4a. Proposed relationship between demand and segregation (seg) by costliness of
segregation

     Seg                                Low cost of seg

                    1

                                                                               High cost of seg




                                                                                Demand for seg
                    0                                                      ∞




                        Figure 4b. Empirical relationship between demand and Segregation
                                           by costliness of Segregation
          .65  .6
   Segregation
      .55 .5
          .45




                -1500                           -1000                    -500                                           0
                                                  distance from South (miles)
                                  if cost is low (i.e. RDI is high)                 if cost is high (i.e. RDI is low)




                                                                      55
                 Figure A. Measuring the railroads of Anaheim, CA




Figure A1. 1894 15’ map showing Anaheim, CA, which is marked in green.




Figure A2. The outline of the densely occupied area of Anaheim, defined as dense
housing (each house is represented by a dot) and regular streets. The centroid of the
occupied area is marked in blue.




                                            56
Figure A3. The historical city center is defined as the 4 kilometer-radius circle around
the centroid of the historical city, and is shown here in red.




Figure A4. Every railroad within the 4-kilometer circle is marked and measured—detail
is shown here in violet.




                                            57
Figure A5. Neighborhoods are defined as polygons created by the intersection of
railroads with each other and with the perimeter. Anaheim contains five neighborhoods,
shown here in orange. The area of each neighborhood is calculated and used to calculate
a RDI measuring the subdivision of the historical city center.




Figure A6. Year 2000 census tracts are shown in green. Note that current neighborhood
borders, as defined by the US Census Bureau in 2000, closely follow historical railroad
tracks.




                                          58
     Table 1a. Mean Outcomes for Cities with Above- and Below-Median Railroad Division
                                                                            T-Statistic for
                                                                            Significance of
                                     Low-RDI      High-RDI Difference in Difference in
                                       cities        cities     Means           Means
Segregation
 Dissimilarity                          0.513        0.623       -0.11           -4.89
                                      (0.017)       (0.015)
Outcomes:                among:
 Poverty rate             whites        0.106        0.083       0.023           3.953
                                      (0.005)       (0.003)
                          blacks        0.253        0.275      -0.023           -1.57
                                      (0.122)       (0.008)

    Percent of adults who are
    high school dropouts        whites    0.168      0.147        0.021           1.86
                                         (0.010)    (0.005)
                                blacks     0.24      0.263        -0.023         -1.334
                                         (0.013)    (0.011)
    Unemployment rate           whites    0.055      0.048        0.008          2.735
                                         (0.023)    (0.002)
                                blacks    0.124      0.126        -0.002         -0.312
                                         (0.006)    (0.004)
    Percent of adults who are
    college graduates           whites    0.267      0.244        0.023          1.313
                                         (0.014)    (0.010)
                                blacks    0.166      0.135        0.031          2.209
                                         (0.011)    (0.008)
    Percent of households
    with more than $150,000
    in income                   whites    0.045      0.038        0.007          1.245
                                         (0.005)    (0.003)
                                blacks     0.02      0.015        0.005           2.22
                                         (0.002)    (0.010)
N                                           60        61




                                               59
    Table 1b. Effect of RDI on Outcomes among Cities with Large vs. Small Expected African-
                                      American Inflows
                                          <400 miles from nearest    >400 miles from nearest
Outcome:                       among:           slave state                 slave state
Poverty rate                   whites             -0.127                      -0.024
                                                  (0.047)                     (0.030)
                               blacks              0.175                      -0.046
                                                  (0.087)                     (0.078)
Percent of adults who are high
school dropouts                whites             -0.093                       0.021
                                                  (0.062)                     (0.073)
                               blacks              0.031                      -0.119
                                                  (0.084)                     (0.111)
Unemployment rate              whites             -0.054                      -0.009
                                                  (0.017)                     (0.014)
                               blacks              0.003                      -0.051
                                                  (0.036)                     (0.054)
Percent of adults who are
college graduates              whites             -0.121                      -0.081
                                                  (0.087)                     (0.129)
                               blacks             -0.127                      -0.014
                                                  (0.063)                     (0.075)

Percent of households with
more than $150,000 in income whites                -0.02                     -0.012
                                                  (0.036)                    (0.040)
                                blacks            -0.009                      0.002
                                                  (0.012)                    (0.016)

N                                                   90                         31
Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                             60
        Table 2. First Stage Relationship between Railroad Configuration and Segregation
                         Dissimilarity Isolation Clustering Concentration Centralization
I. Base specification
  RDI                        0.357         0.472      0.511         0.506            0.285
                            (0.088)       (0.100)   (0.120)        (0.188)          (0.152)



 track length (m/km 2 )     18.514      35.514        56.263     -0.668          -7.183
                           (10.731)    (13.962)      (14.355)   (10.956)         (4.601)


II. Full specification
  RDI                       0.493        0.68         0.78       0.751            0.317
                           (0.126)      (0.161)      (0.197)    (0.280)          (0.196)
 Proximity to the
 South (miles/1000)         -0.21        -0.32       -0.428     -0.388           -0.054
                           (0.144)      (0.187)      (0.184)    (0.358)          (0.290)
 RDI*proximity
 (miles/1000)               0.49         0.68         0.781      0.779            0.04
                           (0.200)      (0.260)      (0.266)    (0.480)          (0.372)

 track length (m/km 2 )    13.319       29.511        51.149    -7.103           -6.355
                           (8.512)     (11.208)      (11.870)   (8.009)          (4.654)

f-stat for joint sig. of
RDI, proximity,
RDI*proximity               17.72       15.37         9.86        6.66            1.42

p-value of f-stat             0           0             0          0             0.242

Robust standard errors in parentheses. N=121.




                                                61
                                                                     Table 3. Specification checks
                                         1910 city characteristics                                             1920 city characteristics

                                                                          Street-cars                     Labor                     Percent of
                     Physical                 Ethnic      Ethnic           per cap.                        force       % of        employment     Percent of   1990
                   area (square Population dissimilarity isolation   %   (thousands)        %       %    particip- employment      in Manufac-   employment income
                   miles/1000) (thousands)     index       index   black    (1915)        black literate   ation    in Trade           turing    in Railroads  seg.
RDI                    23.29      510.357       -0.4       -7.967 -0.013     0.257        -0.005 0.119    -0.018      -0.028            0.265       -0.061     0.073
                     (17.447)    (398.246)    (0.303)    (13.012) (0.02)    (0.181)       (0.03) (0.062) (0.041)     (0.146)          (0.222)       (0.059)   (0.054)
Proximity to the
South
(miles/1,000)        -48.406     -744.81        0.742      0.00017    0        -0.445       0     -0.11     0.076      -0.082          -0.12       -0.021      -7E-07
                     (18.298)   (392.108)      (0.261)     (0.0001) (0.02)    (0.238)     (0.03) (0.063)   (0.056)     (0.13)         (0.342)      (0.036)    (6E-07)
RDI*proximity
(miles/1,000)         35.197     916.524       -0.894      -0.00018 0.032      0.509       0.05   0.132     -0.103      0.153          0.399        0.035      8E-07
                     (31.735)   (631.729)      (0.355)     (0.0002) (0.03)    (0.425)     (0.04) (0.078)   (0.076)     (0.178)        (0.463)      (0.052)    (8E-07)
Track length
per square
kilometer            -38.668     4238.265      36.072      -914.375 13.905    -4.075      13.764 0.61       -3.432      -0.833        13.784        1.396      -2.102
                    (502.551)   (9300.751)    (54.585)     (1891.3) (1.19)   (20.666)     (1.14) (0.775)   (1.418)     (2.849)        (9.155)      (2.234)    (1.549)

N                      58           46           49           49      46        13          42       121    121         121                121       121        69




                                                                                 62
        Table 4. OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Relationship between Segregation and City Outcomes

                                                                                                  Percent of
                       Percent of adults                                Percent of adults      households with
                      who are high school                               who are college       more than $150,000
    Poverty rate           dropouts       Unemployment rate                graduates              in income

                                                    OLS
  white      black      white     black       white     black            white       black      white     black
  -0.073     0.182      0.041     0.348       -0.015    0.091            -0.156      -0.322     -0.022    -0.025
 (0.019)    (0.045)    (0.035)   (0.053)     (0.011)   (0.024)          (0.061)     (0.051)    (0.020)   (0.008)

                                                       IV
  white      black      white     black       white          black       white       black      white     black
  -0.144     0.294     -0.002     0.281       -0.085         0.021       -0.231      -0.322     -0.083   -0.049
 (0.041)    (0.087)    (0.070)   (0.096)     (0.021)        (0.053)     (0.127)     (0.077)    (0.041)   (0.014)

                                           IV with region dummies

  white      black      white     black       white          black       white       black      white     black
  -0.228     0.181     -0.054     0.108       -0.072         0.027       -0.215      -0.36      -0.008    -0.005
 (0.116)    (0.186)    (0.182)   (0.255)     (0.046)        (0.111)     (0.216)     (0.167)    (0.070)   (0.030)


Robust standard errors in parentheses. N=121. The endogenous variable, segregation, is measured using the
1990 dissimilarity index. All 2SLS regressions include RDI, proximity to the South, and RDI*proximity as
instruments, and also control for total track length per square kilometer.

      Table 5. 2SLS Estimates of Relationship between Segregation and City Demand


    Percent of                                                                    Share of households with
residents who are                                   Median rent as a               more than one person
    inmigrants              Median rent             percent of income                    per room

                                                 OLS
  white      black       white        black        white               black        white          black
  0.153      0.294        314          392         8.535                3.49        0.062          0.103
 (0.032)    (0.052)       (84)         (76)       (1.337)             (2.676)      (0.014)        (0.022)

                                                  IV
  white      black       white        black         white              black        white          black
  0.133      0.303        750          767         15.550              6.646        0.177          0.266
 (0.052)    (0.092)      (192)        (149)        (2.510)            (4.318)      (0.033)        (0.050)


Robust standard errors in parentheses. N=121. The endogenous variable, segregation, is
measured using the 1990 dissimilarity index. All 2SLS regressions include RDI, proximity
to the South, and RDI*proximity as instruments, and also control for total track length per
square kilometer.


                                                       63
       Table 6. Reduced Form Estimates of Effect of Segregation Instruments on Individual Outcomes of 22- to 30-Year-Olds
                                                                  High                           Household              Never-
                                                                 school                College     income               married
                                                                dropout In poverty graduate >$150,000            Idle     mom
RDI                                                              -0.068      -0.056     -0.093      -0.036      -0.098   -0.038
                                                                (0.097)     (0.112)    (0.144)     (0.037)     (0.072) (0.017)
RDI*black                                                         0.046      0.246      -0.158       -0.01      0.189     0.218
                                                                (0.033)     (0.042)    (0.035)     (0.007)     (0.027) (0.020)
Proximity to the South (miles/100,000)                            0.178      0.076      -0.106       0.014      0.135     0.052
                                                                (0.143)     (0.093)    (0.130)     (0.030)     (0.066) (0.018)

Proximity to the South*black (miles/100,000)                     -0.083     -0.192      0.276        0.022     -0.183    -0.118
                                                                (0.123)    (0.095)     (0.062)     (0.008)    (0.069)   (0.031)
RDI*proximity (miles/100,000)                                     -0.38     -0.139      0.199       -0.022      -0.21    -0.082
                                                                (0.238)    (0.120)     (0.174)     (0.037)    (0.094)   (0.028)
RDI*proximity*black (miles/100,000)                              0.336      0.431        -0.44       -0.03     0.312     0.253
                                                                (0.226)    (0.181)     (0.106)     (0.016)    (0.103)   (0.053)
Track length per square kilometer                               -13.529    -11.342     12.017        1.682     4.304     0.784
                                                               (11.923)    (8.601)    (12.646)     (2.500)    (7.268)   (1.363)
Track length *black                                             32.118     18.354       -5.818        0.34    18.041     6.313
                                                               (14.547)   (13.288)     (9.809)     (1.810)   (11.544)   (6.011)

p-value of f-test for joint significance of:
 RDI and proximity                                              0.272       0.302      0.033       0.514       0.081    0.015
RDI, RDI*black, RDI*proximity, and RDI*proximity*black          0.247         0          0         0.128         0        0
 RDI*black & RDI*proximity*black                                0.154         0          0         0.185         0        0
Robust standard errors in parentheses. N=478,619.




                                                              64
                            Table A. Mean Characteristics of Cities In and Out of Sample
                                                                                                        p-value of t-
                                                                                                         test for the
Cutler-Glaeser-Vigdor                          (Standard                   (Standard       Difference   difference in
Variable                      Not in sample      error)        In sample     error)        in means         means
Isolation index—1890              0.049          -0.007          0.053       -0.008          -0.004         0.698
Isolation index--1940 (tract-
level)                            0.355          -0.053          0.318       -0.043          0.037         0.586
Isolation index--1940 (ward-
level)                            0.234          -0.034          0.198       -0.023          0.036         0.361
Isolation index—1970              0.343          -0.034          0.365       -0.023          -0.022        0.578
Isolation index—1990              0.229          -0.022          0.214       -0.017          0.015         0.586

Dissimilarity index—1890           0.385         -0.032          0.383       -0.024          0.002         0.956
Dissimilarity index--1940
(tract-level)                      0.736         -0.029          0.742       -0.019          -0.006        0.862
Dissimilarity index--1940
(ward-level)                        0.57         -0.032          0.57        -0.022            0            0.99

Dissimilarity index—1970           0.744         -0.015          0.74        -0.012          0.004         0.843

Dissimilarity index—1990            0.574         -0.016        0.569         -0.012         0.005         0.798
Percent black—1890                  0.03          -0.005        0.027         -0.003         0.004         0.532
Percent black—1940                  0.058         -0.007        0.041         -0.005         0.018         0.034
Percent black—1970                  0.056         -0.006        0.062         -0.005         -0.006        0.477
Percent black—1990                  0.067         -0.006        0.061         -0.005         0.005         0.48
Population—1890                   129,829      -56323.79        66,044     -19199.36        63,785         0.242
Population—1940                   390,895      -170643.4       203,676     -40731.77        187,219        0.206
Population—1970                   919,239      -261007.3       681,599     -129697.5        237,640        0.375
Population—1990                   689,768      -135048.7       590,189     -96574.45        99,580         0.538
# of wards—1890                    17.778         -3.724        13.421        -1.731         4.357         0.288
# of wards—1940                    15.929         -2.641        14.122         -1.44         1.807         0.519
# of tracts—1940                  146.059        -53.033       103.348        -21.92        42.711         0.417
# of tracts—1970                  211.118        -61.515       161.811       -29.971        49.307         0.432
# of tracts—1990                  203.687        -44.957       137.496       -20.894        66.191         0.131
Total area—1900                    19,283      -5711.826        11,764     -1755.343         7,519         0.147
Total area—1940                    32,855      -9499.416        27,137     -6214.421         5,718         0.61
Total area—1970                     2,344       -604.403        1,615       -201.438          729          0.184
Total area—1990                     2,387       -469.458        1,826       -262.051          561          0.262
Per capita street car
passengers—1915                   204.214        -15.422       179.002      -19.461         25.212         0.334
% of blacks employed as
servants-1915                       0.21         -0.015          0.207       -0.013          0.002           0.9
Increase in urban mileage
in 1950s                           0.237         -0.019          0.248       -0.021          -0.011        0.713
# of local
governments—1962                  62.925         -10.281        55.551       -7.477          7.374         0.558
Inter-governmental revenue
sharing—1962                       0.262         -0.011          0.248       -0.007          0.014         0.261

Centralization index—1990          0.741         -0.016           0.77       -0.019          -0.029        0.264
Clustering index—1990              0.207         -0.015          0.177       -0.021           0.03         0.235




                                                          65
Concentration index--1990    0.556      -0.02          0.656     -0.022     -0.1     0.001

Income segregation—1990       0.23      -0.006         0.247     -0.004    -0.017    0.061
Black income
segregation—1990             0.554      -0.012         0.546     -0.009     0.008    0.573
Educational exposure
index—1990                   -0.084     -0.007        -0.088     -0.005     0.004    0.602

Manufacturing share--1990     0.172     -0.009        0.189      -0.006    -0.017    0.118
Median income                31,484    -716.257       31,606    -572.361    -123     0.893
Median education             -0.162     -0.019        -0.143     -0.013    -0.019    0.392
Share of moms who are
single                       0.236      -0.018          0.26     -0.016     -0.024   0.339
Average commuting time       0.823       -0.52         -0.437    -0.363      1.26    0.044
Person-weighted density     1808.075   -338.133       1270.52    -75.12    537.555   0.049
N                             246                       121




                                                 66
