NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTRACTING FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM U.S. CITIES
Jonathan Levin
Steven Tadelis
Working Paper 13350
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13350

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

We are grateful to city managers Frank Benest, David Boesch, Kevin Duggan and Dave Knapp for
helping us understand local governance and contracting. We thank Susan Athey, George Baker, Liran
Einav, Robert Gibbons, Avner Greif, Igal Hendel, Paul Milgrom, Luigi Pistaferri, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg,
Eric van den Steen and Michael Waldman for useful suggestions. Maya Meidan, Marcel Priebsch,
Annika Todd, Joanne Yoong, Vineet Bhagwat Ariel McGinnis, Rizwan Sabar and Kevin Scott provided
stellar research assistance. We appreciate the support of the National Science Foundation and the Stanford
Institute for Economic Policy Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jonathan Levin and Steven Tadelis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Contracting for Government Services: Theory and Evidence from U.S. Cities
Jonathan Levin and Steven Tadelis
NBER Working Paper No. 13350
August 2007
JEL No. D23,D73,H11,L33
ABSTRACT
Local governments can provide services with their own employees or by contracting with private or
public sector providers. We develop a model of this "make-or-buy" choice that highlights the trade-off
between productive efficiency and the costs of contract administration. We construct a dataset of service
provision choices by U.S. cities and identify a range of service and city characteristics as significant
determinants of contracting decisions. Our analysis suggests an important role for economic efficiency
concerns, as well as politics, in contracting for government services.
Jonathan Levin
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
jdlevin@stanford.edu
Steven Tadelis
UC Berkeley
Haas School of Business
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
stadelis@haas.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
The last twenty-five years has seen intense debate about whether the private sector can
provide a variety of public services more eﬀectively than the government. The debate has
touched on services ranging from education, healthcare and transportation to trash collection
and street repair. In addition to the normative question of what role government should
assume in providing services, it has also raised the positive question of what determines
government privatization decisions in practice.
There are at least two accounts of government privatization decisions. One view, which
focuses on transaction costs, looks by analogy to the private sector “make or buy” decision
(e.g. Williamson, 1985; Hart, Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). In this account, privatization is
dictated by eﬃciency considerations. An alternative view, advanced by Boycko, Shleifer and
Vishny (1996) among others, emphasizes the private benefits to politicians of keeping service
provision inside the government. This view holds that privatization tends to occur only in
response to external pressure such as citizen discontent or tight budgets. An analogous
account of the private sector would emphasize the private benefits of control that accrue to
managers, and the role of shareholders in disciplining managers.
In this paper, we study the determinants of privatization at the level of U.S. city government. City government is a useful level at which to study privatization for several reasons.
First, we observe many cities making decisions about service provision in parallel; in this
sense cities are a useful laboratory for making statistical comparisons. Second, cities provide
a wide range of services: from mundane services such as street repair and trash collection to
complex services such as law enforcement and education. Third, cities diﬀer in a variety of
interesting ways – by size, location, economic conditions and form of government. Finally,
local government service provision is important from both an economic and public policy
standpoint. Local government spending (counties and cities) equals about one percent of
GDP in the United States, so there are potentially large gains to be realized from eﬃciency
improvements.
We start by developing a simple model of procurement in which a government must
arrange delivery of a service from an agent. The government can write a contract that
specifies the time the agent must spend on the job and a set of performance requirements.
We assume that specifying and enforcing a time requirement has minimal cost, but that there
are non-trivial costs to establishing and maintaining a set of performance requirements.
Provided the government cares only about what is actually delivered, we show that an
1

optimal contract must take one of two forms. The government either pays the agent for
meeting a minimal time requirement or for meeting a performance requirement, but not
both. We view these forms of contracting as capturing, in a rough way, the two most common
ways that governments provide services: inhouse provision using salaried city employees and
performance requirements contracts with private sector firms.
In our model, governments face a choice between inhouse provision, which is ineﬃcient due
to the low incentives of employees, and the costs of specifying and implementing performance
requirements for an external supplier. This leads to predictions about how privatization
decisions will vary across services. Services for which it is harder to write, monitor or adjust
performance standards are more likely to be provided inhouse. The same will be true of
services for which city administrators are more sensitive to the ultimate quality provided.
We also argue that the trade-oﬀ identified in the model will play out diﬀerently across
cities. For instance, cities may need to be a certain size to produce a given service inhouse
with any sort of eﬃciency. Moreover, if the relevant city administrator is more politically
motivated, he or she may place more emphasize on the benefits provided by supplying a
service well (e.g. from higher quality service or from satisfying the demands of a union) and
less on the costs of service provision. We show that this will lead to less privatization.
We use the theoretical model to motivate an empirical analysis of privatization by
U.S. cities. Our empirical work makes use of survey data collected by the International
City/County Management Association (ICMA). The data documents how a set of just over
a thousand U.S. cities provide a range of services, from public works and transportation
(road construction, street cleaning, residential and commercial waste collection), to safety
(fire, police, emergency services), health and human services, parks and recreation, cultural
programs and administrative support functions. Over eighty percent of services are provided
either inhouse or through contracts with private sector firms. A smaller but still significant
set of services is provided through contracts with other public agencies. We view public
contracts as somewhere between the inhouse and private contract extremes – for instance,
a substitute for inhouse provision for a city that is too small to provide a certain service
eﬀectively, or alternatively, a way to contract for a service while still retaining somewhat
more control over production than may be the case with a private provider.
We complement the data on service provision with data from U.S. Census and other
sources that describe city demographics, form of governance, political leanings, and so forth.
Of course, a central prediction of our theory is that diﬃculties in specifying and administering

2

performance requirements are likely to reduce privatization. To quantify these diﬃculties,
we surveyed a set of city administrators, asking them to assess thirty city services along
a number of salient dimensions. We use this data to construct a measure of performance
contracting diﬃculty.
Our main empirical findings can be summarized as follows. First, services for which it is
harder to write and administer performance contracts are less likely to be privatized. The
eﬀect is substantial. A one standard deviation change in contracting diﬃculty is associated
with a change in the probability of being privatized of eight percentage points – that is,
a forty percent reduction in the likelihood of privatization. The relationship is greater for
larger and more urban cities, which presumably have the resources to use inhouse provision
and perhaps also a more readily available pool of external providers. Newer cities also appear
to be more sensitive to contracting diﬃculty, consistent with a view that governance in these
cities is less political, perhaps due to a smaller public union presence, and more focused on
economic trade-oﬀs.
We also find that services that are less frequently provided, and which managers rank
lower in terms of resident sensitivity to quality, are more likely to be privatized. An interpretation in line with our model is that for these services city administrators focus more on
the costs of provision rather than the benefits.
In addition to the variation across services, our data reveal substantial variation in privatization patterns across cities. For instance, cities in the western states are considerably more
likely to contract for service provision, both to the private and the public sector. A similar
pattern is observed for newer cities. We also find a striking pattern in city size. The smallest
cities are the most likely to contract with other public agencies, perhaps to take advantage
of economies of scale. At the same time, large cities make the greatest use of privatization,
and are the least likely to provide services inhouse. As noted above, we also find evidence
of political eﬀects. Cities run by an appointed manager, rather than an elected mayor, are
more likely to contract for service provision, although the eﬀect is relatively modest.
We find some evidence of spillovers within cities in the use of private sector contracts.
Common wisdom among city administrators is that familiarity and experience with writing
and administering contracts lowers the costs of using contracts for any given service. Consistent with this, we find that after accounting for city size and location, cities are more likely to
contract for any given service if they have more experience with private sector contracting on
other services. To separately identify this spillover eﬀect from diﬀering city-level propensi-

3

ties to privatize, we use an instrumental variables strategy that exploits plausibly exogenous
variation in the mix of services each city provides. We explain the empirical approach in
detail in Section 5.
The bulk of our analysis focuses on the determinants of privatization. In the final section, we provide some suggestive evidence on the relationship between privatization and city
expenditures. We document that controlling for the mix of services that cities provide, cities
that do more private sector contracting spend notably less per capita. Though we cannot
hope to infer causality given the available data, the result is at least consistent with our
modeling approach and suggests possibilities for future research.
Overall, our results indicate that a simple transaction cost based view of privatization
provides a useful framework for explaining local government contracting patterns, at least
at the level of U.S. city government. It is worth noting that our results do not allow us
to distinguish very clearly between the distinct sources of transaction costs that have been
suggested in the theoretical literature. In particular, when we try to separate out problems
with performance measurement, the potential for holdup, and the desire for control and
flexibility, we find our survey measures of these problems to be so highly correlated across
services as to be essentially impossible to disentangle. This suggests to us that trying to
separate these issues empirically is likely to be a diﬃcult task.
We view this paper as contributing to both the economics literature on contracting and
integration decisions and the public administration literature on city practices.1 In particular, our modeling approach draws heavily on Williamson (1975, 1985) and Holmstrom and
Milgrom (1991), in particular Holmstrom and Milgrom’s idea that employment is characterized by the employer prohibiting the agent from certain tasks – that is, dictating what are
permissible activities during a contracted time. More broadly, we follow Sclar (2000) and
Warner and Hebdon (2001), among others, in taking a transaction cost-based view of local
government privatization decisions. In this line of work, the papers most closely related to
this one are by Brown and Potoski (2003a,b), who also collect an original survey with an emphasis on contracting diﬃculties. Our contribution relative to their work is the introduction
of a clearly specified theoretical model, and a richer set of empirical findings.
In terms of studying political variation across local government, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer
and Vishny (1997) use U.S. Census data to relate contracting patterns to government char1
Our paper also relates to the broader and extensive literature on privatization, much of which has focused
on privatization at the level of national governments. The collection edited by Bailey and Pack (1995) is one
entry point to this research.

4

acteristics at the level of U.S. counties. They emphasize that state laws restricting political
hiring or imposing budget constraints on local governments might aﬀect contracting choices.
To relate our empirical findings to theirs, we perform a similar exercise using cross-state
variation in state laws at the level of city contracting. We defer a detailed comparison until
Section 6.

2. Local Government Service Provision: An Overview
A typical city in the U.S. provides about 40 distinct services, ranging from public works
(street repair and garbage collection), to public safety (police and fire), to animal control
and maintenance of public recreation areas. Many city services are relatively labor intensive.
Capital equipment required to provide services (e.g. police cars, fire trucks) tends not to
be highly specialized to a particular city, although there are exceptions, such as municipal
libraries, hospitals or sewage treatment facilities.
City services are provided by a combination of city employees and private and government
contractors. Exactly what services a city government is responsible for providing often
depends on a variety of historical and institutional factors.2 Once provision is decided,
however, city administrators have some flexibility in determining how best to provide a
given service. The city managers to whom we have talked all emphasize that both economic
and political factors go into their decisions.
There is variation across cities in the form of governance. The two most common forms for
city government are Council-Manager and Mayor-Council (other forms of governance such
as town meetings and direct ballot referendums are relatively rare). A Council-Manager
government consists of an elected city council that is responsible for city policies, and a professional city manager, appointed by the council, who is responsible for administration. The
city council is generally prohibited from interfering with the city manager’s administration,
but can remove the city manager at any time. In contrast, a Mayor-Council government
consists of an elected mayor who serves as the city’s chief administrative oﬃcer and an
elected council that forms the city’s legislative body. Cities with a mayor may also appoint
a professional city manager, but the mayor has authority over city operations. Whether a
city government is headed by an appointed manager or an elected mayor, there is typically
2

These can be quite idiosyncratic. For instance, the city government of Stanford’s neighbor, Menlo Park,
California, is not responsible for the city’s fire department, which instead is run by an independently elected
commission.

5

a hierarchy of department managers responsible for service delivery. Contracting decisions
generally are made by the mayor or manager together with the department head who bears
responsibility for implementing the decision.
The ICMA surveys provide a snapshot of how city services are provided. The 1043 cities
in our sample provide a total of 41,227 city-service observations. Of these, 60% were delivered
using only city employees, 20% were provided using at least some private sector contracts,
12% were provided through contracts with another public agency, such as the county or
a neighboring city,3 and 4% were provided by less common channels, such as franchises,
vouchers, or volunteers.4
As our analysis in this paper is purely cross-sectional, it is worth commenting on general
trends in city contracting. Despite many popular press stories about public school contracts
and other high-profile privatization decisions, data from ICMA surveys performed at five year
intervals between 1982 and 2002 show little evidence of any aggregate trend in contracting
behavior. Ballard and Warner (2000) and Hefetz and Warner (2004) argue that decisions to
contract out services are balanced by decisions to bring contracted services back in-house.
Based on this evidence, we will adopt the view that the broad pattern of city contracting is
roughly stationary, though individual cities are adjusting on the margin.

3. Contracting for Services: Theory
We model the choice between external contracting and internal service provision as one of
contractual form, where we associate external contracting with the use of detailed contracts
specifying performance requirements, and internal provision with the use of salaried employees. This view seems particularly appropriate for local government service provision; it may
also be useful for thinking about private sector make-or-buy decisions, an issue explored in
more detail in Levin and Tadelis (2007).
The model establishes a sharp trade-oﬀ between productive ineﬃciencies that arise from
using salaried employees and the costs of specifying and administering more productive
performance contracts. This leads to a clear set of empirical predictions on which to base
3

In some states, cities may also form partnerships to provide services. For instance, in California, two
or more public agencies may join together under a joint powers authority (JPA) to provide a service. Fire
protection in San Mateo is provided by such an arrangement. We consider this a form of public sector
contracting.
4
These numbers sum to less than one hundred percent because for about four percent of city-service pairs
the method of provision is not recorded in our data.

6

our empirical analysis. In this sense, we view the model as a useful advance over less formal
transaction-cost arguments.
A. Technology, Endowments and Preferences
A city administrator, or principal, wishes to procure one unit of a good or service from
an agent. The city administrator cares about service quality and the costs of provision. We
interpret “quality” broadly and say that output is of higher quality if it produces more gross
surplus. For example, the quality of street repair is higher if potholes are fixed in a timely
manner. Similarly, police services will exhibit higher quality if there is a faster and more
adequate response to the various public safety problems that arise.
To capture the idea that the value of higher quality can diﬀer across cities and services,
we let s denote the administrator’s sensitivity to service quality. Sensitivity may be a result
of pressure from city residents or other political constituencies. If the quality provided is q,
the sensitivity is s and the costs of provision are k, the principal’s net benefit is V (q, s) − k.

We assume that Vq (q, s) > 0 and Vqs (q, s) > 0. The latter condition means that a city
administrator with a high value of s is willing to spend more to secure an increase in quality;
that is, she cares more about service benefits relative to costs. To guarantee a unique optimal
contract, we also assume that there are decreasing returns to quality, so Vqq (q, s) < 0.
For simplicity, assume that labor is the only variable input relevant for the quality of
service that is provided. Specifically, assume that service quality is given by the production
function
q = (ρ + e)t,
where t ≥ 0 is time spent on the job, ρ > 0 is baseline productivity, and e ≥ 0 is the agent’s
eﬀort intensity (e.g. attention to detail, problem-solving activities, or physical exertion).

The agent is endowed with T units of time that can be allocated between working for
the principal and working in an outside competitive labor market. When working for the
principal, the agent bears a personal cost of eﬀort c(e) per unit of time, where c0 , c00 > 0.5
The outside job requires no eﬀort intensity and pays a reservation wage r > 0 per unit of
time. The agent has preferences over income and labor costs. If he is paid w ≥ 0 and spends
5

We treat labor intensity as a one-time choice, but this involves no loss of generality. If instead the agent
were to choose a complete time path of eﬀort, the convexity of c(·) would still make it optimal to work at a
constant labor intensity.

7

t hours on the job at an eﬀort intensity e, his utility is
w − c(e)t + r(T − t), with 0 ≤ t ≤ T.
B. Contracting on Time and Performance
Following common practices in procurement, we assume that the principal can write
a contract that specifies two requirements: performance and time spent on the job. For
instance, if the principal wanted the agent to provide landscaping services, the contract
could specify performance requirements such as the frequency for trimming certain trees and
bushes, the amount of weeds allowed per square yard, and what composition of fertilizers were
to be used. Alternatively, the contract could specify that the agent spend forty hours a week
providing landscaping services as directed by the principal. While time and performance
requirements are contractible, however, we assume that labor intensity is not. This implies
that the agent will always have some discretion over how hard to work.
A contract therefore is a triple (w,
b qb, b
t ), where b
t specifies a minimum amount of time the

agent must spend on the job, qb specifies is a minimum quality standard, and w
b specifies the

amount the principal will pay the agent if the time and performance standards are met.

We make an important, and in our view realistic, assumption that there are costs both to

write and enforce contracts. To keep things simple, we assume that the costs of specifying and
monitoring compliance with b
t are minimal, but it is costly to specify and verify compliance
with a quality standard qb. For example, to meet certain quality thresholds several things
may need to be described in advance, such as lists of instructions and ex post measurement

procedures (Bajari and Tadelis, 2001). Furthermore, to verify the delivery of qb the principal

will often have to rely on a certain monitoring and measurement technology that has its own
set-up and operating costs (Barzel, 1982).

We assume that to specify a minimal standard of qb, the principal must expend costs

equal to d(b
q , m). The parameter m is intended to capture diﬃculties in contracting, such as
the diﬃculty of describing performance requirements ex ante or adjusting them over time, or
the diﬃculty of measuring and monitoring quality. Accordingly, we assume that dm > 0. We
also assume that d(0, m) = 0 and dqe > 0, so that specifying and monitoring a higher quality

standard is more costly, but there is no cost if no standard is specified. Finally, we assume

that dqeqe > 0, so that for a given service each increase in performance standards comes at
increasing cost. This seems natural if specifying and monitoring basic issues is rather simple,

8

but for refined issues it is increasingly diﬃcult to specify standards and verify compliance.
(See Bajari and Tadelis, 2001, for a model that results in such a cost function.)
C. Optimal Contracts: Employment versus Specific Performance
Suppose the principal and agent agree to a contract (w,
b qb, b
t ). If the agent intends to honor

the contractual requirements, he faces two constraints. The employment constraint states
that he must spent at least the specified amount of time on the job, t ≥ b
t; the performance

constraint states that he must deliver at least the specified quality, q ≥ qb. The following
result turns out to be very useful.

Proposition 1 An optimal contract either specifies a quality standard or a time requirement
but never both.
The formal proofs of this and other results are relegated to an appendix. The intuition is
as follows. Because contracting is costly, it could only be optimal to specify both requirements
if it resulted in both the employment and performance constraints binding for the agent. But
if both constraints were to bind, then the agent could deliver the same quality at lower utility
cost by substituting eﬀort for time. As the principal cares only about quality and cost, he
would do better to drop the time requirement and lower the wage. Simply put, if the principal
specifies the final product qb, then telling the agent how to do the job can only increase costs

because without this direction the agent has the right incentives for cost minimization.

This result not only simplifies the problem, but adds meaning to the contractual relationship. Namely, an optimal contract (w,
b 0, b
t) that specifies time and not performance

looks very much like an employment relationship in which the agent agrees to spend a fixed
amount of time on the job, does not expend excessive eﬀort, and cares little about what

needs to be done. In contrast, an optimal contract (w,
b qb, 0) that specifies only performance

looks very much like a contracting relationship in which the agent has all the discretion over
how to allocate his time and eﬀort, and he is bound by the performance specifications of the
contract.6
D. Characterizing Optimal Contracts
6

The view of employment that we adopt here is reminiscent of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), who
emphasize that employment is characterized by exclusion. In our model, a salaried employee is excluded
from working in the outside market during the contracted time b
t, meaning that on the job he will do what
is desired, only at a low baseline productivity.

9

Proposition 1 concludes that only one dimension of contracting will be used. Since quality
provision can be accomplished by either kind of contract, it is useful to specify the costs of
each contracting mode. The logic of Proposition 1 almost immediately implies the following
result:
Proposition 2 For any quality level provided, the payment to the agent in an employment
contract is higher than in a performance contract.
The intuition is simple. Because the agent’s choice of production inputs is constrained
under an employment contract, the labor cost of producing quality q is lower under a contract
that simply specifies a performance requirement. Note that Proposition 2 states that ignoring
contracting costs, performance contracts will result in more eﬃcient production.
Accounting for contracting costs, however, implies that a performance contract imposes
additional costs that are not incurred if an employment contract is used. The optimal
contract will weigh the added contractual costs of using performance contracts against the
added benefits of the increased labor eﬃciency and lower labor costs. Hence, we are interested
in how the optimal contract varies with the principal’s sensitivity to quality s and the
diﬃculty of specifying and enforcing performance standards m. Our next result provides a
characterization.
Proposition 3 If contracting diﬃculty m increases, the principal will be more likely to use
an employment contract, while the optimal quality may increase or decrease. If the
importance of quality s increases, the principal will be more likely to use an employment
contract, and optimal quality will increase.
The first claim is straightforward: increased costs of specifying performance standards
will reduce the use of specific performance contracts. The second claim, that increased
sensitivity to quality will also reduce the use of performance contracts, is a bit more subtle.
It relies on the assumption that it is increasingly hard to specify and enforce performance
for higher quality levels, i.e. that d(q, m) is convex in q.
E. Relating the Model to Data
In this section, we describe the empirical implications of our model. We also discuss
how some simple extensions to the model can generate additional hypotheses that we will
consider in our empirical analysis.
10

Before turning to these predictions, we address one preliminary issue of interpretation.
Our model focuses on the choice of contractual form, while we have data on the use of
contracting versus inhouse provision. Matching our theory to the data therefore requires us
to interpret employment, or inhouse provision, as a contract that specifies time on the job and
private sector contracts as specifying detailed performance requirements. This seems to be
an accurate description of local government practice. In principle, however, one could have
“employees” who are paid on performance, or “contractors” who are paid on time. Lawyers,
for instance, often fall into the latter category. We view this as a potentially confounding
problem if one were to apply our model to make or buy decisions in other settings, such as
the private sector, but as relatively unproblematic for our current application.
Basic Predictions: Our model yields two elementary predictions about how contracting
practices will diﬀer across services. First, cities are less likely to privatize services for which
it is harder to specify, enforce or adjust performance standards. Second, cities are less likely
to privatize services for which sensitivity to quality is high. As city residents are the final
consumers of services, and city administrators are ultimately accountable to residents, this
suggests that privatization should be less likely for those services where city residents are
more likely to react to quality problems.
City Size: While not directly addressed in the model, our theory can easily accommodate
the role of economies of scale. It is easy to see that cities may diﬀer in how responsive they
are to the trade-oﬀs in the model depending on their abilities to supply the service themselves
or on the availability of private sector. Some services may have a relatively large eﬃcient
scale, making inhouse production ineﬃcient for a small city. Small or rural cities also may
face a thinner market of external providers. This suggests a third prediction, that small
and rural cities, being potentially more constrained, may be less responsive to contracting
diﬃculties of the type highlighted by our model. In addition, to reach eﬃcient scale within
the public sector, it may be more eﬃcient for a small city to contract for employees from
another public agency rather than provide a service inhouse.
Contracting Experience: Our baseline model treats each city’s contracting decision for
each service in isolation. City managers whom we interviewed, however, emphasized that
writing and administering contracts takes practice, and that capabilities gained contracting
for one service might facilitate future privatization. In the language of the model, the
contracting cost parameter m may decrease with privatization experience. This suggests a
11

fourth prediction: cities that privatize some services may be more likely to privatize others.
Assessing whether this kind of spillover is present is an empirical challenge; we explain our
empirical strategy in detail below.
Political Economy: A set of political economy predictions can be derived from the simple
trade-oﬀs highlighted in the model. When city administrators place more weight on the
benefits of service provision relative to the cost, i.e. have a higher value of s, they will be
more likely to provide the service inhouse. A natural conjecture is that elected mayors may
have motivations that are more explicitly political than appointed managers. In light of our
model, this suggests a fifth “level-eﬀects” prediction: that cities run by mayors may be less
likely to privatize services as compared to cities run by managers. Moreover, to the extent
that political concerns might cause administrators to focus on issues other than the economic
trade-oﬀs emphasized in our model, a sixth “margins eﬀect” prediction is that cities run by
mayors will also be less responsive to diﬀerences in contracting diﬃculties as compared to
cities run by managers.
The form of government is an obvious political distinction across cities, but several others
may be of interest as well, and give rise to similar hypotheses. For instance, cities that
were formed relatively recently may have less of a political infrastructure and perhaps less
public union influence. This suggests they may do more privatization. They also may
make decisions that more closely reflect current economic eﬃciency trade-oﬀs, making newer
cities more responsive to variation in contracting diﬃculties across services. Although it is
somewhat outside of the scope of our analysis, it is also possible that diﬀerences in political
ideology (e.g. cities that are primarily democratic or republican) might aﬀect contracting
choices.
Political Economy and City Finances: A final conjecture that emerges from combining
the political view of privatization with our transaction-cost view is that a city’s financial
condition may matter for its contracting decisions. In particular, the political view would
suggest that if cities are very constrained – for instance because they have a great deal
of outstanding debt – then they may be more likely to privatize to save costs. Moreover,
if financial constraints cause administrators to focus more on economic considerations, our
model would then suggest that debt-constrained cities would be more responsive to contracting diﬃculties.

12

4. Service Provision by U.S. Cities: Data
To study the procurement practices of U.S. cities, we compiled information from several
sources. Our primary data are the International City/County Management Association’s
(ICMA’s) 1997 and 2002 Service Delivery surveys. This data has been used in several other
studies of local government (e.g. Hefetz and Warner (2004) and references therein).
The ICMA sends its survey to roughly 4000 U.S. cities, with a response rate of about
20-25%.7 The survey presents city administrators with a list of 64 services. It asks them to
identify the services they provide and the method of delivery. These include provision by city
employees, contracting out to a private sector firm, contracting out to another public agency,
a combination of the above, and other less frequent forms of procurement. After combining
the survey responses from 1997 and 2002, and eliminating responses that are substantially
incomplete, we have a data on a total of 1043 cities. For cities that responded in both years,
we use the more complete or more recent response.
For each of these cities, we collected information from the U.S. Census on population,
area, county median household income, the ratio of the city’s long-term debt to its current
revenue, whether or not the city has employee bargaining units, and whether the city is part
of a Metropolitan Statistical Area.8 We classify cities outside an MSA as rural, and those
within an MSA as either suburban or urban, with the latter meaning that the city is the
main city in the MSA. We searched city web pages to identify the date at which each city
was incorporated.
From the ICMA, we obtained each city’s form of government – Mayor-Council, CouncilManager, or the less common forms of Commission and Town Meeting. In addition, we
gathered data on state laws that might constrain city decisions – such as limits on borrowing
or restrictions on hiring processes.9 Finally, as a rough measure of political ideology, we
collected county-level voting data from the 2000 presidential election. Table 1 presents a
summary of city characteristics.
7

The ICMA sends the survey to the Chief Administrative Oﬃcer in all municipalities with populations
over 10,000 and a random sample of one in eight municipalities with populations between 2500 and 9999.
Therefore smaller cities are under-represented in the sample. The response rate in 2002 was 23.7%. As can
be seen in Table 1, cities in the Northeast are under-represented among the respondents.
8
The population data comes from the 2000 Census; the other variables from the 1997 Census of Governments. The one exception is the presence of employee bargaining units, which we use as a very crude
measure of the importance of public employee unions in a city. This question last appeared in the 1987
Census of Governments, so that is what we rely upon.
9
This data on state laws comes from the U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations
(USACIR, 1990, 1993).

13

While information on city characteristics is readily available, it is substantially more difficult to assemble useful measures of service characteristics. For instance, we are particularly
interested in how diﬃcult it is to specify and administer performance requirements for a
given service. To assess this, we designed an additional survey of 23 city managers. For
this survey we chose a representative sub-sample of 30 of the ICMA services. The survey is
available as an Appendix.
We asked respondents to rank each service along three contracting dimensions: (1) the
diﬃculty of measuring and monitoring the provision of quality; (2) how routine or unpredictable the requirements of the service are; and (3) the diﬃculty in replacing contractors
due to specificity or lack of competition. For each question we standardized the answers of
each respondent to have zero mean and unit variance. We then averaged the standardized
responses to construct an average response to each question for each service.10
Although our model does not separate out these impediments to successful contracting,
the existing theoretical literature suggests that each of these variables might have an independent influence on contracting decisions. In the next section, we use simple cross-tabulations
to document the relationship between private contracting and our three individual measures.
As the cross-tabulations will show, however, these characteristics turn out to be so highly
correlated across services as to be nearly collinear in multivariate regression analysis. Therefore for the regression analysis we use a principal components approach to identify a single
“contract diﬃculty” variable. The first principal component explains 84% of the variation in
our three survey variables. We call this component, which is very nearly an equally weighted
average of the three variables, contracting diﬃculty. This corresponds to m in our model.
In addition to asking city managers about contracting diﬃculty, we included a survey
question asking the city managers to assess the relative sensitivity of residents to the quality
of the thirty diﬀerent services. Again, we standardized the answers of each response and
averaged the standardized responses to obtain a measure of quality sensitivity that we refer
to as sensitivity. This corresponds to s in our model.
Finally, we used information on which cities provide which services to construct two
additional service characteristics. A number of city managers suggested to us that services
could usefully be distinguished by the degree to which they were (in the words of Palo Alto
10

One might hope that the aspects to contracting we are asking about are commonly understood by
practitioners and do not diﬀer much across cities. Indeed the survey responses were highly correlated across
respondents. To convey a rough sense of the alignment of the responses, say that two standardized responses
are congruent unless one is above 0.5 and the other is below -0.5. Making pairwise comparisons between
responses concerning a given service on a given question, less that 15% were not congruent.

14

city manager Frank Benest) “core to mission” – and hence identified in an important way
with city administration. To provide a measure of whether a given service is a “core” city
service, we calculated for each service the fraction of cities in our sample that provide it. We
then normalized this measure, denoted core, to have mean zero and standard deviation one
across services.
Our core measure captures what fraction of cities provide a service. We constructed an
additional measure to describe which cities provide a given service. To do this, we computed
for each service the average population density of cities providing the service. Again, we
normalize this measure, denoted dense population to have mean zero and standard deviation
one across services. The reason we include this measure is because there do seem to be
services that are provided almost solely by the largest and most dense cities. These services
include programs for the elderly, daycare and drug and alcohol treatment programs.
Table 2 reports provision patterns of each of the thirty services included in our contracting
diﬃculty survey. Both the frequency of provision and the method of provision range dramatically across services. Some services, such as police and code enforcement are provided
by city employees in nearly 90% of the cities in our sample. Other services, such as solid
waste collection are privately contracted over 40% of the time, and vehicle towing is privately
contracted over 80% of the time. The last part of the Table reports service characteristics.
These seem to square with common sense. For instance, the most diﬃcult service to contract
for is police services, while the easiest are utility meter reading and vehicle towing.
While our empirical analysis below focuses on the method of service provision, it is
worth briefly discussing the question of whether a city provides a service at all. As discussed
in Section 2, it seems reasonable to view whether a city is responsible for providing a given
service as predetermined in investigating how the service is provided. This assumption seems
consistent with information gleaned from interviews with city managers, who generally have
to concern themselves with how to provide a specified set of services.
Nevertheless, given variation in the number of cities providing each service, it may be
helpful to convey a sense of which services are provided more frequently and which cities
provide more services. To this end, Table 3 reports results of a logit regression relating
whether or not city i provides service j to city and service characteristics. As the Table
shows, there are a number of regularities. Larger and older cities provide more services, as
do cities in the Northeast. Cities in the western U.S. tend to provide fewer services. Services
for which contracting diﬃculties are greater are also provided somewhat less frequently – in

15

particular, a one standard deviation increase in contract diﬃculty is associated with provision
by 6% fewer of the cities.

5. Economic Determinants of Contracting
We now turn to addressing empirically the determinants of city contracting practices. We
divide our analysis into two parts. We look first at the economic determinants of contracting
behavior, then turn to political economy considerations. An observation in our data is a
city-service pair. We focus on city-service pairs for which the city actually provides the
given service, and for which the service is provided either inhouse or by contract with either
a private firm or another public agency.
A. Preliminary Evidence
In our survey of city managers, we asked managers to assess each service on the basis of
three characteristics: the diﬃculty of measuring and monitoring quality, the need for flexibility, and the potential for holdup problems due to lock-in. We start with some preliminary
evidence on the relationship between private sector contracting and these separate characteristics. Table 4 provides a cross-tabulation that shows how the amount of private sector
contracting varies with whether its score on each of the three contracting diﬃculty dimensions is high (above zero) or low (below zero).11 Each service, and hence each city-service
pair, belongs to one of eight cells in the matrix of Table 4.
The main entry in each cell in Table 4 shows the fraction of times we observe a service
with the identified characteristics being provided via a private sector contract. Contracting
is roughly twice as likely for services that score low on at least two of the three diﬃculty
dimensions than for services that score low on zero or one dimensions. Table 4 also shows the
diﬃculty with separating out the three dimensions of contracting diﬃculty. Of the thirty
services, twenty-three of them score low on none or all of the dimensions. Only one or
two services occupy the remaining six cells. This strong correlation also appears when we
use continuous versions of the three dimensions. Consequently, we use our single principal
component measure of contracting diﬃculty in the statistical analysis that follows.
It is useful to provide some initial evidence on the relationship between our aggregate
measure of contracting diﬃculty and the method of service provision at the level of individual services. To do this in a way that controls for the fact that each service is provided by a
11

Recall that survey responses are normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation equal to one.

16

diﬀerent set of cities and cities may be more or less inclined to privatize for reasons that are
city-specific, we separately regressed a dummy variable for each city-service contracting outcome (inhouse provision, public contract, private contract) on city fixed eﬀects and obtained
the average residual by service. We plot these residuals against our measure of contracting
diﬃculty in Figure 1.
Figure 1A depicts the negative relationship between contracting diﬃculty and privatization. It shows, for example, that vehicle towing, waste collection and building maintenance
are all relatively easy to contract and often privatized, while the reverse is true of police,
fire, emergency medical services and code enforcement. There are two notable outliers: legal
services and parking lot operation. The figure shows that it is relatively diﬃcult to write
a performance contract for legal services, yet they are frequently contracted out. A simple
explanation is that while legal services are frequently contracted out, the standard contract
for legal services is based on time rather than performance. Parking lot operation is rarely
contracted out, despite having low contracting diﬃculty. A natural explanation here is that
outside of relatively large metropolitan areas, parking lot operation doesn’t involve any task
that could be contracted. Once a parking lot is built, there is no need for an operator because
parking is free.
Figures 1B and 1C show the corresponding scatterplots for inhouse provision and public
contracting. Both are positively related to contracting diﬃculty across services, suggesting
that these may be the relevant options for diﬃcult to contract services. We explore this in
more detail below.
B. Determinants of Privatization: Basic Results
We use a multivariate regression analysis to quantify the relationship between city and
service characteristics and the alternative forms of service provision: private contracting,
public contracting and inhouse provision. We describe the choice between these alternatives
using a standard multinomial logit model. In this model, the probability that city i provides
service j using method k is given by:
exp (Xij β k )
Pr{yij = k} = P
,
l exp (Xij β l )

where yij ∈ {Inhouse, Public, Private} is the method of provision and Xij is a vector of

city and service characteristics. We sometimes use city or service fixed eﬀects in place of
measured city or service characteristics; our results are not sensitive to this substitution.
17

Throughout the paper, rather than reporting hard-to-interpret coeﬃcients from the logit
model, we report the marginal eﬀects on the choice probabilities.
Table 5 reports results from our basic specification that confirm the two elementary
predictions of our theoretical model. An increase in contracting diﬃculty is associated with
a shift away from private sector contracting toward both inhouse provision and public sector
contracting. The shift is substantial. A one standard deviation increase in contracting
diﬃculty is associated with a forty percent decrease in the likelihood of private contracting
(recall that on average about 20% of services are contracted privately and the estimated
probability change is between −8.3% and −10.1% depending on the specification).

We also find a significant correlation between privatization and our measure of resident

sensitivity to quality. Note that an increase in sensitivity is associated with a shift away from
private sector contracting toward inhouse provision, but not toward public contracting. This
is consistent with the view that cities want control over the services that are more sensitive
vis-a-vis resident responses. A one standard deviation increase in sensitivity is associated
with about a twenty percent decrease in the likelihood of private contracting (the estimated
probability change is between −3.6% and −4.9%).

Another indication that cities may want to retain control over services that are perceived

as central is that services that are provided by a broader set of cities (i.e. “core services”) are
much more likely to be provided inhouse. A one standard deviation increase in our “core”
measure is associated with a twenty to thirty percent increase in the probability of inhouse
provision.
Finally, services that are provided primarily by densely populated cities are substantially
more likely to be provided through private sector contracts. Part of this result appears to
be driven by a set of services that are provided mainly by large cities and have something
of a “private good” nature (e.g. drug and alcohol treatment, daycare) and are privatized
frequently. One possible explanation is that for these services there is a private market in
addition to public sector provision, making private sector contracting relatively straightforward.
C. Determinants of Privatization: Scale Economies
We argued that diﬀerences across cities in their ability to deliver services, and in the
market conditions surrounding them, will aﬀect their sensitivity to the basic predictions
of our model. As indicated in the lower half of Table 5, larger and more urban cities are
substantially more likely to privatize. Cities that have more than fifty thousand residents are
18

about thirty percent more likely to contract privately as compared with the omitted category
of rural cities that have less than ten thousand residents. Similarly, cities in an MSA (Urban
and Suburban cities) are about fifteen to twenty percent more likely to contract privately as
compared with the omitted category.
These results show that larger and more urban cities are more likely to privatize on
average. Our third prediction was that larger cities would exhibit a closer relationship
between mode of provision and contracting diﬃculty, both because they might have better
access to private suppliers and because they might be able to utilize economies of scale in
inhouse provision. To get at this, we consider an alternative specification where we interact
contracting diﬃculty with city characteristics. These results are reported in Table 6.
The negative relationship between contracting diﬃculty and privatization indeed is much
stronger for larger cities. For the smallest set of cities, a one standard deviation increase
in contracting diﬃculty is associated with a 7.6% decrease in the probability of contracting
privately, holding other city characteristics at their sample averages. The change is almost
twice as large for cities with populations between twenty-five and fifty thousand (13.1%) and
populations greater than fifty thousand (13.7%).
Moreover, strengthening the results from Table 5, these results are consistent with the
idea that large cities substitute from private contracts toward inhouse provision, while very
small cities that may lack the scale for inhouse provision substitute away from private to public contracting. For the smallest set of cities, a one standard deviation increase in contracting
diﬃculty is associated with a 8.6% increase in the probability of public contracting, almost
all of which resulting from the decrease in privatization. For the largest cities, the 13.7%
reduction in private contracting divides into an 8% increase in the probability of inhouse
provision and a 5.7% increase in the probability of public sector contracting.
D. Determinants of Privatization: Scope Economies
Among city managers, contract administration is viewed as a specialized competency
that is not taken for granted. As discussed above, this suggests a potential for economies
of scope in private sector contracting. Cities that have experience privatizing some services
may be more likely to use the private sector for other services. Identifying this empirically is
subtle because we want to tease it apart from the possibility that some cities are just more
likely to contract privately for reasons that we cannot control for directly.
Our empirical strategy is to use what we consider to be plausibly exogenous variation in
the set of services that cities provide. Consider two cities, A and B, that provide an equal
19

number of services and are observably equivalent but for the set of services they provide.
Both cities provide service 1. In addition city A provides a mix of services that are relatively
easy to contract, while city B provides a mix of services that are relatively hard to contract.
Our hypothesis is that city A will be more likely to contract service 1, precisely because
it gains experience with contracting due to its mix of provided services. This suggest an
instrumental variables strategy where we regress an indicator variable for privatization of a
given city-service pair on the number of other services a city privatizes, using the average
diﬃculty of services that a city provides as an instrument for this count.
To implement this strategy, we consider a linear probability model where the dependent
variable yij is a dummy variable equal to one if city i privatizes service j rather than keeping
it inhouse or using a public sector contract. The exact specification is:
yij = α

X

yik + Xi β + dj + εij ,

k∈Ji \j

where Ji is the set of services provided by city i, the sum on the right hand side is the
number of services other than service j that city i privately contracts, Xi is a set of city
characteristics possibly including the number of services that city i provides, and dj is a
service j fixed eﬀect. We report both OLS estimates and IV estimates where we use the
average diﬃculty of services in Ji as an instrument for number of other services that are
privatized.
Table 7 reports our estimates, which are strongly consistent with the economies of scope
hypothesis. A given service is three to five percentage points more likely to be privately
contracted if a city privatizes one additional other service. The eﬀect is not negligible; it
represents a fifteen to thirty-five percent increase in the probability the service is privatized.
The result resonates with the account of city managers that writing and administering contracts with private providers becomes easier with experience.

6. Political Economy Determinants of Contracting
As discussed earlier, our model of privatization decisions suggests a role for political forces
in focusing attention on benefits of service quality and away from costs of provision. We
have several variables capturing aspects of political economy, including form of government,
city age, region of the country, city debt levels and resident voting patterns. There is also
20

variation in state laws that constrain city decision-makers, which Lopez-de-Silanes et al.
(1997) argue may be important for local government privatization decisions.
A. Determinants of Privatization: Political Economy
Recall our fifth prediction above that cities run by mayors will be less likely to privatize
services as compared to cities run by managers. As Table 5 shows, this prediction is borne
out in the data. Cities with an appointed manager are more likely to contract with both the
public sector (by 1.5 percentage points, or 12.5%) and the private sector (by 2.5 percentage
points, or 20%). Supporting our other political economy “level eﬀects” predictions, younger
cities (incorporated after 1950) privatize about 25% more than older cities, and cities with
employee bargaining units privatize about 10% less than cities with no bargaining units.
There is considerable regional variation in levels of contracting. Cities in the West and
Northeast appear to behave quite diﬀerently from cities in the middle of the country. Cities
in the West are more likely to use contracts with both public and private sector providers. At
least two explanations have been suggested to us. One western city manager hypothesized
that people in the West look less to government to provide jobs and services, and hence
are more open to private sector contracting. An alternative explanation is that these cities
have weaker public unions, even conditional on our imperfect control for union presence and
hence there is less resistance to contracting.
We argued above that greater political concerns would aﬀect how responsive city administrators are to the economic trade-oﬀs identified in the model resulting in a sixth margins
hypothesis. This hypothesis is explored in Table 6 where we re-run our main specification
interacting contracting diﬃculty with city characteristics. The results are mixed. The negative relationship between contracting diﬃculty and privatization is much larger for newer
cities and for cities in the western states. The relationship between contracting diﬃculty
and privatization is essentially the same in cities with managers and mayors, however, and
also in cities that do and do not have employee bargaining units.
Our final political economy hypothesis was that cities with higher debt burdens might
be more likely to privatize in order to cut costs. Our expenditure results in Section 7 below
suggest that private sector contracting indeed is associated with lower spending levels. The
estimates in Table 5 show that cities with higher ratios of long-term debt to revenue privatize
significantly more than those with lower levels of debt. The latter finding is consistent with a
story that high debt levels constrain political opportunism by city administrators and force
them to focus on costs (i.e. in the language of the model, act as if they had a lower value of
21

s).
The above results suggest an important role for political economy considerations in privatization decisions. One hypothesis we do not find support for, however, is that heavily
Republican cities do more privatization. In fact, it appears that cities located in counties
that voted Republican in the 2000 presidential election are somewhat less likely to contract
with both the public and private sector. We are hesitant to make too much of the result,
however, because we found no significant relationship using data from earlier presidential
elections.
B. Determinants of Privatization: State Laws
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) argue that state laws may have important
eﬀects on local government privatization decisions. In their paper, they use U.S. Census data
to investigate the contracting decisions of U.S. counties, and find a number of interesting
correlations. For studying local government privatization, however, the Census data has
several weaknesses. First, it covers only a small sample of services (either twelve or seventeen
depending on the year). Second, it does not distinguish between contracts with the private
sector and contracts with the public sector. Our results suggest that the distinction is
important. For these reasons, it is interesting to re-visit their hypotheses with our richer
city-level data.
Table 8 reports results from an additional multinomial logit specification where in addition to service fixed eﬀects and our usual city characteristics, we include as controls dummy
variables for the presence of a range of state laws. The first column includes only the laws
studied by Lopez-de-Silanes et al. The second column shows that these results are robust
to the inclusion of additional state laws governing financial audits, clean government and
collective bargaining practices.
The results yield a mixed comparison. Similar to their analysis, we find that states that
prohibit political activity by city employees and states that impose city debt limits have more
contracting of local services. Both findings are consistent with political economy arguments.
In contrast to their analysis, however, we find that states that require a merit system for
hiring, that prohibit strikes by their employees, and that do not permit take-overs of city
finances all have less contracting of local services.
Lopez-de-Silanes et al. argue that a merit system should make cronyism more diﬃculty
and hence increase privatization, contrary to our results. Another possibility is that it simply
increases the quality of city employees making inhouse provision more attractive. Political
22

economy considerations do not yield a clear prediction about whether prohibiting strikes will
increase or decrease privatization, so perhaps it is not surprising that we obtain contrasting
results. The fact that the possibility of state take-overs is associated with more privatization
is consistent with the idea that cities that are financially constrained look more to the private
sector as a way to keep costs down.

7. Contracting and City Expenditures
The empirical analysis above focused on the determinants of city contracting decisions.
Ideally we would like to assess the consequences of these decisions as well. Although there
are plenty of case studies on individual privatization decisions (see e.g. Sclar, 2000 for a
number of such studies), there is no systematic data that allows a comparison of service
quality and costs of provision across cities that choose diﬀerent methods of provision, nor is
there broad time-series evidence on cities that have changed their modes of provision. One
thing we can do, however, is to look at overall levels of city expenditures and how overall
spending relates to the degree of private sector contracting across a broad set of cities.
We use data from the 1997 Census of Governments to regress per-capita spending on the
fraction of services that are privatized, controlling for city characteristics. The estimates are
reported in Table 9. The first column contains no controls for the set of services that are
provided; the second column controls for the number of services that are provided; the third
column controls for the mix of services by including a dummy variable for each individual
service that is provided. Because our measure of spending is an overall city measure, rather
than disaggregated by service, each observation in these regressions corresponds to a single
city.
The results show a substantial correlation between privatization and per-capita city
spending. Cities that privately contract ten percent more of their services spend about three
percent less per capita. Given that on average cities provide forty services and contract for
eight of them, this means that changing one service from inhouse to private contracting is
associated with a 0.6% decrease in per capita spending. A causal interpretation is obviously diﬃcult, so we view this evidence as suggestive rather than definitive. It suggests an
interesting avenue for future empirical research.

8. Conclusion
23

This paper has studied privatization of local government services. We develop a simple
model that emphasizes what we believe to be a key trade-oﬀ between the productive eﬃciency induced by performance contracts and the low costs of contracting associated with
employment. The model explains why contracting diﬃculties such as problems in monitoring
performance, the need for flexibility, or a lack of a competitive market would lead to less use
of the private sector. It also explains why greater sensitivity to service quality might push
against privatization.
We use this model to interpret our empirical findings about the determinants of privatization for U.S. cities. Using data gathered from a variety of sources, we find that services that
are characterized by high “transactions costs” of contracting and services that are widely
provided by U.S. cities or are ranked high by city managers in terms of resident sensitivity
to quality are less likely to be privatized. We also provide evidence that contracting to
other public agencies appears to be largely a substitute for inhouse provision, rather than
an analogue of privatization.
Perhaps most importantly, we find a substantial degree of heterogeneity across cities in
terms of their contracting practices. In particular, large cities are more likely to privatize
and appear more sensitive to the trade-oﬀs identified in our model. We obtain similar results
for cities that were incorporated more recently, and also observe more privatization in cities
governed by an appointed city manager rather than an elected mayor. We also provide
some evidence of spillovers in contracting practices within a given city, so that privatizing
one service may make it more likely to do further privatization. Finally we oﬀer suggestive
evidence that privatization is associated with lower spending.
Our analysis leaves many questions open. For instance, our empirical analysis is purely
cross-sectional; it would be interesting to study the dynamics of privatization decisions –
for instance, to study whether economic shocks might drive privatization decisions. This
potentially could be done using our data. A more ambitious project would be to try to
assess the direct costs and benefits of privatization decisions. This would probably require
measures of service quality, which is one reason evidence on this front has been limited to
case studies.

24

References
Bailey, Elizabeth and Janet Pack, eds. The Political Economy of Privatization and
Deregulation, Edward Elgar, 1995.
Bajari, Patrick and Tadelis, Steven, “Incentives Versus Transaction Costs: A Theory
of Procurement Contracts.” RAND Journal of Economics, Autumn 2001, 32(3), pp.
387-407.
Ballard, Michael J. and Mildred E. Warner, “Taking the high road: Local government restructuring and the quest for quality,” in Power tools for fighting privatization,
6/1 —6/53. American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees: Washington,DC, 2000.
Barzel, Yoram, “Measurement Costs and the Organization of Markets.” Journal of Law
and Economics, 1982, 20, pp.291-307.
Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “A Theory of Privatization,”
Economic Journal, 1996.
Brown, T. and M. Potoski, “Transaction Costs and Institutional Explanations for Government Service Production Decisions,” Journal of Public Administration Research and
Theory, 2003, 13(4), pp. 441-468
Brown, T. and M. Potoski, “Managing Contract Performance: A Transaction Costs
Approach,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2003, 22(2), pp. 275-297
Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “The Proper Scope of Government:
Theory and an Application to Prisons,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997.
Hefetz, Amir and Mildred Warner, “Privatization and Its Reverse: Explaining the
Dynamics of the Government Contracting Process,” Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, 2004, 14(2), pp. 171—190
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 1991, 7, pp. 24-52
Lazear,Edward, “Salaries and Piece Rates,” The Journal of Business, 1986, 59(3), pp.
405-431.
Levin, J. and S. Tadelis, “A Costly Contracting Approach to the Organization of Production,” U.C. Berkeley Working Paper, 2007.
Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, “Privatization in the United States,” Rand Journal of Economics, 1997, 28(3), pp. 447—71.
25

Masten, Scott, “The Organization of Production: Evidence from the Aerospace Industry.”
Journal of Law and Economics, October 1984, 27(2), pp. 403-417.
Savas, E.S., Privatization and Public-Private Partnerships, Chatham, NY: Chatham House,
2000.
Sclar, E., You Don’t Always Get What You Pay For: The Economics of Privatization,
Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
Tadelis, Steven, “Complexity, Flexibility, and the Make-or-Buy Decision.” American Economic Review, 2002 92(2), 433-37.
Warner, M. and R. Hebdon, “Local Government Restructuring: Privatization and its
Alternatives,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2001, 20(2), pp. 315-336.
Williamson, Oliver E., Markets and Hierarchies, New York: Free Press, 1975.
Williamson, Oliver E., The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: Free Press,
1985.

26

Appendix A: Omitted Theory Details
Given a contract (w,
b qb, b
t ), the agent chooses e and t to solve
b − c(e)t + r(T − t)
maxe,t w
s.t. t ≥ b
t
(EC)
(ρ + e) t ≥ qb
(P C)

Given our assumptions, the agent’s problem has a unique solution. It is independent of the
q, b
t) and t∗ (b
q, b
t).
wage w,
b so we can denote the optimal intensity and time as e∗ (b
The optimal contract from the point of view of the principal solves
b − d(b
q , m)
max(w,e
e q,e
t) V (et, s) − w
∗
b
q , t), t∗ (b
q, b
t))
(IC)
s.t.
(e, t) = (e (b
w
b − c(e)t + r(T − t) ≥ rT (IR)

where the incentive compatibility constraint (IC) states that the agent will allocate his eﬀort
and time optimally and the individual rationality constraint (IR) states that the agent prefers
to accept and honor the contract rather than not. This second constraint will bind for any
optimal contract.
Proposition 1 An optimal contract (w,
b qb, b
t ) either has the form (w,
b 0, b
t) or (w,
b qb, 0).

Proof. By way of contradiction, suppose the optimal contract (w,
b qb, b
t ) has qb > 0 and b
t > 0.
If (PC) binds at the solution to the agent’s problem, then the contract (w,
b qb, 0) will result
in the same quality qb at marginally lower contracting cost. Alternatively, if (PC) does not
bind at the solution to the agent’s problem, then the contract (w,
b 0, b
t) will result in the same
quality at lower contracting cost.
Q.E.D.

To obtain quality q with an employment contract (w,
b 0, b
t), the principal must specify
b
t = q/ρ and pay the agent
r
W (q|EC) = q.
ρ
To obtain quality q with a performance contract (w,
b qb, 0), the principal must specify qb = q,
and the agent solves
b − c(e)t + r(T − t)
max w
e,t

s.t. (ρ + e) t ≥ q.

The optimal eﬀort level solves c0 (e) · (ρ + e) = c(e) + r, which is independent of q, so we
denote it by e∗ . The optimal time allocation is t∗ (q, 0) = q/ (ρ + e∗ ). To make the contract
acceptable, the principal must pay the agent
r + c(e∗ )
W (q|P C) =
q.
ρ + e∗
27

Proposition 2 For all q > 0, W (q|P C) < W (q|EC) and

dW (q|P C)
dq

<

dW (q|EC)
.
dq

Proof. The first inequality follows from revealed preference. The input mix e∗ , t∗ (q, 0) is
the agent’s least cost way of producing quality q, so it must be that W (q|P C) < W (q|EC).
The second inequality follows directly from the first.
Q.E.D.
The cost of implementing q is therefore
C(q, m) = min{W (q|EC), W (q|P C) + d(q, m)}.
The cost function C(q, m) is the lower envelope of W (q|EC) and W (q|P C) + d(q, m). A
useful observation is that because labor costs are linear, the latter cost function will cross the
former at most once, from below, provided that dqq > 0, i.e. that the costs are contracting are
convex. This implies that if an employment contract is the most eﬀective way to implement
quality q, it will be most eﬀective for all higher quality levels. The optimal contract quality
is the solution to the problem
max V (q, s) − C(q, m).
q

Proposition 3 If contracting diﬃculty m increases, the principal will be more likely to use
an employment contract, while the optimal quality may increase or decrease. If the
importance of quality s increases, the principal will be more likely to use an employment
contract, and optimal quality will increase.
Proof. Consider an increase from m to m0 . The costs of implementing any quality q
with an employment contract are unchanged, but the costs of implement any q with a
performance contract are higher for m0 than for m. Therefore an increase from m to m0
makes a performance contract less likely to be optimal. The optimal quality could move
up or down however. To see this, suppose the optimal contract under m is a performance
contract. If the same is true under m0 and dqm > 0 then it is optimal to reduce quality.
On the other hand, if the optimal contract under m0 is now an employment contract, it will
involve an increase in quality.
Now consider an increase from s to s0 . As Vqs > 0 and the principal’s problem has a
unique solution, the optimal quality must increase. The increase in quality could change the
form of optimal contract from a performance contract to an employment contract, but not
vice-versa.
Q.E.D.

28

Appendix B: City Manager Survey
We conducted a survey of 23 city managers, asking them to assess 30 services along several
dimensions. A complete copy of the survey is available from the authors upon request. Here
we re-produce the four questions that we rely upon in the paper.
Question A: Measuring and Monitoring Service Quality
To evaluate performance, it is important to measure and monitor the quality of the
service provided. For each service listed below, imagine you were considering contracting
out the service. Assess how easy or diﬃcult it would be to measure and monitor the quality
of service provision.
Question B: Need for Flexibility
For some services there is significant uncertainty about precisely what (or when) things
need to be done. Other services are more predictable, making it easier to specify in advance
what needs to be done. For services that are predictable there is a greater need for flexibility
and adaptive guidance. For each service below please rank the need for flexibility and
adaptive guidance.
Question C: Provider Scarcity or Lock-in
For some services it may be hard to find qualified providers or to switch providers once
and initial provider is found. This could be due either to specialized expertise, specialized
or expensive physical capital, or the lack of a closely related private sector market. For each
service below please assess the ease of finding or switching outside providers.
Question D: Resident Sensitivity and Response
Problems with service provision may trigger a response from city residents. Residents
are more aware of, and more sensitive to problems with some services as compared to others.
For each service below, please assess the level of resident sensitivity to problems that might
be encountered in the provision of that service.
Following each question was a list of the thirty services, organized by category: Public
Works and Transportation; Public Utilities; Public Safety; Health and Human Services;
Parks, Recreation and Culture; and Support Functions. Respondents were asked to rank
each service on a scale of 1 to 5. For Question B, for example, a one meant “no need for
flexibility”, a three meant “moderate need for flexibility, and a five meant “strong need for
flexibility”. Responses by each manager to each question were standardized to have mean
zero and standard deviation one as described in the text.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Cities (N=1043)
Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

City Characteristics
Population (2000)
Area (sq. miles)
Year Incorporated
County Median Income (1997)
County % Republican (2000 pres. elect.)
City expenditure per-capita (1997)
Long-term debt/Revenue (1997)
Public employees union (1987)

59,904
24.71
1898
38,755
51.0
1355
0.91
0.43

185,683
47.34
47
8,578
12.3
1033
0.78

1,115
1
1699
14,178
16.1
23
0

3,694,820
607
2000
68,017
82.3
16003
6

East
0.05

Midwest
0.31

South
0.35

West
0.30

MSA Status
Urban

Urban
0.21

Suburban
0.49

Rural
0.30

Form of Government
Mayor

Mayor
0.25

Manager
0.73

Other
0.02

39.5
23.6
4.6
7.9
3.4

9.7
8.1
5.2
6.2
3.3

6
0
0
0
0

64
47
35
41
28

20.6
12.0
2.1
4.4
2.1

4.6
4.6
2.5
3.4
2.1

4
0
0
0
0

30
25
17
21
14

Geographic Region

Services Provided (all 64 services)
Number of Services Provided
Inhouse
Publicly contracted
Privately contracted
Otherwise provided or not reported
Service Provision (30 service subsample)
Number of Services Provided
Inhouse
Publicly contracted
Privately contracted
Otherwise provided or not reported

Sources: U.S Census, ICMA, U.S. Election Atlas, City Web Pages.

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Services
Service
Animal control
Building security
Buildings and grounds maintenance
Collection of delinquent taxes
Commercial solid waste collection
Crime prevention/patrol
Drug and alcohol treatment programs
Emergency Medical service
Fire prevention suppression
Insect/rodent control
Inspection/code enforcement
Legal services
Operation/maintenance of recreation facilities
Operation of daycare facilities
Operation of libraries
Operation of museums
Operation of parking lots and garages
Parks landscaping and maintenance
Programs for the elderly
Residential solid waste collection
Sanitary inspection
Sewage collection and treatment
Snow plowing/sanding
Solid waste disposal
Street repair
Street/parking lot cleaning
Tree trimming/planting on public rights on way
Utility meter reading
Vehicle towing and storage
Water treatment
Sources: ICMA, Levin-Tadelis City Manager Survey.

# Cities
Providing
857
721
1003
584
558
1021
201
769
932
443
1013
842
974
194
632
342
411
996
582
750
496
868
698
565
1011
935
939
727
596
783

Method of Provision
Inhouse Public
Private
0.61
0.75
0.62
0.40
0.32
0.86
0.05
0.54
0.82
0.42
0.84
0.34
0.72
0.24
0.56
0.25
0.68
0.69
0.28
0.47
0.51
0.68
0.80
0.32
0.45
0.72
0.42
0.78
0.09
0.78

0.21
0.02
0.01
0.39
0.01
0.07
0.38
0.14
0.07
0.36
0.03
0.02
0.06
0.09
0.29
0.16
0.03
0.05
0.20
0.01
0.40
0.20
0.05
0.18
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.02
0.14

0.13
0.20
0.30
0.17
0.43
0.00
0.39
0.19
0.00
0.16
0.08
0.58
0.10
0.55
0.03
0.29
0.19
0.18
0.19
0.33
0.04
0.08
0.09
0.35
0.36
0.18
0.39
0.13
0.81
0.06

Service Characteristics
Difficulty Sensitivity
Core
Dense Pop.
0.64
-0.98
-1.08
-0.72
-1.21
2.08
1.64
0.72
1.41
0.32
1.47
0.54
0.22
0.78
0.34
0.46
-1.29
-0.91
1.16
-1.25
0.60
0.35
-0.40
-0.40
-0.31
-1.19
-0.85
-1.27
-1.16
0.29

0.25
-0.74
-0.38
-0.61
-0.22
0.93
0.25
1.02
0.77
-0.18
0.24
-0.85
0.30
0.56
0.42
-0.10
-0.74
0.08
0.36
0.77
-0.22
0.03
-0.13
-0.67
0.31
-0.18
0.17
-0.67
-0.28
0.38

0.74
0.27
1.25
-0.21
-0.30
1.32
-1.55
0.44
1.01
-0.70
1.29
0.69
1.15
-1.57
-0.04
-1.06
-0.81
1.23
-0.22
0.37
-0.52
0.78
0.19
-0.28
1.28
1.02
1.03
0.29
-0.17
0.49

-0.44
0.30
0.04
0.15
-0.20
-0.04
1.67
0.33
-0.16
-0.36
0.01
0.16
0.04
2.27
-0.03
-0.47
1.37
-0.03
1.28
-0.19
-0.05
-1.14
-1.34
-0.07
-0.10
-0.13
-0.06
-1.10
0.74
-1.16

Table 3: Provision of City Services
Logit Model of Provision of City-Services (N=31,290)
(1)
Marg. Eff.

(2)
s.e.

Marg. Eff.

s.e.

-0.061
0.160

(0.003)
(0.006)

-0.065
0.171

(0.003)
(0.007)

0.043
0.058
0.072
0.014
-0.012
0.016
0.005
0.031
0.007
-0.031
0.005
-0.012
-0.065
-0.011
0.000

(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.020)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.025)

(3)
Marg. Eff.

s.e.

0.048
0.064
0.080
0.016
-0.013
0.018
0.006
0.034
0.008
-0.036
0.005
-0.013
-0.076
-0.012
0.000

(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.020)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.012)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.025)

Service Characteristics
Contracting difficulty
Resident sensitivity
City Characteristics
Population 10-25k
Population 25-50k
Population >50k
Manager
Other form of government
Unions
City Debt/Revenue
East
South
West
Urban
Suburban
Incorporated after 1950
County med. Income (10k)
Percent republican
Additional Controls

City Fixed Effects

Service Fixed Effects

Table 4: Frequency of Private Contracting
Holdup Potential
Low
High

Low

0.29

Need for
Flexibility

0.35
11

High

0.25

N/A
1

0.06
2

Difficulty of Measurement

Holdup Potential
Low
High

Low

0.12
0

0.16
1

2
0.15

1
High

12

Table 5: Effect of City/Service Characteristics on Contracting
Multinomial Logit Models for Frequency of Private and Public Contracting (N=19,244)
(1)
Service Characteristics
Contracting difficulty
Resident Sensitivity
Core service
Dense population service

(3)

(2)

Public

Private

Public

Private

0.047
(0.003)
0.000
(0.005)
-0.097
(0.003)
-0.037
(0.003)

-0.083
(0.004)
-0.036
(0.007)
-0.029
(0.005)
0.140
(0.006)

0.069
(0.005)
0.004
(0.008)
-0.147
(0.008)
-0.062
(0.006)

-0.101
(0.007)
-0.049
(0.010)
-0.045
(0.007)
0.177
(0.009)

-0.008
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.007)
-0.018
(0.008)
0.015
(0.005)
0.000
(0.017)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.042
(0.007)
0.018
(0.006)
0.032
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.031
(0.006)
0.038
(0.006)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.105
(0.018)

0.011
(0.012)
0.022
(0.013)
0.063
(0.015)
0.024
(0.007)
0.013
(0.025)
-0.011
(0.007)
0.010
(0.004)
0.026
(0.016)
-0.017
(0.009)
0.019
(0.009)
0.035
(0.012)
0.041
(0.010)
0.056
(0.009)
0.016
(0.005)
-0.028
(0.030)

Public

Private

-0.006
(0.006)
-0.011
(0.006)
-0.015
(0.007)
0.015
(0.004)
0.003
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.002)
-0.040
(0.006)
0.014
(0.005)
0.031
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.029
(0.005)
0.036
(0.006)
0.004
(0.002)
-0.091
(0.016)

0.015
(0.011)
0.025
(0.012)
0.065
(0.014)
0.025
(0.006)
0.016
(0.023)
-0.012
(0.006)
0.011
(0.004)
0.037
(0.015)
-0.023
(0.008)
0.013
(0.008)
0.034
(0.011)
0.034
(0.009)
0.048
(0.009)
0.016
(0.004)
-0.044
(0.026)

City Characteristics
Population 10-25k
Population 25-50k
Population >50k
Manager
Other form of government
Public Employee Unions
City Debt/Revenue
East
South
West
Urban
Suburban
Incorporated after 1950
County med. Income (10k)
Percent republican
Additional Controls

City Fixed Effects

Note: Reported coefficients are marginal effects on probability of outcome.

Service Fixed Effects

Table 6: Determinants of Contracting, Interaction Effects
Multinomial Logit Model for Private and Public Contracting
Public

Private

Service Characteristics
Contracting difficulty
Resident sensitivity
Core service
Dense population service

0.065
0.004
-0.147
-0.062

(0.027)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.005)

0.008
-0.049
-0.046
0.178

(0.038)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.010)

-0.020
-0.014
-0.029
0.010
0.007
-0.003
0.000
0.022
0.009
0.022
-0.026
-0.006
0.003
0.003
-0.003

(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.015)
(0.008)
(0.029)
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.020)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.005)
(0.032)

-0.003
-0.056
-0.061
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.002
0.023
-0.028
-0.039
0.043
-0.010
-0.023
-0.015
-0.003

(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.021)
(0.012)
(0.034)
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.023)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.018)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.047)

Contracting Difficulty x City Characteristics
Difficulty * Population 10-25k
Difficulty * Population 25-50k
Difficulty * Population >50k
Difficulty * Manager
Difficulty * Other FOG
Difficulty * Public Employee Unions
Difficulty * City Debt/Revenue
Difficulty * East
Difficulty * South
Difficulty * West
Difficulty * Urban
Difficulty * Suburban
Difficulty * Inc. after 1950
Difficulty * County med. Income (10k)
Difficulty * Percent republican
Additional Controls

City Fixed Effects

Note: Reported coefficients are marginal effects on probability of outcome.

Table 7: Scope Economies in Private Contracting
Linear Probability Model for Private Contracting of City-Services (N=19,244)
(1)

(2)

(4)

(3)

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

0.029

(0.001)

0.033
-0.008

(0.001)
(0.001)

0.047

(0.016)

0.034
-0.008

(0.010)
(0.004)

-0.005
-0.002
0.009
0.010
0.014
-0.011
0.005
0.016
-0.015
0.013
0.013
0.013
0.033
0.011
-0.009

(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.019)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.025)

0.003
0.007
0.016
0.012
0.010
-0.008
0.005
0.018
-0.013
0.007
0.013
0.009
0.021
0.007
-0.007

(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.019)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.025)

-0.015
-0.016
-0.022
0.002
0.014
-0.011
0.001
0.000
-0.009
0.015
0.003
0.005
0.029
0.008
0.005

(0.013)
(0.016)
(0.031)
(0.009)
(0.020)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.028)

0.002
0.007
0.016
0.011
0.010
-0.008
0.005
0.017
-0.013
0.007
0.012
0.009
0.021
0.007
-0.006

(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.016)
(0.007)
(0.019)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.014)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.005)
(0.026)

Scope Economies
Number of other contracted services
Number of provided services
City Characteristics
Population 10-25k
Population 25-50k
Population >50k
Manager
Other form of government
Unions
City Debt/Revenue
East
South
West
Urban
Suburban
Incorporated after 1950
County med. Income (10k)
Percent republican
Additional Controls
Instrument for number of other
contracted services

Service fixed effects

Service fixed effects

Service fixed effects

Service fixed effects

Avg. contract diff. of
other services

Avg. contract diff. of
other services

Table 8: Effect of State Laws on Contracting
Multinomial Logit for Frequency of Private and Public Contracting (N=19,244)
(1)

(2)

Public

Private

Public

Private

-0.036
(0.005)
0.015
(0.005)
0.019
(0.004)

-0.021
(0.009)
-0.012
(0.009)
0.042
(0.007)

-0.035
(0.006)
0.025
(0.005)
0.020
(0.005)
0.003
(0.006)
-0.024
(0.010)

-0.021
(0.010)
-0.008
(0.011)
0.030
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.009)
0.008
(0.014)

-0.008
(0.012)

-0.090
(0.024)

-0.015
(0.014)
0.007
(0.005)

-0.081
(0.025)
0.036
(0.009)

0.022
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.012)
0.018
(0.006)
-0.043
(0.006)
0.060
(0.015)

-0.014
(0.010)
0.065
(0.015)
-0.026
(0.008)
0.087
(0.022)
-0.090
(0.010)

0.029
(0.007)
0.001
(0.012)
0.027
(0.007)
-0.047
(0.007)
0.094
(0.023)

-0.001
(0.013)
0.068
(0.016)
-0.025
(0.009)
0.059
(0.023)
-0.057
(0.015)

-0.022
(0.005)
-0.017
(0.006)

-0.024
(0.008)
0.005
(0.009)

Clean Government Laws
State requires merit system
State sets purchasing standards
State prohibits political activity by city employees
City officials subject to ethics code
City records open to public
Labor Laws
State prohibits strikes by public employees
City authorized to engage in collective bargaining
Budget Constraint Laws
State law permits short-term borrowing
State imposes city debt limits
State mandates balanced budget
State law authorizes "take over" of finances
State assesses property tax
Financial Audit Laws
Law mandates independent audit of local accounts
Law mandates state audit of local accounts

Additional Controls

City Characteristics,
Service FE

City Characteristics,
Service FE

Note : Reported coefficents are marginal effect on the probability of public/private contracting.

Table 9: City Expenditure and Private Contracting
Linear Regression Model of ln(City Expenditure per Capita) (N=1043)
(1)
Degree of Private Contracting
Fraction of city services privately contracted
City Charateristics
Population 10-25k
Population 25-50k
Population >50k
Manager
Other form of government
Unions
City Debt/Revenue
East
South
West
Urban
Suburban
Incorporated after 1950
County med. Income (10k)
Percent republican
Number of city services provided
Additional Controls

(2)

(3)

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

Coeff.

s.e.

-0.305

(0.122)

-0.387

(0.122)

-0.246

(0.122)

0.119
0.058
0.100
0.012
0.093
0.047
0.061
0.316
0.136
-0.021
0.017
-0.390
-0.291
0.131
-0.681

(0.059)
(0.066)
(0.074)
(0.041)
(0.125)
(0.038)
(0.022)
(0.085)
(0.050)
(0.047)
(0.064)
(0.051)
(0.046)
(0.025)
(0.162)

0.094
0.020
0.051
0.004
0.108
0.034
0.057
0.313
0.134
-0.003
0.018
-0.372
-0.252
0.141
-0.687
0.009

(0.058)
(0.066)
(0.074)
(0.041)
(0.123)
(0.038)
(0.022)
(0.084)
(0.049)
(0.047)
(0.063)
(0.051)
(0.046)
(0.025)
(0.160)
(0.002)

0.059
-0.060
-0.041
-0.007
0.085
0.004
0.094
0.364
0.179
0.050
-0.015
-0.261
-0.106
0.119
-0.846

(0.057)
(0.066)
(0.076)
(0.039)
(0.117)
(0.036)
(0.021)
(0.084)
(0.052)
(0.052)
(0.060)
(0.051)
(0.046)
(0.024)
(0.161)

Individual service
provision dummies

Figure 1A: Contract Difficulty and Private Contracting
0.6

Frequency of Private Contracting

0.5

Vehicle towing/storage

0.4
Legal services

0.3

Commercial solid waste collection
Tree trimming/planting
Street repair

0.2

Residential solid waste collection
Solid waste disposal

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

Operation of museums

Buildings/grounds maintenance
Snow plowing/sanding
Utility meter reading
Sewage collection/treatment
Operation of daycare facilities
Parks landscaping/maintenance
Street/parking lot cleaning
Water treatment
Animal control
Drug/alcohol treatment programs
Emergency medical service
Insect/rodent control
Building security
Operation of
Inspection/code enforcement
Collection of delinquent taxes
recreation facilities
Programs for the elderly
Crime prevention/patrol
Operation of libraries
Fire prevention/suppression
Sanitary inspection
Operation of parking lots

-0.3
-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5
Contracting Difficulty

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 1B: Contract Difficulty and Inhouse Provision
0.5

Frequency of Inhouse Provision

0.4

Operation of parking lots

0.3
0.2

Fire prevention/suppression

Building security
Operation of daycare facilities

Crime prevention/patrol
Inspection/code enforcement

Snow plowing/sanding
Utility meter reading
Operation of recreation facilities
Street/parking lot cleaning

0.1
0

Parks landscaping/maintenance

Sanitary inspection
Emergency medical service

Residential solid
waste collection

Insect/rodent control
Animal control
Buildings/grounds maintenance
Sewage collection/treatment
Collection of delinquent taxes
Operation of museums
Commercial solid waste collection
Solid waste disposal

-0.1
-0.2

Operation of libraries
Water treatment

Tree trimming/planting

Programs for the elderly

Drug/alcohol treatment programs

Street repair
Legal services

-0.3
Vehicle towing/storage

-0.4
-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5
Contracting Difficulty

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 1C: Contract Difficulty and Public Contracting
0.25
Collection of delinquent taxes

Frequency of Public Contracting

0.2

Sanitary inspection
Operation of libraries

0.15

Drug/alcohol treatment programs

Programs for the elderly
Insect/rodent control

0.1
0.05

Operation of
recreation facilities

Solid waste disposal
Parks landscaping/maintenance

Fire prevention/suppression
Inspection/code enforcement

Water treatment

Street repair

Buildings/grounds maintenance

-0.1

Crime prevention/patrol

Emergency medical service

0
-0.05

Animal control
Sewage collection/treatment

Tree trimming/planting
Street/parking lot cleaning
Residential solid
waste collection

Operation of museums
Building security

Utility meter reading

-0.15

Snow plowing/sanding
Operation of parking lots

Vehicle towing/storage

Operation of daycare facilities

Commercial solid waste collection

-0.2
-1.5

-1

Legal services

-0.5

0

0.5
Contracting Difficulty

1

1.5

2

2.5

