                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      EMPIRICAL ASSET PRICING AND STATISTICAL POWER IN THE PRESENCE
                          OF WEAK RISK FACTORS

                                         A. Craig Burnside

                                        Working Paper 13357
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13357


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




I am grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support (SES-0516697). I thank John
Cochrane, Martin Eichenbaum, Bjorn Eraker, Ron Gallant, Lars Hansen, Ravi Jagannathan, Sergio
Rebelo, Barbara Rossi, George Tauchen, Mark Watson and Motohiro Yogo, for useful conversations,
and seminar participants at Duke, Wharton, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
for comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by A. Craig Burnside. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Empirical Asset Pricing and Statistical Power in the Presence of Weak Risk Factors
A. Craig Burnside
NBER Working Paper No. 13357
August 2007
JEL No. C33,F31,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

The risk factors in many consumption-based asset pricing models display statistically weak correlation
with the returns being priced. Some GMM-based procedures used to test these models have very low
power to reject proposed stochastic discount factors (SDFs) when they are misspecified and the covariance
matrix of the asset returns with the risk factors has less than full column rank. Consequently, these
estimators provide potentially misleading positive assessments of the SDFs. Working with SDFs specified
in terms of demeaned risk factors improves the performance of GMM but the power to reject misspecified
SDFs may remain low. Two summary tests for failure of the rank condition have reasonable power,
and lead to no Type I errors in Monte Carlo experiments.

A. Craig Burnside
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
burnside@econ.duke.edu
   Classical tests of stochastic discount factor (SDF) models are conducted under the main-
tained hypothesis that the models are true. Con…dence regions and standard errors for
parameter estimates are derived under two important assumptions: the proposed SDF nests
the true speci…cation, and the covariance matrix of the asset returns and risk factors has full
column rank. Tests of pricing errors and over-identifying restrictions proceed in the same
way. In this paper, I explore the properties of point estimates and the power of inference when
these assumptions fail. Using asymptotic theory, as well as small sample simulation-based
evidence, I show that some, but not all, standard tests based on the Generalized Method
of Moments (GMM) have very low power to reject the proposed SDF when it is false and
the rank condition fails to hold. An example of the failure of the rank condition is that the
covariance between the vector of asset returns and one of the risk factors is zero. This means
that my results are especially relevant for tests of consumption-based asset pricing models,
because many consumption-related risk factors proposed in the literature display statistically
insigni…cant covariance with the returns being priced, implying statistical failure of the rank
condition.
   I consider the conventional, though not universal, case where the model SDF is estimated
using data on excess returns. In this case, the mean of the SDF is unidenti…ed but a subset
of the model parameters can still be identi…ed by adopting a normalization. Two candidate
normalizations described by Cochrane (2005)— one using raw risk factors, the other using
demeaned risk factors— are theoretically equivalent when the model is true. In contrast, I
show that empirical results obtained using GMM estimators are dramatically di¤erent for
the two normalizations when consumption-based models are estimated. In particular, the
normalization that expresses the SDF in terms of raw risk factors tends to cast the models in
a favorable light. Measures of …t are close to 1, and the estimated parameters of the SDF are
statistically signi…cant. For the normalization that uses demeaned risk factors, the models
appear to …t the data very poorly, and estimated parameters have a much lower degree of
statistical signi…cance.
   My experiments with Monte Carlo simulation suggest that this lack of robustness does
not stem from the small sample properties of the estimators under the null. Rather, I favor
an alternative explanation, that the rank condition on the covariance between the returns
and the risk factors does not hold and that the proposed consumption-based SDFs are false.
In a single factor model, the rank condition fails when the proposed risk factor is uncorrelated



                                               1
with the returns. This necessarily implies that the model is false or that the excess returns
being studied are all mean zero. I discard the second possibility because the returns I study
in this paper do not appear to be jointly mean zero. In multifactor models failure of the
rank condition can point to a third possibility. The SDF may be true, yet the returns being
studied may simply be uninformative about the relevance of one or more, or some linear
combination, of the factors. I discard this possibility as well, because it implies that in large
samples measures of …t would converge to 1 for any normalization of the model, yet, in
practice, these measures di¤er dramatically across normalizations.
   How do failure of the rank condition and falsehood of the proposed SDF explain the
lack of robustness across normalizations? Using asymptotic theory I demonstrate that the
normalization that uses raw risk factors has the following properties: (i) the estimated
parameters of the SDF converge in probability to a non-zero limit such that the estimated
SDF is uncorrelated with the returns, (ii) an R2 measure of model …t converges in probability
to 1, (iii) the t-statistic associated with any parameter of the SDF that converges to a
non-zero limit (of which there is at least one) will diverge in probability to       1 leading
to the conclusion that the associated risk factor helps to price the assets, and (iv) under
some additional regularity assumptions the test of the over-identifying restrictions rejects
the model with the same probability as the size of the test, that is, as if the model were
true. My simulation-based evidence indicates that these properties are borne out in …nite
samples.
   The normalization that uses demeaned risk factors does not share these properties. When
the rank condition fails the parameters of this normalization of the SDF are asymptotically
unidenti…ed. Under additional assumptions about the data generating processes, I show that
the parameter estimates and test statistics have asymptotic distributions, but these results
do not lead to general statements about the statistical signi…cance of the parameter esti-
mates and the likelihood of rejecting the model in large samples. Simulation-based evidence
suggests that in …nite samples a researcher is more likely to conclude that the model has
poor …t, reject it based on the test of the pricing errors, and conclude that the spurious
factor does not price the assets, when the SDF is expressed in terms of demeaned factors.
Nonetheless, even with the demeaned normalization the power to reject the model can be
low.
   Failure of the rank condition is a possibility of genuine relevance because several of the



                                               2
risk factors studied in the consumption-based asset pricing literature are only weakly cor-
related with the returns. Favorable inference regarding the relevance of these risk factors
should, therefore, be treated cautiously. Although my results are speci…cally relevant for
empirical work that uses GMM and one of the two normalizations, they have broader rele-
vance, because the …rst stage of GMM with the demeaned normalization is equivalent to the
two-pass regression method pioneered by Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972) and Fama and
MacBeth (1973), and widely used in the consumption-based asset pricing literature. In a
separate paper, Burnside (2007a), I extend my discussion to further variants of the demeaned
speci…cation used by Parker and Julliard (2005) and Yogo (2006).
       There is an extensive literature relating to this paper which examines the properties
of asset pricing tests in the presence of spurious risk factors, that is risk factors that are
uncorrelated with the returns. Kan and Zhang (1999a) examine the behavior of GMM
estimators in the presence of spurious risk factors. Their results relate to mine for the
demeaned speci…cation, although they study risk factors that are mean zero by construction.
Kan and Zhang (1999b) study similar issues in the context of the two-pass approach to
model evaluation. A more closely related paper to this one is Kan and Robotti (2006). They
examine the behavior of the Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) distance measure under the
two model normalizations discussed here. They show that results can depend dramatically
on the normalization chosen. A contribution of this paper is that I demonstrate the relevance
of the theoretical results here and in the prior literature to consumption-based asset pricing.
       Going beyond simple failure of the rank condition, or spuriousness of a risk factor, I
consider another possibility: that a risk factor has the same covariance with every asset
return being explained. I refer to this as panel spuriousness and should be considered when
factor betas are statistically signi…cant, but have very little spread, as is the case for the
quarterly Fama-French portfolios and US consumption growth.1 A panel spurious factor is
not irrelevant, but cannot explain the cross-sectional distribution of the expected returns
being studied. I show that in su¢ ciently large samples both normalizations will lead to
rejection of the over-identifying restrictions. However, in …nite samples, if the covariance
   1
    In related work, Lewellen and Nagel (2006) and Lewellen, Nagel and Shanken (2006) criticize empirical
estimates of the conditional CAPM (and CCAPM) arguing that the spread in the betas in these models is
too small for inference to be reliable. Daniel and Titman (2005) discuss the properties of the Fama-MacBeth
procedure when the test assets lie in a low-dimensional subspace of the full payo¤ space. Their analysis
undoubtedly has bearing on GMM-based procedures as well, and one of the sets of data I examine in this
paper (the Fama-French 25 returns, described below) is central to their discussion.



                                                    3
between the returns and the factor is small, the performance of the raw-factor normalization
mimics the case where the factor is spurious.
      My …ndings suggest that a useful diagnostic, prior to estimation, is to simply estimate
factor betas (the slope coe¢ cients in a time series regression of the returns on the risk factors)
and perform diagnostic tests on their signi…cance.2 A simple test of the rank condition
suggested by Cragg and Donald (1997) and Wright (2003) is a useful summary statistic,
has reasonable power in …nite samples, and leads to no Type I errors in my Monte Carlo
experiments.
      I also propose a simple post-estimation diagnostic. When a risk factor or linear combi-
nation of risk factors is spurious, the probability limit of the mean of the SDF is zero for
the normalization that uses raw factors. A test for whether the mean is zero is straightfor-
ward, and performs quite well in Monte Carlo simulations. It has reasonable power against
false models, especially at the …rst stage of GMM, and leads to no Type I errors in my
experiments.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 lays out a standard linear factor model.
Section 2 discusses the identi…cation problem and the two normalizations of the SDF. Section
3 discusses the approach to be used in estimating the two model normalizations. Section 4
discusses empirical …ndings for two sets of data from the …nance literature: the Fama and
French (1993) returns on 25 portfolios sorted by market capitalization and book-to-market
value, and the Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) data on 8 portfolios of returns to long positions
in the foreign exchange market, sorted by short-term interest rates. It lays the foundation
for the rest of the paper by showing that inference regarding consumption-based models is
sharply dependent on the normalization. Section 5 discusses the asymptotic properties of the
estimates and diagnostic tests under the maintained assumption that the model is valid, and
under the alternative assumption that it is misspeci…ed and a risk factor is spurious. Section
6 performs a series of small-sample Monte Carlo simulation exercises that demonstrate the
consequences of failure of the rank condition in samples similar in size to those being studied
in the literature. Section 7 concludes.




  2
    Kan and Zhang (1999b) make the same suggestion and point out that while Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986)
and Ferson and Harvey (1993) performed such tests, relatively few researchers do so.


                                                  4
1       Model Setup and Moment Conditions
I consider the estimation of a class of linear factor pricing models where the SDF takes the
form
                                               mt = a       ft0 b:                                               (1)
Here ft is a k       1 vector of risk factors, a is a scalar constant and b is k                         1 vector of
parameters. If mt is the true SDF, then standard arguments imply that the price of any
asset at time t     1 whose payo¤ at time t is xt is pt          1   = Et 1 (mt xt ). Therefore the expected
price of the asset is E(pt 1 ) = E(mt xt ). It follows that the return to an asset, Rt = xt =pt 1 ,
satis…es Et 1 (mt Rt ) = 1 and E(mt Rt ) = 1. Consequently, the di¤erence between the returns
on two assets R1t      R2t satis…es E[mt (R1t          R2t )] = 0.
    Now consider a particular n          1 vector, Rte , whose ith element, Rite , is the excess return
at time t to asset i de…ned as the di¤erence between the return on asset i and the risk free
rate. If mt given by (1) is the true SDF, then

                                               E (Rte mt ) = 0.                                                  (2)

The restriction (2) implies that
                                                       cov(Rte ; mt )
                                         E(Rte ) =                    :                                          (3)
                                                         E(mt )
Equation (3) states that the expected return, E(Rite ), is higher for those assets for which
cov(Rite ; mt ) is lower. Variation in E(Rite ) across i implies variation in cov(Rite ; mt ) across i.
    A beta representation of the model, derived from (3), is
                                                 cov(Rte ; mt ) var(mt )
                                   E(Rte ) =                             :                                       (4)
                                                   var(mt ) E(mt )
                                               |     {z       }| {z }
                                                        m                m

The term      m   is an n   1 vector of SDF betas, while                 m   is the market price of risk, as it
measures the expected excess return for an asset whose SDF beta is 1. One such asset is
an SDF mimicking portfolio whose excess return is                    m   [mt        E(mt )]. An alternative beta
representation, obtained by substituting (1) into the numerator of (3), is
                                  cov(Rte ; ft0 )b                              var(ft )b
                      E(Rte ) =                    = cov(Rte ; ft0 ) var(ft ) 1           :                      (5)
                                    E(mt )           |          {z            } E(mt )
                                                                   f
                                                                                | {z }
                                                                                          f

The term      f   is an n   k matrix of factor betas, while                  f   is a k       1 vector of factor risk
premia. Row i in the matrix         f   is the vector of slope coe¢ cients in a time series regression
of Rite on ft .

                                                       5
2      Normalizations of the SDF
The moment restriction (2) does not separately identify the parameters a and b. This is
because the GMM errors, Rte mt , for the parameter pair (a; b) are proportional to the GMM
errors for the parameter pair (ka; kb), for any constant k. I consider two approaches to
achieving identi…cation, both of which involve picking a particular normalization of the
SDF.
    To achieve identi…cation, consider rewriting (1) as

                                   mt = amt = a(1             ft0 b )                                         (6)

where b = b=a. Given this way of writing the SDF, the model is estimated by exploiting
the moment restrictions:
                                         E(Rte mt ) = 0:                                                      (7)

I refer to this normalization as the a-normalization.
    Alternatively (1) can be rewritten as

                                mt = mt = [1            (ft       )0 b ],                                     (8)

                                                                            0                       0
where    is the unconditional mean of ft ,   is a scalar,       =a              b and b = b=(a          b). Given
this way of writing the SDF, the model is estimated by exploiting the moment restrictions:

                                 E (ft ) =          E(Rte mt ) = 0:                                           (9)

I refer to this normalization as the -normalization.
    If the original model, (1), is true and (2) holds, the moment restrictions stated in (7)
and (9) are also valid. Although b and b are di¤erent parameters (except when                           = 0) the
normalizations are equivalent in the sense that the GMM errors 1                    ft0 b   and 1   (ft      )0 b
are proportional to one another when evaluated at the true parameter values. Also, b can
                                             0
be obtained from b and : b = b =(1               b ).


3      Estimation and Inference using GMM
3.1     The a-Normalization
Using the n moment restrictions given by (7), b is estimated using GMM. De…ne ut (b ) =
                                            P
Rte mt = Rte (1 ft0 b ) and let gT (b ) = T1 Tt=1 ut = Re DT b be an n 1 vector of pricing

                                                   6
                             1
                                 PT                1
                                                       PT
errors, where Re =           T
                                       e
                                  t=1 Rt , DT =    T     t=1   Rte ft0 and T is the sample size. I consider GMM
estimators that set aT gT = 0, where aT is a k                          n matrix and takes the form aT = DT0 WT ,
where WT is an n             n positive de…nite weighting matrix. It follows that the GMM estimator
of b is
                                          ^b = (D0 W DT )               1
                                                 T  T                       DT0 WT Re :                               (10)

I consider two-stage GMM estimators. In the …rst stage WT = In . In the second stage,
                          P
WT = (ST ) 1 where ST = T1 Tt=1 u^t u^t 0 , u^t = Rte (1 ft0^b1 ) and ^b1 represents the …rst stage
estimator of b .
   Let    T   =       DT . A test of the pricing errors is based on the statistic

                                            J = T gT (^b )(V^g )+ gT (^b );                                           (11)

where
                                 V^g = AT ST AT 0 with AT = In                         T (aT T )
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                        aT ;          (12)

and X + indicates the generalized inverse of the matrix X.
   Equations (6) and (7) imply that

                                                 E(Rte ) = E (Rte ft ) b :                                            (13)

In a …nite sample, corresponding to the left-hand side of (13) is the vector of actual expected
returns, Re . Corresponding to the right-hand side of (13) is a vector of predicted expected
returns given by DT ^b . The model’s …t is evaluated using the cross-sectional R2 :

                                                   (Re DT ^b )0 (Re                     DT ^b )
                                      R2 = 1                                                    ;                     (14)
                                                         • e )0 (Re
                                                     (Re R                              •e)
                                                                                        R
      •e =        1
                      Pn
where R           n    i=1   Rie is the cross-sectional average of the mean returns in the data.
   Equation (13) can be rewritten as
                                                                          var(ft )b
                                   E(Rte ) = E(Rte ft ) var(ft ) 1 E(mt )                                             (15)
                                             |            {z            } E(mt )
                                                           f
                                                                         | {z }
                                                                                               f


Since mt = mt =a and b = b=a, it follows that                      f    and        f    are the same objects de…ned in (5).
The mean and covariance matrix of ft are estimated by GMM using the moment restrictions

                                                               E(ft            ) = 0                                  (16)
                                        E [(ft         )(ft        )0         f]        = 0:                          (17)

                                                               7
An estimate of      f    is given by
                                                             ^ f ^b
                                                  ^ =                     ;                                (18)
                                                   f
                                                         1       ^ 0^b
                         PT                                      PT
where ^ = f          1
                     T      t=1   ft and ^ f = Sf            1
                                                            f )(ft f )0 are, respectively, the
                                                             T        t=1 (ft

sample mean and covariance matrix of ft . Standard errors for ^ f are obtained by the delta
method using the joint distribution of ^b , ^ and ^ f . The details are discussed in Appendix
A.3

3.2          The -Normalization
Using the n + k moment restrictions given by (9), b and          are estimated using GMM. De…ne
                                                                  P
u1t (b ; ) = Rte mt = Rte [1 (ft    )0 b ] and let g1T (b ; ) = T1 Tt=1 u1t = Re DT Re 0 b .
                                                P
De…ne u2t ( ) = ft        and let g2T ( ) = T1 Tt=1 u2t = f        . De…ne ut = ( u1t0 u2t0 )0 and
gT = ( g1T0 g2T0 )0 . I consider GMM estimators that set aT gT = 0, where aT is a 2k                   (n + k)
matrix and takes the form
                                                        d0T WT 0
                                             aT =                               ;                          (19)
                                                            0  Ik
where dT = DT           Re f 0 and WT is an n         n positive de…nite weighting matrix. It follows that
the GMM estimators of b and                 are

                                       ^b                             1
                                             = (d0T WT dT )               d0T WT Re                        (20)
                                        ^ = f:                                                             (21)

I consider two-stage GMM estimators. In the …rst stage WT = In . In the second stage,
WT = (PT ST PT0 ) 1 where PT = ( In Re (^b )0 ) and ST is a consistent estimator of S0 =
P+1            0    4
   j= 1 E(ut ut j ).  Because u2t may be serially correlated I use a VARHAC estimator,
described in more detail in Appendix A, to compute ST .
       Let
                                                         dT Re^b 0
                                             T    =                             :                          (22)
                                                         0    Ik
A test of the pricing errors is based on

                                       J = T gT (^b ; ^ )(V^g )+ gT (^b ; ^ );                             (23)
   3
     The appendices are available at http://www.duke.edu/~acb8/research.htm
   4
     Cochrane (2005) suggests using the matrix ( In 0n k ) in place of PT in the expression for WT . This
is less e¢ cient in terms of the covariance matrix of ^b , but is asymptotically equivalent in terms of the test
of the overidentifying restrictions.


                                                          8
where
                     V^g = AT ST AT 0 with AT = In+k                 T   (aT   T)
                                                                                    1
                                                                                        aT :       (24)

    Equations (8) and (9) imply that

                                   E(Rte ) = E Rte (ft           )0 b :                            (25)

Corresponding to the right-hand side of (25) is a vector of predicted expected returns, dT ^b .
The cross-sectional R2 measure is:
                                           (Re dT ^b )0 (Re          dT ^b )
                             R2 = 1                                          :                     (26)
                                            (Re R• e )0 (Re          •e)
                                                                     R
    Equation (25) can be rewritten as

                        E(Rte ) = E Rte (ft        )0 var(ft ) 1 var(ft )b :                       (27)
                                  |              {z            }| {z }
                                                   f                           f



Since mt = mt = and b = b= , it follows that           f   and   f   are the same objects de…ned in (5).
As in the previous case, the covariance matrix of ft is estimated by GMM using the moment
restriction (17). An estimate of    f   is given by

                                             ^ = ^ f ^b ;                                          (28)
                                              f


where ^ f = Sf , as before. Standard errors for ^ f are obtained by the delta method using
the joint distribution of ^b , ^ and ^ f . The details are discussed in Appendix A.


4     Empirical Findings
Here I consider two sets of data. The …rst is from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) (henceforth
LV), and consists of eight portfolios of positions in foreign currency, with the U.S. dollar as
the home currency, sorted on the basis of the foreign interest rates. The second set of data
is widely used in the consumption-based asset pricing literature: the Fama-French set of 25
portfolios of US stocks sorted on size and the book-to-market value ratio (henceforth, FF25).
The data are described in more detail in Appendix B.

4.1     Lustig-Verdelhan Foreign Exchange Portfolios
I consider the annual real US dollar excess returns to portfolios of short-term foreign govern-
ment securities denominated in foreign currency. The sample period is 1953–2002. LV form

                                                  9
these portfolios on the basis of the interest rates on the underlying securities. In particular
the real excess returns on a large number of countries’treasury securities are sorted into eight
bins in each period according to the nominal interest rates on the securities, from lowest to
highest. The returns to holding equally-weighted portfolios of each bin are then calculated.
   To explain these returns I use three risk factors individually. These are:

        the log-growth rate of real per capita consumption of nondurables and services, which
        I will refer to from now on as “consumption growth”

        the log-growth rate of the real stock of consumer durables, which I will refer to from
        now on as “durables growth”

        the “market premium”; i.e. the di¤erence between the return to a value-weighted
        portfolio of all US stocks and the risk free rate, denoted Rm-Rf, from the Fama-French
        database.

Apart from these individual risk factors, I also consider three groupings of risk factors from
the literature:

        consumption growth and durables growth, which I refer to as the “Consumption Fac-
        tors,”

        consumption growth, durables growth, and Rm, the market return, as in Yogo (2006)
        and LV, which I refer to as the “Yogo Factors,”

        Rm-Rf, SMB (the return di¤erential between small cap and big cap equities) and HML
        (the return di¤erential between high book-to-market and low book-to-market equities)
        from the Fama and French (1993) database. I refer to these as the Fama-French factors.

   Tables 1 and 2 and Figures 1 and 2 present the empirical results for these data.

4.1.1     Results with Individual Factors

The top half of Table 1 shows point estimates, measures of …t and test statistics obtained
using the a-normalization, while the top half of Table 2 shows results obtained using the
 -normalization. Figure 1 plots average returns for the individual portfolios against the
model-predicted expected returns, based on the second stage GMM estimates. The …rst


                                              10
stage estimates for the -normalization are numerically identical to estimates obtained using
the two-pass method without a constant in the cross-sectional regression.5


Consumption Growth For consumption growth, the results are dramatically di¤erent,
in qualitative terms, depending on which of the two normalizations is used. In particular,
when the a-normalization is used, ^b = 48:8 and is highly signi…cant, with a t-statistic of
11:3. The estimated factor risk premium is ^ f = 4:3 and is signi…cant at the 5 percent level.
The cross-sectional R2 measure is 0:87. The good …t of the model can be seen in Figure 1(a),
which show the model’s predicted expected returns plotted against the actual mean returns
observed in the data for the eight portfolios. Finally, the model easily passes a test of the
over-identifying restrictions.
       In contrast, when the -normalization is used, the estimate of b is much less precise,
though it remains signi…cant at the 5 percent level in the second stage of GMM. The esti-
mated factor risk premium is ^ f = 1:5, which is much smaller than when the a-normalization
is used, though it remains signi…cant at the 5 percent level. Figure 1(b) shows that the cross-
sectional …t of the model is very poor. The R2 measure is 0:06 at the second stage of GMM.
The over-identifying restrictions are rejected at the 3 percent level of signi…cance.


Durables Growth A similar story holds for durables growth. When the a-normalization
is used, the estimate of b is positive, large and highly signi…cant. The cross-sectional R2
measure at the second stage of GMM is 0:81. The good …t of the model can also be seen in
Figure 1(c). The model easily passes the test of the over-identifying restrictions. In contrast,
when the -normalization is used, the estimate of b is much less precise, though, again, it
remains signi…cant at the 5 percent level in the second stage of GMM. Figure 1(d) shows
that the cross-sectional …t of the model is very poor, with the R2 measure being          0:13 after
the second stage of GMM. The over-identifying restrictions are rejected at the 5 percent
level.


The Market Premium The results are also quite striking for the market excess return.
Using the a-normalization, the estimate of b is positive and signi…cant, the R2 of the model
is 0:45, and the model is not rejected at the 5 percent level. However, when one turns to the
   5
    See the appendix of Burnside (2007b) for a detailed discussion of the equivalence between GMM and
the two-pass method.



                                                 11
 -normalization, the estimate of b is insigni…cant, the estimate of     f   shrinks by a factor of
eight, the R2 of the model is close to zero, and the over-identifying restrictions are strongly
rejected.

4.1.2      Results with Groups of Risk Factors

When we turn to groups of risk factors, the most striking statistical sensitivity of the results
to the normalization pertains to the R2 statistics and the tests of the over-identifying restric-
tions. Estimates of the factor risk premia shrink in magnitude in all three cases, though their
signi…cance is not dramatically a¤ected. Results for the a-normalization are in the bottom
half of Table 1. Results for the -normalization are in the bottom half of Table 2. Figure
2 plots average returns for the individual portfolios against the model-predicted expected
returns.


Consumption Factors Consider, …rst the model that uses the two consumption factors.
This speci…cation corresponds to a linearized version of a consumption-based asset pricing
model in which households have expected utility preferences and derive utility from non-
durables and services and the stock of durable goods. The apparent …t of the model based
on the a-normalization is very good, while the …t of the model based on the -normalization
is quite poor. Using the a-normalization the R2 measure of cross-sectional …t suggests that
the model can explain at least 81 percent of the variation in expected returns and the model
easily passes the test of the over-identifying restrictions. With the -normalization, however,
rather than being close to 1, both R2 measures are close to zero. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) paint
a similar picture. They plot the sample values of Re against the model predicted values DT ^b ,
for the second stage of GMM. For the a-normalization, the model easily passes the test of
the over-identifying restrictions. For the -normalization, the over-identifying restrictions
are rejected at the 3 percent level.


Yogo Factors Next, consider the linear factor model from Yogo (2006) and LV, which uses
consumption growth, durables growth and Rm as the factors. This is a linearized version of
a consumption-based asset pricing model in which households have Epstein and Zin (1989)
preferences and derive utility from nondurables and services and the stock of durable goods.
While the model based on the a-normalization appears to have nearly perfect …t, with an
R2 of between 0:89 and 0:95, the …t of the -normalization is far from the mark, with the R2

                                               12
measure being 0:34 at the …rst stage, and     0:08 at the second stage of GMM. This despite
the fact that three risk factors are being used to explain the returns to only eight portfolios.
Figures 2(c) and 2(d) paint a similar picture. The apparent …t of the model based on the
a-normalization is very good, while the …t of the model based on the -normalization is quite
poor. The tests of the over-identifying restrictions are also somewhat di¤erent across the
two cases. For the a-normalization the model passes with ‡ying colors (the p-value for the
test is 0:86), while for the -normalization the p-value on the J-statistic falls to 0:15.


Fama-French Factors Finally, consider the three risk factors proposed by Fama and
French (1993). In this case, the results are dramatically di¤erent across the two normal-
izations. The signs of the coe¢ cients on the three risk factors ‡ip in moving from one
normalization to the other, and the signi…cance of the Rm-Rf and HML factors is lost when
moving to the -normalization. The R2 measure of …t falls from between 0:27 and 0:56 for
the a-normalization to close to zero when the -normalization is used. The model fails the
test of the over-identifying restrictions at below the 5 percent level with the -normalization,
but easily passes the test for the a-normalization.

4.2     Fama-French 25 Portfolios
I examine the real excess returns to the FF25 portfolios at the quarterly frequency over the
period 1949Q1–2005Q4. To explain these returns I use the same risk factors as mentioned
above, except that the data are measured at the quarterly frequency. Tables 3 and 4 and
Figures 3 and 4 show the results for these data.

4.2.1   Results with Individual Factors

The top halves of Tables 3 and 4 show the results from estimating a linear factor model using
each of the scalar risk factors. Figure 3 plots average returns for the individual portfolios
against the model-predicted expected returns.


Consumption Growth For consumption growth, the results are dramatically di¤erent,
in qualitative terms, depending on which of the two normalizations is used. In particular,
when the a-normalization is used, ^b = 143 and is highly signi…cant, with a t-statistic of 14,
while ^ f = 1:38 and is highly signi…cant. The cross-sectional R2 s at the …rst and second
stages of GMM are 0:81 and 0:51, respectively. The good …t of the model can also be seen in

                                              13
Figure 3(a), which shows the model’s predicted expected returns plotted against the actual
mean returns observed in the data for the 25 portfolios. The model passes the test of the
over-identifying restrictions, given a p-value of 0:18.
   In contrast, when the -normalization is used, ^b is a large positive number, but only has
a t-statistic of 2, being much less precisely estimated than ^b . The factor risk premium is
much smaller, ^ f = 0:38, but remains signi…cant at the 5 percent level. The cross-sectional
R2 , however, is negative at both stages of GMM. The model’s bad …t is also seen in Figure
3(b). The model still passes the test of the over-identifying restrictions, but narrowly, with
a p-value of 0:051.


Durables Growth For the growth rate of the stock of durables, ^b is positive, large
and highly signi…cant using the a-normalization, while it is e¤ectively zero using the -
normalization. So, the a-normalization leads us to conclude that durables growth helps price
the returns, while the -normalization leads us to the opposite conclusion. The …t of the
model appears to be quite good using the a-normalization, but not with the -normalization,
as can be seen in Figures 3(c) and 3(d). In neither case is   f   estimated to be signi…cant, nor
are the over-identifying restrictions rejected.


The Market Premium The results for the market premium are less striking. The sign
and statistical signi…cance of ^b and ^b are similar. The same is true for the factor risk
premia. The R2 measures are negative in both cases. Figures 3(e) and 3(f) show that, if
anything, the …t of the model is somewhat better with the second stage estimates of the -
normalization, rather than the a-normalization. The over-identifying restriction are rejected
at very low signi…cance levels in both cases.

4.2.2   Results with Groups of Risk Factors

The results are very dramatic when we turn to groups of risk factors. Results for the a-
normalization are in the bottom half of Table 3. Results for the -normalization are in the
bottom half of Table 4. Figure 4 plots average expected returns for the individual portfolios
against the model-predicted expected returns.


Consumption Factors Consider, …rst a model that uses the two consumption factors.
Using the a-normalization, both elements of ^b are positive and signi…cant. The factor risk


                                                  14
premia are positive but are not individually signi…cant. The R2 measure of cross-sectional …t
suggests that the model can explain at least 96 percent of the variation in expected returns.
The model also easily passes a test of the over-identifying restrictions.
   With the -normalization the results are dramatically di¤erent. Neither of the b coef-
…cients is signi…cant, while the factor risk premia are both small and insigni…cant, at the
second stage of GMM. Rather than being close to 1, both R2 measures are negative. Fig-
ures 4(a) and 4(b) paint a similar picture. The apparent …t of the model based on the
a-normalization is very good, while the …t of the model based on the -normalization is very
poor. The model still passes a test of the over-identifying restrictions, but at a much lower
level of signi…cance.


Yogo Factors Next, consider the linear factor model from Yogo (2006) that uses con-
sumption growth, durables growth and Rm as the factors. Using the a-normalization the b
parameters on consumption growth and durables growth are positive and signi…cant. The
factor risk premia are positive but not individually signi…cant. The R2 measures suggest
that the model can explain at least 97 percent of the variation in expected returns. The
model also easily passes a test of the over-identifying restrictions.
   With the -normalization the results are dramatically di¤erent. The b coe¢ cients on
consumption and durables growth remain large but no longer have any statistical signi…cance.
The factor risk premia are much smaller in magnitude and remain insigni…cant, except for
the market return, which actually becomes signi…cant. Rather than being close to 1, both
R2 measures are negative. Figures 4(c) and 4(d) paint a similar picture. The apparent …t
of the model based on the a-normalization is very good, while the …t of the model based
on the -normalization is very poor. The model still passes the test of the over-identifying
restrictions, but at a slightly smaller level of signi…cance.
   The parameters and degree of …t obtained under the a-normalization are qualitatively
similar to the results obtained by Yogo (2006). However, he uses the -normalization rather
than the a-normalization to estimate the model. In section 4.4, I suggest that Yogo’s partic-
ular choice of estimator is the main explanation for his positive assessment, despite his use
of the -normalization.


Fama-French Factors Finally, consider the three Fama-French factors. Here the results
are roughly robust across the two normalizations. The signs and degree of signi…cance of the

                                               15
coe¢ cients and risk premia are invariant to the choice of normalization. The model fails the
J-test using both normalizations. But in both cases the model has quite good …t, at least
at the …rst stage of GMM.

4.3      Accounting for the Findings Using the Two Normalizations
Recall that the two normalizations are equivalent in the following sense. Under the null
hypothesis that the true SDF is given by (1), mt and mt are proportional to one another
when evaluated at the true parameter values. We have seen several cases, however, where
the signi…cance of the b coe¢ cients, the apparent …t of the model, and the estimated risk
premia, di¤er dramatically for the two normalizations. What might explain this apparent
lack of equivalence?
   One possibility is that there are severe small sample problems in estimating the models.
The Monte Carlo simulation experiments in section 6 suggest that this is not the case. The
explanation that I focus on, instead, is the possibility that one or more of the risk factors, or
some linear combination of the risk factors, is uncorrelated with the returns. I explore this
possibility in detail in section 5. Here I provide a quick sketch in the case of a single factor
model.
   Suppose that E(Rite ) 6= 0 for at least one element of Rte . Suppose, also, that ft is a
spurious factor, so that cov(Rte ; ft ) = 0. This means the SDF in (1) cannot be the true
SDF because ft cannot price the elements of Rite with non-zero means. Consider the moment
condition (7). Under the assumptions just given, it can be rewritten

                                    E(Rte )[1   E(ft )b ] = 0:                                (29)

Notice that if E(ft ) 6= 0 the unique solution to (29) is b = 1=E(ft ). Now consider the
moment conditions (9). Under the assumptions just given they can be rewritten as

                       E (ft )    =0       E(Rte ) f1   [E(ft )    ]b g = 0                   (30)

Since E(Rite ) 6= 0 for at least one element of Rte , there is no solution for (b ; ). Not surpris-
ingly, as sections 6 and 7 demonstrate, a GMM estimator based on (7) provides misleadingly
favorable inference about the SDF. GMM estimators based on (9) encounter their own dif-
…culties, but these do not arise because there is a spurious solution to (9).
   There is another, more limited, sense in which a factor can be spurious. Suppose that ft
is panel spurious in that the covariance between Rite and ft itself does not vary with i. That

                                                16
is, cov(Rte ; ft ) = c , where    is an n             1 vector of ones, and c 6= 0 is some scalar constant.
With these assumptions, if the SDF were true then it would follow that E(Rite ) = cb for
                                       e
i = 1, : : : , n. So if E(Rite ) 6= E(Rjt ) for at least one pair of assets, i and j, i 6= j, the SDF
must be false. Sections 6 and 7 also explore the consequences of panel spuriousness for GMM
estimates based on the two normalizations.
   When the risk factors are known to be highly correlated with the individual asset returns
being studied, and the covariance varies across assets, the spuriousness hypothesis is implau-
sible. To show that spuriousness is a plausible explanation of the results obtained with the
LV and FF25 data, I now present evidence on the covariance between the returns and risk
factors.
   First, I directly estimate the covariances, ci , between the risk factors and the asset returns
using GMM by exploiting the moment restrictions

                                       E(ft              ) = 0                                                      (31)
                          E[Rite (ft           )      ci ] = 0;               i = 1; 2; : : : ; n:                  (32)

To test for spuriousness I test the null hypothesis that ci = 0 for all i. To test for panel
spuriousness I test the null hypothesis that ci = c for all i.
                                                                         2
   Second, I estimate the factor betas,                    i    = ci =   f,   by GMM using the following moment
restrictions:

                            E(Rite        ai           i ft )    = 0;          i = 1; 2; : : : ; n:                 (33)
                        E[(Rite      ai            i ft )ft ]    = 0;          i = 1; 2; : : : ; n:                 (34)

To test for spuriousness I test the null hypothesis that                           i   = 0 for all i. To test for panel
spuriousness I test the null hypothesis that                     i   =   for all i.
   Table 5 presents the covariances and betas for the LV data. Notably only one portfolio’s
return, #2, is signi…cantly correlated with consumption growth. The covariance for this
portfolio is signi…cant at the 10 percent level, while the factor beta is signi…cant at the 5
percent level. A joint test of the null hypothesis that ci = 0 for all i has a p-value of 0:447,
while the p-value associated with the null hypothesis that                              i   = 0 for all i is 0:048. Which
test result is more plausible? Using Monte Carlo simulation, Burnside and Eichenbaum
(1996) show that GMM-based Wald tests have excessive size in small samples. Therefore
Table 5 also presents small-sample p-values for the joint tests computed using Monte Carlo

                                                                 17
simulations described in Appendix C. These p-values are 0:618 for the covariance-based test
and 0:334 for the beta-based test.
     A similar story holds for durables growth. The covariance for Portfolio #7 is statistically
signi…cant at the 10 percent level, while the factor beta for Portfolio #7 is signi…cant at the
5 percent level. The joint tests do not reject that ci = 0 and        i   = 0 for all i at conventional
signi…cance levels.
     The market return is not signi…cantly correlated with any of the portfolio returns, and
the joint tests do not reject that ci = 0 and    i   = 0 for all i at conventional signi…cance levels.
     Table 6 presents the covariances and betas for the FF25 returns. For consumption growth,
most of the covariances and betas are signi…cant at the 5 percent level, and all are signi…cant
at the 10 percent level. Indeed, when I test the null hypothesis that               i   = 0 for all i, it is
rejected at the 0:001 percent level of signi…cance, although the null hypothesis that ci = 0 for
all i is only rejected at the 8:5 percent level of signi…cance. P-values based on Monte-Carlo
simulations are larger, but some doubt is cast on the notion that consumption growth is a
spurious factor. It is striking, however, that the regression coe¢ cients and covariances are
quite similar in value across the returns. The standard deviation of ^ across i is just 0:76,
                                                                                i

while the average standard error of ^ i is nearly twice as large at 1:39. This suggests that
cov(Rite ; ft ) does not vary very much across i. Indeed, when I test the null hypothesis that
ci = c for all i, the p-value is 0:29. On the other hand, when I test the null hypothesis that
 i   =    for all i, the asymptotic p-value is 0:009, though the small sample p-value based
on Monte Carlo experiments is 0:172. I conclude that it is reasonable to hypothesize that
consumption growth is a panel spurious factor for the FF25 returns based on this somewhat
mixed evidence.
     Turning to durables growth, the evidence suggests that it is spurious. None of the individ-
ual regression coe¢ cients and covariances is signi…cant at the 5 percent level. Furthermore,
the null hypothesis that ci = 0 for all i is not rejected at conventional signi…cance levels.
When I test the null hypothesis that     i   = 0 for all i, the asymptotic p-value is 0:115, while
the small sample p-value based on Monte Carlo experiments is 0:461.
     Finally, consider the market excess return. Here there is no evidence of either form of
spuriousness. All of the regression coe¢ cients and covariances are signi…cant at the 1 percent
level. All joint hypothesis tests lead to overwhelming rejection of both types of spuriousness.




                                                 18
4.4     Robustness
In Appendix D, I explore the robustness of my …ndings. In particular, I compute long-
run covariance matrices using HAC estimators rather than using the VARHAC procedure
of den Haan and Levin (2000). Following Cochrane (2005), I use an alternative weighting
matrix at the second stage of GMM when estimating the -normalization. I also consider
iterated GMM, where the weighting matrix is recomputed multiple times until approximate
convergence of the parameter estimates. Mimicking Parker and Julliard (2005) I introduce a
common pricing error parameter, akin to the constant sometimes used in the cross-sectional
regression of two-pass procedures used to estimate the beta representation of the model. In
no case do any of these changes a¤ect my qualitative conclusion that the …t of the esti-
mated models is relatively poor and the statistical signi…cance of the estimated parameters
is relatively weak, when using the -normalization.
    As a …nal check on robustness I adopt a variant of the -normalization used by Yogo
(2006). In this variant, all information about          that is available in the moment restrictions
is used to estimate it. In the benchmark approach the GMM estimator sets aT gT = 0 and
aT is designed so that ^ = f . But there is information about               in the moment condition
E(Rte mt ) = 0 because mt = 1        (ft     )0 b . Because Yogo’s approach takes this information
into account, ^ will not, in general, be equal to f . With this variant of the -normalization
I …nd that the models perform better overall because the estimated means of the factors
move substantially to …t the asset pricing conditions. But this depends critically on how
the weighting matrix is speci…ed in the …rst stage of GMM. For the LV data the …t of the
models is poor at the second stage of GMM, while parameter estimates are insigni…cant at
the …rst stage of GMM. For the FF25 data, Yogo’s multi-factor model …ts considerably better
than in my benchmark case. However, again, I …nd this to be highly dependent on how the
weighting matrix is set at the …rst stage of GMM. If further GMM iterations are performed,
this sensitivity to the initial weighting matrix vanishes, and the results are similar to those
for my benchmark approach.6


5     Large Sample Properties of the GMM Estimators
In this section I explore the asymptotic properties of the GMM procedures described above.
  6
    I explore the Parker and Julliard (2005) and Yogo (2006) approaches in more detail in a related paper,
Burnside (2007a).


                                                   19
Assumption 1 Let the true SDF be given by (1) and let the true values of the parameters
a and b be denoted a0 and b0 . Let the true values of b , b and                                    be denoted b0 = b0 =a0 ,
                    0
b0 = b0 =(a0        0 b0 )   and   0   = E(ft ).


Assumption 2 Let E(Rte ft0 ) and cov(Rte ; ft0 ) have full column rank.

                                                   a:s:                               a:s:                              a:s:
Assumption 3 Assume that DT ! D0 = E(Rte ft0 ), dT ! d0 = cov(Rte ; ft ), WT ! W0
           a:s:
and WT ! W0 , with W0 and W0 positive de…nite.

For compactness of notation let                 = (b ; ) and            0   = (b0 ;   0 ).   De…ne

                                                @ut (b0 )
                                       0   =E             =            E(Rte ft0 ) =         D0
                                                  @b
and
                        @ut ( 0 )  cov(Rte ; ft ) E(Rte )b00           d0 E(Rte )b00
              0    =E             =                           =
                          @             0            Ik                0          Ik
           hP                         i              hP                             i
             +1                     0                      +1                     0
Let S0 = E   j= 1 ut (b0 )ut j (b0 )    and S0 = E         j= 1 ut ( 0 )ut j ( 0 ) . De…ne a0 =

D00 W0 and
                                                          d00 W0         0
                                                a0 =                              :
                                                              0          Ik

Theorem 1 Suppose assumptions 1— 3 are satis…ed. Under additional regularity condi-
                                   a:s:      a:s:  p           d               p
tions provided in Hansen (1982) ^b ! b0 , ^0 ! ^0 , T (^b b0 ) ! N (0; Vb ) and T (^
       d                                                           0                                                     0
 0)   ! N (0; V ) with Vb = (a0 0 ) 1 a0 S0 a00 (               0      a0 )   1
                                                                                  and V       = (a0 0 ) 1 a0 S0 a00 (   0    a0 ) 1 .
            a:s:               a:s:
Also, R2 ! 1 and R2 ! 1. The statistics J and J both converge in distribution to                                                   2


random variables with n                k degrees of freedom.

The proof of Theorem 1 is provided in Appendix A. The interpretation of Theorem 1 is that
when the model is true (Assumption 1), and when the moment conditions are informative
about the risk factors (Assumption 2), both approaches to estimation work well.
      Next I turn to a situation where the model remains true, but the returns in the data
being studied do not fully shed light on the relevance of the risk factors.


Assumption 2a Let cov(Rte ; ft0 ) have rank r < k.

Notice that if we maintain assumption 1, that the model is true, then E(Rte ) = cov(Rte ; ft0 )b0
and E(Rte ft0 ) = cov(Rte ; ft0 )[Ik + b0 E(ft0 )]. Hence E(Rte ft0 ) has rank less than or equal to r.

                                                           20
Theorem 2 Suppose assumptions 1, 2a and 3 are satis…ed. It follows that neither b nor
                                                     a:s:                a:s:
b is asymptotically identi…ed. Nonetheless, R2 ! 1 and R2 ! 1.

The proof of Theorem 2 is provided in Appendix A. The interpretation of Theorem 2 is
that even though the model is true (Assumption 1), the moment conditions are insu¢ ciently
informative about the risk factors (Assumption 2a), and neither approach to estimation
will work well in large samples. Presumably the lack of asymptotic identi…cation would be
manifested in large standard errors for ^b and ^b in …nite samples. While the parameters of
the SDF are not identi…ed, this is because there are multiple values of b and b that satisfy
the moment conditions asymptotically. As a result the measures of …t limit to 1.
   Next I turn to a situation where the model is false.


Assumption 1b Assume that the true SDF is not given by (1) so that, in general, E(Rte ) 6=
cov(Rte ; ft )b for the particular vector ft being studied.


Assumption 2b Let E(Rte ; ft0 ) have rank k but cov(Rte ; ft0 ) have rank k             1.

Assumption 2b is feasible because we are no longer maintaining assumption 1. The matrix
E(Rte ft0 ) can have full column rank, even when the matrix cov(Rte ; ft ) has less than full
column rank.


Theorem 3 Suppose assumptions 1b, 2b and 3 are satis…ed. Under additional regularity
                                        a:s:
conditions provided in Hansen (1982) ^b ! bs = x=[x0 E(ft )], where x is the unique element
                                                                                a:s:
of the nullspace of cov(Rte ; ft ) whose elements sum to 1, and R2 ! 1. At least one element
of bs is non-zero. In contrast b is not asymptotically identi…ed.

The proof of Theorem 3 is provided in Appendix A. Since the model is not true, the parameter
vector bs has no interpretation as the “true” value of b . Rather bs is a degenerate value of
b for which the moment condition (6) holds, even though (1) is not the true SDF. The sum
of the elements of bs is 1=[x0 E(ft )] which is the inverse of a weighted average of the means
of the risk factors.
    Before turning to the asymptotic distributions of ^b and J it is helpful to de…ne the
                              P
following notation. Let Ss = E +1                      0                           0
                                j= 1 ut (bs )ut j (bs ) and Vs = E[ut (bs )ut (bs ) ]. In general
                                                                   1
Ss 6= Vs under Assumption 1b. Let A0 = In              0 (a0 0 )       a0 and de…ne Vg = A0 Vs A0 0 and


                                                21
V0 = A0 Ss A0 0 . Finally, diagonalize V0 as V0 = P0                             0
                                                                              0 P0   where the columns of P0 are the
orthonormal eigenvectors of V0 and 0 is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues of V0 on
                           1=2
the diagonal. Let V~0 = P0 0 so that V~0 V~0 0 = V0 .

                                                                              p               d
Theorem 4 Under the assumptions of Theorem 3,                                     T (^bbs ) ! N (0; Vb ) with Vb =
                               0                                d                              d Pn k
(a0 0 ) 1 a0 Ss a00 (      0       a0 ) 1 . If Ss = Vs , J !         2
                                                                     n               6 Vs , J ! i=1
                                                                         k . When Ss =
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                          i zi where

z1 , z2 , : : : , zn are mutually independent standard normal random variables and
                       k                                                                                      1,   2,

:::,    n k   are the non-zero eigenvalues of the matrix V~0 0 (Vg )+ V~0 .

The proof of Theorem 4 is provided in Appendix A. Some examples are helpful in interpreting
Theorems 3 and 4.


Single Factor Model With a Spurious Factor In a single factor model k = 1 so
Assumption 2b implies that cov(Rte ; ft ) = 0 and, since E(Rte ft ) has rank 1, that D0 =
E(Rte ft ) = E(Rte )E(ft ) 6= 0. In this case bs = 1=E(ft ). A researcher testing the model
under the null would compute an inconsistent estimate of Vb that would converge, instead,
to (a ) 1 a V a 0 ( 0 a ) 1 . Nonetheless, because this matrix is …nite, the t-statistic for ^b
       0 0       0 s       0        0   0

would diverge to +1 if E(ft ) > 0 or 1 if E(ft ) < 0. The predicted expected returns,
                                                                      a:s:
DT ^b , would converge almost surely to D0 bs = E(Rte ). Therefore R2 ! 1. Thus, in large
samples a researcher testing the model using the a-normalization would conclude that the
factor ft prices the returns (due to the statistical signi…cance of ^b ) and that the model’s
…t is perfect. A researcher testing the over-identifying restrictions using, say, a 5 percent
                                            2
critical value from the                     n 1   distribution would only reject the model about 5 percent of the
time in repeated large samples if Ss = Vs . It is unclear what would happen in the more
general case when Ss 6= Vs .
    For the -normalization, Hansen’s identi…cation condition requires that there should be
a unique b that solves (d00 W0 d0 ) b = d00 W0 E(Rte ). Clearly any value of b will work when
d0 = 0.


Multi-factor Model with a Single Spurious Factor In a multi-factor model k > 1.
Without loss of generality, let cov(Rte ; fkt ) = 0. In this case, the vector x referred to in the
statement of Theorem 3 has a 1 as its kth element and zeros elsewhere. So bs = x=[x0 E(ft )]
has 1=E(fkt ) as its kth element and zeros elsewhere. Oddly enough, a researcher testing the
model using the a-normalization and a large sample of data would conclude that the factor

                                                                    22
fkt prices the returns and that the other factors are irrelevant, even though they are the
                                                                          a:s:
only ones correlated with Rte . As in the previous example, R2 ! 1. A researcher testing the
                                                                                   2
over-identifying restrictions using a 5 percent critical value from the            n k   distribution would
only reject the model about 5 percent of the time in repeated large samples if Ss = Vs .
   As in the previous example, for the -normalization, the identi…cation condition is not
satis…ed because there is no unique b that solves (d00 W0 d0 ) b = d00 W0 E(Rte ). When the
last column is d0 is zero, but the rest of the matrix has full column rank, it is bk that is
unidenti…ed asymptotically. The rest of the parameter vector b is identi…ed. If it is also
true that mt = 1    (ft   )0 b but bk = 0, so that the proposed SDF nests the true SDF,
the components of ^b other than ^bk will converge in probability to their true values. For
more general forms of misspeci…cation these components of ^b will converge in probability,
although the probability limits will not be interpretable as true values.


Multi-factor Model with Multicollinearity Among the Factors Now consider the
more general case where k > 1, where cov(Rte ; ft ) has no zero columns, but cov(Rte ; ft ) has
rank k 1. In this case, no one factor is spurious, but there is an identi…cation problem akin to
multicollinearity. But this identi…cation problem only arises when using the -normalization.
                                a:s:                        a:s:
Using the a-normalization, ^b ! b = x=[x0 E(ft )] and R2 ! 1. Remarkably, the estimated
                                      s

model puts all its weight on an irrelevant linear combination of the risk factors because

                                cov(Rte ; ft0 bs ) = d0 x=[x0 E(ft )] = 0:

Any elements of ^b that correspond to non-zero elements of bs will be found to be signi…cantly
di¤erent from zero in large samples. A researcher testing the over-identifying restrictions
                                                  2
using a 5 percent critical value from the         n k   distribution would only reject the model about
5 percent of the time in repeated large samples if Ss = Vs .


Greater Numbers of Spurious Factors Theorems 3 and 4 relied on the assump-
tion that only one linear combination of the risk factors is spurious, in the sense that
rank[cov(Rte ; ft0 )] = k   1. If rank[cov(Rte ; ft0 )] = k       r, r > 1, then b is asymptotically
unidenti…ed because there will be many b such that a0 [E(Rte )                   D0 b ] = 0. All these b ,
                                              0
however, share the property that E(ft ) b = 1 and               E(Rte )   = D0 b . Presumably the lack
of asymptotic identi…cation would be manifested in large standard errors for the individual



                                                        23
elements of ^b , but the particular linear combination E(ft )0^b would have a small standard
error, and would be centered around 1. Also, the measure of …t, R2 , would be roughly 1.


More Asymptotic Properties of the -Normalization To this point we have only
been able to show lack of asymptotic identi…cation of the -normalization when the rank
condition on cov(Rte ; ft0 ) fails. Although b is unidenti…ed asymptotically, and does not have
a well de…ned probability limit, it is still possible, under additional regularity conditions, to
derive the asymptotic distributions of ^b , its associated t-statistic, the model’s R2 and the
J-statistic used to test the over-identifying restrictions. Here I consider only the case of a
single factor model with the returns and factors being iid and independent of each other. The
more general case of a multifactor model with persistent returns or factors can be worked
out, but at the cost of algebraic complexity.


Theorem 5 Make the assumptions of Theorem 3. Let Rte and ft be iid over time and
mutually independent, and let k = 1. Let               R   = E(Rte ),       R   = var(Rte ),    = E(ft ) and
 2                                                                      2
 f       = var(ft ). De…ne the random variables X             N (0;     f   R ),   Z = (X 0    R )=(X
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                            X) and
                                                  d
Z~ = (X 0 R1 R )=(X 0 R1 X). Then T 1=2 dT ! X. It follows that at the …rst stage of GMM
          d           d                                      d
T 1=2^b ! Z, t(^b ) ! (X 0 R )=[ 2f Z 2 (X 0 R X)]1=2 and R2 ! 1 ( 0R M R )=( 0R M R ),
where M = In       X(X 0 X) 1 X 0 , M = In     0
                                                 =n and is an n 1 vector of ones. At
                                      d             d
the second stage of GMM T 1=2^b ! Z,     ~ t(^b ) !   (X 0 R1 R )=[ 2f Z 2 (X 0 R1 X)]1=2 and
    d              ~ R )=( 0 M R ), where M
                ~ 0M                        ~ = In                                          d
R2 ! 1 ( 0R M               R                            X(X 0 R1 X) 1 X 0 R1 , and J !
( 0M~ 0 1M~ 0 )=( 2 Z 2 ).
     R       R    R    f


The proof of Theorem 5 is provided in Appendix A.7 Interpreting Theorem 5 in general terms
is di¢ cult because of the dependence of the asymptotic distributions on R and R . The
distribution of ^b will spread out as the sample size increases at a rate of T 1=2 . The t-statistic
for ^b has a well-de…ned asymptotic distribution at both stages of GMM, so the probability of
…nding ^b to be signi…cantly di¤erent from zero will converge to a number generally not equal
to zero. Similarly, the J statistic used to test the over-identifying restrictions has a well-
de…ned asymptotic distribution, so the probability of rejecting the model will converge to a
number generally not equal to zero nor one. When we explore the small sample properties
     7
   Similar asymptotic properties are derived in Kan and Zhang (1999a, 1999b) for the case where ft is zero
mean or, equivalently, has a known mean.



                                                      24
of GMM in section 6 using calibrated examples, we will use the expressions in Theorem 5 to
derive the limiting distributions of ^b , t(^b ), R2 and J as T ! 1.


Approximate Failure of the Rank Condition The assumption that the rank condition
literally does not hold may seem extreme. In single factor models it requires that cov(Rte ; ft )
is exactly zero. A standard device in the theory of weak instruments and unit root testing
is also useful when it is preferable to assume that cov(Rte ; ft ) is small and asymptotically
vanishing but not literally zero. Mimicking Hall’s (2005) discussion of Staiger and Stock
(1997), in the single factor case we might suppose that Rte =            R   + cT (ft   ) + ut where ut
                                                                   1=2
is an n    1 vector that is uncorrelated with ft and cT = T              c where c is a n   1 vector of
constants. Working with this alternative assumption, however, does not change the result
                                      d                                                          p
stated in Theorem 5 that T 1=2 dT ! N (0;      2
                                               f    R)   nor does it change the fact that Re !       R.

As a consequence, the results in Theorem 5 go through unchanged.


Panel Spuriousness We have not yet considered the case where a factor is panel spurious,
that is, cov(Rte ; ft ) = c , where is an n   1 vector of ones, and c 6= 0 is some scalar constant.
Suppose this is the case and the model being tested is a single factor model.
   First, assume that the model is true, or, in other words, maintain Assumptions 1— 3.
Obviously this implies that E(Rite ) = cb0 for all i = 1, : : : , n. Then Theorem 1 applies. Both
normalizations produce GMM estimates with standard, desirable, asymptotic properties.
   Now, assume, instead that the model is false. This means replacing Assumption 1 with
Assumption 1b, so that, in general, E(Rte ) 6= cov(Rte ; ft )b. De…ne ! 0 = [(D00 W0 )=D00 W0 D0 ] c
and ! 0 = 0 W0 E(Re )=( 0 W0 ).


Theorem 6 Suppose assumptions 1b, 2 and 3 are satis…ed. Assume, also, that k = 1
 and cov(Rte ; ft ) = c . Under additional regularity conditions provided in Hansen (1982)
^b a:s:
   ! b = (1 ! )=E(ft ), and the predicted expected returns of the a-normalization converge
       s           0

almost surely to
                                                     c
                                 D0 bs = E(Re ) +            (1   !0) :
                                                    E(f )
        a:s:
Also ^b ! bs = ! 0 =c, and the predicted expected returns of the -normalization converge
almost surely to d0 bs = ! 0 .

The proof of Theorem 6 is provided in Appendix A. It is clear that in a su¢ ciently large

                                                   25
sample the model will be rejected using either normalization because the limit of the predicted
expected returns, in general, is not E(Re ). For small c, however, it is clear that the a-
normalization will imply good …t since for c = 0, bs = 1=E(ft ) and D0 bs = E(Re ). The …t
of the -normalization in large samples, in contrast, is independent of c and is very poor.
                                                 P
In the …rst stage of GMM, W0 = In so that ! 0 = ni=1 E(Rite )=n, the cross-sectional mean
                                                                    a:s:
of the elements of E(Re ). So at the …rst stage of GMM, R2 ! 0. At the second stage of
GMM, ! 0 is a weighted average of the elements of E(Re ). So at the second stage of GMM,
plim R2       0.


Inference Regarding Risk Premia I now turn to the issue of estimating and testing for
the statistical signi…cance of risk premia. As described earlier, in section 3, the estimates
^ and ^ are obtained by adding appropriate moment restrictions and standard errors
 f        f

are obtained by the delta method. When Assumptions 1— 3 standard asymptotic theory
described in more detail in Appendix A goes through. My main concern, here, is with the
properties of risk premia estimated using the a-normalization when the model is false and a
linear combination of the risk factors is spurious (under Assumptions 1b, 2b and 3). Recall
that the estimate of f based on the a-normalization is given by (18), ^ f = Sf ^b =(1 f 0^b ),
where f and Sf are, respectively, the sample mean and covariance matrix of ft . Under
                                                                          a:s:
assumptions 1b, 2b and 3 plim Sf ^b = f bs = f x=[x0 E(ft )], but 1 f 0^b ! 0. Since,
in general,        f bs   6= 0, this implies that in large samples, the risk premia emerging from
estimates of the a-normalization will diverge to        1 with probability 1. Would a researcher
implementing the a-normalization …nd these estimates to be statistically signi…cant if he
computed the t-statistic for ^ ?     f



Theorem 7 Under the assumptions of Theorem 3, each element of the vector of squared
t-statistics for ^ f converges in distribution to cz 2 where c is a scalar and z 2 2
                                                                                   1 . If the

lag restrictions imposed in computing the long-run covariance matrix of the GMM errors are
valid, c = 1.

The proof of Theorem 7 is provided in Appendix A. The lag restriction imposed in computing
the long-run covariance matrix of the GMM errors is that ut (b ) = Rte (1 ft0 b ) is orthogonal
to lagged information. If this restriction is valid, or if it not imposed on the computation of
the long-run covariance matrix, the t-statistics will indicate signi…cance of ^ f in only a small


                                                   26
fraction of repeated large samples when the model is false.


A Simple Diagnostic Test We have seen that when the assumptions 1b, 2b and 3 are
satis…ed the probability limit of ^b is bs = x=[x0 E(ft )]. This implies that in the limit, the
mean of the …tted SDF, m   ^ = 1 f 0^b , is zero. A simple test for this outcome can be
                              t            t
                                                         0
performed by testing the null hypothesis that                b = 1. Equivalently the mean of the SDF
and the standard error of its mean can be calculated. If the null hypothesis that the mean
of the SDF is zero cannot be rejected there is good reason to doubt favorable results based
on the a-normalization.
   Table 7 shows results corresponding to the estimates of the a-normalization that were
presented in Tables 1 and 3 for the LV and FF25 data. For the LV data the mean of the
estimated SDF is only signi…cantly di¤erent from zero for the single factor model that uses
the market premium as the risk factor. The other estimated SDFs are all approximately
mean zero. These results are not unexpected given that we found the factor betas to be
jointly statistically insigni…cant in section 4.
   For the FF25 data the mean of the SDF is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero for the single
factor models with consumption growth and the market premium as the risk factors, as well
as for the multi-factor model that uses the Fama-French factors. This is not unexpected,
because we found consumption growth to be signi…cantly correlated with the FF25 returns,
and it is well known that the Fama-French factors are also correlated with them. On the
other hand, for any model that includes durables growth as one of the factors the mean of
the estimated SDF is small and statistically insigni…cant. This is not surprising given that,
as we in saw in section 4, durables growth is approximately uncorrelated with the FF25
returns.


Direct Tests of the Rank Condition An alternative to estimating the mean of the SDF
is to directly test the rank condition on cov(Rte ; ft ). To do this I estimate the n    k matrix of
factor betas, f , using GMM and the moment restrictions (33) and (34). Let B = vec( f )
                                                                              p
           ^ be a consistent estimator for the asymptotic covariance matrix of T (B
and let V (B)                                                                     ^ B0 ),
where B0 is the true value of B. Following Cragg and Donald (1997) and Wright (2003), to
test the null hypothesis that the rank of       f   is r < k I form the statistic

                                     ^
                       L(r) = min T [B                      ^ 1 [B
                                               vec(P )]0 V (B)   ^       vec(P )]
                                  P2   r




                                                    27
                                                                                           d   2
where   r   is the set of all n k matrices with rank r. If the true rank of B0 is r, L(r) !    n r.

For single factor models k = 1 and the relevant hypothesis is that r = 0. In this case the
L(r) statistic is equivalent to testing that all the factor betas are zero.
    Table 8 shows results for the rank tests corresponding to the models estimated in Tables
1–4 for the LV and FF25 data. For the single factor models, the test statistics and p-values
correspond to the ones show in Table 6. For the LV data, it is only for the single factor
model based on consumption-growth that we can reject the null of insu¢ cient rank, and this
rejection is marginal. For all the other models, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
matrix of factor betas has less than full column rank.
    For the FF25 data we can reject the null hypothesis that cov(Rte ; ft ) has less than full
column rank for the single factor consumption growth model, the single factor CAPM model,
and the three factor Fama-French model. But for the durables growth model, the consump-
tion factors model, and the Yogo factors model it is di¢ cult to reject the null that cov(Rte ; ft )
has rank k     1. This, presumably, re‡ects the inclusion of durables growth in these models.


6     Small Sample Properties of the GMM Estimators
To further demonstrate the sensitivity of empirical results to the choice of normalization in
the presence of a spurious risk factor, I conduct three sets of Monte Carlo experiments. In
the …rst set of experiments I see how the GMM procedures perform when I confront them
with arti…cial spurious risk factor data in combination with either the LV or FF25 returns. I
generate random data for an arti…cial factor that mimics US consumption data— in terms of
mean and standard deviation— yet is either globally spurious or panel spurious. I show that
a researcher draws dramatically di¤erent conclusions about the model depending on which
normalization is used in estimating the model.
    In the second set of experiments I generate data from arti…cial economies. These arti…cial
economies bear some resemblance to the US economy, in that the consumption and returns
series share some of the statistical properties of their US counterparts. Here, however, the
simulated risk factors price the returns by construction. I generate spurious factors in parallel
with the true factors and the returns. I then confront the GMM procedures with either the
true risk factors or a set of alternative risk factors that include a spurious risk factor. I
…nd that the two normalizations perform similarly when the researcher estimates the model
using the true risk factor(s). However, when one of the risk factors in the proposed SDF is

                                                28
spurious the researcher draws dramatically di¤erent conclusions about the model depending
on which normalization is used in estimation.

6.1         Experiments Based on US Data
6.1.1       An Experiment Based on the Lustig-Verdelhan Data

LV’s data consist of 50 annual observations on US consumption between 1953 and 2002.
Accordingly, with MATLAB’s random number generator, I create 10000 samples, each of
length T = 50, for an arti…cial risk factor ft , whose law of motion is

                                         ft = (1     ) + ft   1   +   t                            (35)
                        2
with    t    N iid(0;       ). The parameters in (35) are set so that ft has the same mean (0:0156),
standard deviation (0:0147) and serial correlation coe¢ cient (0:292) as the consumption
growth series in the LV database. For each sample the factor pricing model is estimated
using GMM and each of the two normalizations, mt = 1                      ft b and mt = [1   (ft   )b ].
The results are presented in Table 9.
   The two normalizations perform very di¤erently in …nite samples. As Table 9 indicates,
the median value of the R2 measure of …t is just over 0:7 at the …rst and second stages
of GMM for the a-normalization. In contrast,for the -normalization the median value of
the R2 is less than 0:07 at both stages of GMM. The distribution of ^b is almost entirely
to the right of 35 at the second GMM stage, and ^b is found to be signi…cant at the 5
percent level in 99:9 percent of the samples, indicating that the researcher using the a-
normalization would almost always conclude that the spurious factor prices the portfolios.
On the other hand, a researcher using the -normalization would …nd ^b centered around
0, and would …nd it signi…cant at the 5 percent level in only 25 percent of the samples.
So he would usually conclude that the spurious factor was unhelpful in pricing the assets.
Using the a-normalization the over-identifying restrictions are rejected only 9 percent of the
time with size set to 5 percent, while rejections occur in 81 percent of the samples using the
 -normalization.
   There is less contrast between the results for the factor price of risk. For the a-normalization,
the distribution of ^ is mainly to the right of zero, but has very fat tails to the right and
                            f

left. Using a two-sided test, ^ f is statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level in 32 percent
of the samples, at the second stage of GMM. For the -normalization ^ is centered around
                                                                                    f

0 and is only signi…cant in 24 percent of the samples.

                                                    29
     The simulations with spurious factors can rationalize our …ndings with US consumption
growth used as the risk factor. As Table 1 indicates, when using the a-normalization we
found ^b = 48:6 and ^ f = 4:20 at the …rst stage of GMM, and ^b = 48:8 and ^ f = 4:28 at the
second stage of GMM. These values lie at the 62nd, 57th, 50th and 58th percentiles of the
analog empirical distributions in the Monte Carlo experiments. Table 1 reports R2 = 0:87 at
both stages of GMM, and J = 5:1. These values lie, respectively, at the 82nd, 84th and 17th
percentiles of the analog empirical distributions in the Monte Carlo experiments. In Table
1, the t-statistics for ^b and ^ f are, respectively, 4:67 and 1:05 at the …rst stage of GMM
and 11:3 and 2:61 at the second stage of GMM. The …rst stage values are at the 63rd and
43rd percentiles of the analog empirical distributions in the Monte Carlo experiments, while
the second stage values lie at the 98th and 90th percentiles of their respective empirical
distributions. It is only these last two statistics that seem at odds with the notion that
consumption growth is a purely spurious factor. This may be due to the simulations not
capturing speci…c features of the US data that matter in constructing the weighting matrix
for the second stage of GMM.
   A researcher using the a-normalization would obviously improve his chances of rejecting
a proposed SDF based on a spurious factor if he tested for the statistical signi…cance of ^ f .
As Table 9 indicates, however, he would still …nd ^ to be signi…cant at the 5 percent level
                                                        f

in 32 percent of the repeated samples at the second stage of GMM. He could also test for
the statistical signi…cance of Em , but as Table 9 indicates, it would be signi…cant at the 5
percent level in 46 percent of the repeated samples at the second stage of GMM. The two
statistics are highly correlated with each other, so a joint test would be no more e¤ective.
    Testing for the signi…cance of ^ f at the …rst stage of GMM would be e¤ective, because
^ is only signi…cant at the 5 percent level in 8 percent of the repeated samples. While this
 f

suggests that an e¤ective way of testing for a spurious factor is to test for the signi…cance of
^ , this is only true for single factor models. For multi-factor models, as we will see, rejecting
 f

a model only on the basis of the statistical signi…cance of ^ f would lead to over-rejection of
the true model.
     The most e¤ective test for detecting spurious factors appears to the direct test for the
rank of the     f   matrix. Table 9 shows results from testing the null hypothesis that the rank
of   f   is zero. The L statistic exceeds its 5 percent critical value in only 21 percent of the
samples. As a result, the test would have a 79 percent success rate in detecting failure of



                                                 30
the rank condition if the size of the test was set at 5 percent.

6.1.2   An Experiment Based on the Fama-French Data

When using the FF25 data, above, I set the sample period to 1949Q1–2005Q4. Accordingly, I
create 10000 samples, each of length T = 228, for an arti…cial risk factor ft . This experiment
is more complicated than the previous one, however, because the random factor is designed
to be panel spurious so that it mimics the properties of US consumption growth. In each
                                       0
random sample I set ft = +c Rte Re ^ R1 + t where Re and ^ R are the sample mean and
                                                                                                       2
covariance matrix of the vector of excess returns in the FF25 data, and        t   is   t   N iid(0;       ).
Across repeated samples cov(ft ; Rt ) = c , by construction. I set          = 0:0051 to match the
                                                                   5
mean of consumption growth in the US data, c = 7:49         10         to match the cross-sectional
average of the covariance between consumption growth and the FF25 returns, and                  = 0:005
so that the standard deviation of ft equals the standard deviation of consumption growth in
the data. I do not attempt to replicate the serial correlation properties of US consumption
growth in the randomly generated factor. For each sample I estimate the model using both
the a and   normalizations.
   Recall that when the “Consumption growth” model was estimated with actual US data
we found ^b , ^ , ^b and ^ to be statistically signi…cant (see Tables 3 and 4), though only
marginally so for the -normalization. The main di¤erences across normalizations were that
the R2 was large and positive for the a-normalization, but negative for the -normalization,
at both stages of GMM. The model passed the test of the over-identifying restrictions in
both cases but only marginally for the -normalization.
   A similar pattern emerges when the model is estimated using panel spurious factors in
repeated samples. The results are presented in Table 10. It indicates that ^b and ^ are            f

statistically signi…cant in nearly 100 percent of the repeated samples at the second stage
of GMM. In contrast, for the -normalization, ^b and ^ are statistically signi…cant in a
                                                            f

little over 60 percent of the repeated samples. Here only the R2 measure of …t for the -
normalization provides a strong test of the model’s ability to explain the returns. While R2
exceeds 0:64 in 50 percent of the samples, R2 is negative in 98 percent of the samples at the
second stage of GMM.




                                              31
6.2         Experiments with an Arti…cial Model
6.2.1       A Single Factor Model

In this set of experiments I generate arti…cial data from a single-factor model. The SDF
is given by mt = a                 ft b where a = 1:42, b = 27:7 and ft follows the law of motion
                    2
ft     N iid( ;         ), with    = 0:0156 and       = 0:0147. This ensures that ft has the same mean
and standard deviation as consumption growth in the LV database. Given that the true
value of        is 0:0156 this means that b = 19:5, b = 28,                  f   = 0:68 (expressed in percent) and
Em = 0:70.
      I construct an n        1 (with n = 8) vector of arti…cial excess returns with the law of motion
Rte =       R   + (mt         m)   +    t,   where    R   is an n      1 vector ,          m   =a         b,     is an n              1
vector,         is an n     n diagonal matrix, and          t      N iid(0; In ) and is independent of ft . Given
                                                                                                      2
this de…nition for Rte , it follows that the variance of Rite is                  2
                                                                                  Ri   =   2 2
                                                                                           i m   +    i   with        2
                                                                                                                      m       =     2 2
                                                                                                                                     b.
Let     i   =      m Ri =( m Ri ),     for i = 1, : : : , n. Setting         i   =     i Ri = m     implies that the ith
                                                                2 1=2
element on the diagonal of               is    i   = (1         i)    Ri   and that E(Rite mt ) = 0. So that the
                                                                                                                     2
model returns share some of the characteristics of the LV returns, I set                             Ri   and        Ri       equal to
their sample equivalents in the LV data, and thereby determine the values of                                    i,        i   and     i,

for i = 1, : : : , n.
      In these experiments the SDF, mt , prices the returns. In large samples GMM estimators
based on the two normalizations deliver consistent parameter estimates and lead to correct
inference about the model. To check small sample performance I simulate 10000 samples
of 50, 250 and 1000 observations each from the model, and estimate the model using both
normalizations.
      The results of the experiments with the true risk factor, ft , and the a-normalization are
summarized in Table 11. The distributions of the parameter estimates are centered near
their true values, and in 96 percent of the samples of 50 observations the estimates of b are
found to be statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level (90 percent for                               f)   at the second
stage of GMM. These percentages rise to 100 percent in the larger samples. There is a slight
tendency to under-reject the over-identifying restrictions, but size approaches asymptotic
size as T increases. The median R2 in a sample of 50 observations is 0:83, and this rises to
0:96 in samples of 250 observations, and 0:98 in samples of 1000 observations.
      The results of the experiments with the true risk factor, ft , and the -normalization
are summarized in Table 12. Once again, the distributions of the parameter estimates are


                                                            32
centered near their true values, and in 73 percent of the samples of 50 observations the
estimates of b are found to be statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level (75 percent
for     f)   at the second stage of GMM. These percentages rise to 100 percent in the larger
samples. Here there is a slight tendency to over-reject the over-identifying restrictions, but
size approaches asymptotic size as T increases. The median R2 in a sample of 50 observations
is 0:66, and this rises to 0:92 in samples of 250 observations, and 0:98 in samples of 1000
observations. Overall, the -normalization has a tendency to be less enthusiastic about the
true model than the a-normalization, but both normalizations perform well in su¢ ciently
large samples.
       To examine the performance of the GMM estimators when the rank condition fails, I
                                                           2
generate a globally spurious factor xt         N iid( ;        ), which is orthogonal to Rte and ft , and
estimate the model with xt replacing ft . The results of the experiments with the spurious
risk factor, xt , are summarized in Table 13 for the a-normalization. Consider, …rst, samples
of 50 observations. With the a-normalization the model is rejected at the 5 percent level
in only 2 percent of the samples and the median values of R2 are 0:79 and 0:81 at the two
stages of GMM. The estimates of ^b are statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level in 93
and 96 percent of the samples. Thus, a researcher using only the a-normalization would
almost always conclude that the spurious factor helps to price the assets. The factor risk
premium, ^ , is signi…cant less often, but a researcher would not necessarily reject the model
                f

on this basis.8 As we will see later, rejecting a model based on lack of signi…cance of ^ f can
lead to a lot of Type I errors. The predictions of Theorem 4 are borne out in the simulations.
As the sample size increases the distribution of ^b tightens and is nearly centered around
1=E(f ) = 64:2. The J statistic rejects the model based on the spurious factor about as often
as it would if the model were true. But, as Theorem 7 predicts, ^ is signi…cant at the 5
                                                                                f

percent level in roughly 5 percent of the samples.
  In Section 5 I proposed a simple diagnostic test based on an estimate of Em given by
1 ^ 0^b . Suppose the researcher rejects the model whenever the estimate of Em is not
signi…cantly di¤erent from zero at the 5 percent level. The results in Table 13 suggest that
he would reject the false model 72:7, 89:2, and 94:1 percent of the time in samples of 50,
250 and 1000 observations based on the …rst stage of GMM. This is a reasonable degree of
power. The results in Table 11 suggest that he would make no Type I errors when the model
   8
    The standard deviation of ^ f is very large, as Table 12 indicates, but this is due to a small number of
extreme observations in the tails of its distribution.


                                                    33
is true.
   Turning to the -normalization (Table 14), we can see that in samples of 50 observations
the researcher would rarely be misled into thinking that the model based on the spurious
factor …ts the data. This would not, however, be the result of rejecting the model on the
basis of the J statistic. This would only happen 18:3 percent of the time for a test with 5
percent asymptotic size. Here ^b and ^ are rarely statistically signi…cant, and the estimates
                                             f

are centered approximately around zero. Also, the R2 measure of …t takes on a median value
of just 0:10 at the …rst stage of GMM, and 0:05 at the second stage. Unfortunately, to some
extent the -normalization performs less well in large samples. At the …rst stage of GMM,
the frequency with which ^b and ^ are statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level rises to
                                       f

50 percent in samples of 1000 observations. For the second stage of GMM, this is only true
in about 15 percent of the samples. The distribution of R2 is roughly invariant to the sample
size. The test of the over-identifying restrictions becomes more powerful as the sample size
increases, although it rejects the model only 56:1 percent of the time in samples of 1000
observations.
   The direct test of the rank of      f   proves to be a useful diagnostic. Suppose the researcher
rejects the model whenever the test statistic, L, does not exceed the 5 percent critical value
                   2
of the relevant        distribution. The results in Table 14 imply that he would reject the false
model 65, 90, and 94 percent of the time in samples of 50, 250 and 1000 observations based
on the …rst stage of GMM. This is a reasonable degree of power. The results in Table 12
suggest that he would make no Type I errors when the model is true.
   Overall, my results suggest that when the model is true there is little to choose between
the normalizations. However, the results with spurious factors suggest that a researcher
must interpret his results carefully. The -normalization is less likely to deliver misleadingly
favorable inference about the model than the a-normalization, but at the …rst stage of GMM
even the -normalization has low power. The test of Em = 0, which is based on the
a-normalization, and the direct test based on the rank of              f,   both appear to be useful
diagnostics for failure of the rank condition, in that they have a reasonable degree of power,
and lead to no Type I errors in my simulations.
    As a …nal check on the Monte Carlo simulations with spurious factors, Figures 5 and 6
illustrate the frequency distributions of ^b , ^b , their respective t-statistics t(^b ) and t(^b ), R2 ,
R2 , J and J . For the a-normalization, the distribution of the t-statistic diverges so it is



                                                   34
scaled by a factor of T       1=2
                                    . For the -normalization, the distribution of ^b diverges, so it
                                  1=2
is scaled by a factor of T              . For both normalizations, the distributions across the Monte
Carlos experiments converge to their respective probability limits or limiting distributions
as T ! 1.

6.2.2     A Multi-Factor Model

In this set of experiments I generate arti…cial data from a multi-factor model. The SDF is
given by mt = a          ft0 b where a is a scalar, ft and b are k                               1 vectors, and ft follows the
law of motion ft          N iid( ;       f ).       I set k = 3, a = 1:166 and b = ( 4:50                                  0:12 6:78 )0 .
I set     and     f   equal to the sample mean and covariance matrix of the Rm-Rf, SMB and
HML factors from the Fama-French database. It follows that b = ( 3:86                                                      0:10 5:82 )0 ,
b = ( 4:51        0:12 6:80 )0 and              f   = ( 1:92 0:53 1:32 )0 , expressed in percent. The model
for the true SDF mimics the …rst stage GMM estimates for the Fama-French 3-factor model
shown in Table 4.
     I generate an n 1 (with n = 25) vector of arti…cial excess returns Rte =                                         R+   (ft      )+         t

where     R   is an n   1 vector,        is an n            k matrix,             is an n      n lower triangular matrix, and
 t      N iid(0; In ) and is independent of ft . Given this de…nition for Rte , it follows that the
                                                        0
covariance matrix of Rte is         R   =           f       +          0
                                                                           . So that the model shares some characteristics
with actual data, I set       R   equal to its sample equivalent in the FF25 data. I set                                         equal to
the matrix of factor betas for the FF25 returns regressed on Rm-Rf, SMB and HML. I set
     equal to the Cholesky decomposition of the covariance matrix of the residuals from those
regressions. From the assumptions above we have

                         E(Rte mt ) = E f[                  R       + (ft         )+        t ] (a      ft0 b)g
                                                                0                                0
                                         = (a                       b) [    R      f b=(a            b)] :                           (36)

                                                                                                                                         0
To ensure that the model satis…es the asset pricing restrictions I set                                            R   =    f b=(a            b).
This means that the model expected returns correspond to the model-predicted expected
returns for the …rst stage Fama-French model shown in Table 4.
     In these experiments the SDF, mt , prices the returns. In large samples GMM estimators
based on the two normalizations deliver consistent parameter estimates and lead to correct
inference about the model. To check small sample performance I simulate 10000 samples
of 228 observations (the size of quarterly US sample used early) each from the model, and
estimate the model using both normalizations.

                                                                           35
   I perform four sets of experiments. In the …rst experiment, the true model is tested by
making the proposed SDF a linear function of ft . In the second experiment, a false model
with a single relevant factor is tested. Here the proposed SDF is a linear function of just
f1t , the …rst element of ft . In the third experiment, a false model with a single relevant,
but panel spurious, factor is tested. In the fourth experiment, a false multi-factor model
is tested. Here the proposed SDF is a linear function of a panel relevant factor, a panel
spurious factor, and a purely spurious factor.


Results for the True Model Table 15 shows the results from the …rst set of experiments
with the true model. The results highlight an important fact: even in a sample of 228
observations, the estimated parameters of the true SDF can be statistically signi…cant in a
relatively small fraction of the samples. The coe¢ cient on the second factor, which mimics
the SMB factor, is only signi…cant in around 10 percent of the samples. The factor risk
premium, ^ f , for the second factor is also only signi…cant in about 30 to 50 percent of the
samples. For the a-normalization, the test of the over-identifying restrictions has size less
than asymptotic size, while for the -normalization the two are approximately equal.


Results for a Single Relevant Factor Table 16 shows results for the second set of
experiments where a model based on a single relevant factor is estimated. The single factor
is x1t = f1t , the …rst factor in the true model. Not surprisingly, the estimates of b , b ,                       f

and   f   are statistically signi…cant in nearly every sample. For both normalizations, the low
values of the R2 and the large values of the J-statistic both act as reliable signals that there
is a missing factor.


Results for a Single Panel-Spurious Factor Table 17 shows results for the third set
of experiments with a panel spurious factor. Here the proposed SDF is a linear function of
a factor,
                                                    0       1
                                  x2t =   x2   +c       R       (Rte   R)   + u2t ;
                                                                                           2
where c is a scalar,        is an n   1 vector of ones, and u2t                 N iid(0;   u2 )   is independent of
Rte and u1t . I set    x2   equal to the sample mean of quarterly US consumption growth in the
period 1949Q1–2005Q4. I set c equal to the cross-sectional average of the sample covariance
                                                                                                              2
between US consumption growth and the FF25 returns over the same period. I set                                u2   so
that the variance of x2t equals the sample variance of US consumption growth over the same

                                                        36
period. As Table 17 indicates, the a-normalization provides very misleading inference about
the model. The estimates of b ,        f   and Em are signi…cant in almost every sample at the
second stage of GMM. This is not unexpected. After all, x2t is a relevant factor that is
correlated with Rte . But the model also has good …t in many samples, with the median R2
being 0:79 and 0:58 at the …rst and second stages of GMM, and the J-statistic leading to
very few rejections of the over-identifying restrictions.
   A very di¤erent picture emerges when the model is estimated using the -normalization.
Once again the estimates of the model parameters, in this case b and                  f,   are often statisti-
cally signi…cant due to the relevance of the risk factor. The model is also rarely rejected on
the basis of the test of the over-identifying restrictions. But here, the low R2 values reliably
signal that the model has poor …t.


Results for a False Multi-Factor SDF Table 18 shows results for the fourth set of
experiments with a false proposed SDF that is a linear function of a relevant factor, a panel
spurious factor, and a third, purely spurious factor. In this way, this experiment is meant
to mimic the “Yogo Factors” case in Tables 3 and 4. As we saw in section 4, the market
premium factor appears to be relevant, but the evidence from the factor betas suggests that
consumption growth is panel spurious for the FF25 returns, and durables growth is purely
spurious.
   The trio of factors, xt , consists of x1t and x2t (de…ned above), as well as x3t =                x3   + u3t
                        2
where u3t    N iid(0;   u3 )   is independent of   Rte ,   u1t and u2t . I set   2
                                                                                 u3   equal to the sample
variance of US durables growth over the period 1949Q1–2005Q4.
   The results for the a-normalization follow the predictions of Theorem 4. The estimates
of b3 , the coe¢ cient on the spurious factor, are nearly always found to be statistically sig-
ni…cant. In contrast, the estimates of b1 , the coe¢ cient on the most relevant factor for the
cross-sectional distribution of the returns, is nearly always found to be statistically insigni…-
cant. The cross-sectional R2 measures are also very high and the test of the over-identifying
restrictions rarely leads to the model being rejected. Some doubt is cast on the model by
the fact that some elements of ^ f are signi…cant in relatively few samples, but as we saw
above, this also occurs when the model being tested is the true model. A researcher aware
of this fact would be hesitant to reject the model on this basis.
   The test for Em = 0 at the …rst stage of GMM provides reliable evidence against model,
as Em is found to be statistically di¤erent from zero at the 5 percent level in just 11 percent

                                                   37
of the samples. As Table 15 indicates, using the 5 percent critical value as a threshold for
rejection of the model would not lead to Type I errors as the estimate of Em is signi…cant
in every sample for the true model.
    The test of the rank of   f   also provides reliable evidence against model. The statistic L
is found to be statistically di¤erent from zero at the 5 percent level in just 14 percent of the
samples. As Table 15 indicates, using the 5 percent critical value as a threshold for rejection
of the model would not lead to Type I errors as L is statistically signi…cant in every sample
for the true model.


7     Conclusion
We have seen that standard GMM-based tests based on the a-normalization have very low
power to reject proposed SDFs when they are false and the covariance matrix between the
returns and the proposed risk factors has less than full column rank. This …nding is relevant
for tests of consumption-based asset pricing models, because some consumption-related risk
factors display little covariance with the returns being priced. Estimates of consumption-
based models based on the a-normalization are misleading because parameter estimates
are statistically signi…cant and R2 s are close to 1 despite the lack of signi…cant covariance
between the returns and speci…c risk factors in the models.
    The -normalization, which speci…es the SDF in terms of demeaned risk factors, generally
performs better in small samples, but even then the power to reject a false model can be
surprisingly low. In Burnside (2007a) I show that there are related small sample problems
with the variants of the -normalization used by Parker and Julliard (2005) and Yogo (2006).
    The challenge is to …nd tests that reliably detect failure of the rank condition. Tests
based on the statistical signi…cance of factor risk premia lead to many Type I errors in
…nite samples. Tests based on the statistical signi…cance of an estimate of Em display a
reasonable amount of power and lead to very few Type I errors. So do direct tests of the
column rank of the matrix of factor betas. Given the problematic nature of the small and
large sample properties of GMM when the rank condition fails, these diagnostics are useful
tools for researchers working with macroeconomic factor models.




                                                38
                                   REFERENCES

Black, Fischer, Michael Jensen and Myron Scholes (1972) “The Capital Asset Pricing Model:
    Some Empirical Tests,”in Michael Jensen, ed. Studies in the Theory of Capital Mar-
    kets. Praeger: New York.
Burnside, Craig (2007a) “GMM and the Two-Pass Method in Consumption-Based Asset
    Pricing: A Critical Review,”mimeo, Duke University.
Burnside, Craig (2007b) “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Con-
    sumption Growth Risk: A Comment,”NBER Working Paper 13129.
Burnside, Craig and Martin Eichenbaum (1996) “Small Sample Properties of GMM Based
    Wald Tests,”Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 1996, 294–308.
Chen, Naifu, Richard R. Roll, and Stephen A. Ross (1986) “Economic Forces and the Stock
    Market,”Journal of Business 59, 383–403.
Cochrane, John H. (2005) Asset Pricing, Revised edition. Princeton: Princeton University
    Press.
Cragg, John G. and Stephen G. Donald (1997) “Inferring the Rank of a Matrix,” Journal
    of Econometrics 76, 223–50.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman (2005) “Testing Factor-Model Explanations of Market
    Anomalies,”working paper, Northwestern University.
den Haan, Wouter J. and Andrew T. Levin (2000) “Robust Covariance Matrix Estimation
    with Data-Dependent VAR Prewhitening Order,”NBER Technical Working Paper No.
    255.
Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin (1989) “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
    Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Economet-
    rica 57, 937–69.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1993) “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
   Stocks and Bonds,”Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth (1973) “Risk Return and Equilibrium: Empirical
   Tests,”Journal of Political Economy 71, 607–36.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell Harvey (1993) “The Risk and Predictability of Interna-
    tional Equity Returns,”Review of Financial Studies 6, 527–566.
Hall, Alastair R. (2005) Generalized Method of Moments. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hansen, Lars P. (1982) “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Es-
   timators,”Econometrica 50, 1029–54.
Hansen, Lars P. and Ravi Jagannathan (1997) “Assessing Speci…cation Errors in Stochastic
   Discount Factor Models,”Journal of Finance 52, 557-90.

                                           39
Kan, Raymond and Cesare Robotti (2006) “Speci…cation Tests of Asset Pricing Models
    Using Excess Returns,”Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper No. 2006-10.
Kan, Raymond and Chu Zhang (1999a) “GMM Tests of Stochastic Discount Factor Models
    with Useless Factors,”Journal of Financial Economics 54, 103–27.
Kan, Raymond and Chu Zhang (1999b) “Two-Pass Tests of Asset Pricing Models with
    Useless Factors,”Journal of Finance 54, 203–35.
Lewellen, Jonathan and Stefan Nagel (2006) “The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain
    Asset-Pricing Anomalies,” manuscript, Dartmouth College. Forthcoming, Journal of
    Financial Economics.

Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel and Jay Shanken (2006) “A Skeptical Appraisal of Asset-
    Pricing Tests,”manuscript, Dartmouth College.

Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan (2007) “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk
    Premia and Consumption Growth Risk,”American Economic Review.

Parker, Jonathan A. and Christian Julliard (2005) “Consumption Risk and the Cross Sec-
    tion of Expected Returns,”Journal of Political Economy 113, 185–222.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock and (1997) “Instrumental Variables Regression with
     Weak Instruments,”Econometrica 65: 557–86.

Wright, Jonathan H. (2003) “Detecting Lack of Identi…cation in GMM,”Econometric The-
    ory 19, 322–30.

Yogo, Motohiro (2006) “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,”
    Journal of Finance 61, 539–80.




                                          40
TABLE 1: GMM Estimates of Linear Factor Models
Lustig-Verdelhan Data, a-Normalization

                                   First Stage                        Second Stage
 Risk factor or factors        b         f       R2           b         f     R2        J

 Consumption growth           48.6     4.20      0.87        48.8      4.28    0.87     5.1
                             (10.4)   (4.01)                 (4.3)    (1.64)          (0.645)

 Durables growth              20.2     2.65      0.84        24.3      5.51    0.81     4.8
                              (3.7)   (1.63)                 (1.7)    (4.41)          (0.683)

 Rm-Rf                         5.5     29.1      0.46         6.5      39.1    0.45     10.2
                              (2.3)   (18.8)                 (1.7)    (17.5)          (0.175)

 Consumption Factors
 Consumption growth           40.1     3.64      0.87         -5.5     1.86    0.81     2.7
                             (56.0)   (1.86)                 (27.9)   (1.98)          (0.847)
 Durables growth               3.7     3.64                   26.2     4.81
                             (28.0)   (1.95)                 (13.5)   (3.48)

 Yogo Factors
 Consumption growth            9.6     2.76      0.95          2.3     3.43    0.89     1.9
                             (30.7)   (2.06)                 (21.9)   (3.41)          (0.860)
 Durables growth              14.2     2.91                   22.0     5.96
                             (17.1)   (2.74)                 (11.0)   (6.21)
 Rm                            2.4     33.4                    1.1     12.1
                              (1.7)   (27.7)                  (0.9)   (23.2)

 Fama-French Factors
 Rm-Rf                          6.0     31.3     0.56          7.6      92.8   0.27     5.3
                              (3.4)   (30.2)                 (2.5)    (91.4)          (0.384)
 SMB                           -5.3    -12.7                  -4.5     -17.5
                              (5.7)   (22.1)                 (4.2)    (39.6)
 HML                            4.1     12.3                   6.5      45.7
                              (3.9)   (19.7)                 (2.8)    (50.7)


Note: Annual data, 1953–2002. The table reports …rst and second stage GMM estimates of b , from the SDF
mt = 1 ft0 b , obtained using the moment restriction E(Rte mt ) = 0, where Rte is an 8 1 vector of excess
returns of equally-weighted portfolios of short-term foreign-currency denominated money market securities
sorted by their interest di¤erential with the US, and ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors. The factors are
real per household consumption (nondurables & services) growth, real per household durable consumption
growth, and the following variables from the Fama-French data: the real value weighted US stock market
excess return over the risk free rate (Rm-Rf ), the gross return to the same portfolio (Rm), and the SMB
and HML portfolio excess returns [see Lustig and Verdelhan (2007)]. Estimates of the factor risk premium
^ f = Sf ^b =(1 f 0^b ) are also reported (in percent), where f and Sf are the sample mean and covariance
matrix of ft . GMM-VARHAC standard errors are reported in parentheses for ^b and ^ f . The table reports
the R2 measure of …t between the sample mean of Rte and the predicted mean returns, given by DT ^b , where
           PT
DT = T1 t=1 Rte ft0 . Tests of the overidentifying restrictions are also reported. The test statistic, J, is
asymptotically distributed as a 28 k , where k is the number of risk factors. The p-value is in parentheses.




                                                        41
TABLE 2: GMM Estimates of Linear Factor Models
Lustig-Verdelhan Data, -Normalization

                                       First Stage                          Second Stage
 Risk factor or factors                 b          f        R2      b         f     R2         J

 Consumption growth           0.016     45.1     0.95       0.10    72.3     1.52    0.06     15.6
                             (0.003)   (74.7)   (1.48)             (31.4)   (0.73)           (0.029)

 Durables growth              0.034     20.8     0.87       0.16    48.0     2.01    -0.13    14.3
                             (0.007)   (29.2)   (1.15)             (23.4)   (0.82)           (0.047)

 Rm-Rf                        0.070     1.8      5.97       0.02    1.4      4.72    0.02     22.0
                             (0.025)   (3.6)    (11.8)             (2.4)    (7.76)           (0.003)

 Consumption Factors
 Consumption growth           0.016     -8.7     0.26       0.16    -10.8    0.74    -0.11     14.1
                             (0.003)   (56.9)   (0.80)             (40.6)   (0.69)           (0.028)
 Durables growth              0.034     23.6     0.82                50.8    1.92
                             (0.007)   (39.0)   (1.05)             (28.6)   (0.84)

 Yogo Factors
 Consumption growth           0.016     -22.0    0.59       0.34     -4.9    1.26    -0.08     8.2
                             (0.003)   (63.6)   (1.18)             (48.3)   (1.14)           (0.146)
 Durables growth              0.034      45.5    1.10               65.4     2.40
                             (0.007)   (51.0)   (1.78)             (34.7)   (1.64)
 Rm                           0.070       5.2    11.7                3.3     5.02
                             (0.025)    (3.0)   (9.42)              (2.7)   (7.80)

 Fama-French Factors
 Rm-Rf                        0.070      1.5     7.07       0.08    -0.4     1.07    0.05     17.7
                             (0.025)   (4.3)    (11.4)             (3.5)    (9.51)           (0.003)
 SMB                          0.024      1.7     4.08               2.2      3.79
                             (0.020)   (4.6)    (7.06)             (3.9)    (6.04)
 HML                          0.057     -2.8     -5.91              -2.5     -4.80
                             (0.020)   (5.1)    (8.78)             (4.0)    (7.23)


Note: Annual data, 1953–2002. The table reports …rst and second stage GMM estimates of and b , from
the SDF mt = 1 (ft          )0 b , obtained using the moment restrictions E(Rte mt ) = 0, E(ft   ) = 0. Since
^ is the same for both GMM stages, the estimate is reported once. The variables Rte and ft are de…ned in
the note to Table 1. Estimates of the factor risk premium ^ f = Sf ^b are also reported (in percent), where
Sf is the sample covariance matrix of ft . GMM-VARHAC standard errors are reported in parentheses for
^ , ^b and ^ f . The table reports the R2 measure of …t between the sample mean of Rte and the predicted
                                                PT
mean returns, given by dT ^b , where dT = T1 t=1 Rte (ft0 ^ )0 . Tests of the overidentifying restrictions are
also reported. The test statistic, J, is asymptotically distributed as a 28 k , where k is the number of risk
factors. The p-value is in parentheses.




                                                       42
TABLE 3: GMM Estimates of Linear Factor Models
Fama-French 25 Data, a-Normalization

                                      First Stage                         Second Stage
 Risk factor or factors        b            f        R2           b         f     R2         J

 Consumption growth          126.3        0.94      0.81         142.8     1.38    0.51     30.2
                             (23.6)      (0.49)                  (10.1)   (0.36)           (0.179)

 Durables growth             111.1        -2.48     0.89         93.3      11.0    0.43     15.5
                             (18.3)      (2.84)                  (7.2)    (44.9)           (0.906)

 Rm-Rf                         3.3        2.31      -0.55         4.7      3.40    -3.55    65.5
                              (0.9)      (0.57)                  (0.8)    (0.59)           (0.000)

 Consumption Factors
 Consumption growth           54.0        2.83      0.98          49.3     1.93    0.96     17.2
                             (33.8)      (4.86)                  (13.8)   (2.03)           (0.800)
 Durables growth              64.4        4.24                    64.8     3.15
                             (20.4)      (8.01)                   (8.3)   (3.24)

 Yogo Factors
 Consumption growth           41.0        2.10      0.98          38.5     1.47    0.97     17.3
                             (32.5)      (3.76)                  (16.6)   (1.57)           (0.748)
 Durables growth              69.9        4.21                    68.7     3.02
                             (18.1)      (7.19)                   (8.8)   (2.57)
 Rm                            0.2        2.33                     0.4     2.96
                              (0.5)      (3.42)                   (0.4)   (3.28)

 Fama-French Factors
 Rm-Rf                          3.9       1.92      0.75           5.0     2.53    -0.20    47.8
                              (0.9)      (0.64)                  (0.8)    (0.70)           (0.001)
 SMB                           -0.1       0.52                    -0.5     0.58
                              (1.2)      (0.36)                  (1.1)    (0.37)
 HML                            5.9       1.35                     7.2     1.69
                              (1.1)      (0.49)                  (0.9)    (0.63)


Note: Quarterly data, 1949–2005. The table reports …rst and second stage GMM estimates of b , from the
SDF mt = 1 ft0 b , obtained using the moment restriction E(Rte mt ) = 0, where Rte is a 25 1 vector of excess
returns of the Fama-French 25 portfolios of US stocks sorted on size and the book-to-market value ratio, and
ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors. The factors are real per capita consumption (nondurables & services)
growth, real per capita durable consumption growth, and the following variables from the Fama-French data:
the real value weighted US stock market excess return over the risk free rate (Rm-Rf ), the gross return to
the same portfolio (Rm), and the SMB and HML portfolio excess returns (see Appendix B). Estimates of
the factor risk premium ^ f = Sf ^b =(1 f 0^b ) are also reported (in percent), where f and Sf are the sample
mean and covariance matrix of ft . GMM-VARHAC standard errors are reported in parentheses for ^b and
^ f . The table reports the R2 measure of …t between the sample mean of Re and the predicted mean returns,
                                                                              t
                                   PT
given by DT ^b , where DT = T1 t=1 Rte ft0 . Tests of the overidentifying restrictions are also reported. The
test statistic, J, is asymptotically distributed as a 28 k , where k is the number of risk factors. The p-value
is in parentheses.




                                                            43
TABLE 4: GMM Estimates of Linear Factor Models
Fama-French 25 Data, -Normalization

                                         First Stage                           Second Stage
 Risk factor or factors                    b           f     R2         b         f     R2         J

 Consumption growth           0.0051     335.4     0.89     -0.44     141.9     0.38    -5.93    36.3
                             (0.0005)   (164.5)   (0.46)              (70.7)   (0.17)           (0.051)

 Durables growth              0.0104     -554.0    -1.92    -2.46      -2.2     -0.01   -16.8     2.9
                             (0.0012)   (534.1)   (1.89)             (121.5)   (0.42)           (1.000)

 Rm-Rf                        0.0197      3.5      2.30     -0.77      3.1      2.04    -0.97    69.8
                             (0.0054)    (1.1)    (0.57)              (1.0)    (0.54)           (0.000)

 Consumption Factors
 Consumption growth           0.0051     370.3     0.99     -0.42     130.2     0.35    -6.83    28.2
                             (0.0005)   (166.6)   (0.46)              (82.3)   (0.20)           (0.210)
 Durables growth              0.0104      64.9     0.31                6.6      0.05
                             (0.0012)   (165.2)   (0.56)              (73.8)   (0.25)

 Yogo Factors
 Consumption growth           0.0051     271.6     0.76     -0.33      24.7     0.09    -1.61    20.2
                             (0.0005)   (177.6)   (0.45)              (83.0)   (0.21)           (0.571)
 Durables growth              0.0104     136.4     0.53                40.2     0.14
                             (0.0012)   (136.2)   (0.48)              (63.4)   (0.23)
 Rm                           0.0224      1.5      2.18                 2.7     1.76
                             (0.0054)    (2.4)    (0.73)               (1.8)   (0.88)

 Fama-French Factors
 Rm-Rf                        0.0197      4.5      1.92     0.66       4.4      1.75    0.49     53.7
                             (0.0054)    (1.2)    (0.63)              (1.1)    (0.63)           (0.000)
 SMB                          0.0063      -0.1     0.53                -0.6     0.36
                             (0.0036)    (1.4)    (0.36)              (1.3)    (0.35)
 HML                          0.0119      6.8      1.32                6.9      1.37
                             (0.0036)    (1.4)    (0.49)              (1.3)    (0.50)


Note: Quarterly data, 1949–2005. The table reports …rst and second stage GMM estimates of and b , from
the SDF mt = 1 (ft          )0 b , obtained using the moment restrictions E(Rte mt ) = 0, E(ft   ) = 0. Since
^ is the same for both GMM stages, the estimate is reported once. The variables Rte and ft are de…ned in
the note to Table 3. Estimates of the factor risk premium ^ f = Sf ^b are also reported (in percent), where
Sf is the sample covariance matrix of ft . GMM-VARHAC standard errors are reported in parentheses for
^ , ^b and ^ f . The table reports the R2 measure of …t between the sample mean of Rte and the predicted
                                                PT
mean returns, given by dT ^b , where dT = T1 t=1 Rte (ft0 ^ )0 . Tests of the overidentifying restrictions are
also reported. The test statistic, J, is asymptotically distributed as a 28 k , where k is the number of risk
factors. The p-value is in parentheses.




                                                       44
TABLE 5: Diagnostics for Spurious Factors, Lustig-Verdelhan Data

                    (a) Covariance with Factor                     (b) Factor Beta
 Portfolio         Consumption Durables Market               Consumption Durables Market
                     Growth     Growth    Return               Growth     Growth   Return

 1                      0.22          1.00       -16.3            0.10          0.24       -0.05
                       (1.66)        (3.01)     (15.0)           (0.53)        (0.43)     (0.05)
 2                      1.60          2.04       -7.74            0.76          0.49       -0.02
                       (0.88)        (1.40)     (19.0)           (0.38)        (0.31)     (0.06)
 3                      0.55          2.66       1.62             0.26          0.64       0.00
                       (1.61)        (2.79)     (11.8)           (0.82)        (0.53)     (0.05)
 4                      0.38          3.72       -29.8            0.18          0.89       -0.09
                       (2.31)        (3.48)     (20.9)           (1.09)        (0.54)     (0.06)
 5                      1.34          2.30       4.14             0.63          0.55       0.01
                       (1.43)        (2.31)     (20.7)           (0.65)        (0.54)     (0.06)
 6                      0.55          2.90       2.70             0.26          0.69       0.01
                       (1.75)        (2.53)     (20.2)           (0.83)        (0.57)     (0.06)
 7                      2.32          5.42       -12.4            1.10          1.30       -0.04
                       (1.72)        (2.81)     (21.1)           (0.72)        (0.55)     (0.06)
 8                      0.18          2.82       17.4             0.09          0.68       0.05
                       (2.50)        (2.70)     (33.1)           (1.43)        (1.05)     (0.10)

 Joint-tests
 All = 0               7.87            5.69      7.52            15.6           10.0       7.6
                      (0.447)        (0.682)    (0.481)         (0.048)       (0.265)    (0.475)
                      [0.618]        [0.791]    [0.663]         [0.334]       [0.603]    [0.771]

 All = constant        5.40            2.82      7.16            11.92          7.49      7.56
                      (0.611)        (0.901)    (0.412)         (0.103)       (0.380)    (0.373)
                      [0.731]        [0.932]    [0.572]         [0.369]       [0.629]    [0.664]


Note: Annual data, 1953–2002. The portfolios are equally-weighted groups of short-term foreign-currency
denominated money market securities sorted according to their interest di¤erential with the US (i i). The
risk factors are real per household consumption (nondurables & services) growth, real per household durable
consumption growth, and the real value weighted US stock market return from the Fama-French data [see
Lustig and Verdelhan (2007)]. Part (a) reports the sample covariance between the excess return to portfolio
i and each risk factor. Part (b) reports the slope coe¢ cient from an OLS regression of the excess return to
portfolio i on a constant and each risk factor. GMM (VARHAC) standard errors are reported in parentheses.
The bottom of the table reports 2 test statistics for two tests. The …rst test is of the hypothesis that the
covariances (or betas) with the factor are equal to 0 for all portfolios. The second tests is of the hypothesis
that the covariances (or betas) with the factor equal a common value. GMM (VARHAC)-based p-values are
reported in parentheses. Small sample p-values computed using a Monte Carlo experiment described in the
text are reported in square brackets.




                                                      45
TABLE 6: Diagnostics for Spurious Factors, Fama-French 25 Data

              (a) Covariance with Factor                   (b) Factor Beta
 Portfolio   Consumption Durables Market             Consumption Durables Market
               Growth     Growth    Return             Growth     Growth   Return

 1,1             1.10          -0.62    100.98            4.14          -1.78      1.55
                (0.49)        (0.61)    (12.18)          (1.98)        (1.70)     (0.08)
 1,2             1.30          -0.68     88.22            4.91          -1.95      1.36
                (0.42)        (0.66)    (10.70)          (1.69)        (1.43)     (0.07)
 1,3             0.80          -0.56     74.91            3.03          -1.62      1.15
                (0.37)        (0.63)     (9.39)          (1.53)        (1.35)     (0.06)
 1,4             0.89          -0.45     71.47            3.36          -1.31      1.10
                (0.36)        (0.64)     (9.09)          (1.49)        (1.25)     (0.06)
 1,5             0.97          -0.49     75.94            3.68          -1.41      1.17
                (0.42)        (0.72)     (9.88)          (1.72)        (1.45)     (0.07)
 2,1             0.80          -0.58     95.70            3.01          -1.67      1.47
                (0.42)        (0.64)    (11.11)          (1.72)        (1.55)     (0.06)
 2,2             0.78          -0.56     80.56            2.96          -1.61      1.24
                (0.37)        (0.60)     (9.68)          (1.49)        (1.27)     (0.05)
 2,3             0.80          -0.30     70.88            3.04          -0.87      1.09
                (0.32)        (0.59)     (8.71)          (1.33)        (1.13)     (0.05)
 2,4             0.73          -0.59     68.40            2.77          -1.71      1.05
                (0.33)        (0.61)     (8.46)          (1.38)        (1.12)     (0.06)
 2,5             0.91          -0.39     72.69            3.44          -1.13      1.12
                (0.34)        (0.72)     (9.18)          (1.66)        (1.47)     (0.07)
 3,1             0.73          -0.52     88.47            2.75          -1.50      1.36
                (0.37)        (0.50)    (10.18)          (1.51)        (1.31)     (0.04)
 3,2             0.69          -0.62     73.09            2.60          -1.78      1.12
                (0.31)        (0.57)     (8.51)          (1.26)        (1.05)     (0.04)
 3,3             0.71          -0.44     65.65            2.67          -1.28      1.01
                (0.31)        (0.54)     (7.96)          (1.26)        (1.00)     (0.05)
 3,4             0.71          -0.41     64.44            2.67          -1.19      0.99
                (0.31)        (0.61)     (7.78)          (1.31)        (1.07)     (0.05)
 3,5             0.80          -0.14     67.65            3.04          -0.41      1.04
                (0.32)        (0.73)     (8.62)          (1.55)        (1.41)     (0.07)


Table continues on following page

Note: Quarterly data, 1949–2005. The portfolios are the Fama-French 25 portfolios of US stocks sorted on
size and the book-to-market value ratio. The risk factors are real per capita consumption (nondurables &
services) growth, real per capita durable consumption growth, and the real value weighted US stock market
return from the Fama-French data (see Appendix B for more details). Part (a) reports the sample covariance
between the excess return to portfolio i and each risk factor. Part (b) reports the slope coe¢ cient from an
OLS regression of the excess return to portfolio i on a constant and each risk factor. GMM (VARHAC)
standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                    46
TABLE 6 (continued): Diagnostics for Spurious Factors, Fama-French 25 Data

                   (a) Covariance with Factor                    (b) Factor Beta
 Portfolio        Consumption Durables Market              Consumption Durables Market
                    Growth     Growth    Return              Growth     Growth   Return

 4,1                   0.58          -0.36     82.24            2.20          -1.04      1.26
                      (0.35)        (0.55)     (9.40)          (1.38)        (1.18)     (0.04)
 4,2                   0.56          -0.50     69.14            2.12          -1.43      1.06
                      (0.28)        (0.49)     (8.17)          (1.16)        (1.03)     (0.04)
 4,3                   0.53          -0.37     64.00            2.02          -1.07      0.98
                      (0.29)        (0.59)     (7.47)          (1.19)        (1.01)     (0.04)
 4,4                   0.64          -0.29     62.69            2.43          -0.83      0.96
                      (0.31)        (0.55)     (7.22)          (1.27)        (1.04)     (0.05)
 4,5                   0.91          -0.22     68.85            3.43          -0.62      1.06
                      (0.34)        (0.71)     (8.19)          (1.59)        (1.33)     (0.06)
 5,1                   0.63          -0.22     66.63            2.39          -0.63      1.02
                      (0.26)        (0.48)     (8.16)          (1.05)        (0.95)     (0.03)
 5,2                   0.43          -0.31     59.36            1.62          -0.88      0.91
                      (0.24)        (0.44)     (6.83)          (0.97)        (0.87)     (0.03)
 5,3                   0.44          -0.12     51.60            1.65          -0.34      0.79
                      (0.22)        (0.48)     (6.07)          (0.93)        (0.83)     (0.03)
 5,4                   0.50          -0.09     52.94            1.88          -0.27      0.81
                      (0.26)        (0.49)     (6.14)          (1.07)        (1.13)     (0.04)
 5,5                   0.78          -0.35     57.95            2.94          -1.00      0.89
                      (0.29)        (0.58)     (6.86)          (1.23)        (1.17)     (0.05)

 Joint-tests
 All = 0               35.2           12.3      108            52.3           33.7      24079
                      (0.085)       (0.984)   (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.115)    (0.000)
                      [0.179]       [0.972]   [0.000]         [0.084]       [0.461]    [0.000]

 All = constant        27.3           11.7       66            43.4           33.4       193
                      (0.290)       (0.983)   (0.000)         (0.009)       (0.096)    (0.000)
                      [0.436]       [0.963]   [0.000]         [0.172]       [0.402]    [0.000]


Note: Quarterly data, 1949–2005. The portfolios are the Fama-French 25 portfolios of US stocks sorted on
size and the book-to-market value ratio. The risk factors are real per capita consumption (nondurables &
services) growth, real per capita durable consumption growth, and the real value weighted US stock market
return from the Fama-French data (see Appendix B for more details). Part (a) reports the sample covariance
between the excess return to portfolio i and each risk factor. Part (b) reports the slope coe¢ cient from an
OLS regression of the excess return to portfolio i on a constant and each risk factor. GMM (VARHAC)
standard errors are reported in parentheses. The bottom of the table reports 2 test statistics for two
tests. The …rst test is of the hypothesis that the covariances (or betas) with the factor are equal to 0 for
all portfolios. The second tests is of the hypothesis that the covariances (or betas) with the factor equal
a common value. GMM (VARHAC)-based p-values are reported in parentheses. Small sample p-values
computed using a Monte Carlo experiment described in the text are reported in square brackets.




                                                    47
TABLE 7: Means of Estimated SDFs

                         (a) Lustig-Verdelhan Data        (b) Fama-French 25 Data
                         First Stage Second Stage         First Stage Second Stage

 Consumption growth         0.243         0.240             0.357         0.274
                           (0.221)       (0.132)           (0.115)       (0.067)

 Durables growth            0.319         0.184             -0.156        0.029
                           (0.188)       (0.163)           (0.192)       (0.116)

 Rm-Rf                      0.617         0.546             0.935         0.907
                           (0.181)       (0.169)           (0.034)       (0.040)

 Consumption Factors        0.251         0.205             0.056         0.075
                           (0.161)       (0.162)           (0.100)       (0.077)

 Yogo Factors               0.204         0.148             0.060         0.081
                           (0.139)       (0.156)           (0.105)       (0.082)

 Fama-French Factors        0.477         0.213             0.854         0.820
                           (0.271)       (0.184)           (0.040)       (0.043)


Note: Part (a) of the table displays the sample means of the estimated SDFs corresponding to the parameter
estimates in Table 1. Part (b) of the table displays the sample means of the estimated SDFs corresponding
to the parameter estimates in Table 3. GMM (VARHAC) standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                     48
TABLE 8: Tests of the Rank Condition

                           LV Data        FF25 Data

 Consumption growth          15.6             52.3
                            (0.048)         (0.001)

 Durables growth             10.0             33.7
                            (0.265)         (0.115)

 Rm-Rf                       7.58            24079
                            (0.475)         (0.000)

 Consumption Factors         8.17             23.6
                            (0.318)         (0.487)

 Yogo Factors                4.26             12.9
                            (0.642)         (0.954)

 Fama-French Factors         3.03            7102
                            (0.805)         (0.000)


Note: This table presents test statistics pertaining to the rank of cov(Rte ; ft ). P-values for the statistics are
in parentheses. Under the null hypothesis that rank[cov(Rte ; ft )] = k 1, where k is the number of factors in
the candidate SDF, the statistic shown is distributed as a 2n (k 1) where n is the dimension of Rte . For the
LV data, Rte is an 8 1 vector of excess returns of equally-weighted portfolios of short-term foreign-currency
denominated money market securities sorted by their interest di¤erential with the US, and ft is a scalar or
vector of risk factors. The factors are real per household consumption (nondurables & services) growth, real
per household durable consumption growth, and the following variables from the Fama-French data: the real
value weighted US stock market excess return over the risk free rate (Rm-Rf ), the gross return to the same
portfolio (Rm), and the SMB and HML portfolio excess returns For the FF data, Rte is a 25 1 vector of
excess returns of the Fama-French 25 portfolios of US stocks sorted on size and the book-to-market value
ratio, and ft is a scalar or vector of risk factors. The factors are real per capita consumption (nondurables
& services) growth, real per capita durable consumption growth, and the following variables from the Fama-
French data: the real value weighted US stock market excess return over the risk free rate (Rm-Rf ), the
gross return to the same portfolio (Rm), and the SMB and HML portfolio excess returns.




                                                        49
TABLE 9: Monte-Carlo Experiments with the Lustig-Verdelhan Returns

                                    Percentiles                                            Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM        5        10         50         90           95     Mean    Std. Dev.   10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                     a-Normalization
 b         1       25.1     29.9       44.8        62.1    68.2        45.5      13.2        96.3        93.7
     f     1      -7.64     0.83       2.77       10.18   18.00        1.68      213         18.9         8.2
 Em        1      -0.01     0.06       0.29        0.56    0.64        0.30      0.20        52.0        40.8
 R2        1       0.28     0.40       0.73        0.90    0.93        0.69      0.20         –            –

 b         2       36.2     38.4       48.7        64.0         69.6   50.3      10.5        100.0       99.9
     f     2      -7.66     1.82       3.83       11.98        20.50   3.95     117.28       46.5        31.5
 Em        2      -0.01     0.05       0.24        0.41         0.46   0.23      0.14         56.7       46.0
 R2        2       0.14     0.32       0.71        0.90         0.93   0.65      0.25          –           –
 J         2       3.29     4.16       8.40       13.68        15.24   8.72      3.67        18.8         8.6

                                                      -Normalization
          1/2     0.0110   0.0120     0.0155      0.0191 0.0201      0.0156     0.0027       100.0       99.9
 b         1       -67.0    -49.1       -0.5       47.7    66.6       -0.1       41.2         3.4        1.2
     f     1       -1.34    -0.98      -0.01       0.97    1.33       0.00       0.83         3.9        1.5
 R2        1       -0.01     0.00       0.06       0.28    0.36       0.10       0.12          –          –

 b         2      -82.8    -62.4       0.4        61.2          82.5     0.3     51.6        35.0        25.1
     f     2      -1.66    -1.26      0.01         1.26         1.65    0.01     1.03        34.3        23.7
     2
 R         2      -0.23    -0.13       0.02        0.23         0.32    0.04     0.17         –           –
 J         2       8.18    11.05      18.81       21.68        22.61   17.52     4.39        87.3        80.6

 L (Rank-test)     3.3      4.3         9.7        20.1        24.5    11.3       7.0        28.7        21.0



Note: The table reports results from 10000 Monte Carlo experiments described in the main text. Each
experiment uses a sample of 50 observations. In each experiment Rte , t = 1, : : : , 50, is the 8 1 vector
of excess returns from the Lustig-Verdelhan data (the returns do not vary across experiments). In each
experiment a random risk factor, ft , is generated using MATLAB’s random number generator (so the risk
factor varies across experiments). The process for ft is a Gaussian AR(1) with mean, variance and …rst order
serial correlation equal to the sample mean, variance and …rst order serial correlation of US consumption
growth in the Lustig-Verdelhan data. For each experiment the model is estimated using the a-normalization
and the -normalization.




                                                          50
TABLE 10: Monte-Carlo Experiments with the Fama-French 25 Returns

                                   Percentiles                                            Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM        5       10         50         90          95      Mean    Std. Dev.   10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                    a-Normalization
 b         1      101      106        127         157     169         130        21         100.0      100.0
     f     1      0.56     0.61       0.94        1.89    2.65        1.15      7.1          70.6       51.3
 Em        1      0.15     0.21       0.35        0.46    0.48        0.34      0.1          85.3       78.8
 R2        1      0.55     0.62       0.80        0.91    0.93        0.78      0.12          –          –

 b         2       115      118       131         147         152     132        11         100.0      100.0
     f     2       0.77     0.82      1.04        1.43        1.60    1.09      0.29         99.9      99.6
 Em        2       0.23     0.26      0.33        0.40        0.42    0.33      0.06        100.0      99.9
 R2        2      -0.39    -0.06      0.64        0.86        0.90    0.50      0.45          –          –
 J         2       18.2     20.5      29.1        38.8        41.7    29.4      7.1          28.9       16.4

                                                      -Normalization
          1/2    0.0045   0.0047     0.0051      0.0055 0.0056       0.0051    0.0003       100.0      100.0
 b         1       199      219        335         580     686         371      178         73.9       50.7
     f     1       0.53     0.58       0.88       1.51     1.78        0.97     0.45        75.4       53.6
 R2        1      -5.86    -3.20      -0.54       0.25     0.39       -1.30     2.59          –          –

 b         2       53.0     76.8      146         218         240     146       57.2        71.6        61.5
     f     2       0.14     0.20      0.39        0.57        0.62    0.38      0.15        73.8        64.8
     2
 R         2      -14.8    -13.0      -5.9        -1.3        -0.6    -6.6      4.4          –           –
 J         2        9.2     12.2      26.8        43.3        47.5    27.4      12.0        32.0        23.6

 L (Rank-test)    30.0     34.2       51.1        74.3        81.5    53.0      16.4        89.6        83.5



Note: The table reports results from 10000 Monte Carlo experiments described in the main text. Each
experiment uses a sample of 228 observations. In each experiment Rte , t = 1, : : : , 228, is the 25 1
vector of excess returns from the Fama-French data (1949–2005). Panel spurious risk factors are generated
                                                                            0
using MATLAB’s random number generator by setting ft = + c Rte Re ^ R1 + t where Re and ^ R
                                                   e
are the sample mean and covariance matrix of Rt , and t is t       N iid(0; 2 ). Across repeated samples
      e
cov(Rt ; ft ) = c , by construction. So that ft mimics US consumption growth in the period 1949–2005, I
set = 0:0051, c = 7:49 10 5 , and = 0:005. This implies that across repeated samples E(ft ), var(ft )
and cov(Rte ; ft ) match the corresponding sample moments in US data. For each experiment the model is
estimated using the a-normalization and the -normalization.




                                                         51
TABLE 11: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Annual Data
Estimated Model uses the True Risk Factor and the a-Normalization

                              Percentiles                                      Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM       5     10       50      90   95         Mean    Std. Dev.    10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                 T = 50
 b         1     10.2   12.7     20.6   27.0   28.7        20.2      5.7          90.8        86.7
     f     1     0.25   0.33     0.63   0.95   1.04        0.64     0.24          85.4        76.9
 Em        1     0.49   0.53     0.68   0.83   0.87        0.68     0.12         100.0       100.0
 R2        1     0.33   0.52     0.86   0.96   0.97        0.79     0.22           –           –

 b         2     14.5   17.0     24.0   29.7   31.1        23.6      5.1          97.4        95.7
     f     2     0.38   0.47     0.79   1.13   1.23        0.80     0.26          94.4        89.4
 Em        2     0.45   0.49     0.62   0.77   0.82        0.63     0.11         100.0       100.0
 R2        2     0.15   0.38     0.83   0.95   0.97        0.73     0.28            –           –
 J         2     2.4    3.1      6.2    10.5   11.8        6.5       2.9           4.4         1.2

                                                T = 250
 b         1     15.3   16.4     19.7   22.7   23.6        19.6      2.5         100.0       100.0
     f     1     0.42   0.46     0.60   0.73   0.77        0.60     0.11         100.0       100.0
 Em        1     0.61   0.63     0.69   0.76   0.78        0.69     0.05         100.0       100.0
 R2        1     0.89   0.91     0.96   0.99   0.99        0.95     0.04           –           –

 b         2     16.5   17.5     20.5   23.3   24.1        20.5      2.3         100.0       100.0
     f     2     0.47   0.50     0.63   0.76   0.80        0.63     0.10         100.0       100.0
 Em        2     0.60   0.62     0.68   0.75   0.76        0.68     0.05         100.0       100.0
 R2        2     0.87   0.90     0.96   0.99   0.99        0.95     0.04           –           –
 J         2     2.2    2.8      6.3    11.7   13.5        6.9       3.5          8.9         3.9

                                                T = 1000
 b         1     17.4   17.9     19.5   21.1   21.5      19.5        1.2         100.0       100.0
     f     1     0.50   0.52     0.59   0.66   0.68      0.59       0.05         100.0       100.0
 Em        1     0.65   0.66     0.70   0.73   0.74      0.70       0.03         100.0       100.0
 R2        1     0.98   0.98     0.99   1.00   1.00      0.99       0.01           –           –

 b         2     17.8   18.3     19.8   21.2   21.6        19.7      1.1         100.0       100.0
     f     2     0.52   0.54     0.60   0.66   0.68        0.60     0.05         100.0       100.0
 Em        2     0.65   0.66     0.69   0.72   0.73        0.69     0.03         100.0       100.0
 R2        2     0.97   0.98     0.99   1.00   1.00        0.99     0.01           –           –
 J         2     2.1    2.9      6.3    11.8   13.8        6.9       3.7          9.4         4.6


Note: The table reports results from 10000 Monte Carlo experiments with sample sizes T = 50, T = 250
and T = 1000. The true risk factor, ft N iid( ; 2 ) with and 2 equal to the sample mean and variance
of US consumption growth in the LV data. The SDF is given by mt = a ft b, with a = 1:42, b = 27:72.
I generate Rte = R + (mt        m) +    t where R and       are 8 1 vectors, m = a           b,   is an 8 8
diagonal matrix, and t N iid(0; In ) and is independent of ft . The parameters in R , and are set so
         e
that E(Rit mt ) = 0, and the means and variances of the elements of Rte are equal to their sample equivalents
in the LV data. The model is estimated by GMM using the a-normalization. The parameters’true values
are b = 19:5, f = 0:678 (expressed in percent) and Em = 0:70.




                                                      52
TABLE 12: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Annual Data
Estimated Model uses the True Risk Factor and the -Normalization

                                 Percentiles                                       Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM       5      10        50       90      95       Mean    Std. Dev.    10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                   T = 50
          1/2    0.012   0.013     0.016   0.018   0.019      0.016     0.002        100.0       100.0
 b         1      8.5    12.4      26.7    45.1     51.1      27.9      13.1         73.6         59.4
     f     1     0.18    0.26      0.55    0.85     0.94      0.55      0.23         77.0         66.1
 R2        1     0.10    0.27      0.68    0.88     0.91      0.62      0.25           –           –

 b       2         9.9   13.3      27.6    46.3     52.4      28.9      13.2         82.0         72.5
     f   2        0.21   0.28      0.57    0.87     0.96      0.57      0.23         83.1         74.9
     2
 R       2        0.04   0.22      0.66    0.87     0.90      0.59      0.27           –            –
 J       2         2.6   3.3       7.2     13.2     15.1       7.8       3.9         14.5          7.5
 L (Rank-test)    406    469       807     1384     1632      885       394          100.0       100.0

                                                   T = 250
          1/2    0.014   0.014     0.016   0.017    0.017     0.016     0.001        100.0       100.0
 b         1      19.0    20.8     27.7    35.3      37.7     27.9       5.7         100.0       100.0
     f     1      0.41    0.45     0.58    0.71      0.75     0.58      0.11         100.0       100.0
 R2        1     0.795   0.837     0.925   0.970    0.977     0.911     0.060          –           –

 b       2       19.9    21.5      28.0    35.2     37.5      28.2       5.3         100.0       100.0
     f   2       0.43    0.46      0.59    0.71     0.75      0.59      0.10         100.0       100.0
     2
 R       2       0.78    0.82      0.92    0.97     0.98      0.90      0.07           –           –
 J       2        2.2     2.9       6.5    12.3     14.4       7.2       3.8          10.8        5.6
 L (Rank-test)   1985    2127      2691    3400     3636      2741      507          100.0       100.0

                                                   T = 1000
          1/2    0.015   0.015     0.016   0.016    0.016     0.016     0.000        100.0       100.0
 b         1      23.4    24.4     27.9    31.6      32.7     28.0       2.8         100.0       100.0
     f     1      0.50    0.52     0.59    0.66      0.67     0.59      0.05         100.0       100.0
 R2        1     0.952   0.960     0.980   0.992    0.994     0.978     0.014          –           –

 b       2       23.8    24.7      27.9     31.5    32.4       28.0      2.6         100.0       100.0
     f   2       0.51    0.53      0.59     0.65    0.67       0.59     0.05         100.0       100.0
     2
 R       2       0.95    0.96      0.98     0.99    0.99       0.98     0.02           –           –
 J       2        2.1     2.9      6.3      11.9    14.0        7.0      3.7          9.8         4.9
 L (Rank-test)   8584    8874     10003    11257   11631      10043     932          100.0       100.0



Note: The table reports results from the Monte Carlo experiments described in Table 11. In this table the
results are GMM estimates of the -normalization. The parameters’ true values are b = 28, f = 0:678
(expressed in percent) and = 0:0156.




                                                     53
TABLE 13: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cal Annual Data
Estimated Model uses a Spurious Risk Factor and the a-Normalization

                             Percentiles                                         Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM       5       10     50     90      95         Mean     Std. Dev.   10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                 T = 50
 b         1       27.3   33.3    49.7   69.6   77.6        50.6        15.8       95.7        93.2
     f     1      -19.9    -8.2    3.1   14.6   27.9         8.2       499.1       12.5         4.9
 Em        1      -0.16   -0.06   0.22   0.49   0.59        0.22        0.23       36.6        27.7
 R2        1       0.25    0.42   0.81   0.94   0.96        0.74        0.23        –            –

 b         2      27.4    31.6    44.7   59.8   65.5        45.4        12.1       97.2        95.6
     f     2       0.1    1.0      2.8    8.8   14.7        2.5        164.4       37.6        22.9
 Em        2      0.00    0.08    0.30   0.52   0.60        0.30        0.19       61.9        52.3
 R2        2      0.22    0.39    0.78   0.93   0.95        0.71        0.24         –           –
 J         2       2.4    3.0      6.3   10.8   12.2         6.7         3.0        5.5         1.7

                                                T = 250
 b         1       47.4   50.0    60.3   74.2   79.1        61.4         9.8       100.0       100.0
     f     1      -64.5   -30.3    6.3   35.6   66.0         4.7       757.7        9.6         4.4
 Em        1      -0.21   -0.14   0.06   0.21   0.25        0.05        0.14       15.0         9.9
 R2        1       0.82    0.87   0.95   0.98   0.99        0.93        0.06         –           –

 b         2       44.3    46.9   55.6   66.8   70.8        56.3         8.1       100.0       100.0
     f     2      -35.9   -14.2    6.5   25.8   45.9         2.8       605.2       21.9         12.2
 Em        2      -0.09   -0.03   0.13   0.27   0.31        0.12        0.12       32.9         24.3
 R2        2       0.79    0.84   0.94   0.98   0.98        0.92        0.07         –            –
 J         2        2.2    2.8     6.1   11.3   13.2         6.7         3.5        7.8          3.7

                                                T = 1000
 b         1       55.3   57.0    63.3   70.9   73.5         63.7        5.5       100.0       100.0
     f     1     -128.1   -63.5   10.2   68.7   133.8       -650.1    95362.6       9.8         4.8
 Em        1      -0.13   -0.10   0.01   0.11   0.13         0.01       0.08       10.8         6.0
 R2        1       0.96    0.97   0.99   0.99   1.00         0.98       0.01         –           –

 b         2       54.4    55.9   61.5   68.1   70.4        61.9        4.9        100.0       100.0
     f     2     -111.9   -53.5   13.3   62.7   123.9       13.3       756.3       13.9          7.6
 Em        2      -0.09   -0.06   0.04   0.12   0.15        0.04       0.07        17.6         11.0
 R2        2       0.96    0.96   0.98   0.99   1.00        0.98       0.01          –            –
 J         2        2.2    2.9     6.3   11.7   13.7         6.9        3.6         9.0          4.4


Note: The table reports results from the Monte Carlo experiments described in Table 11. Here the asset
returns and true risk factor are generated in the same way, but I report results from experiments in which
the proposed SDF is mt = 1 xt b and xt is a spurious factor. I assume that xt N iid( ; 2 ) with and
  2
    equal to the sample mean and variance of US consumption growth in the Lustig-Verdelhan data, and xt
is independent of the true risk factor, ft . The model is estimated by GMM using the a-normalization.




                                                       54
TABLE 14: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Annual Data
Estimated Model uses a Spurious Risk Factor and the -Normalization

                                 Percentiles                                        Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM        5       10        50     90       95       Mean    Std. Dev.    10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                    T = 50
          1/2    0.012    0.013     0.016   0.018   0.019      0.016     0.002        100.0       100.0
 b         1     -101.7   -78.9      -0.1    77.9   100.6       0.0       64.0        16.7         6.2
     f     1      -2.05   -1.59      0.00    1.57    2.00      0.00       1.29        19.9         8.6
 R2        1      -0.11   -0.05      0.10    0.52    0.63      0.17       0.24          –           –

 b       2        -74.1   -55.3      -0.4   56.7      76.4      0.2      47.3         20.7        12.2
     f   2        -1.52   -1.13     -0.01   1.15      1.53     0.00      0.95         22.1        13.4
     2
 R       2        -0.20   -0.12      0.05   0.45      0.57     0.10      0.24          –           –
 J       2         3.0     3.9       9.2    16.5      18.7     9.8       4.8          30.5        18.9
 L (Rank-test)     3.9     5.2      12.3    26.6      32.4     14.5      9.4          44.7        35.3

                                                    T = 250
          1/2    0.014     0.014    0.016   0.017    0.017     0.016     0.001        100.0       100.0
 b         1     -185.7   -152.4     1.5    151.3    186.9      0.4      121.1        49.3        27.6
     f     1      -3.88    -3.16     0.03    3.16     3.88     0.01       2.53        50.6        29.6
 R2        1      -0.02     0.00     0.15    0.58     0.68     0.22       0.23          –           –

 b       2       -112.2   -86.7      -1.0   86.6     113.4      0.1      70.3         20.0        10.3
     f   2        -2.34   -1.81     -0.02   1.81      2.36     0.00      1.47         21.0        11.2
     2
 R       2        -0.06   -0.03      0.08   0.47      0.61     0.16      0.21          –            –
 J       2         2.9     4.1       14.1   35.3     40.7      17.3      12.2         56.4        50.1
 L (Rank-test)     3.0     3.8       8.0    15.3      18.1      9.0      4.8          16.1         9.5

                                                    T = 1000
          1/2    0.015     0.015    0.016   0.016    0.016     0.016     0.000        100.0       100.0
 b         1     -353.4   -291.9     -4.1   296.8    360.7      -0.4     233.8        68.9        49.8
     f     1      -7.42    -6.13    -0.09    6.24     7.55     -0.01      4.92        69.3        50.4
 R2        1      -0.01     0.00     0.17    0.59     0.69     0.24       0.23          –           –

 b       2       -201.7   -157.0     -1.6   158.0    205.6      -0.7     125.9        25.2        15.4
     f   2        -4.22    -3.28    -0.03    3.34     4.29     -0.01      2.65        25.5        15.6
     2
 R       2        -0.03    -0.02     0.09    0.49     0.61     0.17       0.21         –            –
 J       2         2.8      4.0      17.1   99.7     121.1     34.1       37.8        60.6        55.6
 L (Rank-test)     2.8      3.6      7.6    13.8      16.0      8.2       4.1         11.2         5.8



Note: The table reports results from the Monte Carlo experiments described in Table 11. Here the asset
returns and true risk factor are generated in the same way, but I report results from experiments in which
the proposed SDF is mt = 1 (xt         )b and xt is a spurious factor. I assume that xt N iid( ; 2 ) with
       2
and      equal to the sample mean and variance of US consumption growth in the Lustig-Verdelhan data, and
xt is independent of the true risk factor, ft . The model is estimated by GMM using the -normalization.




                                                      55
TABLE 15: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Quarterly Data, T = 228
Estimated Model Uses the True Risk Factors

                                   Percentiles                                             Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM        5       10         50         90          95      Mean     Std. Dev.   10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                    a-Normalization
 b1        1       2.49     2.80       3.87       4.91    5.21       3.86        0.83        99.7       99.3
 b2        1      -2.28    -1.79      -0.09       1.61    2.10      -0.09        1.32        11.0        5.3
 b3        1       3.96     4.37       5.83       7.24    7.63       5.81        1.12        99.9       99.8
  f1       1       1.02     1.21       1.92       2.61    2.80       1.92        0.54        97.2       94.1
  f2       1      -0.06     0.07       0.53       1.00    1.14       0.53        0.36        42.5       31.1
  f3       1       0.70     0.83       1.31       1.79    1.92       1.31        0.37        97.3       94.4
 Em        1       0.77     0.79       0.85       0.90    0.91       0.85        0.04        100.0      100.0
 R2        1       0.84     0.87       0.94       0.97    0.98       0.93        0.05          –          –

 b1        2       2.83     3.17       4.34       5.49        5.81     4.34      0.91         99.9      99.8
 b2        2      -2.50    -1.95      -0.06       1.83        2.35    -0.08      1.47         17.2      10.5
 b3        2       4.46     4.91       6.53       8.06        8.48     6.51      1.22        100.0      99.9
  f1       2       1.17     1.40       2.21       3.03        3.26     2.21      0.63         98.2      96.4
  f2       2      -0.06     0.09       0.62       1.16        1.32     0.62      0.42         52.1      40.4
  f3       2       0.80     0.95       1.49       2.04        2.20     1.50      0.42         98.3      96.6
 Em        2       0.75     0.77       0.83       0.88        0.90     0.83      0.05        100.0      100.0
 R2        2      -0.50    -0.10       0.64       0.91        0.94     0.49      0.53           –         –
 J         2       13.1     14.7       21.8       30.2        32.9     22.2      6.1           8.6       3.8

                                                     -Normalization
  1       1/2    0.0108   0.0127     0.0197      0.0266 0.0285        0.0197    0.0054       97.9        95.6
  2       1/2    0.0005   0.0018     0.0063      0.0109 0.0122        0.0063    0.0035       55.7        43.0
  3       1/2    0.0059   0.0072     0.0118      0.0164 0.0177        0.0118    0.0036       95.1        90.9
 b1        1       2.78     3.17       4.55       6.08    6.54          4.60     1.14        99.7        99.2
 b2        1      -2.72    -2.11      -0.09       1.90    2.49         -0.10     1.56         9.8         4.6
 b3        1       4.41     4.92       6.84       8.94    9.62          6.90     1.58        99.9        99.8
  f1       1       1.02     1.21       1.91       2.61    2.80          1.92     0.54        97.3        94.1
  f2       1      -0.06     0.08       0.53       1.00    1.14          0.53     0.36        42.8        31.3
  f3       1       0.69     0.83       1.30       1.77    1.91          1.30     0.37        97.1        94.2
 R2        1       0.80     0.83       0.92       0.96    0.96          0.90     0.06          –           –

 b1        2       2.79     3.15       4.53       6.12        6.58     4.60      1.16        99.8        99.3
 b2        2      -2.66    -2.08      -0.09       1.92        2.50    -0.10      1.56        12.1         6.2
 b3        2       4.39     4.89       6.86       9.02        9.69     6.92      1.62        99.9        99.8
  f1       2       1.00     1.19       1.91       2.63        2.85     1.92      0.56        96.9        93.8
  f2       2      -0.07     0.07       0.53       1.01        1.15     0.53      0.37        44.2        32.3
  f3       2       0.69     0.82       1.30       1.79        1.93     1.31      0.38        97.2        94.7
 R2        2       0.45     0.59       0.85       0.93        0.94     0.79      0.18         –            –
 J         2       13.5     15.3       23.0       32.5        35.6     23.5      6.8         13.7         7.3

 L (Rank-test)    7678     8154      10345       13231    14086       10571      2003        100.0      100.0



Note: The note to Table 15 is on the following page.




                                                         56
Note to Table 15 : The table reports results from 10000 Monte Carlo experiments with sample size T =
228. The true risk factors, ft     N iid( ; f ) with  and f equal to the sample mean and covariance
matrix of the Fama-French factors (1949Q1–2005Q4). The SDF is given by mt = a ft0 b, with a = 1:166,
b = ( 4:50     0:12 6:78 )0 . I generate Rte = R + (ft    )+      t , where R is a 25       1 vector, is an
25 3 matrix,      is a 25 25 lower triangular matrix, and t N iid(0; In ) and is independent of ft . The
elements of and so that the model-implied var(Rte ) and cov(Rte ; ft ) are equal to their sample equivalents
for the FF25 portfolios and Fama-French factors (1949Q1–2005Q4). The vector R is set to ensure that
E(Rte mt ) = 0. The model is estimated by GMM using the a- and -normalizations. The parameters’true
values are 1 = 0:0197, 2 = 0:0063, 3 = 0:0119, b1 = 3:86, b2 = 0:10, b3 = 5:82, b1 = 4:51, b2 = 0:12,
b3 = 6:80, f 1 = 1:92, f 2 = 0:53, f 3 = 1:32.and Em = 0:86.




                                                    57
TABLE 16: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Quarterly Data, T = 228
Estimated Model Uses a Single Relevant Factor

                                      Percentiles                                                Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM          5        10         50         90           95     Mean    Std. Dev.       10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                       a-Normalization
 b          1        2.01      2.29       3.33       4.34    4.61       3.32        0.79           99.1          98.2
     f      1        1.35      1.56       2.31       3.07    3.28       2.31        0.58           99.1          98.0
 Em         1        0.87      0.89       0.93       0.97    0.98       0.93        0.03           100.0         100.0
 R2         1       -1.09     -0.89      -0.41       0.01    0.15      -0.43        0.39             –             –

 b          2        2.27      2.62       3.86       5.03         5.34    3.85      0.94            99.5         99.1
     f      2        1.53      1.79       2.71       3.64         3.89    2.71      0.72            99.5         99.0
 Em         2        0.85      0.87       0.92       0.97         0.97    0.92      0.04           100.0         100.0
 R2         2       -3.18     -2.43      -0.83      -0.17        -0.02   -1.13      1.17             –             –
 J          2        28.7      31.5       42.6       54.8         58.1    42.9      9.0             86.2          76.0

                                                         -Normalization
           12      0.0108    0.0127     0.0197      0.0266 0.0285       0.0197     0.0054           97.9         95.6
 b         1         2.04      2.35       3.54        4.84    5.22        3.58      0.97            99.0         97.8
     f     1         1.35      1.55       2.29        3.05    3.26        2.29      0.58            99.1         97.9
 R2        1        -1.45     -1.19      -0.60       -0.17   -0.03       -0.65      0.45             –            –

 b          2        1.64      1.92       3.05       4.31         4.69    3.10      0.94            97.8         95.0
     f      2        1.07      1.26       1.98       2.72         2.94    1.99      0.57            98.0         95.4
     2
 R          2       -2.10     -1.78      -0.99      -0.51        -0.37   -1.08      0.56             –            –
 J          2        29.2      32.3       44.0       57.3         61.1    44.5      9.7             88.2         79.1

 L (Rank-test)     25259     27305      34312       43574    46898       35047      6588           100.0         100.0



Note: The table reports results from Monte Carlo experiments described in Table 15. The proposed SDF is
a single factor model that uses a fully relevant risk factor, x1t , which is equal to the …rst true risk factor, f1t
(described in Table 15). The model is estimated by GMM using the a- and -normalizations.




                                                            58
TABLE 17: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Quarterly Data, T = 228
Estimated Model Uses a Single Factor that is Panel Spurious

                                     Percentiles                                              Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM         5        10         50         90           95     Mean    Std. Dev.     10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                      a-Normalization
 b          1      91.4      99.0      126.4       159.8   171.3      128.4        24.7         100.0        99.9
     f      1      0.44      0.52       0.93        2.03    2.91       1.26       18.89          71.2        54.1
 Em         1      0.14      0.19       0.35        0.50    0.54       0.35        0.12          85.7        79.7
 R2         1      0.46      0.56       0.79        0.91    0.93       0.75        0.18           –           –

 b          2       98.0    102.8      119.4       137.4        143.1   119.9     13.7          100.0        100.0
     f      2       0.53     0.58       0.80        1.17         1.32    0.85     0.26           99.8         99.3
 Em         2       0.27     0.30       0.39        0.48         0.51    0.39     0.07           99.9         99.8
 R2         2      -1.14    -0.49       0.58        0.85         0.89    0.31     0.87            –             –
 J          2       16.5     18.7       26.8        36.2         39.0    27.2     6.8            18.7          9.5

                                                       -Normalization
           12     0.0045    0.0047     0.0051      0.0055 0.0056      0.0051     0.0003         100.0        100.0
 b         1      148.6     183.2      329.2       614.8   742.3      367.6       210.4         75.0         53.9
     f     1        0.40      0.48       0.87       1.60    1.92        0.96       0.54         76.0         56.1
 R2        1       -7.88     -4.18      -0.51       0.29    0.43       -1.70       4.23           –            –

 b          2       16.2      34.3      96.9       163.7        182.9    97.6     51.5           44.7        32.5
     f      2       0.04      0.09      0.25        0.43         0.48    0.26     0.14           47.4        36.3
     2
 R          2      -27.7     -22.0      -8.7        -2.0         -1.1   -10.9     9.2              –           –
 J          2        5.4       7.2      17.4        32.1         36.9    18.7     9.8             8.5         5.2

 L (Rank-test)     30.1      33.8       51.9        74.8        83.0    53.7      16.9           88.8        83.3



Note: The table reports results from Monte Carlo experiments described in Table 15. The proposed SDF is
a single factor model that uses a panel spurious factor. This factor, x2t , is generated according to the law of
motion
                                     x2t = x2 + c 0 R1 (Rte      R ) + u2t

where c is a scalar, is an n 1 vector of ones, R and R are the mean and covariance matrix of the
vector of returns described in Table 15, and u2t N iid(0; 2u2 ) is independent of Rte and x1t (described in
Table 16). I set x2 equal to the sample mean of US consumption growth in the period 1949Q1–2005Q4.
I set c equal to the cross-sectional average of the sample covariance between US consumption growth and
the FF25 returns over the same period. I set 2u2 so that the variance of x2t equals the sample variance of
US consumption growth over the same period. The factor x2t is panel spurious because cov(Rte ; x2t ) = c,
by construction. The model is estimated by GMM using the a- and -normalizations.




                                                           59
TABLE 18: Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Quarterly Data, T = 228
Estimated Model Has Three Factors, One of Which is Spurious

                                   Percentiles                                             Percent Signi…cant at
         GMM        5       10         50         90           95     Mean     Std. Dev.   10% level 5% level
         Stage
                                                    a-Normalization
 b1        1      -1.22    -0.97      -0.17       0.61    0.82      -0.18         0.63        8.4         3.5
 b2        1      -17.0     -4.6       35.8       75.1    87.8       35.5         32.2       36.5        26.3
 b3        1       43.7     51.1       73.7       97.2   104.8       73.9         18.8       97.2        95.6
  f1       1      -2.10     0.00       2.03       4.20    6.18       2.06         31.4       42.5        34.9
  f2       1      -6.18    -2.61       0.70       3.74    6.59       0.65         34.2        5.8         2.4
  f3       1     -18.18    -8.48       1.90       9.62   17.78       0.77        152.1        7.1         2.5
 Em        1      -0.11    -0.07       0.06       0.16    0.20       0.05         0.09       17.5        10.6
 R2        1       0.93     0.94       0.98       0.99    0.99       0.97         0.03         –           –

 b1        2      -0.89    -0.70      -0.05       0.58        0.77    -0.06      0.51         12.4        6.9
 b2        2       9.0      15.6       37.6       59.4        66.3     37.6      17.6         73.2       64.6
 b3        2       49.3     53.1       66.1       79.2        83.2     66.2      10.4        100.0       99.9
  f1       2      -0.33     0.43       1.94       3.53        4.42     1.81      13.6         49.2       39.5
  f2       2       0.04     0.26       0.76       2.07        3.26     0.94      17.0         37.0       22.9
  f3       2       0.67     0.90       1.77       4.85        7.76     1.99      49.3         52.1       37.2
 Em        2       0.01     0.04       0.12       0.20        0.22     0.12      0.06         62.6       52.4
 R2        2       0.66     0.76       0.93       0.98        0.98     0.89      0.12           –          –
 J         2       10.7     12.2       18.6       26.5        28.9     19.1      5.6           2.6        1.0

                                                     -Normalization
  1       12     0.0108   0.0127     0.0197      0.0266 0.0285        0.0197    0.0054        97.9       95.6
  2       12     0.0045   0.0047     0.0051      0.0055 0.0056        0.0051    0.0003       100.0      100.0
  3       12     0.0098   0.0099     0.0104      0.0109 0.0111        0.0104    0.0004       100.0      100.0
 b1       1       -3.00    -1.91      1.59        5.19    6.44         1.64       2.92       23.9       16.6
 b2       1      -203.6   -101.1     184.3       386.5   446.2        161.2      197.4       43.7       27.2
 b3       1      -393.4   -321.2       0.3       318.9   380.9          0.4      245.0       37.3       18.5
  f1      1        1.21     1.42      2.21        3.00    3.24         2.21       0.61       97.5       94.5
  f2      1       -0.48    -0.22      0.49        1.00    1.15         0.43       0.49       48.0       32.4
  f3      1       -1.34    -1.09      0.01        1.09    1.31         0.00       0.84       38.9       20.2
 R2       1       -0.66    -0.45      0.21        0.64    0.72         0.14       0.44         –          –

 b1        2       0.32     0.85       2.53       4.24         4.74    2.54      1.34        39.3        26.6
 b2        2      -65.3    -39.5       43.9      123.7        148.1    42.8      64.7        11.6         5.9
 b3        2     -111.1    -84.4        1.3       83.8        106.3     0.2      66.2         6.7         2.9
  f1       2       0.90     1.12       1.93       2.74         2.97    1.93      0.63        74.9        62.1
  f2       2      -0.14    -0.08       0.13       0.34         0.40    0.13      0.16        16.0         8.9
  f3       2      -0.38    -0.29       0.01       0.28         0.37    0.00      0.23         7.6         3.5
 R2        2      -3.19    -2.44      -0.85      -0.08         0.09   -1.10      1.08          –           –
 J         2        6.4      7.5       13.6       26.2         31.6    15.5      8.0          5.6         3.8

 L (Rank-test)    14.8     17.2       26.1        37.2        41.4     26.8       8.1        23.4        14.3



Note: The note to Table 18 is on the following page.




                                                         60
Note to Table 18 : The table reports results from Monte Carlo experiments described in Table 15. The
proposed SDF is a three factor model that uses a relevant factor, x1t , a panel spurious factor, x2t , and a
purely spurious factor, x3t . The factors x1t and x2t are described in Tables 16 and 17, while x3t is generated
according to the law of motion x3t = x3 + u3t , where u3t         N iid(0; 2u3 ) is independent of Rte , u1t and
u2t (de…ned in Tables 16 and 17). I set x3 equal to the sample mean of durables growth in the period
1949Q1–2005Q4. I set the variance of u3t equal to the sample variance of durables growth in the period
1949Q1–2005Q4:The model is estimated by GMM using the a- and -normalizations.




                                                      61
                                      FIGURE 1
    Actual Expected Returns and Predicted Expected Returns for Single Factor Models
                                 Lustig-Verdelhan Data


                                (a ) C ons um ption Growth                                        (b) C ons um ption Growth
                                      a -norm a liza tion                                              ξ-norm a liza tion
                         4                                                                 4



                         2                                                                 2
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)
                         0                                                                 0



                         -2                                                                -2



                         -4                                                                -4
                           -4   -2             0              2   4                          -4   -2             0             2   4
                                       Predicted ER (%)                                                  Predicted ER (%)

                                 (c)     D ura ble s Growth                                        (d)    D ura ble s Growth
                                       a -norm a liza tion                                               ξ-norm a liza tion
                         4                                                                 4



                         2                                                                 2
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)




                         0                                                                 0



                         -2                                                                -2



                         -4                                                                -4
                           -4   -2             0              2   4                          -4   -2             0             2   4
                                       Predicted ER (%)                                                  Predicted ER (%)

                                (e ) Ma rke t Exce s s R e turn                                   (f) Ma rke t Exce s s R e turn
                                      a -norm a liza tion                                              ξ-norm a liza tion
                         4                                                                 4



                         2                                                                 2
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)




                         0                                                                 0



                         -2                                                                -2



                         -4                                                                -4
                           -4   -2             0              2   4                          -4   -2             0             2   4
                                       Predicted ER (%)                                                  Predicted ER (%)




Note: The …gures present scatter plots of Re against the model-predicted expected return for the single
factor models presented in Tables 1 and 2. For the a-normalization the model predicted expected return is
DT ^b , while for the -normalization it is dT ^b .



                                                                      62
                                        FIGURE 2
     Actual Expected Returns and Predicted Expected Returns for Multi-Factor Models
                                  Lustig-Verdelhan Data


                                (a ) C ons um ption Fa ctors                                      (b) C ons um ption Fa ctors
                                       a -norm a liza tion                                              ξ-norm a liza tion
                         4                                                                 4



                         2                                                                 2
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)
                         0                                                                 0



                         -2                                                                -2



                         -4                                                                -4
                           -4   -2             0              2   4                          -4   -2             0              2   4
                                       Predicted ER (%)                                                  Predicted ER (%)

                                 (c)   Yogo R is k Fa ctors                                        (d)   Yogo R is k Fa ctors
                                       a -norm a liza tion                                               ξ-norm a liza tion
                         4                                                                 4



                         2                                                                 2
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)




                         0                                                                 0



                         -2                                                                -2



                         -4                                                                -4
                           -4   -2             0              2   4                          -4   -2             0              2   4
                                       Predicted ER (%)                                                  Predicted ER (%)

                                (e ) Fa m a -Fre nch Fa ctors                                     (f) Fa m a -Fre nch Fa ctors
                                       a -norm a liza tion                                              ξ-norm a liza tion
                         4                                                                 4



                         2                                                                 2
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)




                         0                                                                 0



                         -2                                                                -2



                         -4                                                                -4
                           -4   -2             0              2   4                          -4   -2             0              2   4
                                       Predicted ER (%)                                                  Predicted ER (%)




Note: The …gures present scatter plots of Re against the model-predicted expected return for the multi-factor
models presented in Tables 1 and 2. For the a-normalization the model predicted expected return is DT ^b ,
while for the -normalization it is dT ^b .



                                                                      63
                                      FIGURE 3
    Actual Expected Returns and Predicted Expected Returns for Single Factor Models
                                  Fama–French 25 Data


                                 (a ) C ons um ption Growth                                         (b) C ons um ption Growth
                                       a -norm a liza tion                                               ξ-norm a liza tion



                         4                                                                  4
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                            Actual ER (%)
                         2                                                                  2




                         0                                                                  0


                             0                  2                  4                            0                  2                 4
                                        Predicted ER (%)                                                   Predicted ER (%)

                                  (c)     D ura ble s Growth                                         (d)    D ura ble s Growth
                                        a -norm a liza tion                                                ξ-norm a liza tion



                         4                                                                  4
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                            Actual ER (%)




                         2                                                                  2




                         0                                                                  0


                             0                  2                  4                            0                  2                 4
                                        Predicted ER (%)                                                   Predicted ER (%)

                                 (e ) Ma rke t Exce s s R e turn                                    (f) Ma rke t Exce s s R e turn
                                       a -norm a liza tion                                               ξ-norm a liza tion



                         4                                                                  4
         Actual ER (%)




                                                                            Actual ER (%)




                         2                                                                  2




                         0                                                                  0


                             0                  2                  4                            0                  2                 4
                                        Predicted ER (%)                                                   Predicted ER (%)




Note: The …gures present scatter plots of Re against the model-predicted expected return for the single
factor models presented in Tables 3 and 4. For the a-normalization the model predicted expected return is
DT ^b , while for the -normalization it is dT ^b .



                                                                       64
                                       FIGURE 4
     Actual Expected Returns and Predicted Expected Returns for Multi-Factor Models
                                  Fama-French 25 Data


                                  (a ) C ons um ption Fa ctors                                     (b) C ons um ption Fa ctors
                                         a -norm a liza tion                                             ξ-norm a liza tion



                          4                                                                4
          Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)
                          2                                                                2




                          0                                                                0


                              0                  2                4                            0                  2               4
                                         Predicted ER (%)                                                 Predicted ER (%)

                                   (c)   Yogo R is k Fa ctors                                       (d)   Yogo R is k Fa ctors
                                         a -norm a liza tion                                              ξ-norm a liza tion



                          4                                                                4
          Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)




                          2                                                                2




                          0                                                                0


                              0                  2                4                            0                  2               4
                                         Predicted ER (%)                                                 Predicted ER (%)

                                  (e ) Fa m a -Fre nch Fa ctors                                    (f) Fa m a -Fre nch Fa ctors
                                         a -norm a liza tion                                             ξ-norm a liza tion



                          4                                                                4
          Actual ER (%)




                                                                           Actual ER (%)




                          2                                                                2




                          0                                                                0


                              0                  2                4                            0                  2               4
                                         Predicted ER (%)                                                 Predicted ER (%)




Note: The …gures present scatter plots of Re against the model-predicted expected return for the multi-factor
models presented in Tables 3 and 4. For the a-normalization the model predicted expected return is DT ^b ,
while for the -normalization it is dT ^b .



                                                                      65
                                                         FIGURE 5
                                    Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Data
                                   Frequency Distributions of First Stage GMM Estimators


                             Frequency Distribution of b                                           Frequency Distribution of b
                                 a-normaliz ation                                                       ξ -normaliz ation
           0.15                                                                         0.06
                                                                      T=50                                                        T=50
                                                                      T=250             0.05                                      T=250
           0.12
                                                                      T=1000                                                      T=1000
                                                                                        0.04
                                                                      T=∞                                                         T=∞
           0.09
                                                                                        0.03
           0.06
                                                                                        0.02

           0.03
                                                                                        0.01

             0                                                                            0
                  -20    0         20     40          60    80       100    120           -40       -20         0            20            40
                                               b                                                              b/T1/2


                        Frequency Distribution of t(b)                                           Frequency Distribution of t(b)
                              a-normaliz ation                                                         ξ -normaliz ation
            0.2                                                                         0.04
                                                                      T=50
           0.16                                                       T=250
                                                                      T=1000            0.03
                                                                      T=∞
           0.12
                                                                                        0.02
           0.08

                                                                                        0.01
           0.04


             0                                                                            0
             -0.5              0               0.5               1             1.5         -5                   0                          5
                                          t(b)/T1/2                                                           t(b)

                                                                      2                                                           2
                          Frequency Distribution of R                                             Frequency Distribution of R
                               a-normaliz ation                                                        ξ -normaliz ation
           0.15                                                                         0.12
                             T=50                                                                                                 T=50
                             T=250                                                       0.1                                      T=250
           0.12
                             T=1000                                                                                               T=1000
                             T=∞                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                                  T=∞
           0.09
                                                                                        0.06
           0.06
                                                                                        0.04

           0.03
                                                                                        0.02

             0                                                                            0
             0.7        0.75        0.8        0.85        0.9       0.95      1          -0.5            0            0.5                 1
                                           R2                                                                 R2




Note: The experiments are described in the notes to Tables 11–14. Statistics are presented for the …rst stage
of GMM when the proposed SDF is constructed from the spurious risk factor. The frequency distributions
are computed using 100 points over the indicated range on the x-axis. For T = 1, if the distribution limits
to a singleton a vertical red line is used to indicated the probability limit.


                                                                                   66
                                                             FIGURE 6
                                         Monte-Carlo Experiments with Arti…cial Data
                                      Frequency Distributions of Second Stage GMM Estimators



                                Frequency Distribution of b                                                  Frequency Distribution of b
                                    a-normaliz ation                                                              ξ -normaliz ation
           0.15                                                                              0.06
                                                                          T=50               0.05                                           T=50
           0.12
                                                                          T=250                                                             T=250
                                                                                             0.04
           0.09                                                           T=1000                                                            T=1000
                                                                                             0.03
                                                                          T=∞                                                               T= ∞
           0.06
                                                                                             0.02
           0.03                                                                              0.01
             0                                                                                 0
                  -20       0         20     40          60     80       100    120            -20           -10         0             10            20
                                                  b                                                                     b/T1/2
                        Frequency Distribution of t(b)                                                  Frequency Distribution of t(b)
                              a-normaliz ation                                                                ξ -normaliz ation
            0.2                                                                              0.04
                                                                          T=50                                                              T=50
           0.16
                                                                          T=250              0.03                                           T=250
           0.12                                                           T=1000                                                            T=1000
                                                                                             0.02
                                                                          T=∞                                                               T= ∞
           0.08
                                                                                             0.01
           0.04

             0                                                                                 0
             -0.5                 0               0.5                1             1.5          -5                        0                          5
                                             t(b)/T1/2                                                                  t(b)
                                                                          2                                                                 2
                            Frequency Distribution of R                                                  Frequency Distribution of R
                                 a-normaliz ation                                                             ξ -normaliz ation
           0.15                                                                              0.12
                                T=50                                                          0.1                                           T=50
           0.12
                                T=250                                                                                                       T=250
                                                                                             0.08
           0.09                 T=1000                                                                                                      T=1000
                                                                                             0.06
                                T=∞                                                                                                         T= ∞
           0.06
                                                                                             0.04
           0.03                                                                              0.02
             0                                                                                  0
             0.7        0.75           0.8        0.85        0.9        0.95      1           -0.5                0             0.5                 1
                                              R2                                                                        R2
                                Frequency Distribution of J                                                  Frequency Distribution of J
                                    a-normaliz ation                                                             ξ -normaliz ation
           0.06                                                                              0.06
           0.05                                                           T=50               0.05                                           T=50
                                                                          T=250                                                             T=250
           0.04                                                                              0.04
                                                                          T=1000                                                            T=1000
           0.03                                                                              0.03
                                                                          T=∞                                                               T= ∞
           0.02                                                                              0.02
           0.01                                                                              0.01
             0                                                                                 0
                  0     5          10        15          20     25         30      35               0   10         20   30       40         50       60
                                                  J                                                                     J




Note: The experiments are described in the notes to Tables 11–14. Statistics are presented for the …rst stage
of GMM when the proposed SDF is constructed from the spurious risk factor. The frequency distributions
are computed using 100 points over the indicated range on the x-axis. For T = 1, if the distribution limits
to a singleton a vertical red line is used to indicated the probability limit.


                                                                                        67
