NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF INEQUALITY IN PRODUCTIVITY AND WAGES:
PANEL DATA EVIDENCE
Giulia Faggio
Kjell Salvanes
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 13351
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13351

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2007

We would like to thank David Card, Francesco Caselli, Richard Freeman, Steve Nickell, Ariel Pakes,
Justin Wolfers and participants at seminars at LSE, Princeton, the UK Treasury and the Royal Economic
Society Conference for helpful comments. We acknowledge funding from the Economic and Social
Research Council through grant RES-000-22-1392 and the Centre for Economic Performance. Corresponding
author: j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Giulia Faggio, Kjell Salvanes, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of Inequality in Productivity and Wages: Panel Data Evidence
Giulia Faggio, Kjell Salvanes, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 13351
August 2007
JEL No. D24,J24,J31,O31
ABSTRACT
There has been a remarkable increase in wage inequality in the US, UK and many other countries
over the past three decades. A significant part of this appears to be within observable groups (such
as age-gender-skill cells). A generally untested implication of many theories rationalizing the growth
of within-group inequality is that firm-level productivity dispersion should also have increased. The
relevant data for the US is problematic, so we utilize a UK panel dataset covering the manufacturing
and non-manufacturing sectors since the early 1980s. We find evidence that productivity inequality
has increased. Existing studies have underestimated this increased dispersion because they use data
from the manufacturing sector which has been in rapid decline. Most of the increase in individual wage
inequality has occurred because of an increase in inequality between firms (and within industries).
Increased productivity dispersion appears to be linked with new technologies as suggested by models
such as Caselli (1999) and is not primarily due to an increase in transitory shocks, greater sorting or
entry/exit dynamics.
Giulia Faggio
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND
G.Faggio@lse.ac.uk
Kjell Salvanes
Department of Economics
Norwegian School of Economics & Business
Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen, NORWAY
IZA and CEP
kjell.salvanes@nhh.no

John Van Reenen
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

I. Introduction
Wage inequality has increased substantially in the United States and the United
Kingdom in the last thirty years. Acemoglu (2002) reports that the difference in wages
earned by a worker in the 90th percentile of the wage distribution compared to a
worker in the 10th percentile increased by 40% in the US from 1971 to 1995. For the
UK, the 90-10 differential increased by 48% from 1975 to 2000 (see Machin, 2003;
Machin and Van Reenen, 2007). Increases in within-group inequality, i.e. increases in
inequality among observationally equivalent workers, account for a significant
proportion of the rise1.
Many theories have been proposed to explain the rise in wage inequality.
These include demand-side explanations (trade with developing countries or
technological change)2, supply-side explanations (changes in the relative supply of
highly-educated workers across cohorts)3 and institutions (decline in union power
and/or the minimum wage4). Technology-based theories have proven popular in
explaining the within group rise. They generally assume some type of labor market
friction whereby workers’ wages are linked with the productivity of the worker-firm
match. Such effects arise naturally in search based models of equilibrium wage
dispersion, but there are other theoretical foundations based on bargaining that

1

Lemieux (2006) argues that the scale of this increase may have been exaggerated in some early
studies due to compositional effect. Autor et al. (2005) still find a substantial within component
especially in the upper tail of the distribution.
2
See, among others, Machin and Van Reenen (1998) and Autor et al. (1998) for evidence that the rapid
spread of computers has increased the demand for skills. See, among many others, Caselli (1999),
Aghion et al. (2004) and Violante (2002) for models in which rapid technical change increases the
demand for skills and causes a rise in inequality.
3
See Card and Lemieux, 2001.
4
Differences in labor market institutions are often proposed to explain cross-country inequality (e.g.
Blau and Kahn, 1996). Unions have declined just about everywhere and in the US the real value of the
minimum wage fell substantially until the mid 1990s (see, e.g., DiNardo et al., 1996).

2

generate similar implications5. When a “general purpose technology” like information
and communication technologies (ICT) becomes available, firms will adopt
technologies at different rates and be successful to different degrees. This generates
increased wage dispersion even for observationally identical workers (e.g. Violante,
2002; Aghion et al., 2002, 2004). An under-appreciated implication of these models is
that they imply that productivity dispersion between firms should also have risen.
Unfortunately, very little is known about the evolution of the productivity
distribution. Wages are not a sufficient statistic for productivity once we move away
from the simplest models of spot competition in labor markets. Some authors have
examined in detail the determinants of the cross sectional distribution of productivity
and others have decomposed aggregate productivity growth into incumbent firm
productivity growth and reallocation effects driven by entry, exit and the relative
growth of more productive firms. This literature strongly suggests that the between
firm effects (ignored by representative agent models) are very important6. As useful
as this literature is, however, it has generally focused on explaining the evolution of
the first moment of the productivity distribution and has not focused on how the
higher order moments of the productivity distribution have evolved over time.
Understanding the dynamics of productivity dispersion is the main contribution of this
paper.
Data constraints are an important reason why the changing productivity
distribution is under-studied. In order to examine secular changes, a long time series

5

Mortensen (2003) and Postal-Viney and Robin (2003) contain theoretical models linking equilibrium
wages with employer heterogeneity in productivity. They use these models to structurally estimate the
cross sectional wage distribution in Denmark and France, respectively. Layard, Nickell and Jackman
(2005) show how the link between workers wages and employer productivity can arise across a range
of models – union bargaining, efficiency wage, rent-sharing and search-based.
6
For the cross sectional dispersion of productivity see among others Haltiwanger et al. (1999) for the
U.S. and Martin (2004) for the UK. For decompositions of productivity changes see among others,
Bailey et al. (1992), Olley and Pakes (1996) and Bartelsman et al. (2005).

3

of data is needed and firm-level data is usually only available for such periods on the
manufacturing sector7. Since this sector only now employs about 14% of the British
workforce and 13% of the American workforce, it is problematic to extrapolate to the
whole economy from just manufacturing industries. It is particularly a problem for
productivity analysis as the rapid decline in manufacturing in the OECD over the last
three decades is partly due to increased competition from less developed countries
with much lower labor costs. With heterogeneous firms, increases in competition will
generally lower the productivity dispersion (see Syverson, 2004, for a model and
empirical evidence confirming the importance of this intuition). Consequently, the
existing studies of the change in productivity dispersion may have seriously
underestimated the importance of the growth of productivity inequality. Although
production data on non-manufacturing is available in the US in Compustat, this only
includes firms listed on the Stock Market. Since most firms are private, an analysis of
productivity inequality that ignored these unlisted firms is unconvincing8. The new
US Longitudinal Business Database is available for non-manufacturing firms in the
US, but it does not contain data on sales or capital (see Davis et a.l, 2006).
To tackle these data constraints we use the UK as a test bed – wage inequality
has risen rapidly since the early 1980s and we use a data source (FAME) covering
listed and unlisted firms in both manufacturing and service sectors. This is an
unbalanced panel and is available since the early 1980s.
Figure 5a shows the headline finding from this data where we look at the
firm-specific distribution of labor productivity measured by value added per worker.
We will discuss more data details later in the paper (e.g. see Table A1 for levels of
7

See Dunne et al. (2004) for the US and Haskel and Martin (2002) for the UK.
For example, several papers have argued that there is an increase in the dispersion of firm-specific
shocks over time as the variation of firm sales growth in Compustat appears to have increased (e.g.
Comin and Philippon, 2005). Unfortunately, this does not seem to be generally true across the US
economy (see Davis et al., 2006).

8

4

productivity dispersion). We consider the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the log
(labor productivity) distribution where we normalize these values to unity in 1984, so
the lines show what has happened to growth at each of these percentiles. The data
reveal a dramatic growth in the dispersion of productivity between firms. Productivity
increased by 60 log points at the 90th percentile between 1984 and 2001 whereas it
increased by only 20 log points at the 10th percentile (there was a growth of around 40
log points at the median). This is a substantial increase in productivity inequality and
we investigate in detail the cause of this change in this paper. We report three major
findings.
First, using individual and firm level data we find that the vast majority of the
increase in individual wage inequality in the UK is a between-firm (rather than
within-firm) phenomenon9. This implies that understanding the evolution of the
between firm productivity distribution may be critical in understanding the between
firm wage distribution and therefore the overall wage distribution (we also show that
the correlation between wages and productivity has become more important over
time). Furthermore, the vast majority of the growth of wage and productivity
dispersion is within industries, suggesting industry level data on productivity and
wages will not be able to identify the causes of the changes.
Second, we show that the increase in the productivity dispersion (as with the
wage dispersion) is mainly in the service sector of the economy suggesting that the
focus on manufacturing in the existing literature has indeed underestimated the rise of
economy wide productivity inequality.

9

This is interesting as it suggests the media-grabbing attention attached to CEO pay relative to workers
pay in the same firm may be misplaced, as the overall increase in inequality has relatively little to do
with this. Nevertheless, we are not including many components of CEO remuneration such as share
options that are important.

5

Third, we show that the increase in labor productivity dispersion is mainly
driven by an increase in total factor productivity dispersion (rather than being due to
just an increase in the dispersion of capital-labor ratios or greater sorting as in Kremer
and Maskin, 1996). This suggests technological differences may be driving our results
as suggested in the theories of in Caselli (1999) or Acemoglu et al (2001)10. We
present some direct evidence in line with this idea by using ICT data to explain the
increase in within industry productivity dispersion. We also examine (and reject)
other possible explanations including increasing a greater incidence of transitory
shocks, differential entry/exit rates, institutional changes and/or measurement error.
To our knowledge, there are only two studies that have looked at changes in
productivity dispersion across many sectors. Dunne et al (2004) analyse changes in
the distribution of firm productivity across US plants. They show that inequality of
plant wages and productivity dispersion increased between 1975 and 1992 and much
of this was a between-plant phenomenon (this is consistent with what we find below
for the UK). Haskel and Martin (2002) examined changes in labor productivity in UK
establishments (the Annual Business Inquiry Respondents’ Database) and also found
some increase in dispersion. We argue that since both of these earlier studies look
only at the manufacturing sector they have seriously underestimated the magnitude of
the change.
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we briefly discuss the
theoretical framework and Section 3 details the data sources we use. Section 4
describes the main results and Section 5 discusses what could explain the trends
observed in the data. Section 6 offers some concluding comments.

10

Acemoglu et al (2001) present a model where skill biased technical change causes deunionization.
This amplifies the direct effect of technology to further increase wage inequality. We investigate
institutional change and unionisation directly in sub-section 5.4. and 5.5.

6

2. Theoretical framework
In this section, we use the papers by Caselli (1999) and Kremer and Maskin
(1996) to generate some empirical predictions regarding the distribution of wages and
productivity. Caselli (1999) models the impact of a technological “revolution” on the
dispersion of wages and productivity. In the Caselli model, there is a distribution of
worker types and machine types and operating a given type of machine requires a
given type of skill. The cost of learning a skill varies across workers and is lower for
more skilled workers and a technology is a combination of workers of type i who
have the appropriate skills to operate machines of type i. A technological “revolution”
occurs with the introduction of a new type of machine. Since workers of different
abilities are distributed heterogeneously across firms and for each period firms
consider as given the skill composition of their workforce, there will be differential
adoption of new technology by firms. High-skill workers will tend to use the new
technologies since it is less costly for them to acquire the new skills.
This model has at least three implications that are relevant for our empirical
analysis. Firstly, we will expect increased wage dispersion between (and within)
firms11. Secondly, labor productivity (value added per worker) dispersion increases
between firms due to the fact that more skilled workers are now more productive.
Thirdly, since capital is also reallocated to its best use total factor productivity
increases in firms that introduce a new technology so Total Factor Productivity (TFP)
dispersion also rises.
It is worth noting that the Caselli model is different from a pure sorting model
where between firm wage (and labor productivity) dispersion could rise because
11

There are two effects in operation: a direct effect and an indirect effect. The wages of high-skill
workers rise because they now operate on more productive machines (the direct effect). There is also a
reallocation of capital away from old technologies towards new technologies, depressing the wages of
the low skilled and benefiting the wages of the high skilled (the indirect effect).

7

“good” workers tend to cluster in one type of firm and “bad” workers cluster in
another. Kremer and Maskin (1996) present an example of such a model that accounts
for the simultaneous existence of increased wage inequality and increased segregation
of workers by skill. They introduce a set of specific assumptions regarding the firm
organisational structure: imperfect substitution of workers of different skills;
complementarity of tasks within a plant, and differential effects of a worker skill
depending on the task performed. Under this set of assumptions and further assuming
a rise in the dispersion of skills across workers, Kremer and Maskin derive an
equilibrium solution where low-skill workers are sorted in low-productivity plants
and high-skill workers sorted in high-productivity plants (i.e. sorting or segregation).
Therefore, if dispersion of skills has increased due to increased educational inequality
for example, this could lead to increased sorting12.
This model predicts an increase in the dispersion of wages across firms. There
will also be an increase in the dispersion of labor productivity because skilled workers
will be segregated into different firms. However, unlike technology-based models like
Caselli’s, because increased wage and productivity dispersion is due to sorting there
should be no effect on total factor productivity dispersion. We therefore look
explicitly at TFP as well as labor productivity and wages to distinguish between the
two approaches.

12

In this model the degree of asymmetry/complementarity of tasks within a plant is crucial in shaping
the distribution of workers across plants. The asymmetry of tasks in the production function favours
cross-matching across workers (less segregation). Conversely, the complementarity of tasks favours
self-matching (more segregation). Workers of different abilities will be cross-matched up to the point at
which differences in skills or abilities are so great that segregation will be inevitable. If the distribution
of skills is sufficiently compressed, cross-matching seems to be the most probable outcome. If the
distribution of skills is dispersed, self-matching or sorting workers by skill will prevail. This gives
some ambiguity to the predictions as although the level of educational achievement has risen over time,
it is less clear whether educational inequality has risen.

8

3. Data description
All datasets are described in detail in the Appendix B. The main dataset we
use is FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy) which is a UK company-level panel
data set available since 1982. In Britain, all incorporated companies are legally
required to register their accounts at Companies’ House and given a unique (VAT)
registration number. Unlike the US, this includes not only companies listed on the
Stock Exchange (which are held on databases such as COMPUSTAT) but also all
unlisted companies. In 2003, we arranged a special purchase of this data with a
private sector company that has converted this data into electronic form. This is
unbalanced panel data and includes all firms that had exited the database prior to 2003
(by either bankruptcy or takeover)13.
In our main analysis, we drop some firms. In general, this could lead to
selection bias causing us to find smaller or greater increases in inequality over time,
we argue in Appendix B that these biases are not generally large by checking the
sensitivity of the results to including the dropped observations and using
complementary datasets (contrast Figures 5a and 5b to see that these exclusions have
little effect on the overall trends). Firstly, we drop firms with less than ten employees
because small firms are not required to report certain key variables we need for our
analysis such as the wages bill. Secondly, we use the consolidated accounts of parent
firms and drop the unconsolidated accounts of their subsidiaries. We would be double
counting if we used both parents and subsidiaries. Because some subsidiaries are
below ten employees, we would be missing parts of the economy if we just used
subsidiaries. Thirdly, we start the sample in 1984 because sampling of FAME was not
13

Under UK law, firms are also required to report a great deal more accounting information on their
wage bills than in the US (where declaration of staff expenses is a voluntary item). Because of this, we
are able to construct measures of average firm wages that are unavailable for most firms in the US
public accounts.

9

complete in the early 1980s. Finally, we generally drop certain sectors: agriculture,
mining, utilities, health and education. We were concerned that these sectors were
heavily influenced by state control for at least some of the sample period covered. We
also drop the financial sector because of the well-known problems of measuring
productivity in banking and insurance.
Our final sample we use contains about 11,000 firms a year between 1984 and
2001 (we cover about 13 million workers each year). We have information on a large
number of variables. We use information on employment, capital, sales, total worker
remuneration, gross profits and industry. Note that we do not have information on the
demographics of the workforce or hours worked. But we investigate biases associated
with this omission in sub-section 5.4.
The main measure we use for labor productivity is value added per worker, but
we also consider using sales per worker as an alternative. Sales has the advantage that
it is reported as a line item in the accounts, but the major disadvantage is that it will
be influenced by the purchase of intermediate inputs, so “labor productivity” could
rise simply because a firm was buying more materials per worker – this will
particularly be a problem in the service sector. We also examine total factor
productivity (TFP) calculated in various ways. The main way we calculate TFP is as a
residual of outputs from weighted inputs, but we also consider estimating firm
production functions and using the estimated parameters to construct TFP measures.
There are numerous well-known problems with measuring labor productivity
and TFP. Some of these are discussed below (e.g. appropriate choice of weights). One
issue is that the value added numerator is not measured in physical units so will
reflect differential mark-ups among firms as well as physical productivity increases.

10

Thus, when we say productivity it is shorthand for “revenue productivity”14. This is
still an interesting measure to look at as the ability of firms to sustain mark-ups is
partly a reflection of product quality, and technological change may enable firms to
improve quality (see Appendix B and Table A2 for an analysis of the changing
variation in profitability). Undoubtedly, there are other sources of market power and
the increased variation of market power could be a reason for increased measured
productivity dispersion. We have reason to doubt this explanation, however, as
competition has almost certainly increased over time in the UK due to waves of
policy-driven liberalization and globalization of markets. Other things equal, this
would lead to a reduction in productivity dispersion as the least efficient firms are
driven from the market.
The second dataset we use is the New Earnings Survey (NES) data which give
consistent information on individual wages, and covers one per cent of the entire UK
working population (those whose National Insurance/Social Security numbers end in
the same two digits, 14). We currently have access to data for all years between 1975
and 1999 in NES. We use annual gross pay as our measure of the wage in NES which
matches most closely with FAME’s measure of annual staff costs. The FAME
measure is higher on average because it includes the employers’ payroll taxes15.

14

We use an economy wide deflator, the Retail Price Index for value added. Industry-level deflators are
available at a more disaggregated level for manufacturing and the results are robust to using these
deflators. Industry-level deflators are not, however, available for the service sector (due to the difficulty
of defining price). Since the comparison between manufacturing and services is important, we chose to
report our main results using a common aggregate deflator.
15
In FAME, we cannot distinguish employers’ payroll tax costs from total annual staff costs.
Employers National Insurance is a relatively small part of total wage costs so it is unlikely this could
account for an increase in dispersion. Nevertheless, we investigate this issue by looking at
demographics (gender, age, part-time proportion, etc.).

11

4. The evolution of the wage and productivity distribution
In this section we document the changes in wage (sub-section 4.1) and productivity
(sub-section 4.2) dispersion. We then decompose the trends in sub-section 4.3.
4.1. Trends in Wage Dispersion
We begin by first examining wage trends with our data. Using individual data
(NES) and firm level data (FAME), we compute log real annual wages for male
workers aged 16-64. We compute values at the 90th, 50th (median) and 10th
percentiles and normalise these to unity in 1984. The series therefore represent
cumulative changes relative to the initial year, 198416. We split the sample by
manufacturing and private services. Looking at private services first in Figure 1,
wages at the 90th percentile increased by about forty log points between 1984 and
1999. By contrast, the wage earned at the 10th percentile increased by only seventeen
log points, thus generating an increase in the 90-10 differential of about twenty-three
log points. The increase in inequality was stronger in the 1980s than in the 1990s. The
picture does not fundamentally change when we restrict the sample to include only
16-64 full-time17 male workers or measure earnings using hourly instead of annual
wages (we are using annual wages so that we can compare these with FAME). Figure
2 presents the equivalent changes for manufacturing. Although it is clear that wage
inequality has also risen in this sector, the rise is much less dramatic than for services.
Indeed, there is hardly any change at all in the 1990s. Studies focusing on
manufacturing will therefore miss a large part of increased inequality.
Figures 3 and 4 present similar evidence on wage dispersion using the FAME
firm-level data. Recall that we are examining the distribution in the average firm wage
(rather than individual wage) in these diagrams. Wage dispersion has risen for both
16

See Gosling et al (2000) for similar analyses from earlier time periods in the UK.
As documented in Machin (2003), the NES data under-sample part-time low-wage individuals so
focusing on full-time men eliminates a lot of this bias.

17

12

sectors, but again the rise is much stronger for services (Figure 3) than for
manufacturing (Figure 4).
Although the trend analysis is interesting, the samples are somewhat different
– the NES figures cover men and all firms whereas the FAME figures cover all
workers and only firms with more than 10 employees. Below in sub-section 5.3 we
match the samples more exactly to estimate how much of the overall changes in
individual wage variation are due to an increase in inter-firm wage dispersion
compared to the intra-firm wage dispersion.
4.2 Trends in the Productivity Dispersion
We discussed the change in the overall productivity distribution briefly in the
Introduction (Figure 5a). As with the wage distribution there was a substantial secular
increase in productivity inequality 1984-2001. For example, comparing the 1984 to
1989 average with the 1996 to 2001 average the 90-10 differential rose from 1.44 to
1.71. Essentially, this is the main new “stylized fact” of the paper. Note that Figure 5a
“Whole Economy” is the entire raw FAME data before we exclude particular
industries and size classes discussed in the data section. The pattern is remarkably
similar to Figure 5b “manufacturing and services” which is the sample after these
selections have been made.
In addition to the secular increase there is also an interesting cyclical pattern
of productivity dispersion. There was an increase in productivity dispersion in the late
1980s followed by a reduction during the recession of the early 1990s. Afterwards,
productivity dispersion continued to increase until at least the year 2000. This pattern
is consistent with the idea of the “cleaning effect of recessions” (e.g. Caballero and
Hammour, 1994). The least productive firms are more likely to exit an industry (see
the analysis of entry/exit in sub-section 5.3 below) and this effect is likely to be

13

particularly strong during cyclical downturns. Consequently the productivity
distribution is compressed due to a truncation of the left tail in the early 1990s. Note
that this selection effects implies that macro-economists are probably underestimating
the degree of pro-cyclicality of productivity over the business cycle.
Increases in productivity dispersion for the whole economy are largely driven
by increases in private services (see Figure 6). Productivity dispersion across UK
manufacturing firms has increased, but to a much more limited extent (see Figure 7).
The service sector also displays a stronger cyclical component in the variation of
productivity, decreasing very strongly in the early 1990s recession.
Overall, we find that the inter-firm productivity distribution has moved in a
similar way to the inter-firm wage distribution over the last twenty years, suggesting
that the two patterns may be linked. We explore this link in more detail in the next
sub-section.
4.3 Decomposing trends in wage and productivity inequality
We first consider decomposing the overall increase in individual wage
inequality into between firm and within firm components. We can further sub-divide
the between firm component into a within and between industry component. We use
comparable NES and FAME samples to accomplish this, so we restrict the NES
sample in the same way we restricted the FAME sample (same industries, both male
and female workers, both part-time and full-time workers, etc.).
Our decomposition methodology follows Davis and Haltiwanger (1991) and
Dunne et al. (2004). We use the NES data to estimate the overall variation of
individual log wages denoted V (W NES ) , and the FAME data to estimate the variance
of between firm ln(wages) denoted V (W FAME ) . The within firm component denoted
VˆWF , is then the residual between the two series:

14

VˆWF = V (W NES ) − V (W FAME )

(1)

Details and further discussion of the decomposition methodology are in Appendix A.
Figure 8 contains the first results of this decomposition. The bold line shows
the total individual variation of ln(wages) between 1984 and 1999 which has
increased by about 16 log points. This trend is well documented in several papers. The
dashed line shows the “between” component (the inter-firm wage variation) and the
dotted line the within firm component (the difference between overall wage
dispersion and the between firm dispersion) over the same period. Looking first at the
cross section in the 1980s, about half of the variation in wages is attributable to the
variation within firms and half is between firms. The interesting aspect, however, is in
the time series. The trend increase in between-firm wage variation is similar to the
trend increase in the overall variation of wages. In fact, the between firm component
essentially accounts for just about all of the increase in the growth of aggregate
inequality (the within firm increase rises a little in the second half of the 1990s, but is
essentially flat).
Figure 9 takes this one stage further and decomposes the between firm
variation into a between and within industry component. The between industry
component has risen, but only by a minor amount. In short, the dominant reason for
the increase in wage inequality appears to be the growth of inequality between firms
within industries. This suggests that examining how firms’ productivity have changed
over time could help account for the changing wage distribution as many of these
recent theories by Caselli and others have suggested. Figures 10 through 13 show the
breakdown between manufacturing and services to illustrate, as before, that the results
are driven by the service sector.

15

We now turn to productivity again. Since productivity is a firm-level measure,
we cannot look within firms, so our decompositions are into within and between
industry components. We find a consistent picture that the increase in productivity
inequality is a within industry phenomenon (Figure 14). There is only a small increase
in the productivity dispersion between industries in services (Figure 15) and in
manufacturing (Figure 16). One may be concerned that the industry decompositions
are based on two digit sectors and this is too aggregated. We replicated the results on
more finely disaggregated industries that lead to similar qualitative results18.

5. Explaining the rising dispersion of productivity
Our key finding is that there has been a secular increase in labor productivity
dispersion in the UK. We now seek to explain this by first showing that this is not
simply due to an increase in dispersion of factor inputs (sub-section 5.1), in transitory
shocks (sub-section 5.2) or in entry/exit behaviour (sub-section 5.3). We the present
some direct evidence in line with the idea that information technology has an
important role to play (sub-section 5.4). We end with some international evidence
(sub-section 5.5) and some evidence on magnitudes (sub-section 5.6).
5.1. Total Factor Productivity
The main theories of within group wage inequality emphasise that there has
been some increase in the technological heterogeneity between firms over time. We
would expect this to be reflected in differences in total factor productivity (TFP).
Labor productivity differences could arise from TFP differences, but could also arise
from increases in the dispersion of capital intensity (fixed capital per worker) between
firms. Of course, some of this increased capital heterogeneity could reflect
18

There is a trade-off here as the cell size per industry year used to construct the variance components
is obviously rather small when we go to more disaggregated industries.

16

experimentation with different technologies (such as ICT). However, we would still
expect some TFP differences (recall the discussion of Caselli’s model in Section 2).
Theories of increased sorting (e.g. Kremer and Maskin, 1996), by contrast, do not
have this implication.
We can construct TFP in a number of ways. The basic method is the
difference between weighted inputs and outputs. Measured TFP (MTFP) for firm j at
time t is:
MTFP = ln Q jt − α j ln L jt − (1 − α j )ln K jt

(2)

Where Qjt denotes value added, αj denotes the share of labor costs in output, Ljt
denotes labor and Kjt denotes the capital stock. This is the simplest method to
compute TFP. There are more sophisticated ways19 to compute the parameters αj and
to derive measures of TFP. We compute αj as firm specific weights, i.e. αj is
measured as the ratio of total wage bill over value added at the firm level and
averaged over 1984-200120.
We start with analyzing the dispersion of capital intensity (in Figure 17).
Although this has indeed risen over the period, it cannot fully account for the increase
in the productivity dispersion, as TFP has risen significantly over this period as well

19

Griffith et al. (2004) discuss the methods common in the growth accounting literature. Direct
estimation of the production by the methods of inter alia Olley and Pakes (1996) and Blundell and
Bond (1998) is another possibility.
20
We also compared this with (i) imposing αj = 0.7, the typically value for labor’s share used in the
literature on productivity and (ii) estimating αj as industry specific weights, i.e. αj measured as the ratio
of total wage bill over value added at the two or three digit industry level and averaged over the sample
period. These produced similar results.

17

(see Figure 18). Comparing the evolution of labor productivity dispersion and TFP
dispersion, we find that the two series follows each other very closely21.
Since the sorting models do not predict such as rise in TFP, we view this as
giving some support for the technology-based explanations of Caselli (1999) and
others.

5.2. Transitory Shocks
Statistically, a rise in the cross sectional dispersion of firm productivity could
arise purely from an increase in the transitory productivity shocks hitting firms22. The
environment may have become more volatile for firms due to globalization,
liberalization of product markets and/or financial markets. Some analyses of listed US
firms have claimed that the variance of firms’ sales growth has increased over time23.
Since productivity tends to rise with positive demand shocks (see Figures 5a and 5b,
for example), perhaps the increased variability of firm-demand then maybe this could
account for the patterns in the data.
We analyze this hypothesis by looking at transition probability matrices of
labor productivity, TFP, wages and profits. Our objective is to investigate whether
increasing productivity dispersion over time simply reflects increasing firm mobility
across points in the productivity distribution. We consider productivity deciles and
construct transition probability rates for the distributions of labor productivity over
the years 1986-2001. We compare transition probability rates between 1986/87 and
1988/89 (the “early period”), between 1992/93 and 1994/95 (the “middle period”),

21

Interestingly, between-industry effects are slightly more important in explaining variation in TFP
than in labor productivity. While they explain 17% of the increase in labor productivity dispersion, they
account for 25% of the variation in TFP.
22
Dickens (2000) or Blundell and Preston (1998) are examples showing that the increase in wage and
income inequality are partially driven by increases in the transitory component.
23
See the debate between Comin and Philippon (2005) and Davis et al (2006).

18

and between 1998/99 and 2000/01 (the “late period”)24. We pool the data into twoyear blocks and compute the transition probabilities between adjacent blocks of years.
For example, in the early period we pool data for the same firms between 1986 and
1987 to calculate the firm’s position in the productivity distribution in “t”, and then do
the same exercise for the firms in 1988 and 1989 (t+1). We then compare where firms
in each decile of the distribution in t ended up in t+1 (including the state of exiting
from the sample).
It can be misleading to compare transition probabilities rates at different points
of the business cycle, because recession (expansion) years are characterised by an
unusual number of firms exiting (entering) the market. Given our way of shaping the
data, the early and late periods correspond to a roughly similar position in the
business cycle. The middle and late 1980s were expansionary years as well as the
middle and late 1990s. The early 1990s were recession years.
The results are summarized in Table 1 for the top and bottom deciles (the full
matrices for labor productivity are in Table 2)25. We focus on the probability that a
firm stays in the same decile it began with, and measure a decrease in this probability
as indicating a rise in mobility. Unsurprisingly, firms that start in the top decile of the
productivity distribution tend to stay there. In the early period, for example, 60% of
firms who were in the top decile of the productivity distribution were still in the top
decile two years later. Similarly, 46% of the firms who began in the bottom decile of
the productivity distribution were still there two years later (this underestimates the
persistence because the least productive firms are disproportionately likely to exit the
dataset as we show in Table 2). This is a much higher frequency than would be

24

We pooled data in order to keep the cell sizes reasonably large for the decile analysis. Other
grouping lead to similar findings.
25
We condition on the sub-sample of firms that appear in two consecutive years.

19

expected by random fluctuations suggesting that productivity differences are
persistent over time.
The key column for our purposes is column (4) of Table 1 that compares the
early and late years (these are at similar points in the business cycle). There is a very
small increase of firms at the bottom of the productivity distribution moving up: only
45% of firms in the bottom decile stayed there in the late period, a one-percentage
point fall from the early period. Similarly, the most productive firms were two
percentage points less likely to stay in the top decile in the late period relative to the
early period (58% down from 60%). So mobility has increased, but only by a small
amount.
The next rows of Table 1 perform the same exercise for TFP. For the least
productive firms, there is an increase in mobility between the early and the late
period. In the late period, 59% of the firms in the bottom decile of the productivity
distribution were still there two years later (compared to 61% in the early period).
However, the opposite is true for firms at the top: they show a decrease in mobility
(50% up from 47%). As with labor productivity there is no sign of a large increase in
mobility: although mobility rates have increased slightly for the bottom decile by two
percentage points, they have declined at the top decile by three percentage points.
We also investigated transitions for average wages and productivity. Looking
at average wages, we find some increase in mobility between the early and the late
period. This is true for firms both at the top (six percentage points) and at the bottom
(four percentage points) of the wage distribution. This finding is not surprising and is
also consistent with the results obtained by Dickens (2000) and Blundell and Preston
(1998). Looking at average profits, we find an increase in mobility at the top only,

20

with a decrease in mobility at the bottom. The decrease at the bottom (four percentage
points) outweighs the increase at the top (two percentage points).
Overall, then it appears that there is no evidence of a substantial increase in
the transitory productivity shocks facing firms, implying that this is not the main
explanation for the increase in the cross-sectional productivity distribution.
Table 2 shows the transition matrices in full detail. Because we have many
small firms there is a lot of exit26, especially for the least productive firms. In the early
period, for example, 30% of firms in the lowest productivity decile exited compared
to 20% in the highest productivity decile. This pattern of greater exit probability for
the less productive firms is unsurprising as is the greater level of exit during the
middle period in the early 1990s when demand was low. This prompts the question of
whether these differential exit and entry patterns explain the aggregate increase in
productivity dispersion.
5.3. Exit and Entry of Firms
One possible explanation of the rise in productivity dispersion that we observe
could be that there was a rise in productivity dispersion among entrants. If entry
barriers have declined due to liberalization or improved access to finance, for
example, then a wider variety of entrants could enter the market with higher levels of
productivity dispersion than previous cohorts27. In principle, incumbents could have
no increase in dispersion.
We analyse cohorts of new entrants and incumbents for the early (1987-1989),
middle (1993-1995) and late (1999-2001) periods. We then look at the evolution of

26

Note that exit includes exits to bankruptcy as well as exits due to takeovers. Takeovers are less likely
to be a signal of under-performance than bankruptcy.
27
Of course, the tougher competition associated with lower entry barriers could reduce productivity
dispersion if the least productive firms exit. Similarly, lower entry barriers may mean that less efficient
forward looking firms rationally choose not to enter assuming they can observe their productivity in
advance of entry.

21

the top half (90th-50th differential) and the bottom half (50th-10th differential) of the
labor productivity distribution. Table 3 shows that entrants are indeed more dispersed
in terms of productivity than incumbents. In the early period, for instance, dispersion
in the top half of the distribution was 0.92 for entrants and 0.79 for incumbents. This
pattern has also been found in similar datasets for other countries. There has not been
an increase in aggregate entry rates, however, so this finding by itself could not
account for the increase in aggregate productivity dispersion28.
Looking at changes in the productivity dispersion of entrants between the
early and late periods, we do see that there has been an increase: the differentials have
increased by seventeen log points and thirty-one log points in the top half and bottom
half, respectively. Nevertheless, we also see an increase in the productivity inequality
of incumbents. Productivity inequality for the top half has increased at a similar rate
for entrants and incumbents (0.17 vs. 0.15). More interestingly, the 50-10 has
increased faster for entrants (0.31 vs. 0.11). So this suggests that increased
heterogeneity of entrants may have some role to play in accounting for the increase in
“lower tail” (but not upper tail) productivity inequality.
We also conduct a further check in Table 4. We exclude all entrants and
exiters, and we look at the evolution of productivity dispersion for two balanced
panels of “continuing” firms (i.e. those who were alive throughout the period 19842001 and those who were alive throughout the period 1990-2001). We find that there
is an increase in productivity dispersion even among continuing firms, suggesting that
entrants are not the only cause of the rise in productivity dispersion that we observe
within the economy.

28

The higher overall entry rates in the early period are due to the fact that there was strong cyclical
growth in the late 1980s and much merger and acquisition activity.

22

5.4. The role of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in
explaining the growth in productivity dispersion within industries
In the previous sections we discussed and systematically eliminated alternative
explanations for the rise in productivity dispersion within the UK economy (i.e., more
sorting between firms, a rise in transitory shocks, and a rise in productivity dispersion
among entrants). As a consequence, we consider technical progress the most likely
cause and in this sub-section, we directly examine the role of ICT may have in
explaining the growth in within-industry productivity dispersion.
ICT information at the firm level does not exist for a long enough time period
to perform a micro-analysis (See Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen, 2007, for a
discussion). We can, however, evaluate the impact of ICT on within-industry
productivity growth using the Bank of England Industry Dataset29 (BEID) which
contains information on ICT services, total capital services, hours of work, output,
value added, etc. at the two-digit industry level.
We use FAME data to compute the between-firm dispersion of labor
productivity. We measure this as the 90-10 differential in log (real value added per
employee) within each industry and calculate the change between 1984-1988 and
1996-2000. We regress this long-difference change in productivity dispersion on the
change in ICT intensity and various controls.
The first column of Table 5 simply presents the bivariate regression between
the change in productivity dispersion and ICT intensity revealing a large and
statistically significant coefficient on ICT. A 10% increase in the share of ICT capital
in total capital services is associated with a 2.7% increase in the dispersion of labor
productivity. Column (2) includes a dummy for the manufacturing sector. As we
29

See Oulton and Srinivasan (2003). We thank Nick Oulton for making this data available to us.

23

would expect given the earlier analysis, the dummy is significantly negative
indicating that even conditional on ICT the growth in productivity dispersion is lower
in manufacturing. Column (3) includes additional controls for the growth of total
capital services per hour, the growth of the proportion of workers with college degrees
and the change in union density (the proportion of workers who are members of trade
unions). Including these extra controls reduces the magnitude of the coefficient on
ICT intensity, but it remains significant at the 5% level. The other variables take their
expected signs. Capital intensity is positive and significant which is consistent with
the idea that some technology is embodied in non-ICT capital. ICT capital growth
could be reflecting the growth of skills, which is why we condition on human capital
– the variable is positive and significant. Institutional explanations of the rise in
inequality emphasis that union decline may allow low wage/low productivity firms to
survive. The union coefficient is indeed negative but it is insignificantly different
from zero.
We were concerned that the observed increase in dispersion may be due to the
problem that hours are not available at the firm level. Increased dispersion of
productivity could simply reflect increased dispersion of hours worked. To control for
this we calculated the dispersion of hours worked in each industry using individual
level data from the NES (in column (4)) and the Labor Force Survey (in column (5)).
These variables were both insignificant and did not affect the coefficient on ICT
intensity. We also included other demographic controls (female workers and part-time
workers) as possible correlates with the increased use of ICT capital (and as factors
that could affect labor productivity). Again, the ICT coefficient remains significant.
In summary, after controlling for various factors, the positive association
between increases in productivity dispersion and changes in ICT intensity still holds.

24

The ICT variable is economically as well as statistically significant. ICT intensity has
grown very rapidly over this period (from 3.4% of all capital services in 1984-1988 to
15% in 1996-2000). Given the estimated coefficient we can essentially account for all
of the increase in productivity dispersion (0.266 points) by the increase in ICT
intensity30.

5.5. International Data
If the growth of productivity inequality was technology based we would
expect to observe this in other countries. In particular, France and Norway where
there has been little change in wage inequality (e.g. Machin and Van Reenen, 2007).
Figure 19 shows us the situation in France between 1989 and 2000 (we chose these
years because we have consistent data). Interestingly, like the UK, there has been a
clear increase in the variation of productivity over this period. Note, however, the yaxis scale is much narrower than in previous graphs. Productivity has grown by about
10% for firms at the 90th decile and has fallen by 10% for firms at the lower decile.
The median firm has experienced productivity growth of about 5%. This is in the
same direction as the UK, but the rise in productivity dispersion has been less
dramatic.
Figure 20 shows the situation in Norway in the 1995-2002 period (the only
period for which we have value added per worker information in non-manufacturing
as well as manufacturing). There has been a small growth in the 90-10 decile ratio
over this period. Interestingly this increase is confined to the upper part of the

30

See Table A2. ln(ICT services/capital services) increased by 1.605 over this period so the implied
“effect” is 0.37, more than 100% of the observed change.

25

distribution (the 90-50); the lower half of the distribution has shown some small
decrease in inequality.
It is well known that inequality of wages in France and Norway has also
grown more slowly than in the UK or US in the last 25 years. So although the
increase in productivity dispersion is not unique to the UK, it seems more muted in
countries where there has been a slower growth of wage inequality. This suggests that
institutional factors may play a role in the change of productivity dispersion.

5.6. Quantification: How Important are the results for the wage
distribution?
How important could the change in the structure be in explaining the change
in the wage distribution? We have not yet written a formal general equilibrium model
of the simultaneous determination of the wage and productivity distribution31 so all
we can do is to give some intuition over the magnitudes. Appendix C gives a simple
model that could help us estimate some of the magnitudes. The model assumes that
productivity is driven by technological factors and that wages are determined by a
mixture of human capital characteristics and firm characteristics. Our model allows us
to estimate the impact of the changing productivity dispersion on wage dispersion as:
⎛ Q⎞
∆ var⎜ ln ⎟
⎝ L⎠
β2
∆ var(lnW )

(3)

Between 1984 and 2001 the variance of ln(productivity) rose by 0.26 and the
variance of firm ln(wages) rose by 0.21. If we assume that β = 0.3 (e.g. Van Reenen,
1996) then this implies that 10% of the increase in the variance of inter-firm wages is
accounted for by the variance of inter-firm productivity. Therefore, this still leaves a
31

See Klette and Kortum (2004) or Lentz and Mortensen (2005) for an attempt to do this in the cross
section.

26

big residual for such factors as the increase in the return to observable skills (and
possibly increased sorting). Nevertheless, the increased productivity dispersion is a
significant part of the story.
Furthermore, there is some evidence that the between firm distribution of
productivity could have become more important over time in accounting for the wage
dispersion. Running wage regressions separately for different time periods reveals
that β has been increasing over time. For example, Table 6 reports specifications of a
regression of wages on productivity with controls for time dummies and industry
effects. We estimate separately for an early period (1984-1989), a middle period
(1990-1995) and a late period (1996-2001). The first column reports simple OLS, the
second column adds a full set of fixed effects and the third column reports GMM
“System” estimates in the manner of Blundell and Bond (1998). All results show an
increase in the importance of the effect of productivity on wage. For examples in the
GMM estimates the coefficient rises from 0.325 in the mid 1980s to 0.382 in the late
1990s. This suggests that firm heterogeneity has become more important in explaining
the overall wage distribution.
Although this shows that firm heterogeneity remains important for the wage
distribution, it is difficult to estimate how important this phenomenon is for the
overall increase in inequality. As Appendix C shows, the effect will depend on such
hard to measure things as the variation of human capital and the degree of workerfirm sorting (and the changes in these objects).

6. Conclusions
In this paper we have examined some evidence for the explanation of the
growth of residual wage inequality. We have shown that a generally untested
27

implication of many technology-based theories of within group wage inequality is that
there should be an increase in the dispersion of productivity between firms. We argue
that existing studies will underestimate the importance of the growth of productivity
inequality because they focus on the manufacturing sector that has experienced a
surge of international competition truncating the lower tail of poorly performing firms
and therefore compressing the (counterfactual) productivity distribution.
Using new panel data on UK firms over the 1984-2001 period we show that
the substantial increase in individual wage inequality is mainly a between firm (rather
than within firm or between industry) phenomenon. More importantly we show that
there has been a substantial increase in the between firm productivity dispersion. The
90th percentile of the productivity distribution grew by 60 log points between 1984
and 2001 whereas the 10th percentile grew by only 20 log points. Furthermore, we
show that the increase was driven by the private service sector – the growth of
dispersion in the manufacturing sector was muted.
We examined several hypotheses that sought to explain the growth of the
productivity dispersion. Overall, we conclude that the data gives some support for
models along the lines of Caselli (1999) or Acemoglu et al. (2001). The diffusion of
new technologies heterogeneously across firms has increased both the spread of
productivity and the spread of wages. We found that those industries that had the most
rapid increase in the use of ICT also had the most rapid increase in productivity
dispersion.
We argued that increases in the dispersion of inputs (such as ordinary capital)
could not fully account for this pattern as TFP dispersion has risen - which implies
that increased sorting is unlikely to be the main cause of the change. In addition, the
pattern was not due to an increase in transitory shocks as the transition matrices

28

appear to be relatively stable at the beginning and end of the period. Thirdly, we
showed that increased dispersion amongst entrants was not the only cause of the
increased productivity inequality as productivity inequality grew even among
survivors.
The next steps in our analysis are to combine the information here with
explicit measures of firm-level technology to test the theories more rigorously. Such
data is available and is being constructed (Bloom et al., 2007). We also need to use
more of the data from other countries, especially matched worker-firm data where we
can do more to control for worker heterogeneity. Moreover, we need to address
whether institutional or trade explanations have any purchase on the data. Finally, a
tighter match with the theory of equilibrium wage and productivity dispersion is also
a pressing need (e.g. Klette and Kortum (2004) or Lentz and Mortensen (2005)). This
research is in progress.

29

References
Acemoglu, D. (2002). ‘Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market’. Journal
of Economic Literature, vol. 40, pp. 7-72.
Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P. and Violante, G. (2001). ‘Deunionization, Technical
Change and Inequality’. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series of Public
Policy, vol. 55(1), pp. 229-264.
Aghion, P., Howitt, P. and Violante, G. (2004). ‘General Purpose Technologies and
Wages’, Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 7(4), pp. 315-345.
Aghion, P., Howitt, P. and Violante, G. (2002). ‘Technological Progress, Luck and
the Variability of Earnings’, mimeo Harvard University.
Autor, D.H., Katz, L.F. and Kearney, M.S. (2005). ’Trends in US Wage Inequality:
Responding to the Revisionists’, NBER Working Paper No. 11628.
Autor, D.H., Katz, L.F. and Krueger, A. (1998). “Computing Inequality: How
computers have changed the labor market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 113(4) (November), pp. 1161-1213.
Baily, M., Hulten, C. and Campbell, D. (1992). ‘Productivity Dynamics in
Manufacturing Plants’, Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, pp. 187-267.
Bartelsman, E.J., Haltiwanger, J. and Scarpetta, S. (2004). ‘Microeconomic Evidence
of Creative Destruction in Industrial and Developing Countries’, mimeo Free
University of Amsterdam.
Blau, F. and Kahn, L. (1996). ‘International Differences in Male Wage Inequality:
Institutions versus Market Forces’, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104(4),
pp. 791-837.
Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Van Reneen, J. (2007). ‘Americans do I.T. better: US
multinationals and the productivity miracle’, NBER Working Paper No. No.
13085
Blundell, R. and Preston, I. (1998). ‘Consumption Inequality and Income
Uncertainty’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113(2), (May), pp. 603-40.
Blundell, R. and Bond, S. (1998). ’Initial conditions and Moment Conditions in
Dynamic Panel Data Models’, Journal of Econometrics, vol. 87(1), pp. 11543.
Caballero, R. and Hammour, M. (1994). ’The Cleaning Effect of Recessions’
American Economic Review, vol. 84(5), pp. 1350-1368.
30

Card, D. and Lemieux, T. (2001). ‘Can Falling skill supply explain the rising returns
to college for Young Men’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 116(2),
(May), pp. 705-746.
Caselli, F. (1999). ‘Technological Revolutions’ American Economic Review, vol. 89,
pp. 78-102.
Comin, D. and Philippon, T. (2005). ‘The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and
Consequences’, in Gertler, M. and Rogoff, K. (eds) NBER Macro-Economics
Annual
Davis, S. and Haltiwanger, J. (1991). ‘Wage Dispersion within and between US
manufacturing plants 1963-1986’, in Martin Baily and Clifford Winston, eds.,
Brookings papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics 1991, pp. 115-200.
Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J. (2006) ‘Volatility and dispersion in
business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately traded firms’, in
Acemoglu, D., Rogoff, K. and Woodford, M. (eds) NBER Macroeconomics
Annual
Dickens, R. (2000). ‘The Evolution of Individual Male Earnings in Great Britain:
1975-95’, Economic Journal, vol. 110(460), pp. 27-49.
DiNardo, J., Fortin, N. M. and Lemieux, T. (1996). ‘Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution

of

Wages,

1973-1992:

A

Semi-parametric

Approach’,

Econometrica, vol. 64(5), pp. 1001-1044.
Dunne, T., Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J, and Troske, K.R. (2004). ‘Wage and
Productivity Dispersion In US Manufacturing: The Role of Computer
Investments’, Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 22 (2), pp. 397-429.
Griffith, R., Redding, S., Van Reenen, J. (2003). ‘R&D and Absorptive Capacity:
from Theory to Data’, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 105(1), pp. 120.
Griffith, R, Harrison, R. and Van Reenen, J. (2006). ‘How special is the special
relationship: Using the impact of US R&D spillovers on British firms as a test
of technology sourcing’, American Economic Review, vol. 96(5), pp. 18591875.
Gosling, A., Machin, S., and Meghir, C. (2000). ‘The Changing Distribution of Male
Wages, 1966-1992’, Review of Economic studies, vol. 67, pp 635-66.

31

Haltiwanger, J., Lane, J., and Spletzer, J. (1999). ‘Productivity Differences across
employers: the role of employer size, age and human capital’ American
Economic Review, May, 94-98.
Haskel, J. and Martin, R. (2002). ‘The UK Manufacturing Productivity Spread’,
Ceriba Working Paper; http://www.ceriba.org.uk.
Hægeland,T. and T.J. Klette (1999). ‘Do higher wages reflect higher productivity?
Education, gender and experience premiums in a matched plant-worker data
set’, in J. Haltiwanger, J.Lane, J.R Spletzer, J. Theeuwes and K. Troske (eds.):
The creation and analysis of employer-employee matched data, North Holland
Publ.Co.
Katz, L. and Autor, D. (1999). ‘Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality’, in O.C. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. 3A, pp. 1463-1558.
Klette, T.J. and Kortum, S. (2002). ‘Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation:
Evidence and a Theory’ , CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3428.
Kremer, M. and Maskin, E. (1996). ‘Wage inequality and Segregation by Skill’ NBER
Working Paper No. 5718.
Layard, R., Nickell, S. and Jackman, R. (2005). Unemployment, Second Edition,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lemieux, T. (2002). ‘Decomposing the wage distribution: a Unified Approach’,
Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 35(4), pp. 646-88.
Lemieux, T. (2006). ‘Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition effects,
noisy data or rising skill returns?’, American Economic Review, vol. 96(3), pp.
461-498.
Lentz, R. and Mortensen, D.T. (2005). ‘Productivity Growth and Worker
Reallocation’, International Economic Review, vol. 46(3), pp. 731-749.
Machin, S. (2003). ‘Wage Inequality since 1975’ in The Labor Market Under New
Labor – The State of Working Britain, (eds): R. Dickens, P. Gregg and J.
Wadsworth, Palgrave Macmillan: New York, pp. 191-200.
Machin, S. and Van Reenen, J. (1998). ‘Technology and changes in the skill structure:
Evidence from seven OECD countries’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
113(4), (November), pp. 1215-44.
Machin, S. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). ‘Wage Inequality’, forthcoming in Bruce
Weinberg and Chris Taber (eds) New Palgrave Dictionary, London: Palgrave
32

Martin, R. (2005). ‘The True Spread’, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion
Paper No. 692.
Mortensen, D. (2003). Equilibrium Wage Dispersion, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nickell, S. (1996). ‘Competition and Corporate Performance’, Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 104(4), pp. 724-46.
Olley, G.S., and Pakes, A. (1996). ‘The dynamics of productivity in the
telecommunications equipment industry’, Econometrica, vol. 64(6), pp.126397.
Oulton, N. and Srinivasan, S (2005). ‘Productivity Growth and the Role of ICT in the
United Kingdom: An Industry View 1970-2000’ Centre for Economic
Performance Discussion Paper No. 681.
Postel-Vinay, F. and Robin, J-M. (2003). ‘Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker
and Employer Heterogeneity’, Econometrica, vol. 70(6), pp. 2295-350.
Syverson, Chad (2004) ‘Market Structure and Productivity: A concrete example’,
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112(6), pp. 1181-1222.
Violante, G. (2002). ‘Technological Acceleration, Skill transferability and the rise of
residual inequality’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117(1), (February),
pp. 297-338.
Van Reenen, J. (1996). ‘The Creation and Capture of Economic Rents: Wages and
Innovation in a Panel of UK Companies’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 111(1), pp. 195-226.

33

Fig.1: Wage dispersion in private services

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

NES data 1984-99

1984

1989

year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1994

1999

50th percentile (indexed)

Log yearly wage: 16-64 men

Source: New Earnings Survey Data, ln(annual wages), men 16-65. Private
Services only.

Fig.2: Wage dispersion in manufacturing industries

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

NES data 1984-99

1984

1989

year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1994

1999

50th percentile (indexed)

Log yearly wage: 16-64 men

Source: New Earnings Survey Data, ln(annual wages), men 16-65.
Manufacturing sector only.

34

Fig.3: Wage dispersion in private services

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Source: FAME Company level data, ln(average annual wages).

Fig.4: Wage dispersion in manufacturing industries

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

50th percentile (indexed)

Source: FAME Company level data, ln(average annual wages).

35

2000

Fig. 5a: Productivity dispersion in the whole economy

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Source: FAME Company level data, ln(value added per worker).

Fig.5b: Productivity dispersion in manufacturing and private services

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Source: FAME Company level data, ln(value added per worker).

36

Fig. 6: Productivity dispersion in private services

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Source: FAME Company level data, ln(value added per worker).

Fig. 7: Productivity dispersion in manufacturing industries

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Source: FAME Company level data, ln(value added per worker).

37

Fig.8: Decomposition of wage dispersion

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

Manufacturing and private services

1984

1989

year

total variance
within-firm component

1994

1999

between component

NES and FAME Datasets 1984-1999.

Fig.9: Decomposition of wage dispersion

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

Manufacturing and private services

1984

1989

year

total variance
within-firm component

1994

1999

between-firm within-industry comp.
between-industry component

NES and FAME Datasets 1984-1999.

38

Fig.10: Decomposition of wage dispersion

0

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8

Private services

1984

1989

1994

year

total variance
within-firm component

1999

between component

NES and FAME Datasets 1984-1999.

Fig.11: Decomposition of wage dispersion

0

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8

Private services

1984

1989

year

total variance
within-firm component

1994

1999

between-firm within-industry comp.
between-industry component

NES and FAME Datasets 1984-1999.

39

Fig.12: Decomposition of wage dispersion

0

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8

Manufacturing industries

1984

1989

year

total variance
within-firm component

1994

1999

between component

NES and FAME Datasets 1984-1999.

Fig.13: Decomposition of wage dispersion

0

.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8

Manufacturing industries

1984

1989

year

total variance
within-firm component

1994

1999

between-firm within-industry comp.
between-industry component

NES and FAME Datasets 1984-1999.

40

Fig.14: Decomposition of labour productivity dispersion

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

Manufacturing and private services

1984

1988

1992
year

1996

between-firm within-industry comp.

1999

between-industry comp.

NES weights.

Fig.15: Decomposition of labour productivity dispersion

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

Private Services

1984

1989

year

between-firm within-industry comp.
NES weights.

41

1994

1999
between-industry comp.

Fig.16: Decomposition of labour productivity dispersion

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

Manufacturing Industries

1984

1989

year

1994

between-firm within-industry comp.

1999
between-industry comp.

NES weights.

Fig. 17: Capital per worker dispersion in the whole economy

.6

.8

1

1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)
Log capital per worker.

42

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Fig.18: TFP in the whole economy

.9

1.1

1.3

1.5

1.7

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

TFP - firm specific weights.

Figure 19: Change in French Productivity Dispersion (Value added per worker),
whole economy, 1989-2000
p90
p10

p50

1.1

1

.9
1995
year

1990

Source: BRN Database

43

2000

.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

Fig.20: Change in Norwegian Firm Productivity Dispersion 1995-2001
Whole Economy

1995

1996

1997

1998
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)
Source: REGN dataset.

Sample of firms with emp>=10; ln(va/emp).

44

1999

2000

2001

50th percentile (indexed)

Table 1: Transition probability matrices: summary of the results

Labor
Productivity
1st decile
10th decile
TFP (α=firm
weights)
1st decile
10th decile
Average
Wage
1st decile
10th decile
Average
profits
1st decile
10th decile

(1)
Early

(2)
Middle

(3)
Late

(4)
Total
change

(5)
∆ Late to
Middle

From 1986/87
to 1988/89

From 1992/93
to 1994/95

From 1998/99
to 2000/01

∆ (2000/01 1986/87)

∆ (2000/01 1992/93)

0.60
0.46

0.48
0.38

0.58
0.45

-0.02
-0.01

0.10
0.07

0.47
0.61

0.44
0.52

0.50
0.59

0.03
-0.02

0.06
0.07

0.59
0.60

0.50
0.52

0.55
0.56

-0.04
-0.06

0.05
0.04

0.60
0.25

0.48
0.19

0.58
0.29

-0.02
0.04

0.08
0.06

Note: Labor Productivity is defined as log (real value added /employment). We compare the
transitions between (two year) periods by decile (see Table 2 for the full matrix for labor
productivity). For example, the element in the first row and column indicates that 60% of the
firms who were in the top decile of productivity in the 1986-1987 period remained in the top
decile in the 1988-1989 period. Column (4) is the absolute difference between columns (3)
and (1). Column (5) is the absolute difference between columns (3) and (2).

45

Table 2: Three-Year Transition Rates: Labor Productivity

State in 1988-89
State
86-87
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

0.60
0.10
0.04
0.01
0.01
0
0
0.01
0
0.01

0.13
0.38
0.15
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.02
0
0
0

0.05
0.18
0.26
0.15
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.01
0.06
0.19
0.22
0.14
0.07
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02

State
92-93
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

0.48
0.13
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0
0
0
0

0.11
0.32
0.14
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.01
0
0.01
0.01

0.03
0.15
0.25
0.13
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.01
0
0.01

0.01
0.06
0.18
0.19
0.11
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01

State
98-99
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th

1st

2nd

3rd

0.58
0.11
0.02
0
0.01
0
0
0
0.01
0

0.11
0.36
0.15
0.06
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0

0.02
0.16
0.26
0.15
0.07
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01

6th

8th

9th

10th

Exit Obs.

0.01 0
0
0.03 0.02 0.01
0.07 0.03 0.02
0.18 0.08 0.05
0.22 0.18 0.09
0.15 0.21 0.16
0.07 0.13 0.24
0.03 0.07 0.14
0.02 0.03 0.05
0.01 0.01 0.02
State in 1994-95
5th
6th
7th

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.19
0.24
0.12
0.04

0
0
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.07
0.18
0.31
0.12

0
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.18
0.46

0.20
0.20
0.20
0.22
0.20
0.20
0.21
0.24
0.25
0.30

8th

9th

10th

Exit Obs.

0
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.10
0.18
0.19
0.10
0.03

0
0
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.09
0.20
0.24
0.08

0.01
0.01
0
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.15
0.38

0.35
0.28
0.27
0.27
0.30
0.32
0.34
0.37
0.38
0.40

4th

0
0
0
0.02 0.01 0.01
0.07 0.02 0.02
0.18 0.08 0.04
0.17 0.17 0.10
0.10 0.19 0.16
0.07 0.10 0.16
0.03 0.04 0.10
0.02 0.03 0.05
0.01 0.02 0.03
State in 2000-01
5th
6th
7th

8th

9th

10th

Exit Obs.

0.01
0.04
0.14
0.23
0.17
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01

0.01
0.03
0.06
0.15
0.22
0.14
0.08
0.03
0.02
0.01

0
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.08
0.15
0.25
0.14
0.04

0
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.07
0.17
0.29
0.10

0
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.15
0.45

0.28
0.26
0.29
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.30
0.34

0
0.01
0.03
0.08
0.13
0.23
0.15
0.05
0.03
0.02

7th

0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.16
0.23
0.14
0.04
0.02

706
706
706
706
707
706
706
706
706
707

810
809
809
809
809
810
809
809
809
809

959
959
959
959
959
959
959
959
959
959

Notes: Labor Productivity is defined as log (real value added /employment). We compare the
transitions between (two year) periods by decile (see Table 2 for the full matrix for labor
productivity). For example, the element in the first row and column indicates that 60% of the
firms who were in the top decile of productivity in the 1986-1987 period remained in the top
decile in the 1988-1989 period. Column (4) is the absolute difference between columns (3)
and (1). Column (5) is the absolute difference between columns (3) and (2).

46

Table 3: Labor productivity dispersion among entrants and incumbents
Periods
Early
(1987-1989)
Middle
(1993-1995)
Late
(1999-2001)
∆(19872001)
th

Entrants
90th-50th 50th-10th

Obs.

Incumbents
90th-50th 50th-10th

Obs

.92

.72

5585

.79

.60

7437

.99

.82

5167

.84

.65

9764

1.09
.17

1.03
.31

4180

.94
.15

.71
.11

10367

th

Notes: 90 -50 = differential between the 90th and 50th percentile of the productivity
th
th
distribution; 50 -10 = differential between the 50th and 10th percentile of the productivity
distribution.

Table 4: Labor productivity dispersion – balanced panels
Periods

Balanced panel, 1984-2001
90th-50th
50th-10th
Median
0.68
0.50
2.96
0.68
0.53
3.09
0.60
0.55
3.07
0.64
0.57
3.19
0.74
0.58
3.24
0.77
0.58
3.24
0.09
0.08
0.28

Balanced panel, 1990-2001
90th-50th
50th-10th
Median

84-86
87-89
0.72
0.60
3.09
90-92
0.73
0.57
3.21
93-95
0.79
0.60
3.28
96-98
0.86
0.59
3.25
99-01
0.14
-0.01
0.16
∆(1984-2001)
th
th
Notes: 90 -50 = differential between the 90th and 50th percentile of the productivity
th
th
distribution; 50 -10 = differential between the 50th and 10th percentile of the productivity
distribution. The balanced panel (1984-2001) contains 784 observations every year; the
balanced panel (1990-2001) contains 2136 observations every year.

47

Table 5: The role of ICT in explaining the growth in within- industry productivity dispersion
Dep. Var.: ∆(Dispersion in labor productivity)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

∆ln(ICT services/total capital services)

0.266*
(0.143)

0.311**
(0.147)
-0.356**
(0.154)

0.230**
(0.117)
-0.166
(0.133)
0.538*
(0.319)
0.368**
(0.170)
-0.118
(0.263)

0.232*
(0.124)
-0.090
(0.186)
0.403
(0.273)
0.375
(0.243)
-0.282
(0.388)
-0.357
(0.469)

0.292**
(0.136)
-0.141
(0.167)
0.184
(0.317)
0.517**
(0.237)
-0.094
(0.414)

Manufacturing dummy
∆ln(total capital services/hours)
∆(proportion of workers with college degree)
∆(union density)
∆(coefficient of variation in
total actual hours of work - LFS)
∆(coefficient of variation in
hours of work - NES)
∆(proportion of part-time workers)

-0.121
(0.096)
0.223
0.141
(0.183)
(0.167)
0.088
0.001
∆(proportion of female workers)
(0.324)
(0.426)
0.10
0.17
0.36
0.44
0.49
R2
33
33
33
33
33
No. of observations
Notes: These are OLS regressions using the Bank of England Dataset. All variable are in “long differences” between 1984-88 and 1996-2000. The dependent
variable, Dispersion in labor productivity, is the 90-10 of log(value added per worker). Robust standard errors are in parentheses below coefficients. ).
Regressions weighted by the industry size. Robust standard errors are in parentheses below coefficients. (*): significant at the 10% level; (**): significant at
the 5% level; (***): significant at the 1% level.

48

Table 6: Correlation between wage and labor productivity

Firm
Performance
Variable

(1)
Ln(Value added
per worker)

(2)
Ln(Value added
per worker)

(3)
Ln(Value added
per worker)

OLS

Within Groups

GMM (BlundellBond, 1998)
0.325***
(0.028)
0.352***
(0.037)
0.382***
(0.032)
118,806

0.385***
(0.002)
Middle (1990- 0.446***
(0.002)
1995)
Late
(1996- 0.491***
(0.002)
2001)
182,189
# of obs.
Early (1984-89)

0.240***
(0.002)
0.259***
(0.002)
0.282***
(0.002)
182,189

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficients are robust to heteroskedacity and
arbitrary serial correlation (i.e. clustered by firm). (*): significant at the 10% level; (**):
significant at the 5% level; (***): significant at the 1% level. GMM in column (3) conditions
on having at least four continuous time series observations. Instruments used are ln(value
added per worker) lagged t-2 and t-3 in the differenced equation and ∆ln(value added per
worker) lagged t-1 in the levels equations. All columns include a full set of time dummies.
Columns (2) and (3) include firm fixed effects.

49

Appendix A: Variance decomposition of the between-firm component
Following Davis and Haltiwanger (1991) and Dunne et al. (2004), we
decompose wage dispersion into between-firm and within-firm components. Our
objective is to measure the contribution of the between and within components in
explaining wage inequality.
Total variation in W = ln (wages) across workers is defined as V and can be
divided into a within firm (VWF) and between firm (VBF) component:
V = VWF + V BF
(A1)
The between firm component can be further divided into a between industry ( VBI ) and
within industry (but between firm) component ( VBFI ). This can be written:
V = VWF + VBI + VBFI
(A2)
More explicitly write the individual variance of wages as:

V = ∑∑∑ (Wijk − W ) 2 = ∑∑∑ [(Wijk − W jk ) + (W jk − W )]2
k

j

i

k

j

(A3)

i

where Wijk is the ln(wage) for worker i at firm j in sector k, Wjk is the average
ln(wage) at firm j in sector k and W is the mean wage across all workers in all firms
and sectors.
Multiplying and dividing the first term of the right-hand side of equation (A3)
by Njk, (the total number of workers in firm j) and considering that the
∑ (W jk − W ) = N jk (W jk − W ) , equation (A3) becomes:
i

V = ∑∑ N jk ∑

(Wijk − W jk ) 2

+ ∑∑ N jk (W jk − W ) 2

N jk
Equation (A4) can be written as:
k

j

i

k

V = ∑∑ N jk V jk + ∑∑ N jk (W jk − W )
k

j

k

(A4)

j

2

(A5)

j

Dividing through by N, the total number of workers in the economy, we obtain
the decomposition of overall variation into within firm (WF) and between-firm (BF)
components:
2
1
1
V = ∑∑ N jk V jk + ∑∑ N jk (W jk − W )
(A6)
N k j
N k j
Define VWF as the employee-weighted variance of mean wages within firms and VBF
denotes the employee-weighted variance of mean wages between firms.
⎛1⎞
VWF = ⎜ ⎟∑∑ N jk V jk
(A7)
⎝N⎠ k j
2
⎛1⎞
V BF = ⎜ ⎟∑∑ N jk (W jk − W )
(A8)
⎝N⎠ k j
Substituting (A7) and (A8) into (A6) gives us equation (A1). It is straightforward to
show how this can be further decomposed into an industry specific component.
The between-firm and within-firm variance terms in (A8) and (A7) cannot be
isolated from individual surveys like the NES, although the NES does permit
estimation of their sum, V. To isolate the components, we first calculate VBF directly
from the wage data in a firm-level database, FAME. We then estimate the within-firm
50

wage variance as a difference between total variance and the between-firm component
using equation (A1)
VˆWF = V (W NES ) − V (W FAME )
(A9)
where V(W NES) is the variance of measured wages in the NES and V(WFAME) is the
variance of wages in FAME. By applying this straightforward approach, we assume
that there is no bias resulting from measurement error in the NES32.

32

Our approach of using equation (A8) to estimate within-firm variance of wages relies on the
assumptions that the variance of measurement error in the NES wage observations and the covariance
between true wage and the NES measurement error are negligible. Testing these assumptions requires
both employer-reported and worker-reported wages for a sample of workers. Unfortunately, we do not
have employer-employee linked data for the UK.

51

Appendix B: Data and additional results
B1. The Datasets used
Firm level dataset - FAME (Financial Analysis Made Easy)

This database consists of company account data for the United Kingdom as
discussed in the main text. The main dataset we use is FAME (Financial Analysis
Made Easy) which is a UK company-level panel data set available since 1982. In
Britain, all incorporated companies are legally required to register their accounts at
Companies House and given a unique registration number. Unlike the US, this
includes not only companies listed on the Stock Exchange but also all unlisted
companies. In 2003, we arranged a special purchase of this data with a private sector
company (Jordan’s) that has converted this data into electronic form33. This is
unbalanced panel data and includes all firms that had exited the database prior to 2003
(by either bankruptcy or takeover).
Under UK law, firms are also required to report a great deal more accounting
information on their wage bills than in the US (where declaration of staff expenses is
a voluntary item). Because of this, we are able to construct measures of average firm
wages that are unavailable for most firms in the US public accounts.
We define average firm wage as the log ratio of total remuneration over the
number of employees. We define labor productivity as log real value added per
worker. Value added is calculated as the sum of gross profits before tax and staff
expenses (see Griffith, Harrison and Van Reenen, 2006). We also consider a
definition based on sales minus estimates of intermediate inputs.
We apply three different measures of total factor productivity (TFP): (1) TFP
measured by the Solow residuals with fixed weights, (2) TFP measured by the Solow
residuals with industry specific weights and (3) TFP measured by the Solow residuals
with firm specific weights (this is the preferred measure used in the Figures). All
financial variables are expressed in thousands of pounds sterling and deflated by the
annual Retail Price Index (RPI).
We made the following selections in the main analysis (selection biases
discussed below)
• We exclude firms whose main industry was in agriculture, fishing, mining,
utilities, public administration, health, education, social work and finance
(the “manufacturing and private services” sample).
• We keep consolidated company accounts data.
• We keep firms with at least 10 employees.
The final sample of firms contains information on about 11,000 companies
each year between 1984 and 2001. The database provides detailed information on
employment, tangible fixed assets, sales, gross profits, profits before tax and the
industry in which the firm is operating (as well as many other items from the balance
sheet).
In testing the incidence of transitory productivity shocks hitting firms (subsection 5.2) we compute transition probabilities matrices of labor productivity, TFP,
average wage and average profits. We condition on the sub-sample of firms that also
33

Bureau Van Dijk (BVD) supplied AMADEUS which contains FAME as a UK sub-component
(licensed from Jordan’s). Unfortunately only firms who died within the previous ten years are kept and
AMADEUS was not very complete until around 1999. This is why we needed to deal directly with
Jordan’s and arrange a dump from their mainframe.

52

satisfy the conditions that we have labor productivity values in a two-year periods.
The two-year periods are 1986/87 and 1988/89 (“the early period”), 1992/93 and
1994/95 (“the middle period”), 1998/99 and 2000/21 (“the late period”). The final
sub-sample for the entry/exit analysis includes 7,062; 8,092 and 9,590 firms in the
early, middle and late periods, respectively.
The New Earnings Survey (NES) is an employer reported survey, conducted in
April each year, of employees in employment in the UK. The sample frame, based on
national insurance (NI) numbers, covers roughly 1% of all employees – some 200,000
individuals each year between 1984 and 1999. Individuals can be matched across
years by their National Insurance (NI) numbers to form a panel of employees in
employment. Details on personal characteristics are limited, but there is a wealth of
information on earnings, hours, industry, occupation, sector and region. We have
access to the data for the years 1984 through 1999.

In order to compute our measure of gross annual pay, (1) we exclude Northern Ireland
from our sample, thus concentrating on a sample for Great Britain; (2) we select 1664 year old males and 16-59 year old females for which their pay and working hours
are not affected by absence; (3) we compute gross annual pay by multiplying gross
weekly pay by 52. Our sample consists of about 160,000 individuals each year. Wage
variables are expressed in thousands of pounds sterling and deflated by the annual
Retail Price Index (RPI).
Datastream contains company accounts data for UK firms listed on the stock
exchange. We exclude firms operating in the financial sector (SIC80 code: 814-832).
The sample at our disposal consists of about 1,350 firms each year between 1983 and
2001. We define average firm wage as real total remuneration per employee. We also
define labor productivity as real value added per employee. We use the annual RPI as
deflator.
Regnskapsstatistikk (REGN data) are the statistics of accounts for non-financial
joint-stock companies prepared by Creditinform and Statistics Norway. The accounts
statistics are from the enterprises’ financial statements submitted annually to the
Register of Company Accounts in Brønnøysund and cover in principle the entire
population of non-financial joint-stock companies. Data are available from 1992 but
the sample is incomplete before 1995. By selecting companies with at least 10
employees, our sample consists of about 18,000 firms each year from 1995-2002. We
define average firm wage as gross pay per employee. We also define labor
productivity as log real value added per employee. We use the annual CPI as deflator.
Bank of England Industry Dataset (BEID). This is a two-digit industry level dataset
covering all sectors of the economy. We drop public administration and defence so we
are left with 33 sectors. (Results are robust to the exclusion of sectors 31 (Education)
and 32 (Health and social work.) It is based on National Accounts data from the
Census. The ICT data is based on the supply and use tables. The full list of industries
is contained in Table A2. Descriptive statistics of the BEID dataset matched to FAME
are in Table A3.

53

B2. Robustness of the findings to sample selection and choice of productivity
measure

In this sub-section we discuss the sensitivity of the findings to the sample selections
(and other decisions) that we have made on FAME.
Industry Selection
We considered a sample with no exclusions based on industry (“whole
sample”) as well as the main sample which drops various problematic sectors. These
sectors are problematic either because they have been influenced by government
control and/or because of difficulties in measuring productivity (financial services).
The original data had some missing values on the industry codes of dissolved firms so
we collected this information from other sources. Of the final sample, an average of
6% of firms (which represent 1% of aggregate employment) had missing values on
industry codes (see Table A.4 for details).
To check the findings we contrast the dispersion trends for the “whole
economy” sample with the “manufacturing and private services” sample. The levels
of the firm and wage productivity distribution are given in Table A1 below. In Panel
A we use the whole economy sample across all sectors and group years into an early
(1984-89), middle (1990-95) and late (1996-2002) period. Mean real wages and real
productivity grew at the 10th, median and 90th percentiles of the distribution. But
inequality clearly grew too. The lower panel (B) shows the equivalent for the more
restricted sample. Although there is less dispersion as a whole (as we would expect
from drawing a more homogenous sample) the trends in inequality of wages and
productivity are quite comparable to the larger sample. This similarity can also be
seen from Figure 5a which contains the whole sample which is very similar to the
trends when we drop the problematic industries (see Figure 5b).
Using sales per worker instead of value added per worker
Figure A1 uses sales per worker as an alternative measure of productivity to
value added per head. Sales are a line item in the company accounts, but have the
major disadvantage that they will be affected by intermediate materials. An increase
in the intensity of material use will increase sales per worker even if value added per
worker remains constant. This is particularly important in the retail and wholesale
sectors where intermediates are a large share of revenue.
The variation of sales per worker has increased over this period, but not to the
same extent as value added per worker. In particular the increase in inequality has
come from an expansion of the 50-10 whereas the 90-50 has remained pretty constant.
We conclude that it is important to look at value added as the distribution of
intermediates has changed systematically over time.
Profit dispersion
A related concern of using value added is that the increase in value added
dispersion is mechanical because value added is partly composed of the wage bill. Of
course, it is quite possible for individual wage dispersion to rise and between firm
wage dispersion to stay constant if the rise in wage inequality was entirely within
firms. Nevertheless, it is useful to examine the other component of value added, gross
profits directly to see if the variation in profits has risen. This is illustrated in Figure
A2. We see that it is indeed the case that profit variability has raised substantially in

54

the data and the increase in productivity dispersion is driven by both an increase in the
inter-firm wage and the inter-firm profit dispersion.
FAME Sampling Frame
Could our results be driven by some problem with the sampling structure of
FAME? Although FAME is meant to be comprehensive, data errors cannot be ruled
out as the data collectors did appear to become more efficient over time (we dropped
the 1979-1983 data because the numbers of firms were too low to be representative of
the cross section). The total number of firms in FAME rises over time, but this is also
partly due to the booming business cycle after 1983. The fact that inequality rises
consistently after 1987 when the number of FAME firms is very stable gives us
confidence that this is not the case.
Nevertheless, we tested the “sample composition” hypothesis in several ways.
First, we turned to an entirely separate database, Datastream. The Datastream On-line
service includes only listed firms (like Compustat) but has been running since 1968 so
is much better established. It is comparable to Compustat in the US. The disadvantage
of Datastream, of course is that it does not include unlisted firms. Consequently,
whereas we have 11,000 firms a year in FAME we have around 1,500 firms a year in
Datastream.
Despite these limitations, we re-ran our analysis on the Datastream sample
using the same variable and sample definitions as FAME. The results were similar, if
not even stronger. Figure A3 gives the productivity dispersion graphs for the whole
economy and is comparable with Figure 5 in the main text. The 90th percentile has
increased value added per worker by 60 log points over this period, almost identical to
FAME. This is all of the Datastream firms are contained in FAME and will generally
be those at the top of the productivity distribution. By contrast, the 10th percentile has
experienced almost no productivity growth. This is a larger increase in dispersion than
we observed in FAME. It is consistent with the Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and
Miranda (2006) finding that listed firms in the US appear to be becoming more
heterogeneous than unlisted firms (possibly due to greater turnover in the Stock
Market as more volatile firms, such as biotechnology and software start-ups enter and
exit).
When we split by sector, as usual we observe that the growth of inequality in
the manufacturing sector (Figure A4) is much less than the growth of inequality in the
services sector (Figure A5). Again, this is reassuring as it is consistent with the
findings from the FAME database.
Firm Size
We drop firms with less than ten employees because sales and employment do
not need to be reported for these firms under UK accounting regulations. This could
cause various types of selection bias. One test of this concern is to compare the
variance trends with the 90-10 Figures. The percentiles of the firm distribution treat
each firm as a separate unweighted unit, so dropping the small firms potentially
makes a large difference. The variance calculations, however, weight a firm’s
productivity by its employment size. Since the firm size distribution is highly skewed
the missing firms will only have a small weight in the overall productivity distribution
so are unlikely to have much effect on the results.
As a second check on the sample composition of FAME we examined the
changing size distribution by looking at employment. In 2002 the median firm had

55

150 employees in FAME. We plot out the 90-50 and 50-10 of the log (employment)
distribution in FAME in Figure A6. There has been some decrease in the size
distribution at the higher end – the 90-50 has fallen, but there has been some widening
of the size distribution at the bottom end as the 50-10 has risen. Overall, the 90-10 is
about the same at the end of the period (4.02) as it was at the beginning of the period
(4.11). We conclude that the firm size distribution has not become systematically
more unequal over this period. This suggests that the sampling frame has not changed
in FAME in a systematic way that would necessarily imply more heterogeneity on all
measures.
The lack of a trend in the size distribution also makes it unlikely that our
results are due to changes in the degree of outsourcing by firms. A concern with using
consolidated accounts is that firms may be focusing on smaller lines of business and
outsourcing non-core functions. This would give the appearance of increased
productivity dispersion even though all that is occurring is vertical fragmentation. The
fact that the size distribution is reasonably stable makes this explanation unlikely.

56

Appendix C: Changes in the variance of wages and the role of firm productivity

Assume that wages are determined partially by the worker’s value on the open labor
market and partially by the performance of the firm that he or she is matched to. This
type of equation is rationalised by a number of theoretical models of imperfect labor
market competition (e.g. Mortensen, 2003; Layard et al., 2005). The wage equation is
assumed to be:
ln Wt = α t ln H t + β t ln At = α t ht + β t at

(C1)

where W is the average wage in the firm, H is the competitive wage for the workers
(which depends on human capital) and A is the performance (i.e. the productivity of
the firm). Small case letters denotes natural logarithms. Theory restricts 0 ≤ β t , α t ≤ 1 .

(

)

(

)

d
(var(wt ) ) = d α t2 var(ht ) + d β t2 var(at ) + 2 d (α t β t cov(ht , at ) )
dt
dt
dt
dt

(C2)

d
(var(wt ) ) =
dt
dβ
d
β t2 (var(at ) ) + 2 var(at ) β t t
dt
dt
dα t
d
+ α t2 (var(ht ) ) + 2 var(ht )α t
dt
dt
d cov(ht , at )
dβ
dα
+ 2α t β t
+ 2α t cov(ht , at ) t + 2β t cov(ht , at ) t
dt
dt
dt

(C3)

In discrete time this becomes
∆(var(wt ) ) =

β t2 ∆(var(at ) )

+ 2 var(at ) β t ∆β t + α t2 ∆(var(ht ) ) + 2 var(ht )α t ∆α t

(C4)

+ 2α t β t ∆ cov(ht , at ) + 2α t cov(ht , at )∆β t + 2β t cov(ht , at )∆α t
So clearly, one way in which an increase in the productivity variation increases the
wage dispersion is through the first term: β t2 ∆(var(at ) ) . The percentage of the increase
∆ var(ln A)
in wage variation accounted for by this component is: β 2
.
∆ var(lnW )

To obtain some more intuition on the other terms, consider the situation where the
coefficients do not change over time (i.e. β t = β and α t = α ). In this case:
∆ (var(wt ) ) = β 2 ∆ (var(a t ) ) + α 2 ∆ (var(ht ) ) + 2α β ∆ cov(ht , a t )

57

(C5)

The variance of wages could increase because the variance of productivity has
increased (the first term, β 2 ∆(var(at ) ) , or because the variance of the human capital
has increased (the second term, α 2 ∆ (var(ht ) ) ) or because the covariance of human

capital and firm productivity has become more positive (the third term,
2α β ∆ cov(ht , at ) ). The final explanation is equivalence to an increased sorting of
“good firms” and “good workers” (Kremer and Maskin, 1996).

Returning to the full decomposition in equation (C4) consider the model
where α t = 1 − β t . Simplifying terms we can express this as:
∆(var(wt ) ) = β t2 ∆(var(at ) ) + (1 − β t ) 2 ∆(var(ht ) ) +
+ 2(1 − β t ) β t ∆ cov(ht , at ) + 2∆β t [ β t (var(at ) ) +

(C6)

− (1 − β t ) var(ht ) + (1 − 2β t ) cov(ht , at )]
In the paper we show evidence that β t appears to have risen over time, suggesting the
productivity distribution is becoming more important. However, we cannot say for
certain whether this also contributes to increased inequality as it depends on the sign
of the second line. Since most estimates put β t <0.5 and assume cov(ht , at ) >0 the
final term is positive.
Unfortunately, the var(h) is essentially unobservable in our data so we cannot rule out
the possibility that:
β t (var(at ) ) − (1 − β t ) var(ht ) + (1 − 2β t ) cov(ht , at ) < 0 in which case the increase in
the impact of productivity on wages would contribute to a fall in inequality.
Using β =0.3 and the empirical average variances in our data var(w) = .23, var(a) =
.55. Using (C1) and calculating the cross sectional variance residual var(h) = 0.37 0.21*cov(h,a). To calculate the final line of (C6):

β t (var(at ) ) − (1 − β t ) var(ht ) = 0.3*0.55 - 0.7*(0.37 - 0.21*cov(h,a)) = -0.094 +
0.147*cov(h,a). So in order for an increase in the β to have a positive impact on
wage inequality we need cov(h,a)>0.64, a high degree of the level of positive sorting
between firms and workers.

58

Fig. A1: Labour productivity in the whole economy

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Log real sales per employee.

Notes: “Productivity” is measured here by ln(sales per worker) instead of the more
standard value added per worker used elsewhere in the paper.

Fig. A2: Profits per worker in the whole economy

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Log real gross profits per employee.

Notes: Gross profits before all deductions (tax, interest, dividends and depreciation)
per worker.

59

Fig. A3: Labour productivity in the whole economy

.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

UK Datastream 1984-2002

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Log real value added per employee.

Fig. A4: Labour productivity in manufacturing industries

.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

UK Datastream 1984-2002

1984

1988

1992
year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1996

2000

50th percentile (indexed)

Log real value added per employee.

Notes: Data is from Datastream On-line company accounts database. This is a strict
sub-sample of FAME as it only includes listed firms.

60

Fig.A5: Labour productivity in private services

.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

UK Datastream 1984-2001

1984

1989

year

10th percentile (indexed)
90th percentile (indexed)

1994

1999

2001

50th percentile (indexed)

Log real value added per employee.

Notes: Data is from Datastream On-line company accounts database. This is a strict
sub-sample of FAME as it only includes listed firms.

Fig. A6: Log employment in the whole economy

1.5

2

2.5

FAME data 1984-2001

1984

1988

1992
year

90th-50th ln(emp)

1996

2000

50th-10th ln(emp)

Notes: 90-50 is the difference of the ln(employees) at the 90th percentile minus the
50th percentile. 50-10 is the difference of the ln(employees) at the 50th percentile
minus the 10th percentile. FAME sample.

61

Table A1: Dispersion of firm average wage and labor productivity over time
Panel A: all sectors
50th
10th
90th - 10th
90th
percentile percentile percentile differential
Labor productivity (log real value added per employee)
3.81
2.98
2.36
1.44
Early
(19841989)
3.11
2.42
1.55
Middle 3.96
(19901995)
4.21
3.27
2.50
1.71
Late
(19962002)
Log real average wage
3.17
2.70
2.21
0.95
Early
(19841989)
2.89
2.34
1.11
Middle 3.45
(19901995)
3.70
3.07
2.45
1.25
Late
(19962001)

Mean Variance No. of
obs.
3.06

0.54

8803

3.16

0.60

10909

3.33

0.69

10841

2.69

0.19

8803

2.89

0.26

10909

3.07

0.33

10841

Panel B: manufacturing and private services
50th
10th
90th
-10th Mean Variance No.of
90th
percentile percentile percentile differential
obs.
Labor productivity (log real value added per employee)
3.77
2.99
2.39
1.38
3.06
0.49
7316
Early
(19841989)
3.10
2.43
1.45
3.14
0.53
9468
Middle 3.88
(19901995)
4.12
3.25
2.51
1.61
3.30
0.62
9554
Late
(19962002)
Log real average wage
3.14
2.69
2.22
0.92
2.68
0.17
7316
Early
(19841989)
2.88
2.35
1.06
2.87
0.23
9468
Middle 3.41
(19901995)
3.65
3.06
2.45
1.20
3.05
0.29
9554
Late
(19962001)
Notes: In Panel A “All sectors” keeps all firms in FAME database with at least 10 employees
1984 to 2001 and non-missing data on wages and value added. In Panel B we drop the
agriculture, mining, utilities, financial services, health and education sectors.

62

Table A2: List of industries in the Bank of England Industry Dataset (BEID)
List of industries and their definitions
Number Name
1
Agriculture
2
Oil and gas
3
Coal & other mining
4
Manufactured fuel
5
Chemicals & pharmaceuticals
6
Non-metallic mineral products
7
Basic metals & metal goods
8
Mechanical engineering
9
Electrical
engineering
&
electronics
10
Vehicles
11
Food, drink and tobacco
12
Textiles, clothing & leather
13
Paper, printing & publishing
14
Other manufacturing
15
Electricity supply
16
Gas supply
17
Water supply
18
Construction
19
Wholesale, vehicle sales &
repairs
20
Retailing
21
Hotels & catering
22
Rail transport
23
Road transport
24
Water transport
25
Air transport
26
Other transport services
27
Communications
28
Finance
29
Business services
30
Public administration & defence
31
Education
32
Health & social work
33
Water treatment
34
Miscellaneous services

SIC92
01,02,05
11,12
10,13,14
23
24
26
27,28
29
30,31,32,33

Industries used in Table 5
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

34,35
15,16
17,18,19
21,22
20,25,36,37
40.1
40.2,40.3
41
45
50,51

√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

52
55
60.1
60.2,60.3
61
62
63
64
65,66
67,70,71,72,73,74
75
80
85
90
91-99

√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
X
√
√
√
√

Source: Oulton and Srinivasan (2005)

63

Table A.3: Descriptive Statistics of the data used in the industry regressions
Series

90th-10th differentials in log(labor productivity)
90th-10th differentials in log(average firm wage)
Real ICT capital services /total real capital
services
Total real capital services/total hours of work
Proportion of workers with higher degree
Union density share
Proportion of individuals employed part-time
Proportion of workers who are females
Coefficient of variation in basic hours of work
(NES)
Coefficient of variation in total actual hours of
work (LFS)

1984-88
average
1.36
0.801
0.034

1996-00
average
1.63
1.05
0.151

∆(1984-88
1996-00)
0.266
0.260
0.117

0.009
0.082
0.498
0.126
0.315
0.063

0.014
0.145
0.331
0.143
0.338
0.08

0.005
0.063
-0.167
0.017
0.022
0.017

0.126

0.123

-0.003

Note: These are taken from the sample of 33 two digit industries used in the Bank of England
Industry Dataset (BEID).

64

Table A.4: Summary Statistics, FAME Dataset, 1984-2001

Year
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

No. of firms
5,244
7,082
7,859
8,849
10,279
10,887
11,176
10,852
10,485
11,205
11,125
10,564
10,839
10,958
11,153
11,293
11,173
11,166

Number of employees of firms in the sample
9,234,232
10,441,836
10,714,181
11,077,291
11,828,257
12,384,826
12,654,988
12,456,892
11,817,806
12,320,312
11,356,830
11,488,408
11,540,081
11,804,507
12,107,974
12,753,770
13,144,882
12,987,585

Source: FAME Dataset

65

