                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO TEACHER ABSENCES IMPACT STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT? LONGITUDINAL
              EVIDENCE FROM ONE URBAN SCHOOL DISTRICT

                                          Raegen T. Miller
                                         Richard J. Murnane
                                           John B. Willett

                                        Working Paper 13356
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13356


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2007




We thank participants at seminars and conference presentations at Harvard University, NBER,APPAM,
and AEFA for their useful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Raegen T. Miller, Richard J. Murnane, and John B. Willett. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Teacher Absences Impact Student Achievement? Longitudinal Evidence from One Urban
School District
Raegen T. Miller, Richard J. Murnane, and John B. Willett
NBER Working Paper No. 13356
August 2007
JEL No. I2,J08,J22,J33,J38

                                                 ABSTRACT

Rates of employee absences and the effects of absences on productivity are topics of conversation
in many organizations in many countries. One reason is that high rates of employee absence may signal
weak management and poor labor-management relations. A second reason is that reducing rates of
employee absence may be an effective way to improve productivity. This paper reports the results
of a study of employee absences in education, a large, labor-intensive industry. Policymakers' concern
with teacher absence rests on three premises: (1) that a significant portion of teachers' absences is discretionary,
(2) that teachers' absences have a nontrivial impact on productivity, and (3) that feasible policy changes
could reduce rates of absence among teachers. This paper presents the results of an empirical investigation
of the first two of these premises; it discusses the third premise. We employ a methodology that accounts
for time-invariant differences among teachers in skill and motivation. We find large variation in adjusted
teacher absence rates among schools. We estimate that each 10 days of teacher absences reduce students'
mathematics achievement by 3.3 percent of a standard deviation.

Raegen T. Miller                                         John B. Willett
Graduate School of Education                             Graduate School of Education
Harvard University                                       Harvard University
6 Appian Way                                             6 Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
millerra@mac.com                                         john_willett@harvard.edu

Richard J. Murnane
Graduate School of Education
Harvard University
6 Appian Way - Gutman 409
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_murnane@harvard.edu
                                                                                               2


I. INTRODUCTION

       Rates of employee absences and the effects of absences on productivity are topics

of conversation in many organizations in many countries. One reason is that high rates of

employee absence may signal weak management and poor labor-management relations.

A second reason is that reducing rates of employee absence may be an effective way to

improve productivity.

       Education is an industry in which research on the magnitude and consequences of

employee absences, in particular those of teachers, is both feasible and interesting. The

feasibility stems from the ability to use student test scores, net of prior achievement, as

measures of teacher productivity. The interest comes from several sources. First, most

school systems contain many schools (work sites), and the quality of leadership and

informal norms about attendance are likely to vary among schools. Consequently,

absence rates, net of differences in the demographic characteristics of teachers, are likely

to vary among schools. Exploring the reasons for the differences in school-specific

teacher absence rates may provide insights about strategies to reduce absences. Second,

teacher compensation accounts for more than half of public sector education budgets.

There are few opportunities to substitute capital for the labor of absent teachers. Instead,

substitutes, often with very little training, are typically hired at considerable expense.

Third, the output of the education industry, students’ skills and knowledge, are critical to

both the equality of opportunity norm and the economic growth aspiration of most

countries.

       The concern with teacher absence rests on three premises: (1) that a significant

portion of teachers’ absences is discretionary, (2) that teachers’ absences have a non-
                                                                                             3

trivial impact on productivity, and (3) that feasible policy changes could reduce rates of

absence among teachers. This paper presents the results of an empirical investigation of

the first two of these premises; it discusses the third premise. Our data come from the

education industry, but our methodology could potentially be applied to data from other

industries.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides

background on teacher absences. Section III presents our data, describes the distribution

of teacher absences, and explores determinants of teacher absence. Section IV explains

the analytic strategies we use to assess the impact of teacher absence on student

achievement, and Section V presents findings. Section VI discusses these findings and

offers conclusions.

II. TEACHER ABSENCES

How often are teachers absent?

       On average, public school teachers in the United States are absent five to six

percent of the days schools are in session (Ballou, 1996; Podgursky, 2003). This rate of

absence is low relative to those in the developing world, where teacher absence rates of

20 percent are common (Chaudhury, Hammer, Kremer, Muralidharan and Rogers (2006).

However, U.S. teacher absence rates are nearly three times those of managerial and

professional employees (Ballou, 1996; Podgursky, 2003). One contributing factor may be

teachers’ daily exposure to large numbers of children, some of whom are carriers for

infectious diseases. A second is that the proportion of teachers who are female is much

higher than the proportion of managerial and professional employees who are female.
                                                                                                           4

Numerous studies have documented higher rates of absence for female employees than

male employees (Educational Research Service, 1980).

Do teachers exercise discretion over their absences?

         A variety of evidence indicates that some teacher absences are discretionary and

can be influenced by school and district policies.1 For example, teachers’ rates of absence

are positively associated with the generosity of available leave provisions (Ehrenberg,

Ehrenberg, Rees, & Ehrenberg, 1991; Winkler, 1980), and the number of contractually

allowed days of paid sick- or personal-leave. Rates of absence drop when incentive

schemes like buy-backs of unused sick-leave (Boyer, 1994; Ehrenberg et al., 1991;

Winkler, 1980) or bonuses for exceptional attendance (Boyer, 1994; Freeman & Grant,

1987; Jacobson, 1990; Skidmore, 1984; White, 1990) are implemented. Teachers respond

to changes in absence control policies. For example, teachers who are required to report

absences directly to their principal by telephone are absent less often than teachers who

report their absences indirectly, to either a centralized reporting center or a school-based

message machine (Farrell & Stamm, 1988; Winkler, 1980).

         The temporal pattern of teacher absences also suggests discretionary behavior.2

First, teachers are absent most frequently on Mondays and Fridays (Bundren, 1974;

Capitan & Morris, 1978; Educational Research Service, 1980; Malick, 1997;

Pennsylvania School Boards Association, 1978), timing consistent with a desire to have .

longer blocks of leisure time (Rhodes & Steers, 1990). Second, a high proportion of


1
  State policies are also relevant. For example, the California state Teachers Retirement System was
modified in 1997 to make more teachers eligible to purchase extra retirement benefits in proportion to their
accumulated, unused sick-leave (California Assembly Bill 1102, Knox, 1997).
2
  We have intentionally avoided the term absenteeism for two reasons. First, the term has pejorative flavor
that we do not wish to impart. Second, although the term has been used by researchers in connection with
avoidable absence (Rhodes & Steers, 1990), we do not observe the true motivation of particular absences.
                                                                                            5

teacher absences are of a duration just short of that requiring medical certification of

illness (Educational Research Service, 1980)), (Rhodes & Steers, 1990).

How might teacher absences affect student achievement?

       The literature on the impact of employee absences on productivity in industries

apart from education provides a backdrop for the current study. In a paper published in

1983, Allen hypothesized that productivity loss from worker absences will depend on the

extent to which managers can reassign workers from other positions and can find

temporary replacements as productive as the absentees. In a 2006 paper, Nicholson and

co-authors used results of a survey of managers in 12 industries to test a number of

hypotheses similar to Allen’s. They found that absences had larger negative effects on

productivity the more difficult it was to find a perfect replacement, the more time

sensitive the work involved, and the more the worker functioned as part of a team.

       This pattern of findings suggests that the negative impact of the absences of

teachers from urban elementary schools may be substantial. Good substitutes are

notoriously difficult to find in urban districts. Many districts are responding to

accountability pressures by pressing teachers to stick with instructional schedules aligned

with state curriculum standards and the content of mandatory state tests. They are also

investing in professional development that involves teachers working in teams to improve

instruction and make it more consistent.

       There are several mechanisms through which teacher absences may reduce

student achievement. First, instructional intensity may be radically reduced when a

regularly assigned teacher is absent (Capitan & et al., 1980; Gagne, 1977; Varlas, 2001).

itute teacher showing movies is a time-honored illustration, but low skill levels of
                                                                                                6

substitute teachers may contribute to the reduction in instructional focus. In contrast to

policies of similarly industrialized countries (e.g., Canada, Australia), nineteen states do

not require that substitutes hold a Bachelor’s degree (Henderson, Protheroe, & Porch,

2002), much less the equivalent licensure status of the regular teacher. Furthermore,

NCLB specifically exempts substitutes from its otherwise ambitious requirements for

teacher quality (US Department of Education, 2004).

       A second mechanism through which teacher absences may affect student

achievement is through the creation of discontinuities of instruction, the disruption of the

regular routines and procedures of the classroom (Rundall, 1986; Turbeville, 1987).

Students may have difficulty forming meaningful relationships with multiple, mobile

substitutes, and even if substitutes deliver brilliant isolated lessons, they may not be able

to implement a regular teacher’s long-term instructional strategies. Furthermore,

substitutes’ lack of detailed knowledge of students’ skill levels makes it difficult for them

to provide differentiated instruction that addresses the needs of individual students.

       Teacher absences may also negatively impact student achievement in less direct

ways. For example, teacher absences may inhibit attempts by school faculties to

implement consistent instructional practices across classrooms and grades. Common

planning time, during which teachers may collaborate on improving instruction, is often

so scarce that even low rates of teacher absence could almost completely undermine its

purpose. Note that this mechanism implies that a teacher’s absence not only impacts

negatively on the students he or she directly works with, but also on the students taught

by the teacher’s colleagues.
                                                                                                       7

Prior studies relating teacher absences to student achievement

        Many studies have found a negative relationship between teacher absences and

student achievement (Bayard, 2003; Beavers, 1981; Boswell, 1993; Cantrell, 2003; 2005;

Lewis, 1981; Madden & et al., 1991; Manatt, 1987; Pitkoff, 1989; Smith, 1984; Summers

& Raivetz, 1982; Womble, 2001; Woods, 1990).3 However, these studies do not provide

compelling evidence of a causal link between teacher absences and student achievement

because they do not deal explicitly with the potential correlation between measures of

teacher absences and unobserved levels of teacher skill and effort. For example, a high

rate of absence may signal a teacher’s lack of skill or effort when she is in school. If this

were the dominant pattern, then the observed negative relationship between teacher

absence and student achievement would be an upwardly biased estimate of the causal

impact of teacher absence on student achievement. Thus, the research challenge is to

develop a strategy that permits unbiased estimation of the causal impact of teacher

absence on student achievement.

        Duflo and Hanna’s (2006) experimental study, in which financial incentives for

good attendance were provided to teachers in a random sample of elementary schools in

rural India, provides strong evidence of a causal relationship between teacher absence

and student achievement. A year after the intervention began, test scores for students in

the treatment schools were substantially higher (0.17 SD) than those of students in the

control schools. This finding, however, may be peculiar to the context in which the study



3
 There are exceptions to this pattern. Studies that have not found a correlation between teacher absences
and student achievement include (Ehrenberg et al., 1991; Kirk, 1998; New York City Public Schools, 2000;
Occhino, 1987). The Ehrenberg, et al. paper, for example, used data aggregated to the level of the school
district.
                                                                                                     8

was done. The background rate of absence was extremely high (42 percent) compared to

rates observed in the US.

           A study conducted by Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2006) using data from North

Carolina provides U.S.-based causal evidence that teacher absences negatively affect

student achievement. Using a large dataset in which teachers were observed in multiple

years, they were able to control for time-invariant skill and effort levels of teachers. Their

evidence indicates that 10 additional days of teacher absences decreased student

achievement by one or two percent of a standard deviation. This finding, however, speaks

to the average effect across rural, suburban, and urban districts alike. Our study focuses

on one urban district, where the importance of high quality instruction and the negative

effects of teacher absence may be especially large because most students live in families

that lack the resources to compensate for poor school-based instruction.

III. DATA

           We obtained data on students and teachers from the Ormondale School District

(OSD),4 a large, urban school district in the northern part of the United States. The

district has nearly 80 elementary schools, with approximately 200 teachers and 4000

students at each elementary grade level. OSD has an electronic report card system in

place that supports the matching of students to individual classroom teachers. The OSD

Office of Human Resources provided information on each of these teacher’s

demographic characteristics, home ZIP-Code, absences, experience, licensure and

employment status over three consecutive academic years (SY03–SY05). For the purpose

of constructing a measure of the distance that a teacher commuted from home to school,


4
    In accordance with the wishes of district officials, Ormondale School District is a pseudonym.
                                                                                                          9

we obtained the geographical locations of schools from the Common Core of Data of

the National Center for Education Statistics, and we purchased a commercial database

that matched each ZIP-Code to the geographic latitude and longitude of its centroid.5

From the National Climatic Data Center, we obtained files containing multiple measures

of daily weather conditions in the vicinity of teachers’ homes. We accessed information

on the enrollment and aggregate student demographics within each school from the

website of Ormondale’s State Department of Education.

Demographic characteristics of teachers and schools

         Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on selected characteristics of 2,594 unique

teachers and 75 elementary schools in which they teach. Although we only use 285 of

these teachers in examining the impact of teacher absences on student achievement (those

teaching fourth grade in at least one of the three years studied),6 we work with the larger

group for purposes of documenting important patterns of absence. Not surprising for US

elementary schools, more than 86 percent of the teachers are female. Twenty-four percent

are African-American and nine percent are Hispanic. On average, teachers possessed 14

years of teaching experience. Over seven percent of teachers were in their first year of

teaching, and another seven percent were in their second year. Their average length of the

home-to-school commute was slightly more than seven miles, with almost eight percent

commuting more than 20 miles.7



5
  ZipCodeWorldTM Premium is published by Hexa Software Development Center
(www.zipcodeworld.com).
6
  We verified that this subset of teachers is statistically representative of the larger group on observed
characteristics.
7
  We constructed the measure of commuting distance by applying the standard formula from spherical
trigonometry to the geographical coordinates (longitude, latitude) of a teacher’s school and home (centroid
of the home ZIP-Code).
                                                                                          10

       Table 1 also presents means and standard deviations for variables measured at

school-level. Student enrollment for the schools in our sample ranged from 113 to 948

students, with an average of 364 students. Nine of the 75 schools in the sample have

students from Kindergarten through 8th grade, as opposed to having students from

Kindergarten through 5th grade. The demographic composition of the student body varied

markedly across schools. However, in all but two of the schools, at least half of the

students were students of color, and 55 of the 75 schools had a student body that was

made up of more than 80 percent students of color. Other indicators showing

considerable variation include the out-of-school student suspension rate (Mean=4.128;

SD=4.029) and the student retention rate (Mean=5.067; SD=2.493).

Measures of teacher absences, by purpose

       In contrast to many previous studies of teacher absence, which rely on yearly

aggregate measures of teacher absence, the data used in the present study include day-by-

day information about teachers’ absences and their reported reasons for being absent.

This information allows us to construct measures of absence to suit our different

purposes. For the purposes of comparing rates of teacher absence between schools and

exploring the determinants of absence, we first derive a measure of discretionary

absences.

       Two patterns suggest that discretionary absences are a significant proportion of

total absences for OSD elementary school teachers. Table 2 shows the percentage of

teachers reported as absent on instructional days, by weekday, over three academic years.

The weekdays with the highest percentage of teachers absent are Friday (6.6 percent) and

Monday (5.7 percent). In contrast, only 4.9 percent and 5.1 percent of teachers were
                                                                                                          11

absent on an average Tuesday or Wednesday, respectively. These figures suggest that

some OSD teachers tend to use their leave privileges to stretch out weekends.

                                        <Table 2 about here>

         When OSD teachers report an absence, they must provide an “excuse” code.8

Based on these codes, we constructed 16 categories of absence. Absences due to personal

illness constitute almost 57 percent of the 59,600 absences we observed. Of these

absences, 21,343 occur in blocks of one or two consecutive days. One explanation for the

elevated percentage of teachers absent on Fridays and Mondays is that teachers take

advantage of the contractual provision that they need not provide any documentation for

absences of less than three days due to personal illness. 9 This would explain why the

proportion of absences attributed to short-term personal illness that occurred on a day

adjacent to a non-instructional day (52.3%) was higher than the 45.7 percent of all

instructional days that were adjacent to a non-instructional day.

                                         <Table 3 about here>

         The percentage of absences attributed to personal necessity that occurred on a day

adjacent to a non-instructional day (64.3%) was also considerably higher than the 45.7

percent of instructional days adjacent to non-instructional days. Conversations with

school principals revealed that many teachers viewed such absences as an entitlement that

they could use to fit their preferences. We combine short-term absences due to personal




8
  There were 46 distinct “excuse” codes, and their names provided a reasonable basis for creating less fine-
grained categories of absence.
9
  The collective bargaining agreement in operation at our research site is not specific about the number of
consecutive absences due to illness that necessitate documentation. Rather, the agreement notes that
building administrators may demand documentation (e.g., a note from a doctor) after a “pattern of abuse”
has been established.
                                                                                                           12

illness and those due to personal necessity to create a measure of discretionary

absences.10 We call remaining absences non-discretionary.

Determinants of discretionary teacher absences

         We begin by hypothesizing a regression model represented by Equation 1,

         D jkt = ! 0 + !1T jkt + ! 2 Skt + " t + # jk ,                                                  (1)

where Djkt represents the measure of discretionary absence of teacher j in school k during

year t, Tjkt represents a vector of teacher characteristics, Sjkt represents a vector of school

characteristics, !t represents a set of year fixed-effects to control for district-wide trends

in absence behavior, and "jk represents a complex error term that respects the structure of

the data.11

         Table 4 displays selected results of fitting our preferred specification of the model

to our dataset. Goodness-of-fit statistics show that the model accounts for 18.5 percent of

the variation in discretionary absence, with 5.0 percent of the variation occurring between

schools. These goodness-of-fit statistics are quite fairly stable across years.

                                          <Table 4 about here>

         Our results are quite consistent with prior research on the determinants of teacher

absence. We found that discretionary absence increases as enrollment increases, but at a


10
   Many of the absences captured by our measure of discretionary absences are not truly discretionary, but
we make no further refinement of the measure. Based on the difference between the weighted percentage of
these absences occurring on days adjacent to non-instructional days (55.9) and the expected percentage
(45.7), we reckon that 3,123 of these absences (5.2 percent of the total) are truly avoidable. Using figures
on substitute teachers’ salaries, the direct cost of these absences is roughly $500,000, a figure that ignores
completely absences of teachers in OSD’s middle schools (grades 6–8) and high schools (grades 9-12).
11
   By and large, an individual teacher is associated with the same school for as many years as she appears in
our dataset. We follow Uribe, Murnane, Willett and Somers (2006) in using a parsimonious structure of the
error term. Because 14 percent of teachers in our dataset actually change schools, we check our results with
a multi-level approach to fitting models (Stata’s xtmixed) that uses MLE to produce point estimates and
standard errors that respect this cross-nesting. We find the simpler approach adequate for our descriptive
goals here.
                                                                                           13

progressively smaller rate. This finding accords with previous literature showing a

positive relationship between student enrollment (school size) and teacher absence. We

also found that a quadratic function of teachers’ years of experience made sense in the

model, thus duplicating previous findings of lower rates of discretionary absence for the

very new and very experienced teachers than for teachers with moderate levels of

experience. Most strikingly, our results confirm the important role of permanent

employment status in predicting teachers’ absence behavior. Holding all else equal, a

teacher with permanent status took 3.7 more days of discretionary absence (.89 SD) than

one without such status.

       Consistent with prior research (Ehrenberg et al., 1991), we find that the rate of

discretionary teacher absences is higher in schools with relatively low student attendance

rates than in schools with high student attendance rates. We also find that teachers

working in schools serving grades K–8 tend to have lower rates of discretionary absence

than teachers in K–5 schools, holding all else equal.

Adjusted school means

       To examine the extent to which the discretionary absence rate varies across

schools for observationally similar teachers, we replaced the school characteristics in

Equation 1 with a set of dichotomous indicators representing each school, save a

reference school. We use the fitted results from this model to extract school-level means

on the outcome variable (discretionary absence), adjusted for individual teacher

characteristics. Figure 1 displays these adjusted means as vertical bars whose heights are

measured in days of discretionary absence. The overall mean, shown as a solid black bar,

is 5.13 days (SD=1.12). Three schools’ adjusted averages exceed 7 days; in four schools
                                                                                                        14

the adjusted average is less than 3 days. This school-specific variation is consistent

with prior research arguing that informal set of school-specific cultural norms influence

teachers’ absence behavior.12 Our conversations with principals from four of the

elementary schools in our sample suggest that high-quality, continuous leadership is

critical to creating cultural norms that discourage discretionary absences. For instance,

two of the principals said that they require teachers to call them directly on the morning

of an absence.

                                        <Figure 1 about here>

Student achievement and demographic characteristics

        Our analytic dataset contains detailed information on a sample of 8,631 unique

students who were in the fourth grade in one or more of the three academic years studied.

Table 5 presents descriptive statistics for these students. Our primary outcome variable,

student achievement in mathematics, is based on scores obtained on state-sponsored

assessments administered to fourth-grade students in early May. We also used scores on

the state-sponsored English Language Arts examinations as outcomes. The dataset also

includes students’ scores on Stanford Achievement Tests (Series-9) of mathematics and

reading that the students took while they were in third grade. We treated these prior

measures as covariates in our regression analyses. For the 7 percent of students in our

sample who repeated 3rd grade, we used the highest available score to represent their

prior achievement, by domain.



12
  Chadwick-Jones, Nicholson, and Brown (1982) elaborated a theory of absence culture, refined by
Nicholson and Johns (1985), with two dimensions: (1) the strength of the school-level norms in
determining individual absence behavior, and (2) the level of trust that teachers feel extended to them by
their schools’ administrators. See Martocchio (1994) or Xie and Johns (2000) for empirical work that uses
this theory explicitly.
                                                                                          15

                                  <Table 5 about here>

       Our dataset also contains a variety of student-level demographic and

programmatic variables that we included as covariates in our analyses. Demographic

controls include: (a) a vector of dichotomous indicators of student race/ethnicity

(African-American, Asian, Hispanic, White), (b) student gender, (c) whether English was

the student’s first language, (d) whether the student received Special Education and

Related Services, and (e) whether a student was eligible for free or reduced-price lunch.

As indicated by the summary statistics presented in Table 5, our analytic sample

primarily contains disadvantaged students. More than 83 percent of the students were

eligible for a free or reduced-price lunch, 34 percent had a first language other than

English, and 13 percent received Special Education. Our sample also consisted primarily

of students of color: 47 percent of the students were African-American, 29 percent were

Hispanic, and 9 percent were of Asian background.

       Finally, we constructed additional student-level covariates to account for

important facets of the students’ academic participation. Using information on each

student’s date of enrollment in OSD, we constructed dichotomous indicators of whether

students entered their fourth grade classes after particular points in the school year.

Students who entered classes late in the academic year may have differed from other

students in the extent to which their fourth grade instruction was provided by the teachers

in our dataset. Additionally, these students may not have experienced some portion of the

teacher absences that provide the focus of our inquiry. We also constructed indicators of

whether students had repeated third grade, and whether they were repeating fourth grade

in the current year.
                                                                                                             16

IV. METHOD

         Our investigation of the causal impact of teacher absence on student achievement

was conducted in a student-teacher-year dataset, in which there was a single record

(“row”) of information for each student, i, with each teacher, j, in each year, t. In our

baseline hypothesized regression model, we specified that student mathematics

achievement depended on teacher absence, as seen in Equation 2,

         Yijkt = ! 0 + !1 A jkt + ! 2T jkt + ! 3Sijkt + " t + # ijk ,                                  (2)

where Yijkt is the mathematics achievement of student i , taught by teacher j in school k in

year t. The predictor of interest, Ajkt, represents the number of days that the teacher j was

absent from her class in year t before the administration of the achievement test. The Tjkt

is a vector of teacher characteristics (ethnicity, gender, years of experience, licensure

status, tenure status, commuting distance, classroom student turn-over rate) and school

characteristics (enrollment, range of grades, suspension rate and student attendance rate).

The Sijkt is a vector of student characteristics (ethnicity, gender, poverty status, language

status, disability status, grade repetition status and measures of prior achievement), and

the ! t represents a set of year fixed effects to account for district-wide trends in teacher

absence and student achievement.13 The "ijk is a complex error term.14




13
   In SY03, teachers had access to 3 days of personal necessity leave, but in later years, this figure increased
to four days. With respect to achievement, OSD systematically strove to produce improvements in all
schools during the years we studied with heavy investments in professional development, particularly
around implementation of a standards-oriented mathematics curriculum. Thus, allowing for different
average levels of achievement, by year, makes analytical sense.
14
   In an analytic appendix to their 2006 article, Uribe, Murnane, Willett and Somers explain alternative
ways of specifying and fitting models to account for multilevel structures in data. We opted for a
parsimonious error structure (random intercepts).
                                                                                              17

Threats to validity

       Estimates of #1 obtained by OLS estimation of Equation 2 may be biased because

rates of teacher absence may be correlated with unobserved levels of teacher skill or

effort. Our primary strategy for dealing with this potential problem is to fit a variant of

Equation 2 in which the time-invariant teacher characteristics are replaced by

dichotomous indicators representing each teacher (fixed-effects), save a reference

teacher. This is a powerful strategy because the teacher-specific fixed effects absorb all

time-invariant teacher skills and effort levels. Of course, since this strategy involves the

estimation of #1 using only year-to-year variation in absences for the same teacher, we

can only fit this version of Equation 2 for teachers who appear in the dataset for more

than one academic year.

       While powerful, the teacher fixed effects strategy does not deal with potential bias

that may be introduced by time-varying differences in unobserved teacher or effort skill

levels that may be correlated with teacher absences. For example, a teacher with a

critically ill family member during the current academic year may be absent from school

more days than during the previous academic year. However, weaker performance by her

students in the current year than in the previous year may reflect not only her absences

from school, but possibly her low energy levels and high stress levels when she is in

class. To address potential bias due to unobserved, time-varying correlates of student

achievement and teacher absence, we use an instrumental variables (IV) strategy.

       In an attempt to address this threat to validity, we employed a unique two-stage

least squares (2SLS) estimation strategy. Our instrumental variables derive from the idea

that bad weather may inhibit teachers’ willingness or ability to attend school. We used
                                                                                                       18

principal components analysis to generate an index of the difficulty of daily driving

conditions in each teacher’s home from information on maximum temperature, minimum

temperature, snowfall, and accumulated snowfall.

        We use a two-stage least squares approach (2SLS) to implementing our IV

strategy. First, we estimate a model represented by Equation 3,

         ABSENT jktd = ! 0 + !1W jktd + ! 3 X + " jktd                                           (3)

where ABSENTjktd is a dichotomous indicator of whether teacher j was absent from school

k in year t on day d.15 The X is a vector representing predictors appearing in Equation 2

other than teacher absences, 16 and the Wjktd is a vector that includes the index of weather

conditions in the teacher’s home community, the teacher’s commuting distance, and the

interaction of the weather index and the length of commute. Fitted values of the outcome

(the probability that a teacher was absent from school on a given school day) are

aggregated to the school year to generate a predicted number of teacher absences for the

school year (excluding days that occur after the spring student exam date). Since daily

weather in the vicinity of teachers’ homes is neither correlated with nor can directly

influence yearly measures of student achievement, these aggregates constitute a measure

of teacher absence that plausibly removes the threat to validity posed by unobserved,

time-varying levels of teacher skill and effort, as described above. Figure 2 illustrates the

intuitive appeal of this instrument in our first stage predictions. Each bar represents the

average predicted value (response probability) of daily absence within bins defined by


15
   We estimated these stage-one models using OLS methods for computational reasons. Methods relying on
MLA (e.g., logit) impose extraordinary computational time, owing to the size of the teacher-day dataset to
which the models are fitted. An important implication of our choice is that we handle appropriately any
response probabilities outside the interval [0, 1].
16
   Classroom mean values are used in the case of student-level information.
                                                                                            19

foulness of weather and the length of a teacher’s commute to school. That the heights

of the bars tend to increase with severity of the weather, from front to back, and the

height of the bars also increases with commuting distance, from left to right, shows that

the weather index and its interaction with commuting distance play a useful role in

predicting daily absence. In our second stage, we refit Equation 2, replacing the original

measure of teacher absence with the aggregated predictions from the first stage, thus

yielding new estimates of #1. We adjusted the standard errors to account for the two-step

procedure.

V. RESULTS

       Table 6 presents parameter estimates, robust standard errors approximate p-

values, and goodness-of-fit statistics from fitting the model in Equation 2 using our two

analytic strategies. The columns of this table are labeled 1(a) through 1(d). Column 1(a)

contains OLS-estimates of the parameters in Equation 1 based on information on all 285

teachers who taught fourth grade in at least one academic year. Column 1(b) presents

OLS-estimates of the parameters in the same model, but using only the sample of 144

teachers who taught fourth grade in more than one academic year. We provide this

column of estimates to facilitate comparison with those in Column 1(c), which are the

estimates from fitting the version of the model that includes fixed effects for teachers.

The results reported in Columns 1(b) and 1(c) are based on the same sample of teachers

and students. The estimates reported in Column 1(d) come from the second stage of our

IV strategy.

                                   <Table 6 about here>
                                                                                             20

           As indicated in column 1(a) of Table 6, the OLS estimate of the impact of

teacher absences on students’ mathematics achievement is negative and significantly

different from zero at the .01-level. When this model is refitted using only data on the

sample of 144 teachers who taught fourth grade in more than one year, the estimated

absence parameter retains a negative sign, has a somewhat smaller magnitude, and retains

statistical significance (p<.05). The fixed effect estimate in column 1(c) is identical in

sign, magnitude, and statistical significance to the one in column 1(b).

           We also fitted models in which the students’ scores on the state fourth grade

English Language Arts (ELA) examination provided the outcome measure. The estimates

of interest were consistently negative, but were smaller in magnitude and less precise

than the estimates obtained when mathematics achievement was the outcome.17 This

pattern raises the question of why teacher absences would influence students’

mathematics achievement more than their ELA achievement. To gain some insight into

the answer to this question, we conducted interviews with four elementary school

principals in the OSD. They told us that in SY01 OSD had adopted a new elementary

school mathematics curriculum that placed great emphasis on developing children’s

mathematical problem-solving skills, their ability to make use of alternative

computational algorithms, and their ability to explain their reasoning processes in

writing. Teaching the new mathematics curriculum successfully required the

development of new teaching skills for most OSD elementary school teachers. The

district invested heavily in mathematics coaches and in summer training institutes to

provide OSD’s elementary with the requisite skills. The net effect of the new


17
     Tables providing these results are available from the authors.
                                                                                             21

mathematics curriculum and the retraining of OSD’s elementary school teachers—

training that was not received by OSD substitute teachers—is that the gap in instructional

quality in mathematics when a fourth grade teacher was replaced by a substitute teacher

was particularly large. This explanation for the larger impact of absences on students’

math skills than on their English language arts skills is consistent with Nicholson et al.’s

findings on other industries reported above.

       Other estimates presented in Table 6 support the findings of previous studies.

Like Rockoff (2004) and Kane, Rockoff, and Staiger (2006), we found that teacher

experience has a non-linear relationship with student achievement. Based on estimates

from Column 1(c), students with a teacher who has 1 or 2 years of experience scored 33

percent of a standard deviation below students with teachers who had 10 or more years of

experience, and students with a teacher who has 3 or 4 years of experience scored 23

percent of a standard deviation below students with teachers who had 10 or more years of

experience. The comparable deficit for students whose teachers have between 5 and 9

years of experience is statistically indistinguishable from zero. We take these results as

evidence that teachers face a steep learning curve when they begin service, but that their

instructional prowess peaks between their 5th and 9th year in the classroom.

       As mentioned above, even though the fixed effects estimate controls for potential

time-invariant differences among teachers in unobserved skill and effort levels, it does

not control for time-varying differences other than those captured by the time-varying

measure of teacher experience. To address this problem, we implemented the IV strategy

described above. The estimated impact of teacher absences on student achievement using

the IV approach was consistently negative, with a magnitude between approximately two
                                                                                                           22

and four times the size of the OLS estimate.18 The value of the point estimate suggests

that in years in which particular teachers were absent from school more than was typical

for them, they were not less effective when they were present. Unfortunately, the

standard error associated with the IV estimate of the impact of teacher absences on

student achievement is too large to be able to reject the null hypothesis of no impact. A

likely explanation is that our IV is a relatively weak instrument and we needed a much

larger sample of teachers and students to estimate a statistically significant impact.

         We conducted several sensitivity tests to determine if our primary findings

(displayed in Table 6) are robust. First, we assessed whether the teachers exhibiting the

most extreme absence behavior drove the findings. To do this, we omitted teachers with

pre-test absences in excess of 63 (99th percentile) from the dataset and refitted the various

models. The results for the remaining teachers are hardly different from those presented

in column 1(a) of Table 6. However, the loss of teachers led to larger estimated standard

errors in columns 1(b) and 1(c) and a loss of statistical significance (p!.13). Second, we

omitted the 19 percent of students who were missing values on one or the other of our

measures of prior achievement. The resulting parameter estimates were identical in sign

and similar in magnitude to their analogues presented in Tables 7; standard errors were,

of course, larger. Third, we omitted the classrooms corresponding to the 3 percent of

teachers for whom we imputed values of teaching experience. Corresponding results were

nearly identical in all respects to those presented in Tables 7. Finally, in four successive


18
  The estimated effect of teacher absence shown in Column 1(d) has a magnitude over four times the
corresponding estimate in Column 1(c). When we fit stage one differently, omitting classroom means of the
variables observed at the student-year level, the estimate fall to roughly twice the size of the one in Column
1(c). A note to the table in Appendix B elaborates on the conundrum posed by the different units of
analysis in the two stages of our IV strategy.
                                                                                          23

steps, we omitted from the dataset students who entered their classes after January 15,

December 15, November 15, and October 15, each time refitting the models embodying

our analytic strategies. These results were very close to those presented in Table 6.

VI. DISCUSSION

Contribution

       Our paper adds to the small literature examining the causal effects of teacher

absences. Our focus on a single large urban district enabled us to document important

patterns of absence based on local school calendars (including snow-days) and a single

collective bargaining agreement. Our interviews with principals in four of the schools in

our research site provided interpretations of teacher absence patterns and especially a

compelling explanation for why teacher absences in OSD affected students’ mathematics

achievement more than their ELA achievement.

Non-trivial impact

       We believe that our estimate that 10 additional days of teacher absence reduce

student achievement in fourth grade mathematics by 3.3 percent of a standard deviation is

large enough to be of policy relevance. One reason is that teacher absences directly

affect the achievement of as many as 25 students. A second is that by reducing the

efficacy of regularly scheduled team planning and professional development sessions, a

teacher’s absences may have an indirect negative impact on the students of the teacher’s

colleagues. Third, small differences in the performance of even a few students on the

state’s mathematics examination can result in the school not meeting the “Adequate

Yearly Progress” mandate of No Child Left Behind.
                                                                                             24

Potential policy implications

       Since our study did not examine the impact of particular policies aimed at altering

the distribution of teacher absences, it cannot provide evidence on the consequences of

policy changes. However, our evidence that teacher absences do affect student

achievement makes it worthwhile to review briefly existing evidence on the effects of

school and district policies on the distribution of teacher absences. Teachers’ rates of

absence are positively associated with the generosity of leave provisions, such as the

number of contractually allowed days of paid sick- or personal-leave (Ehrenberg et al.,

1991; Winkler, 1980). Rates of absence drop when incentive schemes like buy-backs of

unused sick leave or bonuses for exceptional attendance are implemented (Boyer, 1994;

Ehrenberg et al., 1991; Freeman & Grant, 1987; Jacobson, 1990; Skidmore, 1984; White,

1990; Winkler, 1980).

       Another previously reported finding is particularly salient. Teachers who are

required to report absences directly to their principal by telephone are absent less often

than teachers who can report their absences indirectly via a centralized reporting center or

a school-based message machine (Farrell & Stamm, 1988; Winkler, 1980). Ironically, the

planned implementation of a web-based absence reporting system in OSD will undercut

the practice of two of the four principals we interviewed who require that teachers report

absences directly to them by telephone.

Future Research

       Advances in administrative record keeping will make it possible in the near future

to improve studies of the impact of teacher absence on student achievement. First,

information on the characteristics of substitute teachers matched to teacher absences will
                                                                                        25

allow researchers to explore possible heterogeneity of effects due to differences in

substitutes. Web-based absence reporting and substitute assignment systems promise to

make such data available in the near future. Second, perhaps the greatest tool for

assessing productivity costs of teacher absences will be frequent measures of student

achievement. The increasing use of computer-based benchmark assessments administered

throughout the school year should provide such data in the near future.
                                                                                          26



                                     REFERENCES

Allen, S. G. (1983). How Much Does Absenteeism Cost? Journal of Human Resources,
       18(3), 379-393.

Ballou, D. (1996). The condition of urban school finance: efficient resource allocation in
       urban schools: National Center for Education Statistics.

Bayard, S. R. (2003). A study of the relationship between teacher absenteeism, teacher
      attributes, school schedule and student achievement. Unpublished Ed.D, Florida
      Atlantic University.

Beavers, H. J. (1981). The Relationship between Selected Educational Variables and
      Student Achievement in a Selected School District. Unpublished Ed.D, East Texas
      State University.

Boswell, C. B. (1993). The relationship between teacher absenteeism and student
      achievement in secondary schools in South Carolina. Unpublished Ed.D,
      University of South Carolina.

Boyer, C. E. (1994). The Relationship between Buy-Back Provisions and Teacher
       Attendance Rates. Georgia.

Bundren, D. L. (1974). The influence of situational and demographic factors on the
      absentee patterns of teachers. University of Southern California.

Cantrell, S. (2003). Pay and performance: the utility of teacher experience, education,
       credentials, and attendance as predictors of student achievement at elementary
       schools in LAUSD. Los Angeles, CA: Los Angeles Unified School District,
       Program Evaluation and Research Branch.

Capitan, J. H., & et al. (1980). Teacher Absenteeism. A Study of the Ohio Association of
       School Personnel Administrators. Ohio: American Association of School
       Personnel Administrators, Seven Hills, OH.

Capitan, J. H., & Morris, R. (1978, October). The Ohio report on teacher absenteeism.
       Paper presented at the American Association of School Personnel Administrators.

Chadwick-Jones, J. K., Nicholson, N., & Brown, C. (1982). Social psychology of
      absenteeism. New York, N.Y.: Praeger.
                                                                                        27

Chaudhury, N., Hammer, J., Kremer, M., Muralidharan, K., & Rogers, F. H. (2006).
      Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing Countries.
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(1), 91-116.

Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2006). Teacher absences: importance,
        incidence, and consequence. Paper presented at the Association for Public Policy
        Analysis and Management.

Duflo, E., & Hanna, R. (2006). Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come to School:
       C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers CEPR Discussion Papers: 5426.

Educational Research Service. (1980). Employee absenteeism : a summary of research.
       Arlington, Va.: Educational Research Service.

Ehrenberg, R. G., Ehrenberg, R. A., Rees, D. I., & Ehrenberg, E. L. (1991). School
      District Leave Policies, Teacher Absenteeism, and Student Achievement. Journal
      of Human Resources, 26(1), 72-105.

Farrell, D., & Stamm, C. (1988). Meta-analysis of the correlates of employee absence.
        Human Relations, 41(3), 211.

Freeman, R., & Grant, F. (1987). How we increased staff attendance by 16 percent and
      saved $156,000. American School Board Journal, 174(2), 31.

Gagne, R. M. (1977). The conditions of learning (3d ed.). New York: Holt Rinehart and
       Winston.

Henderson, E., Protheroe, N., & Porch, S. (2002). Developing an effective substitute
      teacher program. Arlington, VA.: Educational Research Service.

Jacobson, S. L. (1990). Attendance Incentives and Teacher Absenteeism. Planning and
       Changing, 21(2), 78-93.

Kirk, C. L. (1998). Teacher absenteeism and student achievement. Unpublished Ed.D,
       Florida Atlantic University.

Krishnan, P., Habyarimana, J., Dercon, S., & Das, J. (2005). Teacher shocks and student
       learning: evidence from Zambia: The World Bank Policy Research Working
       Paper Series: 3602.

Lewis, J., Jr. (1981). Do You Encourage Teacher Absenteeism? American School Board
       Journal, 168(11), 29-30,40.
                                                                                           28

Ludwig, J., & Bassi, L. J. (1999). The puzzling case of school resources and student
      achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(4), 385-403.

Madden, H. D., & et al. (1991). Teacher Absences: Are There Implications for
     Educational Restructuring? South Carolina.

Malick, J. J. (1997). The relationship of situational and demographic variables to staff
       attendance and utilization of available absence leave. Unpublished Ed.D,
       University of Delaware.

Manatt, R. P. (1987). Lessons from a Comprehensive Performance Appraisal Project.
       Educational Leadership, 7(44), 7p.

Martocchio, J. (1994). The effects of absence culture on individual absence. Human
      Relations, 47(3), 243.

New York City Public Schools. (2000). Impact of Student Attendance, Teacher
     Certification and Teacher Absence on Reading and Mathematics Performance in
     Elementary and Middle Schools in New York City. Flash Research Report #3.

Nicholson, N., & Johns, G. (1985). The Absence Culture and the Psychological Contract-
       Who's in Control of Absence? Academy of Management Review, 10(3), 397-407.

Nicholson, S., Pauly, M. V., Polsky, D., Sharda, C., Szrek, H., & Berger, M. L. (2006).
       Measuring the Effects of Work Loss on Productivity with Team Production.
       Health Economics, 15(2), 111-123.

Occhino, J. C. (1987). Teacher Absenteeism: Its Relationship to Student Attendance and
      Performance on a Standardized Achievement Test. Unpublished Ed.D, The
      University of Rochester.

Pennsylvania School Boards Association. (1978). Teacher absenteeism: professional staff
      absence study. Harrisburg, PA: Pennsylvania School Boards Association.

Pitkoff, E. (1989). Absenteeism among urban high school employees: Organizational
        variables. Unpublished Ed.D, Columbia University Teachers College.

Podgursky, M. (2003). Fringe benefits. Education Next(Summer).

Rhodes, S., & Steers, R. (1990). Managing employee absenteeism. Reading, MA:
      Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.
                                                                                      29

Rundall, R. A. (1986). Continuity in Subbing: Problems and Solutions. Clearing
      House, 59(5), 240.

Skidmore, D. E. (1984). We Used These Few Simple Steps to Cut Teacher Absenteeism
      in Half--And Increased Productive Class Time and Community Support in the
      Bargain. American School Board Journal, 171(3), 40-41.

Smith, D. B. (1984). A Study of the Relationship between Elementary Teacher
       Absenteeism and the Achievement of Elementary Pupils in Reading and
       Mathematics. Unpublished PhD, Michigan State University.

Summers, A., & Raivetz, M. (1982). What helps fourth grade students to read? In A.
     Summers (Ed.), Productivity Assessment in Education. San Francisco, CA:
     Jossey-Bass.

Turbeville, I. F. (1987). The Relationship of Selected Teacher Characteristics on Teacher
      Absenteeism in Selected School Districts of South Carolina. Unpublished PhD,
      University of South Carolina.

Uribe, C., Murnane, R. J., Willett, J. B., & Somers, M.-A. (2006). Expanding school
       enrollment by subsidizing private schools: lessons from Bogotá. Comparative
       Education Review, 50(2).

US Department of Education. (2004). No child left behind: a toolkit for teachers.
      Washington, DC: US Department of Education.

Varlas, L. (2001). Succeeding with substitute teachers. Education Update, 43(7).

White, N. A. (1990). Cut Sick-Pay a Day: An Incentive Plan To Reduce Teacher
       Absenteeism. A Practicum Report. Florida.

Winkler, D. R. (1980). The Effects of Sick-Leave Policy on Teacher Absenteeism.
      Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 33(2), 232-240.

Womble, M. (2001). Teacher absenteeism: the relationship between teacher absence due
     to illness and school performance level ranking on the 1998-1999 North Carolina
     ABCs accountability K-8 plan model. East Carolina University.

Woods, R. C. (1990). The effect of teacher attendance on student achievement in two
      selected school districts. Unpublished Ed.D, Ball State University.
                                                                                       30

Xie, J. L., & Johns, G. (2000). Interactive effects of absence culture salience and group
        cohesiveness: A multi-level and cross-level analysis of work absenteeism in the
        Chinese context. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 73(1),
        31-52.
                                                                                            31

                                    TABLES AND FIGURES

Table 1. Means and standard deviations on selected characteristics of 2594 unique teachers and
their 75 schools over three academic years (SY03–SY05).
Variable                                                                    Mean        SD
   TEACHERS
Discretionary absences (days per year)                                      4.581     4.140
Distance commuted (miles)                                                    7.32     7.752
Teaching experience (years)                                               13.832 11.884
Permanent employment status                                                 0.620         -
Licensed                                                                    0.864         -
Male                                                                        0.136         -
Asian                                                                       0.042         -
African-American                                                            0.242         -
Hispanic                                                                    0.091         -
Native-American                                                             0.003         -
White                                                                       0.623         -
   SCHOOLS
Enrollment (students)                                                     363.96 191.946
Attendance ratea                                                            94.64     1.189
                b
Suspension rate                                                             4.128     4.029
Retention ratec                                                             5.067     2.493
            d
Poverty rate                                                              79.888 10.816
Asiane                                                                      6.743 10.218
African-Americane                                                         47.625      24.45
         e
Hispanic                                                                  30.125 21.412
Native-Americane                                                            0.497     0.575
       e
White                                                                       15.01 13.341
School with grades ranging from K–8f                                         0.12         -
Notes:
a. Percentage of days attended by students.
b. Percentage of students who received one or more out-of-school suspensions.
c. Percentage of students who were repeating the grade in where they were enrolled.
d. Percentage of students eligible for free or reduced-priced lunch program.
e. Percentage of students of named ethnicity.
f. Grade ranges are K–8 or K–5
                                                                                        32

Table 2. Proportion of teachers absent on instructional days, by weekday (2594 unique
teachers over three academic years).
Weekday Proportion
Monday           0.057
Tuesday          0.049
Wednesday        0.051
Thursday         0.053
Friday           0.066

Total           0.055
                                                                                                        33

Table 3. Number of absences observed and proportion of absences observed on days adjacent
to non-instructional days,a by type of absence. The proportion of instructional days adjacent to
non-instructional days is 0.457. (2,594 unique teachers over three academic years)
Type of absence                                                   N     Proportion
Religious observance                                           258           0.752
Personal necessity                                           9,238           0.643
Short-term personal illness (1 or 2 consecutive days)       21,343           0.523
Death in the family                                          2,084           0.476
Adoption                                                       136           0.463
      b
Other                                                        1,163           0.454
Workplace injury                                                 31          0.452
Critical family illness                                      1,054           0.448
Maternity leave                                              3,261           0.445
Union business                                               1,162           0.444
No pay                                                         885           0.429
Cancer screen                                                  150           0.427
Medium-term personal illness                                12,407           0.416
Professional conference                                      5,618           0.397
Military duty                                                    53          0.358
Court appearance                                               757           0.358

Total                                                             59,600           0.494
Notes:
a. Non-instructional days include Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, professional development days and
   snow-days.
b. This category includes, for example, absences taken to visit the school of a teacher’s child under the
   provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 as well as absences that were coded in two
   ways (e.g., 3 hours for cancer screen and 4 hours for personal day).
                                                                                                    34

Table 4. Selected parameter estimates, robust standard errors, approximate p-values, and
goodness-of-fit statistics for a regression model fit to a dataset in which a the unit of analysis is a
teacher-year and the outcome is a measure of discretionary teacher absence.
                                                                       Parameter           Robust
Predictor                                                               estimate       standard error
School with grades ranging from K–8                                      -0.697*           0.345
Log of enrollment                                                        0.591**           0.225
Student attendance rate                                                 -0.217**           0.060
Male teacher                                                             0.383~            0.056
Permanent employment status                                              3.702**           0.193
Years of experience/10                                                   0.830**           0.021
Square of years of experience/10                                        -0.268**           0.054
Asian teacher                                                           -0.942**           0.256
Black teacher                                                            1.002**           0.166
Hispanic teacher                                                         0.711*            0.289
Native American teacher                                                  1.333*            0.588
Constant                                                                22.033**           6.033
Teacher-year observations                                                 5961
Unique Schools                                                              75
Between-school variance                                                   0.686
Within school variance                                                   12.960
Intraclass correlation                                                    0.050
Between school R-squared                                                  0.355
Within school R-squared                                                   0.167
Overall R-squared                                                         0.185
~ p<.1; * p<.05; ** p<.01
                                                                                                        35

Table 5. Means and standard deviations on selected characteristics of 8,631 unique students
and 280 unique teachers over three academic years (SY03–SY05).a
Variable                                                                          Mean      SD
                                 b
Mathematics achievement score                                                    -0.264 1.001
English Language Arts achievement scoreb                                         -0.436 0.998
Female                                                                            0.505       -
First language is English                                                         0.663       -
Asian                                                                             0.094       -
African-American                                                                  0.474       -
Hispanic                                                                          0.293       -
White                                                                             0.139       -
            rd
Repeated 3 grade                                                                  0.072       -
Repeating 4th grade                                                               0.032       -
Eligible for free or reduced-price lunch                                          0.827       -
                                                  c
Receives Special Education (substantially included )                              0.083       -
Receives Special Education (less includedc)                                       0.047       -
Notes:
a. We do not present descriptive statistics for our measures of students’ prior achievement, SAT-9 test
   scores for mathematics and reading obtained when students were in 3rd grade. We standardize these
   scores to make use of quadratic and cubic terms more convenient in regression models.
b. We standardized achievement scores using information on the whole population of test-takers. The
   means in the analytic sample, therefore, reflect the “achievement gap”, which is associated with the
   fact that our research site comprises primarily students living in poverty (82.8%) and students of color
   (86.2%).
c. We partition the students receiving Special Education and Related Services into two groups.
   Substantially included students spend at least 75% of their time in the regular classroom setting
   (learning from the teachers in our dataset to whom the student is matched). The other group consists
   of students who spend less than 75% of their time in the regular classroom.
                                                                                                  36

Table 6. Selected parameter estimates, [robust standard errors], approximate p-values, and
goodness-of-fit statistics for a sequence of regression models fit to a dataset in which a the unit
of analysis is a student-year and the outcome is measured achievement in mathematics.
                                                   OLS        OLS           OLS          2SLS
                                                  Fixed-
                                                effects of
                                                 teachers
                                                    no         no            yes           no
Predictor                                          1(a)       1(b)          1(c)          1(d)
Teacher absences (days before test)            -0.0040** -0.0033* -0.0033* -0.0175
                                                [0.0012] [0.0013] [0.0016] [0.0114]
Teacher has 1 or 2 years of experiencea        -0.1775** -0.3430** -0.3315* -0.1838**
                                                [0.0527] [0.0831] [0.1472] [0.0546]
Teacher has 3 or 4 years of experience         -0.1574** -0.2607** -0.2281* -0.1684**
                                                [0.0527] [0.0643] [0.1109] [0.0546]
Teacher has 5 to 9 years of experience           -0.0432   -0.1070*       -0.0994     -0.0459
                                                [0.0481] [0.0521] [0.0830] [0.0493]
Male teacher                                      0.0235     0.0912                     0.022
                                                [0.0545] [0.0701]                     [0.0561]
Permanent teacher                               0.1843** 0.1863*         0.1830~ 0.2261**
                                                [0.0590] [0.0735] [0.0929] [0.0726]
Teacher holds at least one license             -0.1783** -0.2154** -0.2146** -0.1910**
                                                [0.0525] [0.0577] [0.0712] [0.0564]
Asian Teacher                                    -0.0575    -0.2147                    -0.0895
                                                [0.1592] [0.2466]                     [0.1664]
African-American teacher                       -0.1676** -0.2476**                    -0.1206~
                                                [0.0473] [0.0585]                     [0.0646]
Hispanic Teacher                                  0.0229     0.025                      0.0474
                                                [0.1110] [0.1259]                     [0.1134]
Student attendance (school mean)                  0.0235     0.0912                     0.0264
                                                [0.0545] [0.0701]                     [0.0177]
Percentage of students who received one or
more out-of-school suspensions                  0.0289~    0.0329~         0.0232 -0.0140**
                                                [0.0166] [0.0172] [0.0266] [0.0047]
K-8 range of grades                            -1.4002** -1.2666*                    -1.4247**
                                                [0.3953] [0.5007]                     [0.3896]
Square-root of enrollment                        -0.0072    -0.0051        0.0117      -0.0074
                                                [0.0047] [0.0062] [0.0183] [0.0050]
(K-8 range of grades)*(square-root of
enrollment)                                     0.0680** 0.0711**                     0.0685**
                                                [0.0169] [0.0221]                     [0.0166]
Log(commuting distance + 1)                       0.0064     0.0196        0.1195       0.0085
                                                [0.0231] [0.0315] [0.0760] [0.0237]
                                                                                            37


Prior math achievement                        0.3636**    0.3697**   0.3680**   0.3637**
                                              [0.0109]    [0.0136]   [0.0141]   [0.0110]
Prior reading achievement                     0.2022**    0.2141**   0.2125**   0.2009**
                                              [0.0107]    [0.0127]   [0.0130]   [0.0107]
Square of prior math achievement              0.0119~      0.0107      0.0093   0.0114~
                                              [0.0063]    [0.0087]   [0.0091]   [0.0065]
Square of prior reading achievement           0.0372**    0.0375**   0.0367**   0.0377**
                                              [0.0064]    [0.0080]   [0.0083]   [0.0065]
Female student                                 0.0053      0.0003     -0.0007    0.0055
                                              [0.0142]    [0.0172]   [0.0171]   [0.0143]
Asian student                                 0.2972**    0.3333**   0.3352**   0.2964**
                                              [0.0366]    [0.0443]   [0.0433]   [0.0370]
Hispanic student                              0.0841**    0.0873**   0.0855**   0.0822**
                                              [0.0201]    [0.0234]   [0.0239]   [0.0202]
White student                                 0.1688**    0.1286**   0.1227**   0.1672**
                                              [0.0288]    [0.0344]   [0.0345]   [0.0290]
Student eligible for free or reduced-priced
lunch                                          -0.0557* -0.0836** -0.0828** -0.0560*
                                               [0.0229] [0.0263] [0.0260] [0.0230]
Repeated 3rd grade                            -0.1850** -0.1831** -0.1880** -0.1872**
                                               [0.0217] [0.0249] [0.0250] [0.0219]
Repeating 4th grade                             0.0293    0.035     0.0306    0.0273
                                               [0.0358] [0.0432] [0.0428] [0.0362]
Receives special education: included at
least 3/4 time                                -0.0428     -0.0273    -0.0289    -0.0474~
                                              [0.0282]    [0.0340]   [0.0344]   [0.0277]
Receives special education: included less
than 3/4 time                                 -0.1070**   -0.0608    -0.0599    -0.1072**
                                               [0.0392]   [0.0500]   [0.0503]    [0.0395]
Ratio of number of 4th graders in
classroom to number with test scores            -0.205    -0.1169  -0.1715    -0.1724
                                               [0.1819] [0.2074] [0.2348] [0.1871]
SY03                                          -0.3511** -0.3319** -0.3301** -0.3647**
                                               [0.0663] [0.0814] [0.1013] [0.0675]
SY04                                           -0.0914    -0.0736    -0.07   -0.1169~
                                               [0.0643] [0.0776] [0.0957] [0.0654]
Constant                                       -2.3252   -2.7960~  -2.3652    -2.0267
                                               [1.5425] [1.6270] [2.4383] [1.6591]

Student-year observations                       8713       6048       6048        8713
Unique teachers                                  285        144        144         285
Between-teacher variance                        0.103      0.094      0.150       0.107
                                                                                                    38

Within teacher variance                           0.402        0.408        0.409        0.402
Intraclass correlation                            0.204        0.187        0.268        0.211
Between teacher R-squared                         0.729        0.707        0.560        0.722
Within teacher R-squared                          0.357        0.364        0.363        0.357
Overall R-squared                                 0.498        0.482        0.431        0.497
~ p<.1; * p<.05; ** p<.01
Notes:
a. The reference group for teacher experience comprises teachers with 10 or more years of experience,
    46 percent of the analytic sample.
                                                                                                      39

Figure 1. Adjusted mean values of discretionary absences,a by school, displayed in ascending
order. The black bar indicates the overall adjusted mean of 5.13 days (SD=1.12). (2,594 unique
teachers in 75 schools over three academic years)




Notes:
a. Means adjusted for fixed-effects of academic years and observed characteristics of individual teachers
   in the schools: gender, ethnicity, commuting distance, licensure status, permanent employment status,
   and teaching experience.
                                                                                              40

Figure 2. Mean of predicted daily absence over three academic years, by bins defined by a
teacher’s commuting distance and the severity of the weather in the vicinity of her home (2,594
unique teachers).
                                                                                                     41

                                          APPENDICES

                               Appendix A: Table of stage one results

Table A1. Parameter estimates, [robust standard errors], approximate p-values, and goodness-
of-fit statistics for a regression model fit to a dataset in which a the unit of analysis is a teacher-
day and the outcome is a dichotomous indicator of teacher absence.
Predictor
Foul weather indexa                                                                     0.0039**
                                                                                         [0.0012]
Square of foul weather index                                                            -0.0014*
                                                                                         [0.0006]
(Foul weather index)*(log(distance))                                                    -0.0011~
                                                                                         [0.0006]
(Square of foul weather index)*(log(distance))                                           0.0007*
                                                                                         [0.0003]
Log(commuting distance)                                                                   0.0005
                                                                                         [0.0031]
Teacher has 1 or 2 years of experienceeb                                                  -0.007
                                                                                         [0.0070]
Teacher has 3 or 4 years of experience                                                   -0.0081
                                                                                         [0.0066]
Teacher has 5 to 9 years of experience                                                   -0.0036
                                                                                         [0.0065]
Male teacher                                                                              0.0041
                                                                                         [0.0068]
Permanent teacher                                                                       0.0229**
                                                                                         [0.0048]
Teacher holds at least one license                                                      -0.0069~
                                                                                         [0.0042]
Asian Teacher                                                                            -0.0205
                                                                                         [0.0219]
African-American teacher                                                                0.0219**
                                                                                         [0.0064]
Hispanic Teacher                                                                          0.0043
                                                                                         [0.0100]
Student attendance (school mean)                                                         -0.0018
                                                                                         [0.0016]
Percentage of students who received one or more out-of-school suspensions                -0.0004
                                                                                         [0.0005]
K-8 range of grades                                                                      -0.0262
                                                                                         [0.0364]
Square-root of enrollment                                                                -0.0004
                                                                             42

                                                                  [0.0006]
(K-8 range of grades)*(square-root of enrollment)                   0.0008
                                                                  [0.0016]
Prior math achievementc                                             0.0073
                                                                  [0.0059]
Prior reading achievement                                        -0.0102**
                                                                  [0.0031]
Square of prior math achievement                                 -0.0173**
                                                                  [0.0059]
Square of prior reading achievement                               0.0130**
                                                                  [0.0033]
Female student                                                      0.0146
                                                                  [0.0110]
Asian student                                                      -0.0005
                                                                  [0.0162]
Hispanic student                                                  -0.0158~
                                                                  [0.0091]
White student                                                       -0.014
                                                                  [0.0134]
Student eligible for free or reduced-priced lunch                   0.0035
                                                                  [0.0129]
Repeated 3rd grade                                                 -0.0272
                                                                  [0.0203]
Repeating 4th grade                                                -0.0294
                                                                  [0.0225]
Receives special education: included at least 3/4 time           -0.0702**
                                                                  [0.0170]
Receives special education: included less than 3/4 time             0.013
                                                                  [0.0235]
(Number of 4th graders in classroom)/(number with test scores)     -0.0044
                                                                  [0.0158]
SY03                                                              -0.0103*
                                                                  [0.0052]
SY04                                                             -0.0166**
                                                                  [0.0051]
Constant                                                            0.2374
                                                                  [0.1506]
Teacher-day observations                                           89191
Unique teachers                                                      285
Between-teacher variance                                           0.0021
Within teacher variance                                            0.0409
Intraclass correlation                                             0.0484
Between teacher R-squared                                          0.1358
                                                                                                         43

Within teacher R-squared                                                                     0.001
Overall R-squared                                                                           0.0074
~ p<.1; * p<.05; ** p<.01
Notes:
a. We conducted tests of hypotheses concerning the relevance of the instruments to the model. First, we
    tested the null that the parameters associated with the foul weather index and its square are
    simultaneously zero. We rejected this null hypotheses (p<.01). Second, note that the interactions
    between the log of distance and both the foul weather index and its square vary at the teacher-day
    level. Thus, it is not possible to include these interactions in the second stage (where the unit of
    analysis is the student-teacher-day). This omission has the effect of treating the interactions as
    exogenous instruments, so we tested the null hypothesis that the parameters associated with all four
    predictors involving the foul weather index are simultaneously zero. We rejected this null (p<.001).
    We included a quadratic polynomial function of both measures of prior student achievement
    (mathematics and reading) as a control for the entire academic background before 4th grade. Each of
    the four estimated parameters was significant (p<.01) in all three specifications. In addition, our
    models included controls for students’ gender, ethnicity, and status with respect to living in poverty,
    first language being English, receiving Special Education, grade repetition.
b. The reference group for teacher experience comprises teachers with 10 or more years of experience,
    46 percent of the analytic sample.
c. Variables that vary by student in the second stage of our modeling strategy are included in this first
    stage as classroom means. We also fit the first stage without these classroom means, which had little
    effect on model fit. However, the estimate of interest at the second stage—the effect of yearly
    absences before the achievement tests—is reduced by roughly half in this case. We favor including
    theses classroom means at in the first stage of our estimation strategy because of their clearly
    endogenous nature.




                                   Appendix B: Standard Error Adjustment

           Our indirect 2SLS strategy requires manipulation of estimates in order to obtain correct

standard errors. This appendix describes the general process we used. Stata code is available

from the authors.

           The key to the standard error correction procedure involves adjusting the second stage

variance-covariance matrix. The necessary ideas and suggested approach to forming an

adjustment scalar are documented in the Stata technical database19 The adjustment scalar is

formed by taking a ratio of two mean squared error values. The numerator is the mean squared



19
     See “Two-stage least squares regression” by Vince Wiggins, updated July, 2005.
                                                                                                      44

error corresponding to the second-stage estimation using the endogenous predictor. The

denominator is the mean squared error corresponding to the second-stage estimation using the

exogenous predictor (aggregated estimates from the first stage). This estimation step, of course,

produces the point estimate of interest, but the estimated standard error is artificially low. The

correction scalar, being greater than unity, inflates the standard errors

         Unfortunately, the most straightforward way of creating this scalar does not apply to the

situation in which the data have a nested structure. The procedure uses the regress command, but

our preferred command for fitting second-stage models is xtreg. In order to produce estimated

standard errors that respect the nesting of students within classrooms at stage-two of our 2SLS

strategy, a preliminary data transformation step is required. By combining the xtdata and regress

commands, one can duplicate the results of xtreg. Random effects requires estimation of the

square root of the ratio of between and within variance components of the fitted second-stage

model.

         Earlier versions of this paper afford us some confidence that our departure from the

conventional approach to adjusting the standard errors is correct. In particular, by aggregating

daily information on absence and weather, we were able to produce a student-teacher-year

dataset in which the unit of analysis at both stages of our 2SLS strategy were the same. Thus, we

could fit models simultaneously with xtivreg or in the indirect method described above. We

obtained identical results. In this paper, we are unable to use a MLE-based simultaneous

equation modeling approach to provide estimated standard errors because of the aggregation step

inherent in our strategy. This step is necessary in order to reconcile the units of the first stage

estimates and the second stage outcome.
