NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF RELIGIOUS AND SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE LIVES OF
DISADVANTAGED YOUTH
Rajeev Dehejia
Thomas DeLeire
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Joshua Mitchell
Working Paper 13369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13369

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

Corresponding author: Erzo F. P. Luttmer, erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu. This research was funded by
the Annie E. Casey Foundation. We thank them for their support but acknowledge that the findings
and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the authors alone, and do not necessarily reflect
the opinions of the Foundation. Luttmer also gratefully acknowledges funding from the National Institute
on Aging through Grant Number T32-AG00186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. We
thank Jon Gruber, Dan Hungerman, Chris Ellison, and conference participants for useful suggestions
and helpful discussions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Rajeev Dehejia, Thomas DeLeire, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Joshua Mitchell. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Religious and Social Organizations in the Lives of Disadvantaged Youth
Rajeev Dehejia, Thomas DeLeire, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Joshua Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 13369
September 2007
JEL No. D10,I30,J62,Z12
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether participation in religious or other social organizations can help offset
the negative effects of growing up in a disadvantaged environment. Using the National Survey of
Families and Households, we collect measures of disadvantage as well as parental involvement with
religious and other social organizations when the youth were ages 3 to 19 and we observe their outcomes
13 to 15 years later. We consider a range of definitions of disadvantage in childhood (family income
and poverty measures, family characteristics including parental education, and child characteristics
including parental assessments of the child) and a range of outcome measures in adulthood (including
education, income, and measures of health and psychological wellbeing). Overall, we find strong
evidence that youth with religiously active parents are less affected later in life by childhood disadvantage
than youth whose parents did not frequently attend religious services. These buffering effects of religious
organizations are most pronounced when outcomes are measured by high school graduation or non-smoking
and when disadvantage is measured by family resources or maternal education, but we also find buffering
effects for a number of other outcome-disadvantage pairs. We generally find much weaker buffering
effects for other social organizations.
Rajeev Dehejia
Department of Economics
Tufts University
8 Upper Campus Road
114A Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155-6722
and NBER
rajeev@dehejia.net
Thomas DeLeire
La Follette School of Public Affairs
University of Wisconsin - Madison
1225 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
tdeleire@lafollette.wisc.edu

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Kennedy School of Government, Mailbox 25
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu
Joshua Mitchell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
mitchel6@fas.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
This paper examines whether religious and social organizations benefit youth by
offsetting the long-term consequences of growing up in a disadvantaged environment.
Disadvantages suffered during childhood not only impose an immediate cost on children
and families, but have also been shown to impose harm that lasts well into adulthood.
Research in economics and other social sciences has documented that children who grow
up in poverty have worse physical health, lower levels of cognitive ability, lower levels
of school achievement, more emotional and behavioral problems, and higher teenage
childbearing rates. Other sources of disadvantage include growing up with a single or less
educated parent, parental job loss, divorce, or death, and growing up in a poor
neighborhood. Moreover, the consequences of a disadvantaged upbringing may be
compounded by weak ties to the community and the family.
Not all children who grow up disadvantaged suffer negative outcomes to the same
extent. Families and children can adopt strategies to try to minimize the negative impacts
of their surroundings. In this paper, we examine one such strategy: engagement with
religious and other social organizations. The link between poverty and poor outcomes
has been hypothesized to be partially due to deficiencies in parenting, home
environments, and neighborhoods. Religious and social organizations could therefore
make up for some of this lost social capital by providing counseling, social services,
income support, or a network of social contacts. Our previous research (Dehejia, DeLeire,
and Luttmer 2007) has found that religious organizations enable adults to partially insure
their consumption and happiness against income shocks. This paper builds on those

results by examining whether involvement with religion or social organizations mitigates
the long-run negative effects on youth of growing up in a disadvantaged environment.
In particular, we examine whether, by adulthood (13 to 15 years later), children
whose parents were involved with religious and social organizations suffered less harm
from growing up in a disadvantaged environment than children whose parents were less
involved. We consider 14 measures of disadvantage in childhood: family income and
poverty (measured by household income relative to the poverty line, the poverty rate in
the census tract where the child resides, and by whether the child’s household received
public assistance); family characteristics (measured by the mother’s level of education,
by whether the child’s parent was unmarried, by whether the parents’ marriage broke up,
and by an indicator for nonwhite households1); and child characteristics (parental
assessments of the child, whether the child has repeated a grade, and an index of
disciplinary problems). We consider 12 outcome measures in adulthood to capture
whether these disadvantages had lasting detrimental consequences: the child’s level of
education, household income relative to the poverty line, whether the child receives
public assistance, and measures of risky behavior (measured by smoking, age of first sex,
and health insurance coverage) and psychological well-being (measured by subjective
happiness and locus of control). Thus, in total, we test for buffering of religious
participation in 168 (=14×12) possible combinations of a measure of youth disadvantage
and a measure adult outcome.
We find that religious organizations provide buffering effects that are statistically
significant at the 5 percent level for 38 out of a total of 168 disadvantage-outcome
1

While we do not consider being nonwhite to be a disadvantage per se, it may be associated with
disadvantages (such as experiencing racism or discrimination) that we are unable to capture in our other
measures.

2

combinations examined. We can formally reject at the 1% level that this number of
significant effects could arise by pure chance, and we conclude that religious
organizations play an important buffering role against disadvantage experienced during
youth. Of course, it is quite plausible that religious organizations also provide buffering
effects for many of the disadvantage-outcome combinations that were not significant in
our analysis. In those cases, we simply do not have the statistical power to prove or
disprove buffering effects.2 The buffering effects of religious organizations are most
often statistically significant when outcomes are measured by high school graduation or
non-smoking and when disadvantage is measured by family resources or maternal
education, but we also find statistically significant buffering effects for a number of other
outcome-disadvantage pairs. Our data do not allow us to determine to what extent the
buffering effects are driven by religious organizations actively intervening in the lives of
disadvantaged youth (through tutoring, mentoring, or financial assistance) as opposed to
providing the youth with motivation, values, or attitudes that lead to better outcomes. We
find suggestive evidence that that leisure groups also provide some buffering against
youth disadvantage. Other types of social organizations do not appear to provide
buffering, but this lack of findings could be due to the fact that the buffering effects of
social organizations are not very precisely estimated.
Because participation in a religious or social organization is a choice that a child’s
parents actively make, we must be cautious in interpreting the buffering effect of religion
as a causal effect of religious participation. For example, the effect of participation could
be confounded with other coping strategies that families adopt in response to
2

None of the 168 estimates of buffering effects is even marginally significantly negative, so we cannot
reject the hypothesis of a positive buffering effect for any disadvantage-outcome combination at the 10%
level.

3

disadvantage, leading our estimated buffering effect to capture the combined effect of all
of these strategies. Reverse causality is less of a concern since outcomes for
disadvantaged youth are observed 13 to 15 years after we measure involvement with
religious and social organizations and whether the child had a disadvantaged upbringing.
We believe our results show that religious organizations play an important role in
shaping the lives of disadvantaged youth by mitigating at least some of the long-term
consequences of disadvantage. We view our research as a first step in the important task
of understanding whether – and through what mechanisms – disadvantaged youth benefit
from participating in religious organizations.

2. Literature Review
The consequences of growing up in disadvantaged circumstances have been extensively
documented in the academic research literature. In this section, we provide a brief
overview of three aspects of this literature: the sources of disadvantage, the consequences
of growing up in disadvantaged circumstances, and adaptive behaviors that families may
adopt to protect themselves, in part, from these disadvantages. Finally, we review the
less extensive economic literature on the role of religion in the lives of youth.

2.1 Sources of Disadvantage for Youth
Children can be disadvantaged if they grow up in poverty or if they experience any one of
a large number of other circumstances. Collectively, researchers have considered a large
number of potential disadvantages when examining consequences for youth. These
include low family income and poverty (e.g. Duncan and Brooks-Gunn 1997), growing

4

up in a single parent family (McLanahan and Sandefur 1994), having a less educated
mother (Currie and Moretti 2003, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2005, and Oreopoulos,
Page, and Stevens 2006), having a parent on public assistance (Antel 1992, Page 2004),
having obese parents (Anderson et al. 2007), and poor parenting behaviors (Currie and
Hyson 1999, Bitler and Currie 2004).

2.2 Consequences of Growing up Disadvantaged
Many studies have documented the correlation between poverty and youth outcomes
(inter alia Brooks-Gunn and Duncan 1997, Duncan and Brooks-Gunn 1997). Growing up
in poverty is related to having worse physical health (Korenman and Miller 1997), lower
levels of cognitive ability, lower levels of school achievement, and a greater number of
emotional or behavioral problems (Smith et al. 1997). Low income is unlikely to be
causally responsible for all of these outcomes. Longitudinal analysis has suggested that
omitted parental characteristics that are correlated with income are likely responsible for
many of these negative outcomes (Mayer 1997). However, there is also evidence from
social experiments (Currie 1997) and sibling fixed effects models (Duncan et al. 1998)
suggesting that income does at least partially matter. Shea (2000), Dahl and Lochner
(2005), Oreopoulos et al. (2005), Page et al. (2007) use plausibly exogenous income
variation due to industry shocks, changes in EITC rules, and worker lay-offs. These
studies generally find effects of parental income on subsequent educational and labor
market outcomes for the youths, and in many cases the effects are strongest for
disadvantaged youths.
Having an unmarried parent has also been found to be associated with a range of

5

negative outcomes for youth. McLanahan and Sandefur (1994, p. 3) argue that “growing
up with only one biological parent frequently deprives children of important economic,
parental, and community resources, and that these deprivations ultimately undermine
their chances of future success”. Their analysis suggests that roughly one-half of the
deficit associated with having a single parent is due to low income and one-half is due to
inadequate parental guidance and a lack of ties to community resources. Other research
has also suggested that parenting behavior is an important determinant of child outcomes
(Hanson et al. 1997).
Parental education also matters. In addition to being associated with higher levels
of family income, research has shown that parents’ level of education has a strong,
causal, effect on children’s health (Currie and Moretti 2003) and children’s educational
attainment (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2005). Other parental behaviors can influence
children's outcomes as well. Even otherwise positive behaviors can have negative
consequences. For example, Anderson, Butcher, and Levine (2003) find a causal
relationship between maternal employment and the likelihood that a child is overweight.
Growing up in a poor neighborhood may also have a negative effect on outcomes
later in life. Identifying these effects is complicated by the likely correlation of
neighborhood conditions with unobserved parental characteristics and behaviors.
Moreover, it is difficult to even sign the bias stemming from this correlation as parents
who live in poor neighborhoods may have unobservable characteristics that lead to worse
outcomes for their children or, alternatively, parents in poor neighborhoods may invest
more in compensating activities to partially alleviate those effects. A number of studies
have sought to overcome these biases to identify the effects of growing up in a poor

6

neighborhood on children's outcomes using sibling fixed effects models (e.g. Aaronson
1997) or instrumental variables (Case and Katz 1991 and Evans, Oates, and Schwab
1992).

2.3 Strategies to Minimize the Consequences of Disadvantage
Families and children can adopt strategies to mitigate the negative impacts of their
surroundings. For example, single mothers can improve the educational outcomes and
reduce the delinquency of their children by living with their own parents in multigenerational households (DeLeire and Kalil 2002). Guralnick (2004) describes how
parents of children with developmental challenges adopt strategies – including expanding
their networks of social support – in order to best meet the needs of their children. These
strategies to mitigate the negative impact of disadvantage may or may not have value in
and of themselves. While some adaptive strategies may be intrinsically valuable, others,
such as not venturing outdoors in response to living in a dangerous neighborhood, may
not.

2.4 Economic Consequences of Religion
In an overview of the growing literature on the economics of religion, Iannaccone (1998)
discusses a range of studies on the economic consequences of religious participation, for
example Freeman’s (1986) finding that black youth who attend church are less likely to
smoke, drink, or engage in drug use. More recent studies have also focused on the
consequences of religious participation, but it has been difficult to determine whether the
consequences are causal or driven by omitted variables. Gruber (2005) succeeds in

7

credibly establishing causality by instrumenting own religious attendance by the religious
market density of other ethnic groups sharing the same denomination. He finds that
increased religious participation leads to higher educational attainment and income, less
dependence on social insurance programs, and greater levels of marriage. Gruber and
Hungerman (2006) use variation in “blue laws” to find causal evidence that religious
attendance reduces drug use and heavy drinking. Lillard and Price (2007) show a strong
association between religious participation among youth and criminal and delinquent
behavior, smoking, drug use, and drinking. Moreover, they use a variety of methods
including propensity score matching, instrumental variables (using the “blue laws”
instrument described above), and Altonji et al.’s (2005) method of using selection on
observables to infer the degrees of selection on unobservables to suggest that at least
some of their observed associations between religious participation and outcomes are
indeed causal relationships.
There is also a large literature showing that religiosity correlates with health
outcomes and subjective well-being. Studies show a relationship between religion
(variously measured by self-reported “religious coping” or religious activity including
prayer) and a range of health outcomes (including depression, mortality, and immune
system responses). These are exclusively correlation studies (see, for example,
McCullough et al. 2000). Similarly, there is wide-spread evidence that religiosity is
correlated with measures of subjective well-being (see inter alia Diener et al. 1999 and
the meta-analyses by Parmagent 2002 and Smith et al. 2003).
A number of papers study the buffering effects of religion on subjective wellbeing in the context of traumatic life events. Using cross-sectional data from the General

8

Social Survey, Ellison (1991) finds that people with stronger religious beliefs have higher
well-being and are less affected by traumatic events. Strawbridge et al. (1998) find nonuniform buffering effects using cross-sectional data from California. They find that
religiosity buffers the effects of non-family stressors (e.g. unemployment) on depression
but exacerbates the effects of family stressors (e.g. marital problems). This finding
dovetails with Clark and Lelkes (2005) who find that religiosity may dampen or
exacerbate the happiness effect of a major life shock depending on the denomination and
the type of shock. Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2007) find that religion buffers
subjective well-being against income shocks. Moreover, in that paper we document that
religious involvement also insures consumption against income shocks, i.e., religion
provides more than spiritual support alone.

3. Data Description
3.1 The National Survey of Families and Households
We use three waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), a panel
data set collected by demographers (Sweet, Bumpass, and Call 1988, and Sweet and
Bumpass 1996, 2002). The NSFH contains detailed information on participants’ family
structure, living arrangements, educational attainment, religiosity, and economic and
psychological wellbeing.
The first wave of interviews took place in 1987-88 and was conducted in a faceto-face setting with respondents taking self-administered questionnaires for more
sensitive topics. The sample consists of 13,007 individuals, and is nationally
representative of individuals age 19 or older, living in households, and able to speak

9

English or Spanish. If these “main respondents” lived in a household with children age 19
or younger, one of these children was chosen at random to be the “focal child”. The
respondent answered a series of questions about this focal child, including questions
about the child’s behavior and school performance. Wave one contains information on
5,684 focal children.

A second wave of interviews with the main respondents took place

in 1992-94. This allows our analysis to consider changes in variables of interest over the
first two waves, such as whether the household experienced a marital breakup.
The third wave of interviews took place in 2001-2003. This wave included
interviews with both the main respondents and with people who were focal children in
wave one (for convenience we continue to refer to them as “focal children” though by
wave three they are adults). We use the information from these grown-up focal children
to construct our outcome measures. The NSFH conducted telephone interviews with
eligible focal children, namely those aged 18 to 34 in wave three (and who were age 3 to
19 in wave one). The NSFH originally identified 4,128 focal children as eligible but were
only able to locate and successfully interview 1,952 of them; this raises issues of sample
attrition, which we discuss section 5.5. These interviews asked about the focal child’s
educational attainment, income, risky behaviors, and subjective measures of well-being.
The NSFH granted us permission to use a limited-access version of the data set
that contains characteristics of the respondent’s neighborhood from the 1990 Census at
the tract level. A census tract is a local area that is fairly homogenous and typically
contains between 2,500 and 8,000 people. We use log median household income and the
poverty rate as tract level measures of disadvantage.
10

3.2 Data Description and Choice of Variables
The full sample of wave-three interviewees who were focal children in wave one includes
1,952 observations. In some specifications, we restrict the sample to individuals older
than 25 in wave three. This sample consists of 1,125 observations. The age restriction is
useful for outcomes that are best measured in adulthood (for example, education or
income). Table 1 provides a snapshot of the samples. Households are mostly white (with
8 percent black, 5 percent Hispanic, and 1 percent other nonwhite). Of the wave-one
adult respondents, 91 percent are biological parents (for convenience we refer to both
biological parents and guardians as “parents”). Parents’ ages range from 19 to 71 in
wave one, with an average age of 39.
We use a range of variables to measure household disadvantage in wave one of
the data. Summary statistics for household disadvantage are presented in Table 2 for the
full sample as well as for parents who are above and below the median religious
attendance frequency in our sample. Our first set of measures is based on family
resources or poverty: log household income relative to the poverty line, an indicator for
household income less than 200 percent of the poverty line (21 percent of the full
sample), log median household income in the census tract, the poverty rate at the censustract level (11 percent of the full sample), and an indicator for the household receiving
public assistance in wave one (5 percent of the full sample). The second set of
disadvantage measures is based on family characteristics, namely indicators for:
nonwhite parents (14 percent of the full sample), an unmarried parent (13 percent of the
full sample), a break-up of the parents’ marriage (divorce or separation) occurring

11

between wave one and wave two (10 percent of the sample, conditional on having
married parents at wave one), a mother with less than a high school education (11 percent
of the full sample), and a mother with high school education or less (52 percent of the full
sample).
The third set of disadvantage measures is based on child characteristics: indicators
for whether the parent thinks the focal child is unlikely to graduate from college or is
difficult to raise; an indicator for the focal child having repeated a grade, and a composite
measure of discipline difficulties. Some child characteristics reflect the parent’s
perception of the child, and as such must be interpreted with great care. For example, if
religious parents systematically assess their children differently than non-religious
parents, then our estimates of buffering could be spurious.3
Tables 3 and 4 summarize measures of participation in religious and social
organizations and religious affiliation. Table 3 summarizes the measure of religious
participation that we use in this paper: the parent’s percentile rank in the wave-one
distribution of attendance at religious services.4 We see that the distribution is
substantially skewed to the right: the parent at the 10th percentile never attends, the
median parent attends twice per month (24 times per year), and the parent at the 90th
percentile attends twice per week (104 times per year). We also examine the robustness
of our results to alternative specifications of parental religious attendance. In Table 4, we
see that most youth have parents that participate in a social organization (where such

3

If religious parents have a lower threshold for saying that the child is in trouble (e.g., skipping church
qualifies as trouble), then “troubled” children of religious parents have on average less severe trouble than
“troubled” children of non-religious parents. As a result, we would expect troubled children of religious
parents to have better outcomes later in life even if religion does not directly help youth overcome the
negative consequences of being in trouble.
4
We use the religious attendance of the parent who was selected as the “main respondent” by the NSFH.

12

organizations include community, work-related, leisure, and religious groups; note that
here religious groups refer to non-worship activities). Approximately 90 percent of the
sample provides information about a religious denomination with the most common
denominations being Catholic and Baptist.
Finally, Table 5 summarizes our wave-three outcome measures for the adult focal
child. We examine measures of educational attainment (indicators for having a high
school education or more, some college or more, and being a college graduate) and
income (the age-specific percentile rank of a household’s income to poverty line ratio, an
indicator for a household’s being above the 25th percentile in the age-specific distribution
of the income to poverty line ratio, and an indicator for receiving public assistance). We
also include measures of behavior and psychological well-being: an indicator for being a
non-smoker, an indicator for whether the child’s age at first having sex was 16 or older,
an indicator for a normal body mass index5, an indicator for being covered by health
insurance, a measure of overall happiness, and a composite measure of locus of control
(i.e., the extent to which someone perceives himself or herself to be in control of his or
her environment).

4. Empirical Strategy
In this section we present our empirical strategy, and discuss related identification and
econometric issues.

5

Body mass index (BMI) is defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. We
followed the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (part of the National Institutes of Health) in defining
a healthy body weight as 18.5 ≤ BMI < 25.0.

13

4.1 Specification
To examine whether religious and other organizations help to attenuate the effect of a
disadvantaged upbringing, we estimate models of the form:

(1)

Outcomeit = Disadvantagedi,t-1 β1 + Religiousi,t-1 β2 +
Disadvantagedi,t-1 × Religiousi,t-1 β3 + Xi,t-1 β4 + αit + δt + εit

where Outcomeit is a particular youth outcome in wave three, Disadvantagedi,t-1 is an
indicator of a disadvantaged household in wave one of the survey, and Religiousi,t-1 is a
measure of parents’ religiosity in wave one (or a measure of the parents’ participation in
other social organizations). Xi,t-1 is a set of controls for the characteristics of the
household in which the youth grew up as well as the race/ethnicity and gender of the
youth; αit is a set dummies for the age of the youth at the time of the wave three
interview; δt is a set of year-of-interview dummies for the wave one and wave three
interview; and εit are error terms.
Based on the literature, we expect to find a negative β1 (disadvantage leads to
worse outcomes in adulthood) and a positive β2 (growing up with religious parents is
generally associated with better outcomes). However, since any measure of disadvantage
is likely correlated with several omitted measures of disadvantage, β1 merely measures an
association. Similarly, since parental religious participation is a choice and is likely to be
correlated with many other omitted characteristics that have a beneficial effect on later
outcomes, the effect of parental religious participation is unlikely to be causal. Our main
coefficient of interest is β3, which measures the extent to which children of religious

14

parents are less affected by growing up under disadvantaged conditions. Thus, we take a
positive β3 as suggestive evidence of the buffering effect of religion.
Despite omitted variables problems that bias β1 and β2, it is possible, under strong
assumptions, to give a causal interpretation to β3. The key condition for identification is
that omitted characteristics are correlated with religious attendance to the same degree for
disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged households. However, we prefer to interpret the
estimates of β3 as associations rather than as causal evidence of buffering because we are
concerned that this identification condition does not hold in practice. In particular, it is
possible that parental religious involvement is more strongly associated with omitted
characteristics that affect later outcomes for disadvantaged children than it is for nondisadvantaged children. For example, it is possible that parents who participate in
religious activities out of concern for their children growing up in a disadvantaged
environment might also decide to enroll their children in after-school activities that could
mitigate the effects of disadvantage. We could fully address this issue if we had an
instrument for parental participation in religion, but unfortunately no such variable is
available in our data.6 We also acknowledge that the disadvantaged religious families
form a selected sample for which religious participation did not succeed in overcoming
their disadvantage in the first wave of our data. Thus, our estimated buffering effect
should be interpreted as the average buffering given the selected nature of the sample in
wave 1. We are less worried about reverse causation because we measure disadvantage
in wave one of the survey and outcomes in wave three, 13 to 15 years later.
6

An instrumental variable for religion has been suggested by Gruber (2005), namely the percent of
individuals in the same locality who, based on their ethnic background, are predicted to share the
respondent’s religious denomination. For our relatively small sample, however, this instrument yielded
estimates that were so imprecise that they did not provide evidence either way on whether our main results
can be interpreted causally.

15

4.2 Joint Significance of the Buffering Effects
Given the large number of effects we investigate (14 measures of disadvantage and 12
outcomes), we would expect to find some statistically significant buffering effects of
religion simply as a matter of chance. It would be problematic, indeed data mining, only
to present the significant effects. Furthermore, there is a danger of ex-post theorizing to
justify the particular pattern of effects we find. We deal with this issue in two ways. First,
we present our results – both significant and insignificant – for a range of disadvantage
and outcome measures that we believe reasonably spans the data available to us. Second,
we show the whole distribution of t-statistics on the buffering effects of all disadvantageoutcome pairs and compare this with a simulated distribution of t-statistics under the null
hypothesis of no true buffering effect, i.e., we test whether we observe more statistically
significant effects than would be expected by chance if religious organizations did not
buffer at all against disadvantage.

5. Results
5.1 Direct Effects of Wave-One Disadvantage on Wave-Three Outcomes
We begin by examining the direct effect of our measures of disadvantage in wave one on
outcomes in wave three. These results are present in Tables 6a and 6b. With the
exception of the log of the ratio of household income to the poverty line, log median
household income in the census tract, and the indicator for public assistance (the first and
third rows and the sixth column, which are shaded), disadvantage measures and outcomes
are scaled so that a negative coefficient corresponds to a worse outcome for the child.

16

Table 6a depicts the effects of our disadvantage measures on education, income,
and public assistance in wave three. Regressions include controls for parental religious
participation, parental race-ethnicity dummies, a dummy for whether the guardian is a
biological parent, a dummy for the gender of the focal child, age dummies for the focal
child, and year of interview dummies. In columns (1) and (2), we see that each measure
of disadvantage (other than parents’ marital breakup) has a negative and significant effect
(at the 1 or 5 percent levels) on a dummy for high school or more education as well as on
the dummy for some college or more education. The same holds for the college
graduation variable, except that the effect of “difficult to raise” is now only marginally
significant. The next two columns examine the effect of disadvantage on two measures of
income. As with education, we find uniformly significant effects of family income and
resource measures of disadvantage, and many significant effects among family
characteristics. The effects of child characteristics are more equivocal. Finally in column
(6) we note that most measures of disadvantage have a significant positive effect on an
indicator for receiving public assistance in wave three.
Table 6b depicts the effects of wave-one disadvantage on wave-three behavior,
wellbeing, and health-related outcomes. We find the most uniform effects for the health
insurance indicator, followed by the normal weight indicator, smoking, and age at first
sex. We find fewer significant effects for subjective wellbeing and locus of control.
Overall, these results show a significant ongoing association between childhood
disadvantage and outcomes in adulthood. It must be emphasized that, although it is
appealing to interpret these results causally, they are fundamentally correlations. From
other studies (especially Currie 1997, Duncan et al. 1998, Currie and Moretti 2003, and

17

Black et al. 2005) we know that at least part of the effect of the family resource and
poverty measures is causal. For child characteristics – particularly parental assessments
of whether the child is expected to graduate from college or is difficult to raise – the
scope for omitted variable bias is higher because both these assessments and the future
outcome may depend on factors that are known to the parents but not to the researcher.

5.2 Religion and Buffering
Before examining the full set of religion-disadvantage interactions, we begin by
examining in detail the results for a single specification, the effect of having a mother
with a high school degree or less (measured in wave one) on the adult child’s having
some college or more education in wave three. In Table 7, we present both ordinary least
squares (linear probability model) and probit results. Columns (1) and (3) show the direct
effect of having a mother with no more than a high school education on the adult child’s
level of education in wave three. In both specifications, there is a negative effect that is
significant at the one percent level. In the OLS specification, having a mother with no
more than a high school education reduces the probability that the adult child has at least
some college in wave three by 23 percentage points relative to a mean of 65 percent. The
direct effect of religious participation is positive and significant at the one percent level in
both specifications. Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of parental religious
participation is associated with an 8 percentage point increase in the adult child’s
probability of having some college or more education in wave three.
In columns (2) and (4), we see that the interaction of religious participation and
mother’s education is positive and significant at the one percent level for OLS and at the

18

5 percent level for the probit specification. The lower half of the table expresses this
interaction coefficient in terms of the buffering effect that religious participation provides
against the measure of disadvantage. Row (A) shows that having a mother with no more
than a high school degree reduces the probability that the child has at least some college
by 31 percentage points if the parent was at the 25th percentile of religious participation,
i.e., the typical non-participant. Row (B) shows that this effect is reduced to 16
percentage points if the parent was at the 75th percentile of religious attendance, i.e., the
typical active participant. The difference between rows (A) and (B), 15 percentage
points, is shown in row (C). We refer to this difference, expressed as a fraction of row
(A), as the buffering effect of religion. In this case, we find that religious involvement
buffers (31-16)/31 = 48 percent of the negative effect of having a mother with no more
than a high school degree on the adult child’s probability of having some college or more
education in wave three. The results for the probit specification are very similar.7
We next examine the extent to which religious participation can buffer the longterm effects of a disadvantaged childhood for our full set of measures of disadvantage
and our full set of outcome variables. For simplicity, we present the results for the OLS
specifications, but we show that results are similar for probit specifications when we
check the robustness of the results in Table 11 below. Tables 8a and 8b present the tstatistics of the buffering effects of religion while Tables 9a and 9b present the magnitude
of the buffering effects.
7

It is also clear from Table 7 that the direct effect of religious participation declines in magnitude and loses
significance when moving from specifications (1) and (3) to (2) and (4). However, we stress again that our
hypothesis does not concern whether greater religious participation itself leads to better outcomes but
whether it alleviates the effects of disadvantage on those outcomes. Furthermore, the direct effect cannot be
interpreted causally due to the likely presence of omitted variables. Nevertheless, we have examined what
happens to the direct effect of religion for all 168 outcome-disadvantage combinations and have found that,
unlike the example given in Table 7, the coefficient on religious participation remains positive and
significant roughly 75 percent of the time.

19

Table 8a, column (1), shows whether measures of youth disadvantage have less of
a detrimental impact on the high school graduation rates of youths with religious parents
than on youth whose parents do not frequently attend religious services. For all measures
of family resources and poverty and for most measures of family characteristics, we find
statistically significant buffering effects. However, we find no significant buffering
effects with respect to any of the child characteristics. Table 9a, column (1), shows that
the magnitude of the buffering effect ranges between 42 and 113 percent for the
significant effects.8 It is notable that we do not find many significant effects when
education is measured using an indicator for having some college or more or using an
indicator for being a college graduate in columns (2) and (3). This suggests that the
buffering effects of religion are concentrated on the high school dropout margin. It is also
notable that we do not find a uniformly statistically significant buffering effect for any of
our income measures, including those that might be expected to pick up the effect of high
school or more versus less than high school education (such as the indicators for being
above the 25th percentile of the ratio of household income to the poverty line and for
being on public assistance). One potential explanation for this puzzling result is that
annual income is a noisy measure of permanent income in the age range at which we
observe respondents in wave three.
The most uniformly significant buffering effect of religion against disadvantage
as measured by child characteristics is for the public assistance indicator, with significant
buffering effects for “not expected to go to college”, “difficult to raise”, and repeated a
8

The magnitude of the buffering effects is generally reasonable (between 0 and 1) for the significant
buffering effects. However, estimates of buffering effects sometimes become unreasonably large when the
direct effect of disadvantage on the outcome measure is small because this direct effect enters in the
denominator of the formula for buffering effects. However, the resulting unreasonably large buffering
effects are never statistically significant.

20

grade. In Table 9a, we see that among disadvantages associated with child characteristics,
the significant buffering effects range from 35 to 130 percent.
Tables 8b and 9b present the t-statistics and the magnitudes of the buffering
effects for behavior and psychological well-being. We find the most uniform buffering
effects for the indicator for being a non-smoker. We find buffering effects of religiosity
for all family resource measures of disadvantage, some family characteristic measures of
disadvantage, and one of the child characteristics. For the significant effects, the degree
of buffering ranges between 71 and 181 percent. For other behavior and psychological
well-being outcomes we do not find any uniformly significant buffering effects.

5.3 Joint Significance of the Buffering Hypothesis
Although our discussion thus far has examined the buffering effect of religion for each
disadvantage-outcome combination, we have not yet addressed the overarching
hypothesis of the paper, that participation in religious activities buffers disadvantaged
youth later in life. Overall we find that just over 20 percent of the buffering effects from
all disadvantage-outcome combinations are significant at the 5% level and we find no
cases of a significantly negative buffering effect. Given the number of coefficients in
question, is this statistically significantly more than we would expect by chance?
Figures 1 to 3 test this formally. Figure 1 plots the percentiles of the distribution
of the 168 t-statistics of the buffering effects we estimate in Tables 8a and 8b, along with
the expected value (and the 99% confidence interval) of each percentile under the null
hypothesis of no buffering effect in any disadvantage-outcome pair.9 Comparing the

9

Under the null hypothesis of no effect, the observed t-statistics are a draw from a distribution with zero
mean and unknown covariance structure. By bootstrapping our sample 10,000 times and recalculating the t-

21

actual with the expected distribution confirms that we observe significantly more
significant buffering effects than would be expected by chance. In particular, at the
critical values for the 5 percent and 1 percent levels of significance (1.96 and 2.57) the
observed distribution of t-statistics lies not only above the expected distribution of tstatistics, it also lies above the 99% confidence interval for the expected distribution of tstatistics. Moreover, all t-statistics greater than 0.5 lie above the 99% confidence interval
for ordered t-statistics. Thus, we are able to reject the joint null hypothesis of no
buffering effect of religion across all outcomes.
Figures 2 and 3 present the same test for the subsets of education and income tstatistics and for behavior and mental and physical health t-statistics. In both cases, we
can also reject the null hypothesis of no significant effects at the 1% level, but the
distribution for the education and income t-statistics lies further above the confidence
interval than the distribution for the behavior and mental and physical health t-statistics.
Thus, the evidence for buffering is stronger for education and income outcomes. Overall,
we observe significantly more significant effects than would be expected by chance
alone, which allows us to reject the hypothesis of no overall buffering effect.
In Tables 10 to 13, we present additional specifications that explore whether
social organizations also provide buffering effects, the robustness of the buffering results
to changes in specification, likely mechanisms for buffering effects, and heterogeneity in
the buffering effects by youth demographics. Space constrains us from showing the
buffering effects for all 168 disadvantage-outcome combinations for these additional

statistics of our 168 disadvantage-outcome combinations, we obtain the correlation matrix of our tstatistics. We then draw 100,000 vectors of 168 t-statistics from a distribution with mean zero and this
correlation matrix. This creates a probability distribution for each percentile of the distribution of tstatistics, which we summarize by the mean and 0.5 and 99.5 percentiles.

22

specifications. Instead, we present five disadvantage-outcome combinations for the
additional specifications that are broadly representative of the significant buffering
effects in the baseline specification.

5.4 Buffering Effects of Social Organizations
In Table 10 we consider whether other social organizations provide buffering effects that
are comparable to those associated with religious participation. In particular, we examine
the effects of parental involvement with community groups, work-related organizations,
leisure clubs, and church-related social organizations. This last category refers to churchrelated social groups rather than worship per se. For the five selected adult outcomedisadvantage combinations, we measure the effects of indicators for each of these
additional measures of social ties, both directly and interacted with the selected
disadvantage measures. In the final column, we examine all 168 possible outcomedisadvantage combinations and report the number that show statistically significant
buffering. We compare this to the religious participation baseline where we find
significant positive buffering in 38 of the 168 outcome-disadvantage combinations.
While the point estimates suggest that there might be some buffering effect
associated with participating in community and work-related organizations, those effects
are typically not statistically significant. For community organizations, only 10 out of
168 outcome-disadvantage combinations show significant positive buffering, while for
work-related organizations, there are zero instances of positive buffering and four
instances of negative buffering. However, given the relatively large standard errors on
our estimates, we cannot rule out that these groups do provide sizeable buffering in many

23

of the insignificant cases. For leisure clubs, on the other hand, we find significant
positive buffering for 27 of the outcome-disadvantage combinations and no significant
negative buffering for any of the outcome-disadvantage combinations. This suggests that
parental involvement with leisure groups may also mitigate the effects of growing up in a
disadvantaged environment.
The buffering effects of church-based social organizations are similar to the
buffering effects of religious attendance. While participation in religious worship and
other social groups are sufficiently correlated that it would be difficult to identify both
effects simultaneously, it is striking that the consistent buffering effects that we find are
from religious worship and church-based social organizations, with the important caveat
that leisure clubs also seem to confer substantial buffering.

5.5 Robustness Checks and Attrition
Table 11 presents a range of robustness checks of our baseline specification, which is
reproduced in the first row. In the second row, we use an alternative measure of
religiosity, the raw attendance scale rather than the percentile of religious attendance. We
continue to find significant buffering effects. In row three, we instead use an indicator for
attendance greater than the median. Again, in most specifications, we continue to find
significant effects at the 5% level, and, in the one case where we do not, our estimate
loses precision but continues to correspond to plausible buffering effects.
We are also concerned that our measure of religious participation of the main
parent may not reflect the level of involvement of the entire family. For households
where a spouse is present we try alternative measures of religious participation: the

24

average, the maximum, and the minimum attendance of both parents (again expressed as
percentile in the attendance distribution). If there is no spouse present or if religious
participation information is missing for the spouse, we use the main parent information
alone. Results in rows four, five, and six indicate that buffering effects are robust to
these alternative family religious participation measures.10
In row seven, we run separate regressions for those with an attendance frequency
above and below the median. This is equivalent to adding interaction terms between the
indicator of attendance above the median and each of the controls to our row three
specification. We again find substantial buffering in most cases and this suggests that our
baseline results are not simply picking up omitted effects of our controls that differ by
degree of religious participation. In row eleven, we use a probit specification rather than
a linear probability model, and continue to find significant buffering effects for most
outcomes. Finally, in row twelve we add additional controls for Census region, maternal
education and household size to our baseline specification; our results remain robust.
Since just over half the sample of focal children in wave one are not reinterviewed in wave three, we explore whether attrition might bias our estimates of
buffering effects. We find that attrition is not random – youth from disadvantaged
backgrounds are more likely to attrit, and this effect is significant for all measures of
disadvantage except those based on child characteristics. Moreover, treating attrition as
an outcome variable, we find evidence of differential attrition by religious attendance:
religious organizations buffer against attrition when disadvantage is measured by
neighborhood income, the neighborhood poverty rate or the mother having a high school
10

Ultimately, we chose the main parent measure of attendance for our baseline specification because the
religious attendance survey question for the main parent allows a more detailed response than does the
corresponding survey question for the spouse.

25

degree or less. Since disadvantaged youth are less likely to attrit if their parents have
high attendance, disadvantaged youth will be overrepresented in the high attendance
group relative to the low attendance group. To the extent disadvantage is fully measured
by our variables, our control for the direct effect of disadvantage will correct for this and
our estimate of buffering effects will not be biased by this differential attrition. However,
to the extent that there are also unobservable components of disadvantage and there is
also differential attrition on the unobservable component, unobservably disadvantaged
youth will be overrepresented in the high attendance group and the estimates of the
buffering effect of religious organizations will therefore be biased down. Thus, it seems
plausible that bias introduced by differential attrition causes our estimates to understate
the true buffering effects provided by religious organizations.

5.6 Buffering Mechanisms
In Table 12, we examine mechanisms that could plausibly account for the buffering
effects of religion that we find. The first row reproduces our baseline estimates. In the
second row, we use the grandparent’s attendance of religious services as our measure of
religiosity instead of using the parent’s attendance.11 If we were to continue to find
significant effects, then it would bolster a causal interpretation of our results since the
grandparent’s religious attendance is more likely to be exogenous with respect to the
child’s outcomes. However, since the grandparent’s religious attendance is only
available for about 40% of our sample, the resulting estimates are much less precise. This
plausibly explains why we find a significant buffering effect in only one of the five

11

In wave two, the NSFH randomly selected one of the parents of the main respondent for a telephone
interview. Thus, the grandparent’s religious attendance is measured at wave two rather than at wave one.

26

disadvantage-outcome combinations we examine. However, in no case can we rule out
that the buffering effect is as large as in the baseline specification.
In the remaining rows, we run “horse races” between additional variables and
religious attendance, i.e., we add both the direct effect of these variables and their
interaction with the measure of disadvantage to our main specification. In the third row,
we run a horse race between actual attendance and attendance as predicted by covariates.
The point estimates of buffering remain similar to those in the baseline specification, but
only one estimate remains significant at the 5% level while the other four are now merely
significant at the 10% level. Despite this decline in statistical significance, the robustness
of the point estimates suggests that our estimates of buffering in our main specifications
are due to actual religious attendance rather than the underlying covariates associated
with religious attendance.
In the fourth row, we address the concern that people with higher levels of
religious attendance might be living in neighborhoods that have peers, schools, or other
institutions that provide buffering effects.12 To disentangle the buffering effects of
religious attendance from the potential buffering effects of living in a better
neighborhood, we run a horse race with neighborhood quality as measured by log median
income in the Census tract. We find that religious attendance continues to have
significant buffering effects, suggesting that our findings are not driven by selection of
religiously active parents into higher income neighborhoods.
Finally, we run a horse race between religious attendance and religious beliefs (as
measured by belief in religious doctrine and in the literal truth of the Bible). We continue

12

However, the raw correlation between attendance and neighborhood quality (as measured by log median
household income in the Census tract) is negative but not statistically significant.

27

to find a significant buffering effect of religious attendance, suggesting that attendance
over and above belief buffers children against a disadvantaged upbringing. Taken
together, the results from Table 12 suggest that it is religious participation itself, rather
than a likely correlate of religious participation, that provides the buffering effect against
growing up in a disadvantaged environment.

5.7 Buffering Effects by Sub-population
Table 13 displays how our baseline results for the five selected disadvantage-outcome
combinations vary by the age, race, and sex of the child, the mother’s level of education,
the marital status of the parent, and religious denomination. While the estimates are not
nearly as precise for these subpopulations, we generally find buffering effects of similar
magnitude independently of the youth’s sex, age, race, parental marital status, or maternal
education. In fact, for none of the 5 disadvantage-outcome combinations, do we find
significant differences between the subpopulations defined by these demographic
characteristics.
When we cut the results by religious denomination, we consistently find
significant buffering effects for those belonging to evangelical Protestant denominations.
Although we find almost no significant buffering effects for Catholics or mainline
Protestant denominations, the difference in buffering effects across denominations is not
statistically significant at the 5% level for any of the five disadvantage-outcome
combinations.
A large literature (Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005, Evans and Schwab 1995,
Grogger and Neal 2000, Neal 1997) has examined whether Catholic school attendance

28

increases educational attainment; many of these papers use self-reported Catholic
denomination as an instrument for Catholic school attendance. The fact that we find
relatively weak buffering effects among Catholics suggests that Catholic schooling is
unlikely to account for the buffering effects we observe.

6. Conclusions and Discussion
We draw two conclusions from our results. First, there are significant long-term effects
of childhood disadvantages on subsequent outcomes in adulthood. This is not surprising
given the large and expanding literature on intergenerational correlations in income,
health, and education. Second, we find a substantial buffering effect of religion for a
significant subset of outcomes. In particular, we find that religion buffers against a broad
range of measures of disadvantage along the high school or more dimension. The
buffering effect of religion on education, however, does not seem to translate into a
buffering effect for income. In looking at behavior outcomes, we find some significant
buffering effects for the likelihood of smoking. Finally, for health, health insurance, and
psychological outcomes we find few systematic buffering effects of religion.
Overall, we believe that our results support the notion that religion plays an
important role in how households respond to the disadvantages they face. Our results are
especially strong when disadvantage is measured by maternal education and outcomes
are measured by the youth’s educational attainment. Given that education has been
shown to have far-reaching consequences for a range of outcomes, including mortality,
voting, and crime, we believe our results shed light on a potentially important mechanism
that can mitigate the intergenerational transmission of disadvantage.

29

References
Aaronson, Daniel (1997). “Sibling Estimates of Neighborhood Effects” in Neighborhood
Poverty, Vol. II, Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G. and Aber, L. (eds.), Russell Sage
Foundation: New York, pp. 80-93.
Altonji, Joseph, Todd Elder, and Christopher Taber (2005). “Selection on Observed and
Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal
of Political Economy, 113(1): 151-184.
Anderson, Patricia M., Kristin F. Butcher, and Phillip B. Levine (2003). “Maternal
Employment and Overweight Children,” Journal of Health Economics, 22(3): 477
- 504.
Anderson, Patricia M., Kristin F. Butcher, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2007).
“Childhood Disadvantage and Obesity: Is Nurture Trumping Nature?”
Manuscript, Dartmouth College.
Antel, John J. (1992). “The Intergenerational Transfer of Welfare Dependency: Some
Statistical Evidence,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(3): 467-477.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Greg Duncan (1997). “The Effects of Poverty on Children,”
The Future of Children, 7(2): 55-71.
Bitler, Marianne P., and Janet Currie (2004). “Does WIC Work? The Effect of WIC on
Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
24(1): 73-91.
Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005). “Why the Apple Doesn’t
Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital,”
American Economic Review, 95(1): 437-449.
Case, Anne and Lawrence F. Katz (1991). “The Company You Keep: The Effects of
Family and Neighborhood Effects on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working
Paper 3705.
Clark, Andrew and Orsolya Lelkes (2005). “Deliver us from Evil: Religion as Insurance,”
Manuscript, PSE, Paris.
Currie, Janet (1997). “Choosing among Alternative Programs for Poor Children,” The
Future of Children, 7(2): 113-131.
Currie, Janet, and Rosemary Hyson (1999). “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned
by Socioeconomic Status?: The Case of Birth Weight,” American Economic
Review, 89(2): 245-250.

30

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2003). “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence From College Openings,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1495-1532.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner (2005). “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement,” NBER Working Paper No. 11279.
Dehejia, Rajeev, Thomas DeLeire, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer (2007). “Insuring Consumption
and Happiness through Religious Organizations,” Journal of Public Economics,
91(1-2): 259-279.
DeLeire, Thomas and Ariel Kalil (2002). “Good Things Come in Threes: Single-parent
Multigenerational Family Structure and Adolescent Adjustment,” Demography,
39(2): 393-412.
Diener, Ed, Daniel Kahneman, and Norbert Schwarz (Eds.) (1999). Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology. Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Duncan, Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (1997). Consequences of Growing Up Poor.
Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Duncan Greg J., W. Jean Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith R. Smith (1998).
“How Much Does Childhood Poverty Affect the Life Chances of Children?”
American Sociological Review, 63(3): 406-423.
Ellison, Christopher G. (1991). “Religious Involvement and Subjective Well-Being.”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 32(1): 80-99.
Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab (1992). “Measuring Peer
Group Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
100(5): 966-991.
Evans, William N., and Robert M. Schwab (1995). “Finishing High School and Starting
College: Do Catholic Schools Make a Difference?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(4): 941-974.
Freeman, Richard B. (1986). “Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and Other
Background Factors to the Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male Youths
From Inner-City Tracts.” in Richard B. Freeman and Harry J. Holzer (Eds.), The
Black Youth Employment Crisis, University of Chicago Press: Chicago: 353-376.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Derek Neal. (2000). “Further Evidence on the Benefits of Catholic
Secondary Schooling.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2000(1):
151-193.
Gruber, Jonathan (2005). “Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and

31

Outcomes: Is Religion Good for You?” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy,
5(1): 1-30.
Gruber, Jonathan and Daniel Hungerman (2006). “The Church vs. The Mall: What
Happens When Religion Faces Increased Secular Competition?” NBER working
paper No. 12410.
Guralnick, Michael J. (2004). “Family Investments in Response to the Developmental
Challenges of Young Children with Disabilities” in Kalil, Ariel and Thomas
DeLeire (Eds.), Family Investments in Children’s Potential: Resources and
Parenting Behaviors That Promote Success, Lawrence Erlbaum: Mahwah, New
Jersey: 119-139.
Hanson, Thomas L., Sara McLanahan, and Elizabeth Thomson (1997). “Economic
Resources, Parental Practices, and Children’s Well-Being” in Duncan, Greg J. and
Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Consequences of Growing Up Poor, Russell Sage
Foundation: New York: 190-238.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1998). “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 36(3): 1465-1495.
Korenman, Sanders and Jane E. Miller (1997). “Effects of Long-term Poverty on Physical
Health of Children in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,” in Duncan,
Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Consequences of Growing Up Poor,
Russell Sage Foundation: New York: 70-99.
Lillard, Dean R. and Joseph Price (2007). “The Impact of Religion on Youth in
Disadvantaged Families,” Manuscript, Cornell University.
Mayer, Susan E. (1997). What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life
Chances. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
McCullough, Michael E., William T. Hoyt, David B. Larson, Harold G. Koenig, and Carl
Thoresen (2000). “Religious Involvement and Mortality: A Meta-Analytic
Review,” Health Psychology, 19(3): 211-222.
McLanahan, Sara and Gary Sandefur (1994). Growing Up with a Single Parent. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Neal, Derek (1997). “The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational
Attainment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(1): 98-123.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne E. Page and Ann Huff Stevens (2005). “The
Intergenerational Effects of Worker Displacement,” NBER Working Paper No.
11587.
32

Oreopoulos, Phillip, Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens (2006). “The
Intergenerational Effects of Compulsory Schooling,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 24(4): 729-60.
Page, Marianne E. (2004). “New Evidence on Intergenerational Correlations in Welfare
Participation,” in Generational Income Mobility in North America and Europe,
Miles Corak (Ed.), Cambridge University Press: 226-244.
Page, Marianne, Ann Huff Stevens, and Jason Lindo (2007). “Parental Income Shocks
and Outcomes of Disadvantaged Youth in the United States,” Manuscript,
University of California at Davis.
Pargament, Kenneth I. (2002). “The Bitter and the Sweet: An Evaluation of the Costs and
Benefits of Religiousness,” Psychological Inquiry, 13(3): 168-181.
Shea, John (2000). “Does Parents’ Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics, 77(2):
pp. 155-184.
Smith, Judith R., Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and Pamela K. Klebanov (1997). “Consequences
of Living in Poverty for Young Children’s Cognitive and Verbal Ability and Early
School Achievement” in Duncan, Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (Eds.),
Consequences of Growing Up Poor. Russell Sage Foundation: New York: 132189.
Smith, Timothy B., Michael E. McCullough, and Justin Poll (2003). “Religiousness and
Depression: Evidence for a Main Effect and the Moderating Influence of Stressful
Life Events,” Psychological Bulletin, 129(4): 614-636.
Sweet, James A., and Larry L. Bumpass (1996). “The National Survey of Families and
Households - Waves 1 and 2: Data Description and Documentation,” Center for
Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
(http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/nsfh/home.htm).
Sweet, James A., and Larry L. Bumpass (2002). “The National Survey of Families and
Households - Waves 1, 2, and 3: Data Description and Documentation,” Center
for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
(http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/nsfh/home.htm).
Sweet, James A., Larry L. Bumpass, and Vaughn Call (1988). “The Design and Content
of the National Survey of Families and Households,” Center for Demography and
Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, NSFH Working Paper No. 1.
Strawbridge, William J., Sarah J. Shema, Richard D. Cohen, Robert E. Roberts, and
George E. Kaplan (1998). “Religiosity Buffers Effects of Some Stressors on
Depression but Exacerbates Others,” Journal of Gerontology Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 53(3): 118-126.
33

Table 1. Characteristics of Parents and Children in our Sample
Children: All Ages
Mean
S.D. Minimum Maximum
Characteristics of Children
Age at Wave 1
11.02
4.51
3
19
Age at Wave 3
25.95
4.54
18
34
Black
0.08
0.27
0
1
Hispanic
0.05
0.21
0
1
Other Nonwhite
0.01
0.11
0
1
Female
0.53
0.50
0
1
Wave 3 Interview in 2001
0.07
0.25
0
1
Wave 3 Interview in 2002
0.76
0.43
0
1
Characteristics of Parent Respondent
Age at Wave 1
Biological Parent
Female
Married at Wave 1
Wave 1 Interview in 1987
N

38.96
0.91
0.55
0.87
0.90

8.05
0.29
0.50
0.34
0.30
1,952

19
0
0
0
0

71
1
1
1
1

Children: Ages 25+ in Wave 3
Mean
S.D. Minimum Maximum
14.38
29.34
0.07
0.04
0.01
0.51
0.06
0.75

2.58
2.55

9
25
0
0
0
0
0
0

19
34
1
1
1
1
1
1

42.19
0.88
0.56
0.86
0.91

7.56

24
0
0
0
0

71
1
1
1
1

1,125

Table 2. Measures of Childhood Disadvantage
All
Mean

S.D.

1.17
0.21
10.35
0.11
0.05

0.82
0.41
0.43
0.11
0.21

1.19
0.21
10.34
0.11
0.04

0.77
0.40
0.43
0.11
0.19

1.16
0.21
10.35
0.11
0.06

0.86
0.41
0.42
0.10
0.12

Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup Between Wave 1 and Wave 2*
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less

0.14
0.13
0.10
0.11
0.52

0.34
0.34
0.30
0.31
0.50

0.16
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.48

0.36
0.30
0.28
0.27
0.50

0.12
0.16
0.12
0.14
0.55

0.32
0.37
0.32
0.34
0.50

Child Characteristics
Parent Does Not Expect Child to Graduate from College**
Parent Says Focal Child is Difficult to Raise**
Focal Child Repeated a Grade**
Composite of Discipline Trouble** +

0.34
0.08
0.08
0.09

0.47
0.27
0.26
0.29

0.29
0.07
0.05
0.10

0.45
0.25
0.21
0.30

0.40
0.09
0.10
0.09

0.49
0.29
0.31
0.28

Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
Household Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
Log Median Household Income in Census Tract
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
Received Public Assistance in Prior Year

Attendance > Median
Mean
S.D.

Attendance < Median
Mean
S.D.

* Sample restricted to children age 3-12 with married parents at Wave 1
** Sample restricted to children age 3-12
+ Parental reports any of the following: disciplinary meeting with teacher or principal, child suspended or expelled from school, child in trouble with police.
Attendance measures the number of times per year the parent attends religious services (expressed as percentile).

Table 3. Distribution of Parent Religious Attendance

Percentile
1%
5%
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
95%
99%
Mean
Standard deviation
N

Times / Year
0
0
0
1
24
52
104
156
156
36.5
46.7
1911

Based on the self-reported frequency of attendance of the
parent respondent in Wave 1.

Table 4. Religious Affiliation and Participation in Non-Profit Organizations
Mean
S.D.
Participation in the Following Types of Social Organizations
Community Organizations
Work-related Organizations
Leisure Groups
Church-based Social Organizations

0.28
0.35
0.66
0.53

0.45
0.48
0.47
0.50

Religious Affiliation
No Religion
Catholic
Jewish
Baptist
Episcopalian
Lutheran
Methodist
Mormon
Presbyterian
Congregational
Protestant, No Denomination
Other Christian
Other Religions / Missing

0.08
0.25
0.02
0.18
0.02
0.06
0.11
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.02

0.27
0.44
0.15
0.38
0.14
0.24
0.31
0.21
0.19
0.13
0.23
0.30
0.14

Community organizations is a dummy variable indicating any participation in fraternal groups,
service clubs, veterans' groups, or political groups. Work-related organizations is a dummy
variable indicating any participation in labor unions, farm organizations, or
professional/academic societies. Leisure groups is a dummy variable indicating any
participation in sports groups, youth groups, hobby or garden clubs, or literary/art groups.
Church-based social organizations is a dummy variable indicating any participation in churchaffiliated groups (other than attending religious service). Religious affiliation is the selfreported religious affiliation of the parent respondent in Wave 1.

Table 5. Adult Outcomes Measures (Wave 3)
All
Mean

Attendance > Median
S.D.
Mean
S.D.

Attendance < Median
Mean
S.D.

Education, Income, Public Assistance
High School Education or More (includes GED)
Some College or More*
College Graduate*
Percentile Household Income/Poverty Line*+
Household Income/Poverty Line Above 25th Percentile*+
Received Public Assistance in Prior Year

0.94
0.65
0.24
0.51
0.76
0.06

0.25
0.48
0.43
0.29
0.43
0.23

0.96
0.71
0.39
0.52
0.77
0.05

0.19
0.45
0.49
0.28
0.42
0.22

0.91
0.59
0.29
0.49
0.73
0.07

0.29
0.49
0.46
0.30
0.44
0.26

Behavior and Health
Non-Smoker (smoked <1 cigarette per day in last month)
Age of First Sex 16 or over (includes never)
Normal Weight (18.5 ≤ Body Mass Index < 25.0)
Covered by Health Insurance
Subjective Happiness (scale from 1-10)
Composite Locus of Control (scale from 1-5)**

0.71
0.75
0.51
0.77
7.39
3.81

0.45
0.43
0.50
0.42
1.50
0.75

0.77
0.83
0.52
0.79
7.46
3.85

0.42
0.38
0.50
0.40
1.44
0.73

0.65
0.68
0.50
0.74
7.32
3.78

0.48
0.47
0.50
0.44
1.56
0.76

* Sample restricted to those age 25+ in Wave 3.
+ Percentiles are within age categories.
**Composite Locus of Control is average of responses to three questions (each on scale from 1-5): whether or not focal child feels pushed around, whether or
not focal child can solve problems, and whether or not focal child has control over situation.
Attendance measures the number of times per year the parent attends religious services (expressed as percentile).

Table 6a. Effect of Youth Disadvantage on Adult Outcomes: Coefficient on Disadvantage
Outcomes in Wave 3: Education, Income, and Public Assistance
HH Income/ Poverty
Some
Poverty Line Above
College or
College
Line
25th
High School
More
Graduate
Percentile Percentile
Public
or More
(age 25+) (age 25+)
(age 25+) (age 25+) Assistance
Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
HH Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
Log Median HH Income in Census Tract
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
Received Public Assistance

0.04***
-0.09***
0.06***
-0.25***
-0.12***

0.13***
-0.19***
0.19***
-0.62***
-0.28***

0.15***
-0.22***
0.22***
-0.59***
-0.25***

0.08***
-0.15***
0.14***
-0.50***
-0.16***

0.06***
-0.10***
0.16***
-0.65***
-0.17**

-0.02**
0.03**
-0.03**
0.23***
0.05*

Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup Between Waves 1 & 2
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less

-0.07***
-0.12***
-0.02
-0.07***
-0.05***

-0.19***
-0.12***
-0.03
-0.26***
-0.23***

-0.16***
-0.15***
-0.07
-0.20***
-0.29***

-0.15***
-0.06**
-0.05
-0.16***
-0.12***

-0.20***
-0.08*
-0.12**
-0.21***
-0.11***

0.05***
0.04***
0.06***
0.03
0.02*

Child Characteristics
Not Expected to Graduate College
Difficult to Raise
Repeated a Grade
Composite of Discipline Trouble

-0.12***
-0.10***
-0.17***
-0.07**

-0.40***
-0.21***
-0.34***
-0.16**

-0.30***
-0.14*
-0.19***
-0.22***

-0.06
-0.04
-0.22***
-0.06

-0.07
-0.09
-0.20***
-0.03

0.04***
0.02
0.13***
0.04*

Note: Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each cell contains the coefficient on disadvantage when we regress outcome
(column) on disadvantage (row), percentile of parent's religious attendance, and controls. Controls include race, sex, and age dummies, an indicator of
whether the focal child is a biological child, and year of interview dummies. Shaded cells indicate entries where we expect the value to be positive
(due to reverse coding of the measure of disadvantage or the outcome).

Table 6b. Effect of Youth Disadvantage on Adult Outcomes: Coefficient on Disadvantage
Outcomes in Wave 3: Absence of Problem Behavior
NonAge 1st Sex
Normal
Health
Smoker
≥ 16
Weight
Insurance

Subjective
Happiness

Locus of
Control

Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
HH Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
Log Median HH Income in Census Tract
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
Received Public Assistance

0.04**
-0.06*
0.06**
-0.09
-0.13***

0.04***
-0.08***
0.10***
-0.39***
-0.15***

0.06***
-0.07**
0.07**
-0.28**
-0.06

0.08***
-0.17***
0.12***
-0.49***
-0.17***

-0.05
0.05
0.05
-0.70*
-0.41**

0.08***
-0.09*
0.20***
-0.66***
-0.19**

Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup Between Waves 1 & 2
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less

0.08**
-0.10***
-0.07*
-0.03
-0.05**

-0.06**
-0.13***
-0.14***
-0.05
-0.07***

-0.12***
-0.05
-0.07
-0.13***
-0.11***

-0.12***
-0.15***
-0.12***
-0.17***
-0.09***

-0.16
-0.12
-0.34**
-0.09
0.01

-0.01
-0.01
-0.10
-0.12**
-0.15***

Child Characteristics
Not Expected to Graduate College
Difficult to Raise
Repeated a Grade
Composite of Discipline Trouble

-0.12***
-0.10*
-0.10*
-0.12**

-0.09***
-0.08
-0.13**
-0.08*

-0.02
-0.19***
-0.17***
-0.12**

-0.15***
-0.14***
-0.18***
-0.18***

-0.19*
-0.25
0.03
-0.10

-0.22***
0.03
-0.24**
0.03

See notes to Table 6a.

Table 7. The Effect of Wave-One Maternal Education (High School Graduate or Less) on
Focal Child's Wave-Three Education (Some College or More)
Specification
OLS
OLS
Probit
Coefficient

Mother a High School Graduate or Less
Parental Religious Participation
H.S. Grad or Less×Religious Participation
Parent Black
Parent Hispanic
Parent Other Race
Focal Child Male
Guardian is Biological Parent
Age Dummies for Focal Child
Interview Year Dummies
(Pseudo) R-squared
Buffering Effect
(A) Effect of Parent a H.S. Grad or Less at
25th Percentile of Religious Participation
(B) Effect of Parent a H.S. Grad or Less at
75th Percentile of Religious Participation
(C) Difference (A-B)
(D) Buffering (C/A)

SE

-0.23*** 0.03
0.16*** 0.05

Coefficient

SE

Marginal
Effect

Probit
SE

Coefficient

SE

-0.25*** 0.03
0.17** 0.07

-0.10*
0.06
-0.20*** 0.07
-0.33*
0.17
-0.11*** 0.03
0.18*** 0.04
Yes
Yes

-0.38*** 0.06
0.01
0.07
0.29*** 0.10
-0.10*
0.06
-0.22*** 0.07
-0.34
0.17
-0.12*** 0.03
0.17*** 0.04
Yes
Yes

-0.11*
0.06
-0.21*** 0.08
-0.40** 0.19
-0.12*** 0.04
0.20*** 0.06
Yes
Yes

-1.08*** 0.21
0.03
0.28
0.78** 0.37
-0.31** 0.15
-0.59*** 0.20
-1.04*
0.56
-0.35*** 0.10
0.51*** 0.14
Yes
Yes

0.14

0.14

0.11

0.11

-0.31*** 0.04

-0.89*** 0.13

-0.16*** 0.04

-0.50*** 0.14

-0.15*** 0.05
0.48*** 0.13

-0.39** 0.19
0.44*** 0.17

Note: Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. The buffering effects for the Probit in column (4) refer to effects in "latent
variable space," not to effects expressed in terms of probabilities. Parent White is omitted race category.

Table 8a. Buffering Effect of Religious Participation
Outcomes in Wave 3: Education, Income, and Public Assistance
t-statistics for Buffering Effect

HH Income/ Poverty
Some
Poverty Line Above
High College or College
Line
25th
School or
More
Graduate Percentile Percentile
Public
More (age 25+) (age 25+) (age 25+)
(age 25+) Assistance

Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
HH Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
Log Median HH Income in Census Tract
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
Received Public Assistance

1.99**
3.54***
3.68***
4.04***
5.50***

Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup between Wave 1 & 2
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less

3.81***
1.00
0.14
4.37***
3.10***

Child Characteristics
Not Expected to Graduate College
Difficult to Raise
Repeated a Grade
Composite of Discipline Trouble

1.19
-0.58
1.34
-0.56

0.19
1.72*
0.89
0.09
2.24**

0.81
-0.07
0.47
-0.84
-0.17

-1.24
-0.96
0.96
0.31
0.52

-0.87
-0.61
1.58
1.11
0.99

-0.61
-0.37
1.11
1.57
0.03

0.03
-0.56
0.73
0.04
-0.07
0.43
-0.73
0.20
3.66*** 2.12**

-0.27
0.13
2.38**
0.17
1.99**

-0.31
-0.53
3.50***
0.33
0.37

1.27
1.76*
-0.09
0.86
-0.16

2.13**
2.09**
-0.68
0.13
3.27*** 3.14***
0.26
-0.32

1.85*
1.73*
1.05
0.01

1.90*
-0.19
2.51**
-0.06

2.49**
2.05**
4.37***
-0.12

Note: Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each cell contains the t-statistic for the buffering effect when we regress
outcome (column) on disadvantage (row), percentile of parent's religious attendance, the interaction of disadvantage and religious attendance,
and controls. Controls include race, sex, and age dummies, an indicator for whether the focal child is a biological child, and year of interview
dummies.

Table 8b. Buffering Effect of Religious Participation
Outcomes in Wave 3: Absence of Behavioral Problems
Nont-statistics for Buffering Effect
Smoker
Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
2.43**
HH Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
2.56**
Log Median HH Income in Census Tract
3.79***
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
2.36**
Received Public Assistance
1.99**
Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup between Wave 1 & 2
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less
Child Characteristics
Not Expected to Graduate College
Difficult to Raise
Repeated a Grade
Composite of Discipline Trouble
See notes to Table 8a.

-0.37
2.05**
0.22
1.92*
2.08**
1.70*
1.91*
1.81*
2.09**

Age 1st
Sex

Normal
Weight

1.88*
2.30**
-0.54
-0.33
-0.79

-0.72
0.63
-0.65
-0.61
-0.27

-1.43
0.82
0.90
-0.20
0.53

0.53
-0.43
-0.90
1.23
1.16

-0.12
-0.49
-0.17
0.06
0.01

-0.83
0.13
2.06**
-0.78
1.43

0.18
1.27
2.89***
-0.04
1.57

0.12
-0.64
-0.84
-0.35

0.85
0.64
0.93
-0.11

-0.21
4.01***
1.70*
1.95*

1.37
1.79*
2.10**
1.98**

Health
Insurance

Subjective
Happiness
1.69*
1.41
1.86*
2.72***
0.06

Locus of
Control
-0.79
-0.22
-0.19
-0.17
1.51
3.05***
0.09
0.80
-0.45
1.29
0.11
0.35
1.89*
1.04

Table 9a. Buffering Effect of Religious Participation
Outcomes in Wave 3: Education, Income, and Public Assistance
Value of Buffering Effect

Some
High College or College
Graduate
More
School or
More (age 25+) (age 25+)

Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
HH Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
Log Median HH Income in Census Tract
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
Received Public Assistance

0.42**
0.56***
0.69***
0.78***
0.99***

0.05
0.41*
0.22
0.04
0.62**

Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup between Wave 1 & 2
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less

0.68***
0.22
13.8
1.13***
0.66***

Child Characteristics
Not Expected to Graduate College
Difficult to Raise
Repeated a Grade
Composite of Discipline Trouble

0.22
-5.41
0.35
-1.54

Income/
Income/
Poverty
Poverty
Line Above
Line
25th
Public
Percentile
(age 25+) Percentile Assistance

0.15
-0.02
0.11
-0.70
-0.10

-0.57
-0.39
0.21
0.10
0.24

-1.14
-0.87
0.40
0.33
0.53

-1.72
-0.39
0.49
0.45
0.03

0.02
0.36
-10.2
-0.29
0.48***

-0.70
0.02
0.53
0.08
0.28**

-0.14
0.10
1.51**
0.06
0.37**

-0.18
-1.21
1.42***
0.12
0.15

0.46
0.75*
-0.06
0.70
-0.20

0.35**
-1.30
0.78***
0.20

0.42**
0.13
1.13***
-0.25

0.99*
1.38*
0.34
0.02

1.11*
-0.48
0.94**
-0.35

0.74**
1.30**
0.99***
-0.15

Note: Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each cell contains the value of the buffering effect when we regress
outcome (column) on disadvantage (row), percentile of parent's religious attendance, the interaction of disadvantage and religious attendance,
and controls. Controls include race, sex, and age dummies, an indicator of whether the focal child is a biological child, and year of interview
dummies.

Table 9b: Buffering Effect of Religious Participation
Outcomes in Wave 3: Absence of Behavioral Problems
NonAge 1st
Value of Buffering Effect
Smoker Sex ≥ 16
Family Resources/Poverty
Log Household Income / Poverty Line
0.90**
0.61*
HH Income Less than 200% of Poverty Line
0.96**
0.70**
Log Median HH Income in Census Tract
1.08*** -0.29
Poverty Rate in Census Tract
1.45**
-0.18
Received Public Assistance
0.74**
-0.97
Family Characteristics
Nonwhite
Unmarried Parent
Marital Breakup between Wave 1 & 2
Mother Is a High School Dropout
Mother Has High School Education or Less
Child Characteristics
Not Expected to Graduate College
Difficult to Raise
Repeated a Grade
Composite of Discipline Trouble
See notes to Table 9a.

-0.51
0.71**
15.8
1.66*
0.71**
0.47*
0.86*
1.06*
0.71**

6.48
-0.22
-1.00
0.87
0.37
0.47
0.95*
0.90**
0.81**

Normal
Weight

Health
Insurance

Subjective
Happiness

-0.43
0.35
-1.34
-1.39
-1.10

-0.75
0.19
0.23
-0.08
0.21

1.23*
1.38
1.50*
1.02***
0.04

-0.07
-2.18
-11.7
0.03
0.00

-1.12
0.04
0.67**
-0.32
0.38

12.0
1.06
0.97***
-0.11
1.80

12.1
-0.72
-3.33
-0.48

0.22
0.35
0.39
-0.06

-0.24
1.43***
3.16*
1.27*

Locus of
Control
-0.83
-0.27
-0.07
-0.09
0.70
1.81***
8.67
0.60
-0.57
0.37
0.04
3.86
0.81*
2.47

Table 10. The Buffering Effect of Social Organizations
Outcome Measure:

Measure of Disadvantage:
Baseline Buffering Effect of
Religious Participation
(From Table 9)

Some College
or More

HS Graduate or
More

Received Public
Assistance

Mother HS
Graduate or Less
Effect
SE

Poverty Rate in
Census Tract
Effect
SE

0.48*** 0.13

Focal Child
Repeated Grade
Effect
SE

Non-Smoker
HH Income
Below 200%
Poverty Line
Effect
SE

Subjective
Happiness
Marital BreakUp between
Wave 1 and 2
Effect
SE

All OutcomeDisadvanage Pairs

0.78*** 0.19

0.99*** 0.23

0.96**

0.38

0.97*** 0.34

38

0

0.05

0.24

1.01

0.92

0.67

0.51

10

1

-0.30

0.24

1.35

1.08

-0.52

0.93

0

4

Stat. Significant
Buffering
# Positive #Negative

Buffering Effect of Participation
-0.22
in Community Organizations

0.31

0.96*** 0.30

Buffering Effect of Participation
in Work-related Organizations

0.19

0.27

0.70*

0.37

Buffering Effect of Participation
in Leisure Groups

0.04

0.25

0.38

0.28

0.33*** 0.12

-0.38

1.65

0.29

0.44

27

1

Buffering Effect of Participation
in Church-based Social
Organizations

0.50*** 0.14

0.80*** 0.17

0.64*** 0.17

0.74

0.48

0.63**

0.32

27

0

Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Each specification measures the value and standard error of the buffering effect of participating in the social organization
and is analagous to the baseline specification. We regress outcome on disadvantage, participation in the social organization, the interaction of disadvantage and the social organization,
and controls. Controls include percentile of parents' religious attendance, race, sex, and age dummies, an indicator of whether the focal child is a biological child, and year of interview
dummies. The rightmost column, "All Outcome-Disadvantage Pairs," counts the number of statistically significant (at 5 percent level) positive and negative buffering effects of social
organizations found for the full set of outcome-disadvantage pairs (total of 168 pairs).

Table 11. Robustness Checks on Buffering Effects
Some College
or More

High School
Graduate or
More

Received Public
Assistance

Mother HS
Graduate or Less
Effect
SE

Poverty Rate in
Census Tract
Effect
SE

Baseline (From Table 9)

0.48*** 0.13

Attendance Scale

Focal Child
Repeated Grade
Effect
SE

Non-Smoker
HH Income
Below 200%
Poverty Line
Effect
SE

Subjective
Happiness
Marital BreakUp between
Wave 1 and 2
Effect
SE

0.78*** 0.19

0.99*** 0.23

0.96**

0.38

0.97*** 0.34

0.44*** 0.12

0.78*** 0.18

0.63*

1.02***

0.37

0.87*** 0.33

Attendance > Median

0.55*** 0.13

0.76*** 0.19

0.75*** 0.22

0.80*

0.42

0.77**

0.39

Avg. of Parents' Attendance

0.44*** 0.13

0.70*** 0.20

0.99*** 0.23

0.82**

0.41

0.92**

0.36

Max. of Parents' Attendance

0.44*** 0.13

0.72*** 0.21

0.98*** 0.22

0.87*

0.67

1.00*** 0.34

Min. of Parents' Attendance

0.44*** 0.13

0.62*** 0.21

0.94*** 0.23

0.77**

0.37

0.44

-0.33*** 0.04

-0.42*** 0.10

0.20*** 0.04

-0.08**

0.04

-0.55*** 0.20

-0.14*** 0.04

-0.07*** 0.07

0.00

0.04

-0.03

0.04

-0.13

0.20

0.57*** 0.13

0.83*** 0.16

0.98*** 0.22

0.61

0.53

0.76**

0.38

0.51

0.97**

0.45

-

-

1.09*** 0.23

0.84**

0.41

0.97***

0.35

Outcome Measure:

Measure of Disadvantage:

0.35

0.52

Cut by Median Attendance
(A) Effect of Disadvantage
(Attendance < Median)
(B) Effect of Disadvantage
(Attendance > Median)
Buffering

(A-B)/A

Probit

0.44**

0.17

Additional Controls

0.31*** 0.10

0.45

0.36

1.02*** 0.29

1.01**

Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Attendance Scale measures attendance on a six-point scale (never, few times a year, once a
month, two to three times a month, once a week, two or more times a week). Average Parents' Attendance, Max. of Parents' Attendance, and Min. of Parents'
Attendance uses both main parent and spousal responses. If the spouse is absent, the main parent's value is used alone. Cut by Median Attendance takes the
standard specification but runs separate regressions conditioning on parent percentile attendance being above and below the median. Additional Controls
consist of three maternal education dummies (high school grad, some college, college grad), three region dummies (northeast, north central, south) and four
Wave 1 household size dummies (three, four, five, six or more persons). All specifications also include the standard controls: percentile of parent's religious
attendance (or one of the above alternative measures of attendance), race, sex, and age dummies, an indicator of whether a biological child, and year of
interview dummies.

Table 12. Possible Mechanisms for the Buffering Effect

Outcome Measure:

Measure of Disadvantage:
Baseline Buffering Effect of Religious
Participation (From Table 9)
Buffering Effect if Participation is Measured
by Grandparent's Attendance (N=763)

Some College
or More

High School
Graduate or More

Received Public
Assistance

Mother HS
Graduate or Less
Effect
SE

Poverty Rate in
Census Tract
Effect
SE

0.48*** 0.13

-0.28

Horserace with Predicted Attendance
Main Interaction
Horserace Interaction
Buffering Effect of Religious Participation

0.18**
0.07**
0.36*

Horserace with Neighborhood Income
Main Interaction
Horserace Interaction
Buffering Effect of Religious Participation
Horserace with Belief
Main Interaction
Horserace Interaction
Buffering Effect of Religious Participation

0.57

Focal Child
Repeated Grade
Effect
SE

Non-Smoker
HH Income
Below 200%
Poverty Line
Effect
SE

Subjective
Happiness
Marital BreakUp between
Wave 1 and 2
Effect
SE

0.78*** 0.19

0.99*** 0.23

0.96**

0.38

0.97*** 0.34

0.68**

0.70*

1.34

1.28

98

6841

0.80
1.71
0.72*

0.60
1.50
0.42

0.27

0.39

0.21

0.61** 0.23
-1.32** 0.57
0.82*** 0.24

0.12
-0.20
-0.62*** 0.26
0.90*
0.46

0.14
0.25
0.78*

0.11
0.27
0.48

0.15**
0.05
0.34**

0.07
0.05
0.14

0.66*** 0.20
-0.24** 0.11
0.73*** 0.27

-0.38*** 0.10
0.24*** 0.07
0.90*** 0.21

0.19**
-0.01
1.07**

0.10
0.08
0.48

1.11** 0.50
-0.72** 0.33
0.89*** 0.32

0.22*
0.03
0.42**

0.12
0.03
0.18

0.52** 0.22
0.05
0.06
0.68*** 0.23

-0.33*** 0.11
-0.07** 0.03
0.94*** 0.26

0.28**
-0.07**
1.61**

0.11
0.03
0.64

1.18** 0.56
0.11
0.15
0.88*** 0.32

0.12
0.29

Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Horserace adds a direct effect (Predicted Attendance, Neighborhood Income, Belief) and its interaction with
disadvantage to the baseline specification. Standard focal child controls along with maternal education, parent gender, region, household size, log of household income to poverty
ratio, and four dummies for degree of agreement (scale from 1-5) for each response to four values statements are used to predict religious attendance, with R-squared of 0.17.
These four statements are: (1) It is much better for everyone if the man earns the main living and the woman takes care of the home and family. (2) It's better for a person to get
married than to go through life being single. (3) Preschool children are likely to suffer if their mother is employed. (4) In a successful marriage, the partners must have freedom
to do what they want individually. Neighborhood Income is the log of median household income in the Census Tract. Belief is strength of religious belief as measured by degree
of agreement (scale from 1-5) with following two statements: (1) The Bible is God's word and everything happened or will happen exactly as it says. (2) The Bible is the
answer to all important human problems. Responses to these statements are averaged and standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.

Table 13. Buffering Effects by Subpopulation
Some College
or More

HS Graduate or
More

Received Public
Assistance

Baseline, from Table 9

Mother HS
Graduate or Less
Effect
SE
0.48*** 0.13

Poverty Rate in
Census Tract
Effect
SE
0.78*** 0.19

Gender of Focal Child
Male
(N=1037)
Female (N=894)

0.44*** 0.15
0.44
0.29

Race
Whites
Nonwhites

0.49*** 0.14
0.44
0.32

Outcome Measure:

Measure of Disadvantage:

(N=1563)
(N=386)

Maternal Education
HS Graduate or Less (N=889)
Some College or More (N=1059)

-

-

Wave One Age of Focal Child
Age <= 12 (N=792)
Age > 12 (N=1160)
Marital Status of Parent
Married
(N=1197)
Not Married (N=555)

-0.46
0.76*

Religious Denomination
Catholic
(N=452)
Mainline Protestant (N=585)
Evangelical
(N=671)

1.48
3.79
-0.28
0.88
0.98*** 0.23

0.30
0.37
0.51*** 0.14
0.52
0.46

Focal Child
Repeated Grade
Effect
SE
0.99*** 0.23

Non-Smoker
HH Income
Below 200%
Poverty Line
Effect
SE
0.96**
0.38

Subjective
Happiness
Marital BreakUp between
Wave 1 and 2
Effect
SE
0.97*** 0.34

-0.40
2.11
0.99*** 0.15

1.12*** 0.21
1.15
0.77

1.09**
0.82

0.51
0.63

1.04*** 0.35
1.04
0.78

0.57*** 0.22
1.34** 0.63

1.19*** 0.28
0.37
0.67

0.68*
2.00**

0.39
0.81

0.91**
1.11**

0.41
0.53

1.15*** 0.38
0.02
0.67

0.94*** 0.33
1.38*** 0.52

-0.14
1.57**

0.93
0.72

0.84
1.00**

0.53
0.47

-

0.93
0.90**

0.64
0.41

0.87**
1.08*

0.43
0.61

1.96
0.43

1.28*
0.10

0.65
0.90

-

-

-0.38
-2.51
1.24**

1.23
31.4
0.49

0.29
1.69**
1.33**

0.60
0.71
0.62

0.79*** 0.30
0.91*** 0.23
0.63
0.84**

0.41
0.30

-0.66
1.14
-0.40
0.60
0.79*** 0.16

1.35
0.34

0.12
0.67
0.48
1.20
0.97*** 0.18

Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. Dashes indicate that the sample cannot be or is already cut along those dimensions.
All regressions include the standard controls: percentile of parent's religious attendance, race, sex, and age dummies, an indicator of whether a biological child,
and year of interview dummies.

Figure 1: The Actual and Predicted Percentiles of the Distribution of T-statistics

6
5

Actual distribution of t-statistics

4

T-statistic

3
2
1
0
-1

99.5 percentile of t-statistics

-2

Expected distribution of t-statistics

-3

0.5 percentile of t-statistics

-4
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Percentile
The figure shows the expected distribution and the 0.5th and 99.5th percentile of the ordered distribution of tstatistics.

Figure 2: The Actual and Predicted Percentiles of the Distribution of T-statistics for
Buffering of Education and Income Outcomes

6
5

Actual distribution of t-statistics

4

T-statistic

3
2
1
0
-1

99.5 percentile of t-statistics

-2

Expected distribution of t-statistics

-3

0.5 percentile of t-statistics

-4
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Percentile
The figure shows the expected distribution and the 0.5th and 99.5th percentile of the ordered distribution of
t-statistics.

Figure 3: The Actual and Predicted Percentiles of the Distribution of T-statistics for
Behavior and Mental and Physical Health Outcomes.

6
5

Actual distribution of t-statistics

4

T-statistic

3
2
1
0
-1

99.5 percentile of t-statistics

-2

Expected distribution of t-statistics

-3

0.5 percentile of t-statistics

-4
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Percentile
The figure shows the expected distribution and the 0.5th and 99.5th percentile of the ordered distribution of tstatistics.

