                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE RELATIVE PERFORMANCE OF REAL ESTATE MARKETING PLATFORMS:
                     MLS VERSUS FSBOMADISON.COM

                                           Igal Hendel
                                           Aviv Nevo
                                      François Ortalo-Magné

                                       Working Paper 13360
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13360


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




We are grateful to the owners of FSBOMadison.com and the South-Central Wisconsin Realtors Association
for providing us with their listing data. We thanks Geoff Ihle and James Robert for valuable research
assistance, and Estelle Cantillon, Leemore Dafny, Morris Davis, Steve Levitt, and seminar participants
for comments. Hendel and Nevo thank the Center for the Study of Industrial Organization and the
Guthrie Center for Real Estate Research at Northwestern University. Ortalo-Magné acknowledges
financial support from the Graduate School at UW--Madison. Hendel and Nevo are in the department
of Economics at Northwestern University and NBER. Ortalo-Magné is in the department of Economics
and the department of Real Estate and Urban Land Economics at the UW-Madison. Contact information:
igal@northwestern.edu, nevo@northwestern.edu, and fom@bus.wisc.edu. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Igal Hendel, Aviv Nevo, and François Ortalo-Magné. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Relative Performance of Real Estate Marketing Platforms: MLS versus FSBOMadison.com
Igal Hendel, Aviv Nevo, and François Ortalo-Magné
NBER Working Paper No. 13360
September 2007
JEL No. L14,L85,R31

                                            ABSTRACT

We compare outcomes obtained by sellers who listed their home on a newly developed For-Sale-By-Owner
(FSBO) web site versus those who used an agent and the Multiple Listing Service (MLS). We do not
find support for the hypothesis that listing on the MLS helps sellers obtain a significantly higher sale
price. Listing on the MLS shortens the time it takes to sell a house. The diffusion of the new FSBO
platform was quick, with the market share stabilizing after 2 years, suggesting it managed to gain a
critical mass necessary to compete with the MLS. However, the lower effectiveness of FSBO (in terms
of time to sell and probability of a sale) suggests that the increasing returns to network size are not
fully exploited at its current size. We discuss the welfare implications of our findings.

Igal Hendel                                        François Ortalo-Magné
Department of Economics                            School of Business
Northwestern University                            University of Wisconsin, Madison
2001 Sheridan Road                                 5259 Grainger Hall
Evanston, IL 60208                                 975 University Avenue
and NBER                                           Madison, WI 53706-1323
igal@northwestern.edu                              fom@bus.wisc.edu

Aviv Nevo
Department of Economics
 Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
nevo@northwestern.edu
1         Introduction
A large proportion of housing transactions are carried out with the help of realtors.1 Realtors
provide expertise (on pricing, conditioning the house for sale and bargaining) and convenience
(by showing the house, advertising and holding open houses and helping with the paperwork).
Another advantage of working with a realtor is access to the Multiple Listing Service (MLS),
a database that compiles information on all the properties listed by local realtors. For their
services, sold almost exclusively as a bundle, realtors charge a commission at, or around, 6%.
The commission rate has been stable over time and across regions and has been the subject
of the scrutiny of antitrust authorities (see DOJ, 2007).
        The advent of the internet has a¤ected many markets. The real estate market is one
of them. Direct marketing was always possible using newspapers, ‡yers and other forms of
advertising. However, the internet o¤ers a cheaper and potentially more e¤ective platform
that facilitates direct (by owner) marketing. Sellers can post detailed information, photos as
well as virtual tours. For-Sale-By-Owner (FSBO) websites provide an alternative platform,
or two-sided network, that competes directly with the MLS network.
        In this paper we study the performance of these two competing platforms: MLS and
FSBO. The established platform o¤ering the bundle of services available from realtors, ver-
sus the newly established no-service platform. The actual cost of MLS transactions is the
commission minus the price premium an MLS transaction might generate and the …nancial
savings from a faster sale. The price premium may largely o¤set, or even more than make
up for, the commission.2 We quantify the actual monetary cost of using an agent by com-
paring the performance of listings by owner to transactions with realtors. We also assess the
platforms’e¤ectiveness, comparing measures like time on the market and the probability of
sale within a time window.
        We focus on the city of Madison, Wisconsin, where a single website (FSBOmadison.com)
has become the dominant for-sale-by-owner platform. With the cooperation of FSBOmadi-
    1
     Real estate agents are licensed by the state. A realtor is a real estate agent who is a member of the
Realtor Association.
   2
     The National Association of Realtors website claims, based on the 2005 Home Buyer & Seller Survey
that "the median home price for sellers who use an agent is 16.0 percent higher than a home sold directly
by an owner; $230,000 vs. $198,200; there were no signi…cant di¤erences between the types of homes sold."


                                                    2
son.com we gained access to all FSBO listings since the start of the platform. We combined
the FSBO data with data from two other sources. First, from the South-Central Wisconsin
Realtors Association we got access to all MLS listings in the city. Second, we matched every
listing with data from the city of Madison. The city of Madison assessor o¢ ce maintains a
database with the full history of transactions on every property together with an exhaustive
set of property characteristics. By merging these data sets we get a complete history of
events that occurred for virtually every single family home for sale, over 15,000 observations,
between January 1998 and December 2004. A history of a listing includes: date and platform
of initial listing, moves across platforms, and outcome (sale date and price if sold, withdrawal
date otherwise).
   After controlling for houses and seller heterogeneity, we …nd no support for the hypothesis
that the MLS delivers a higher sale price than FSBO. Considering that realtors charge a 6%
commission versus $150 for FSBO, FSBO sellers come ahead …nancially. The lack of a MLS
premium does not mean realtors do not provide value to the seller. It means instead that
the cost of the convenience provided by realtors seems to be the full commission.
   MLS does, however, lead to faster transactions. The longer time to sell on FSBO is
driven by two factors. First, over 20% of FSBO listings do not sell on FSBO and have to
list afresh on the MLS. Second, the probability of a quick sale is larger for houses initially
listed on the MLS.
   Next, we consider the welfare implications of the results. From the quicker time to
sell we conclude that the MLS is a more e¤ective matching platform. This suggests that
FSBO’s current size does not fully exploit economies of scale in network size. In the context
of homogenous platforms welfare would increase if all transactions were consolidated into
a single network. The countervailing force, which calls for multiple platforms, is product
di¤erentiation (Armstrong, 2006, and Rochet and Tirole, forthcoming). In this case, the
platforms are di¤erentiated by the service level. Full service by agents and no frills by FSBO.
Therefore, it might be e¢ cient for both platforms to coexist. The bundling of agents’services
with the MLS, the source of di¤erentiation, is the current practice, but is not technologically
dictated. It might be bene…cial to unbundle the platform from the additional services o¤ered



                                               3
by agents.3
       The raw price comparison shows that the average sale price of homes that sell on FSBO
is higher than the average price of homes that sell with a realtor. The characteristics, re-
ported in the city assessor’s database, of houses sold on the di¤erent platforms are somewhat
di¤erent. However, after controlling for these observed characteristics a signi…cant price gap
persists. Naturally, platform selection is the main suspect behind the persistent premium.
We take several approaches to deal with selection. All the approaches support the same
conclusion: MLS does not deliver a price premium.
       There are two concerns due to platform selection. First, there might be unobserved house
characteristics that a¤ect both the decision to sell on FSBO and outcomes. For example,
easier to sell homes (i.e., conform better to the taste of the population) may be more likely
to be listed and sold through FSBO. At the same time these popular homes may sell at
a premium. To deal with unobserved house heterogeneity we examine properties that sold
multiple times. The inclusion of a house …xed e¤ect is essentially inconsequential. We
therefore conclude that unobserved house heterogeneity, which is …xed over time, does not
seem to be a problem.
       The second concern is the selection of sellers into FSBO. Sellers may di¤er, for example,
in their patience or bargaining ability.4 More patient sellers are likely to get a better price,
regardless of the platform they choose. At the same time they may be more prone to list on
FSBO. In that case we will get a positive correlation between FSBO and sale price.
       We deal with the potential seller selection issue in several ways. First, we compare the
houses that listed and sold on FSBO, to those that listed on FSBO, failed, and eventually
sold on the MLS. These two groups of houses sell on di¤erent platforms but belong to the
initial population that selected FSBO. If we think that the reason some sold while others
did not is luck of the draw, then the di¤erence in price will give us the causal e¤ect of
FSBO. Even if moving from FSBO to MLS depends on seller type the selection bias should
be attenuated, as the group of FSBO listers is more homogenous than the population as a
   3
     Although there is a tendency –or attempts– in the direction of unbundling services, realtors are quite
reluctant to do so (see Nadel (2007)).
   4
     For a descriptive study of bargaining patters using English data see Merlo and Ortalo-Magné (2004),
and Merlo, Ortalo-Magné and Rust (2006) for a structural model of bargaining using the same data.



                                                    4
whole.
       The second approach to deal with seller heterogeneity is related to Levitt and Syverson
(2006). They …nd –as we do in our data– a premium for realtors’ own properties sold on
the MLS. They attribute this price gap to an incentive problem. We compare the realtors’
premium to the premium sellers get on FSBO. Both are by owner transactions; thus, do not
su¤er from the agency problem identi…ed by Levitt and Syverson. They amount to by-owner
transactions in di¤erent platforms. Since realtors are professionals this comparison should
bound the impact of selection. Even if the homeowners who use FSBO are better bargainers
than the typical homeowner, it is reasonable to assume they are no better at bargaining than
professional realtors. We …nd that the FSBO premium is similar to the premium realtors
obtain when selling their own homes.
       The third approach we take is to compare transactions of the same seller using di¤erent
platforms. After matching seller names across transactions we …nd no price premium across
platforms. Namely, the initial FSBO premium vanishes once we add a seller …xed e¤ect.5
       One important caveat is that our data comes from a single city. We do not know how
representative the results are of other markets. Similar FSBO websites exist in many other
markets, mostly in medium size cities (see www.fsbopublishers.org). Madison is reasonably
representative in measurable demographics, although it is unique in other dimensions (college
town, state capital), it is unclear how this would impact our main …ndings. It would be useful
to repeat the analysis for other markets.
       As far as we know this is the …rst paper that compares the performance of MLS to an
internet based FSBO platform. A related study that complements our …ndings, by Bernheim
and Meer (2007) compares non-MLS listings with and without agent. They look at sales
of faculty and sta¤ homes on the Stanford University campus with and without an agent.
They …nd, consistent with our …ndings, that brokers accelerate sales but do not deliver higher
prices. They isolate the e¤ect of information from other broker services, since the Stanford
Housing O¢ ce maintains a free listing service for eligible buyers they know the value of a
   5
    We examined various factors that impact the sellers decision to sell on FSBO as instrumental variables.
For example, we used the fraction of previous sales on FSBO in the seller’s neighborhood. The point estimates
we …nd are consistent with a FSBO premium. However, the instruments are very weak and the standard
errors are very large.



                                                     5
broker does not reside in information di¤usion (i.e., the platform). Instead, brokers’value
“is likely con…ned to pro-motional services, negotiations, and the interpretation of market
data.”
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the institutional back-
ground with special emphasis on Madison. Section 3 brie‡y describes a theoretical frame-
work, borrowed from the labor literature, to think about platform selection. Section 4
presents the data and basic descriptive analysis. Section 5 presents the results. It starts
with raw platform comparisons followed by several approaches to deal with selection. Fi-
nally, we present some welfare implications and concluding remarks.



2         Realtors and FSBOMadison.com
Historically, most real estate transactions have been performed using real estate agents.
Homeowners wishing to sell their homes contract with a real estate agent (the listing agent)
o¤ering the agent exclusivity for a limited period, usually 6 months, and agreeing to pay a
commission, of usually 6% of the sale price, if the house is sold during the contract period.6
The commission is typically split between the listing agent and the selling agent, who is the
agent that brings the buyer.7 When the same agent lists and sells the property, this agent
gets the whole commission.
        Real estate agents are licensed by the state. In most states licensing requires a short
course and passing an exam. A real estate agent becomes a realtor when s/he joins the
realtor association and subscribes to its code of ethics. Joining the association provides the
agent with several advantages; one of them is access to the MLS.
        Working with an agent, and agreeing to pay the commission, gives the homeowner access
to a number of services. The National Association of Realtors (NAR) argues that Realtors
provide valuable help with setting the listing price, preparing the house, checking potential
buyers’ quali…cations, showing the house, bargaining the terms of the deal, and handling
    6
    For a discussion of the commissions charged by agents see DOJ (2007).
    7
    Some states, for example, Wisconsin, also recognize the status of buyer agency. If a buyer agent is
involved in the transaction, s/he deals with the listing agent to settle the terms of the transactions, and gets
the selling agent commission.



                                                       6
the paperwork. Another advantage of working with a realtor is access to the MLS. In the
market we examine this involves the ability to list on the South Central Wisconsin MLS,
which costs a minimal fee, $10 as of 2007, but requires membership in the organization, and
thus is available only to local realtors.
   In 1998 an alternative to the MLS was launched in Madison, Wisconsin: the website
FSBOMadison.com. Christie Miller and Mary Clare Murphy recruited 9 listings from ads
in the local newspaper, added Mrs. Murphy’s house and launched their website with 10
listings. From the get-go, the strategy of FSBOMadison.com was to provide a cheap no-frills
service. In exchange for a fee of $75 initially, $150 for most of the period of our sample,
homeowners can post their listing on the website (property characteristics, contact details
and a few pictures). FSBO provides sellers with a yard sign similar to those provided by
realtors but with the distinctive logo and color of FSBOMadison.com. Listings are kept
active for 6 months, more if the fee is paid again. FSBOMadison.com has establishing itself
as basically the only website for for-sale-by-owner properties in the city.
   Properties are removed from the site upon instruction of the homeowners. Typical events
that trigger removal include sale of the property, withdrawal of the property from the market,
or transfer of the property to the MLS platform. The sta¤ of FSBOMadison.com monitors
listings on the MLS and extinguishes any listing from their website that ends up on the MLS.
This is done primarily to avoid disputes with the MLS.
   Real estate agents are occasionally involved in FSBO sales when they represent the buyer
and one of the parties to the transaction accepts to pay a buying agent commission, typically
3%. In such a case, a FSBO transaction only saves half the realtor commission.
   Recently, a number of limited-service brokers have emerged. In Madison, the dominant
…rm appears to be Madcity Homes (www.madcityhomes.com). Madcity Homes charges $399
to list a house on the MLS for 6 months and also provides the seller with a yard sign. The
homeowner gets no other service. Additional services are available for an extra fee upon
request. The homeowner is responsible for paying the 3% commission to any realtor that
sells the house, whether the realtor is under buyer agency agreement or not. No commission
must be paid if the sale does not involve a realtor. By the end of 2004, when our sample ends,
this …rm had too few listings for us to analyze the extent to which limited-service brokerage

                                               7
yields di¤erent outcomes than full-service MLS listings or FSBOMadison.com listings.



3         Theoretical Framework
In this section we brie‡y describe a theoretical framework, borrowed from the labor literature
that will help us think about platform selection and guide the empirical exercise. Coles and
Muthoo (1998) present a stock-and-‡ow model of matching between unemployed workers
and job vacancies.8 We adopt their stock-and-‡ow model, to platform choice. There are
several relevant issues like: incomplete information, learning about market conditions or
own property, which we abstract from.
        The basic idea of their model is as follows. There is a ‡ow of new buyers and sellers into
the market (which in their case is a single platform) in every period. The ‡ow of entrants is
immediately –and costlessly–put in touch with the stock of agents on the other side of the
market. There is a probability         that there are gains from trade between each buyer and
seller (namely, that a house for sale meets the needs of each speci…c buyer). The parties that
…nd a single match to trade with split their gains from trade. If instead a newcomer meets
multiple counterparts, she receives simultaneous o¤ers generating a Bertrand-type game.
Agents that trade leave the market. Incoming buyers (sellers) that do not …nd a match,
or fail to trade, join the stock of buyers (sellers). They remain on the market waiting for
newcomers (‡ow) to trade with.
        Coles and Muthoo show that in equilibrium matched players always trade (due to com-
plete information). In equilibrium there is no trade among the stocks; if two members of the
stock had gains from trading they would have traded already (upon arrival, namely, when
one was part of the (in-)‡ow). Thus, in equilibrium the incoming ‡ow trades with the stock.
        We consider two variations: (i) the coexistence of two competing platforms, F and M ,
where agents can meet and, (ii) house and seller heterogeneity. The framework will help us
think about platform selection as well as moves across platforms.9
    8
     See also Coles and Smith (1998), and Taylor (1995), and for a discussion of brokerage choice Salant
(1991), Yavas and Colwell (1999) and Munneke and Yavas (2001).
   9
     We do not solve the full model. Solving the model with heterogeneity would be very hard, beyond the
scope of this paper. We only intend to intuitively discuss plausible extensions of a more basic framework
easier to solve.


                                                   8
    Notice that in a stationary environment it would be hard to explain why sellers move
across platforms. Coles and Muthoo’s framework, once we allow for multiple platforms,
captures the idea of exploring a stock and then moving on to the other network’s unexplored
stock. As we argue next, within the relevant environment of our application it provides a
sharp prediction regarding platform moves, namely, one way moves across platforms.


    Heterogeneity We think of houses di¤ering in their degree of liquidity,                       . Owners
of more liquid houses, may systematically opt for one of the platforms, and at the same
time sell at a premium (as they generate more o¤ers). Sellers may also be heterogeneous,
for example, in their patience or bargaining ability. Patience in this model will a¤ect both
platform choice as well as transaction price given a platform.


    Platform Choice We make the following assumptions in order to capture the main
practical di¤erences across platforms. First, we assume that only a proportion of agents
know the existence of platform F .10 Only informed agents have a choice, uninformed ones
trade on M:11 Second, we assume there is an asymmetry between buyers and sellers. While
informed buyers can shop on both platforms, sellers choose a single platform. This exclusivity
is required by the MLS. Third, listing on M , in addition to the exclusivity, involves a
commitment to pay a transaction cost (or commission) C should the house sell within
periods of listing. These assumptions make F a cheaper alternative, it involves no fees. At
the same time F involves less exposure, thus a lower matching rate.


    Implications Only informed sellers face a choice, they have to chose an exclusive plat-
form. Others parties (uninformed buyers and uniformed sellers) are either uniformed of F;
or shop on both (informed buyers are not constrained by exclusivity). The trade o¤ faced
by informed sellers is between an expensive and more e¤ective platform, M; and the non-fee
F platform that o¤ers exposure to fewer buyers (only those informed of F ). An immediate
implication is that for any speci…c property, the extra exposure leads to higher success rate.
  10
     Heterogeneity in the disutility of trading without a realtor can also drive platform choice. Some sellers
are aware of the option of selling by owner but may …nd it too costly or unpleasant.
  11
     Although not necessary, it is reasonable to assume that the set of buyers aware of F is a subset of those
aware of M. For example, out of town buyers are less likely to be familiar with FSBOmadison.com.


                                                      9
Claim 1 For given seller and house characteristics, on M we should observe shorter time
to sell and higher success rate, holding time on the market …xed.

   The bene…t of listing on F is common to all sellers, however, the more patient the seller
or liquid the property the less costly it is to try F …rst: Thus, the appeal of F depends on
seller patience and liquidity of the property,    (see House and Ozdenoren (2007)):
   Two implications are immediate. First, impatient sellers and non-liquid properties list
on M . Second, sellers that fail to match on M have no incentive to move to F . The reason is
that buyers on F are a subset of those that shop on M; thus after listing on M will not …nd
in the stock of F any buyers who have not seen the property. Having explored all the stock
of buyers (all buyers are present on M ), the seller has to wait for the ‡ow of new buyers.
Since the ‡ow is larger on M; impatient sellers stay. In sum, we should not expect any ‡ow
from M to F:
   In contrast, patient sellers and owners of liquid properties prefer to initially list on F:
If they fail to match on F; they move to M to match with the rest of the stock of buyers
(those that shop only on M ): Once they explored M , the whole stock of buyers has been
exhausted, thus, they have no incentive to move back to F: The incentives just described
can be summarized in the following claims.

Claim 2 More patient sellers and owners of liquid houses list on F …rst.

Claim 3 Sellers that fail to match on F move to M and stay (to match the ‡ow on M).
There are no moves from M to F


   Given similar terms, buyers are indi¤erent between the platforms. Thus, as buyers be-
come more patient they would not pay a platform premium.

Claim 4 As frictions vanish (i.e., more buyers become patient and informed about F) prices
across platforms tend to coincide

   In sum, the model suggests that patient sellers are likely to list on FSBO to expose their
property to a subset of the stock of buyers. Should they fail to match, they move on to the
MLS to expose their property to the rest of the stock, and the subsequent ‡ow of buyers. In
contrast, no moves from MLS to FSBO are expected.

                                                 10
4     Data
We obtained data from FSBOMadison.com, the South-Central Wisconsin Realtors Associ-
ation, the City of Madison and Dane County. We merged the data into a single database,
organized by parcel numbers as designated by the City. We restrict our attention to single
family homes because of lack of address details for condos in the FSBO and MLS records
and incompatibility between the city and county database for condos records.


    MLS data The South-Central Wisconsin Realtors Association provided us with all
listing activity on their Multiple Listing Service between 1/1/1998 and 5/23/2005. For each
listing, we know the address of the property, its parcel number, the listing date, and the
status of the listing. In addition, whenever relevant, each record contains the expiration
date of the listing, the accepted o¤er date, the closing date and the sale price as recorder by
realtors. We also know whether the listing realtor has an interest in the property.


    FSBO data The owners of the FSBOMadison.com website provided us with informa-
tion on all the listings with their service since it started in 1998. For each listing, we know
the address of the property, the last name of the seller, the date the property is put on the
web and sometimes information about the outcome of the listing. We use data for the years
1998-2004, with an address in the city of Madison.


    City Data The city of Madison is located within Dane County. The city assessor
database provides information on sale prices and a large set of property characteristics,
about both the parcel and the buildings. In addition, the county maintains a county-wide
database with location information for each parcel. We use this database to obtain spatial
coordinates for each property. The county and the city do not use the same parcel numbers
for condominium. Whenever there are such incompatibilities, we use Streetmap to locate
the properties.
    Matching the three data sets we get 19,142 observations. An observation is a marketing
history from initial listing, on one of the platforms, until sale or withdrawal from the mar-
ket. Actual histories can be complicated, like listing with several agents. We exclude new


                                              11
construction from the sample, 3007 observations. New units are generally sold by develop-
ers. The reason we exclude them is that we are interested in platform performance for the
average non-professional seller. We exclude 149 houses that went though major renovations
(we do not know their characteristics at the time they sold). We exclude 253 observations
due to missing price or sales information. We include units between $50,000 and $1,000,000,
which top censors 4 units and bottom censors 72 inexpensive units. After merging these data
sets and excluding observations as described we get 15,606 listings, which represent 12,373
unique properties, in the period 1998 to 2004.


4.1    Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 summarizes platform usage over time. A row represents where the property was
initially listed. The columns represent the eventual outcome of the listing, namely, whether
it sold and how.
   The market share of FSBO in listings during the entire sample period is roughly 20%. We
de…ne a non-sale as any listing that showed up on either MLS or FSBO but was not recorded
later in the city data with a sale price. Approximately 87% of the properties eventually sell.
Out of the properties that sell, 95% sell through the initial listing platform. The remaining
5% are almost completely switches from FSBO to MLS. Switches from MLS to FSBO are
almost nonexistent, accounting for just 0.2% of the MLS listings.
   This is consistent with the predictions of the model (i.e., Claim 3) by which some sellers
may try the cheaper platform …rst but they have no incentive to return. Moreover, should
they prefer to list on M they would not move to F , as they have no additional stock to
match on F once M was already explored.
   The market share of FSBO in properties sold is 14%, slightly below its listing share. Since
FSBO was only introduced in 1998, these numbers somewhat underestimate the current
FSBO market share. Therefore, in the rest of Table 1 we present the breakdown for every
other year of the sample. FSBO’s share in listing and in outcome increases over time. By
2004, the last year of the sample, FSBO share in listing is almost 26%, and the share in sales
is almost 19%.


                                             12
   In terms of di¤usion, it is interesting to point out how quickly FSBO came to maturity.
While the …rst listings are in mid 1998, by 2000 FSBO’s market share basically plateaued.
   To judge the performance of each platform we look at the proportion of properties that
sell through their initial listing platform. Of the 3,138 initial FSBO listings 2,153 or 68.6%
sell on FSBO while 86.0% of initial MLS listings (10,725 out of 12,468) sell on MLS. While
there is a clear trend in FSBO listing, increasing from 6% in 1998 to 25.6% in 2004, the
success rate is more stable. The success rate in 2004, 72.6%, is higher than the rate in 1998,
55.8%. However, there is no clear trend in the intermediate years.
   Just as the penetration of FSBO increases over time it also di¤ers across neighborhoods.
In Table 2 we present the FSBO penetration rate across di¤erent assessment areas. These
areas are de…ned by the City of Madison for assessment purposes. We get similar variation
if we look at elementary schools areas. The FSBO listing share varies between 7.9% and
43.6% The top FSBO share neighborhoods tend to be close to campus. Similar variation is
present also in the FSBO share of sales.
   The success rate of FSBO listings also varies by neighborhood. For a neighborhood with
at least ten FSBO listings the success rate ranges from 31% to 100% (with one outlier at
9%). The mean success rate is 66% and the standard deviation is 13.2%. There is a positive
relation between the propensity to list on FSBO and the success rate, which can be seen
through a linear regression. Using the estimated slope, one standard deviation increase in the
success rate translates into 2 percentage points increase in the propensity to list on FSBO.
   In the analysis below we compare the performance of properties sold through FSBO
and through MLS. A key question is whether these properties are comparable. In Table 3
we compare several property characteristics. The columns present the mean and standard
deviation for properties listed initially through FSBO and MLS. The last two columns present
the di¤erence between these means and the t-statistic of the di¤erence. The di¤erences in
the means for most characteristics are small. However, because of the reasonably large
sample size the di¤erences are signi…cant in some cases. For example, FSBO properties are
somewhat older, tend to be on smaller lots and have smaller basements, but have somewhat
newer roofs and furnaces.



                                             13
5       Results

5.1     Outcomes by FSBO and MLS platforms

We now explore the di¤erences in outcomes for properties sold through FSBO and MLS. Ta-
bles 4-6 present the results from regressing sale price, time on the market and the probability
of a sale, on a FSBO dummy variable and various controls.
    In Table 4 we display the e¤ect of platform on price. In the top panel of the table the
dependent variable is the logarithm of price, while in the bottom panel we regress the price
level on various controls. The sample in columns (i) through (iv) includes only properties
that sold on the platform they were originally listed. In the …rst column we regress price on
a dummy variable that equals one if the house was sold on FSBO (divided by 100). If listing
platform is determined at random, and the seller cannot switch from the platform they were
assigned then this regression measures the causal e¤ect of selling on FSBO. In the spirit of
this ideal situation the sample includes only houses that sold on the platform they originally
list.
    The results suggest that on average there is a large positive premium for selling on
FSBO, roughly an 11 percent premium or 14,800 dollars. Since the dependent variable is
the sale price, and not the sale price net of commission, this premium is on top of the saved
commission. The magnitude of the premium is driven by the time trends that we saw in
Table 1. Over time prices have gone up and so has the share of FSBO sales. Indeed, once we
control for year and month time dummy variables and a linear time trend, in column (ii), the
e¤ect goes down to roughly 4 percent, or 3,000 dollars, but is still statistically signi…cant.
    The numbers in Table 3 suggest that there is some di¤erence in the observed charac-
teristics of houses sold through FSBO and MLS. If the houses sold on FSBO have more
attractive characteristics, then the FSBO dummy variable will also capture the impact of
these features, rather than the e¤ect of selling through FSBO. Furthermore, Table 2 suggests
that FSBO has a higher share in some areas. If these areas are more attractive this will bias
our estimates.
    In order to control for the di¤erences in houses we construct a hedonic model of prices.
Column (iii) reports the results from this model. In the controls we include the characteristics

                                              14
of the house, displayed in Table 3. The e¤ect of selling on FSBO is mostly unchanged and
stays at roughly 4 percent. This is consistent with the numbers in Table 3 that suggested that
while some characteristics were statistically di¤erent, the di¤erences are small. In column
(iv) we also control for neighborhood characteristics by including neighborhood …xed e¤ects.
The coe¢ cients on these controls are of no direct interest. However, the key is that we are
able to explain 92.4 percent of the variation in the logarithm of price, and 89.3 percent of
the variation in price. The impact of selling through FSBO goes down to approximately 3.2
percent.
   The regressions in columns (i) through (iv) focus on the impact of the platform through
which the house was sold. In column (v) we explore the impact of the initial listing channel.
There are two di¤erences relative to the results in column (iv). First, the sample now includes
switchers: houses that initially listed on one platform but that sold through the other. These
are mostly houses that listed on FSBO but ended up being sold through MLS. Second, now
the FSBO dummy is de…ned as being initially listed on FSBO, as apposed to being sold
through FSBO.
   This regression is of interest for a potential seller asking what is the expected impact on
price if they list on FSBO, and then behave like the sellers in the sample (depending on how
lucky they were with the FSBO stock of buyers), regardless of where they end up selling.
The results suggest that the premium for listing on FSBO, which is estimated at 3.1 percent,
is almost identical to the premium for selling through FSBO.
   To further explore the distinction between listing and selling on FSBO we also examine,
in column (vi), the regression that includes both the initial listing platform and the sales
channel. We see that there is a small additional premium of selling on FSBO of 0.7 percent.
This premium is driven by the very small number of houses that initially listed on MLS, but
were eventually sold on FSBO. In the last column we separate these houses. These houses
command a large premium, over 6 percent relative to houses that listed and sold on MLS.
Once we isolate the thirty properties that list on MLS but eventually sell on FSBO, we …nd
that now the additional premium of selling on FSBO disappears.
   Overall the results in Table 4 deliver a surprising result. Sellers on FSBO are able to
sell their houses at a premium relative to MLS. In addition, sellers that initially list their

                                              15
houses on FSBO but then move to MLS also command a signi…cant premium relative to
initial MLS listings. The causal interpretation of the results relies on random assignment to
platform, or random success, conditional on time, house and neighborhood characteristics.
Random assignment is a strong assumption in this context. We deal with selection in the
next section.
       We also explored the FSBO premium by year. We ran the regression in column (v)
by year. The estimated coe¢ cients (standard errors) from 1998 to 2004 are: 4.05 (1.01),
3.39 (0.82), 2.13 (0.72),3.40 (0.58), 3.02 (0.59),3.14 (0.52), and 2.69 (0.52). These numbers
suggest that the FSBO premium was roughly stable through out the sample period.
       Finally, we used a quantile regression to estimate the e¤ect of listing on FSBO, the
e¤ects were constant across quantiles and thus essentially identical to the e¤ects in the mean
regression in Table 4.
       We now examine other outcomes. In Table 5 we focus on the total time to sell, de…ned
as the time between the initial listing and the sale date as recorded in the city data. The
dependent variable in all regressions is the total time to sell, and the controls follow a similar
structure to Table 4. In columns (i) through (iv) we focus on the sample of houses that sold
on the platform where they were initially listed.
       Without any additional controls, the results in column (i) suggest that total time to sell
is 4 days shorter when selling on FSBO. Once we control for year and month dummies, and
for house and neighborhood characteristics, the e¤ect of selling on FSBO is not statistically
signi…cant. The additional controls change the R-squared very little, compared to the price
regression where the house and neighborhood characteristics explained a large fraction of
the variation.12
       Notice that the lack of a statistical di¤erence in the time on the market does not imply
that FSBO is as e¤ective a platform as the MLS. Quite the contrary, this suggests that the
MLS is likely more e¤ective. While the average time to sell on the MLS re‡ects the whole
population of houses listed on MLS, since there are few switches to FSBO, the FSBO average
represents the average conditional on the house belonging to the 75% that sold on FSBO
  12
    Time on market is de…ned by the timing of closing which depends on considerations hard to predict,
thus a lower explanatory power is expected.



                                                 16
before moving to MLS. Even absent unobserved heterogeneity the FSBO average represent
the luckiest draws, in terms of time to sell, while MLS the whole population.
   In the last three columns we once again study the full sample of houses that sold, not
just houses that sold on the platform originally listed. In column (v) we …nd that sellers who
originally list on FSBO should expect to take 20 days longer to sell. This is largely driven by
houses that originally listed on FSBO but then switch to MLS. The results in column (vii)
allow us to separate the e¤ects in four groups. The base group is properties listed and sold
on MLS. Relative to this group the properties listed and sold on FSBO take 1 day longer,
the same result we found in column (iv). For houses that listed on FSBO but eventually
sold on MLS the time to sell is almost 69 days longer. Finally, for houses that listed on MLS
but that were sold through FSBO the expected time to sell is 115 days longer.
   To further characterize the di¤erences of outcomes between the two platforms we report,
in Table 6, the e¤ect of platform on the probability of sale. In all cases we regress a dummy
variable, which varies by column, on platform dummy variables, year and month dummy
variables, a linear time trend, house and neighborhood characteristics.
   We start by examining in columns (i) and (ii) the probability of a sale. The dependent
variable is equal to one if the property sold. A non-sale is de…ned if we do not observe a
sale price in the city data. Overall in the sample 87 percent of the properties sold. The
properties initially listed on FSBO tend to have a higher probability of eventually being
sold, although some of them are eventually sold through MLS. In column (ii) we separate
the properties into four groups depending on initial listing and …nal channel. If the property
sold the …nal platform is the platform where it sold, otherwise it is the last platform used for
listing. We …nd that relative to the base group –properties that listed and sold on MLS –
properties that listed and sold on FSBO are roughly 1 percentage points more likely to sell,
although the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant. The properties that listed on FSBO
but eventually switched to MLS are even more likely to sell. Relative to the base group they
are roughly 4 percentage points more likely to sell. The properties that list MLS and switch
to FSBO are less likely to sell, but this is an extremely small group and the e¤ect is not
estimated precisely.
   In columns (iii)-(viii) we examine the probability of a sale, conditional on eventually being

                                              17
sold, within a …xed number of days. We look at 180, 90 and 60 days. We …nd a pattern
similar to what we saw in Table 5: the properties listed on FSBO tend to take longer to sell.
Thus, within a …xed interval of time a FSBO property is less likely to sell. Although FSBO
listings are somewhat more likely to eventually sell, their initial success is lower than MLS.
This is mainly driven by the properties that start on FSBO and switch to MLS. In columns
(iv), (vi) and (viii) we separate the properties into four groups. The FSBO listing that sold
on FSBO are less likely to sell within 60 or 90 days. This is consistent with MLS exposing
sellers to a bigger stock of buyers (as in Claim 1). The properties that start on either FSBO
or MLS, and then switch, take an even longer time to sell and thus are much less likely to
sell within a …xed time period.


5.2     Selection

In the previous section we documented the di¤erence in outcomes for properties listed on
FSBO and MLS. A key issue in interpreting the results is selection. As suggested by Claim 2
there are two separate concerns. First, are properties sold on FSBO comparable to those sold
on MLS? We control for a rich set of observed house characteristics, but it is still possible
that there are unobserved di¤erences that are correlated with the platform choice. Second,
even if the house unobserved characteristics are not correlated with the channel, the sellers
attributes might be. We now discuss both of these issues in detail.


5.2.1   Unobserved House Characteristics

As we show in Table 2 there are some di¤erences in observed characteristics between the
properties listed on FSBO and MLS. These di¤erences are not large but in some cases they are
statistically signi…cant. Indeed, once we control for house and neighborhood characteristics,
in the regressions we display in Tables 4-6, the results change somewhat. The di¤erences in
the observed characteristics might suggest di¤erences in unobserved characteristics as well.
To examine this issue we exploit properties that were sold multiple times in our sample using
di¤erent platforms. As long as the unobserved characteristics are constant over time looking
at properties that sold multiple times, then including a house …xed e¤ect will control for the


                                             18
unobserved characteristic. Recall that we eliminated from our sample property that undergo
a major renovation during our period of study (this is one of the characteristics reported by
the city assessor).
   In our sample, there are 2,023 properties that sold more than once. The majority, 1,872,
sold twice, with 146 and 5 selling three and four times. Together this yields 4,202 sales.
Out of these sales 3,376 (or 80%) were listed and sold on MLS, 629 (15%) listed and sold
on FSBO, 194(5%) listed on FSBO and sold on MLS, and only 3 listed on MLS but sold on
FSBO. Out of the 2,023 properties that were sold multiple times we have 645 that were sold
using di¤erent platforms at di¤erent times.
   In Table 7 we present results using this sample. Di¤erent columns focus on di¤erent
outcome variables. In all regressions we include year and month dummy variables and a
linear time trend. In almost all cases the results are similar to those we found in Tables
4-6, where we controlled for di¤erences across properties using the house and neighborhood
characteristics.
   We also display in Table 7 regressions using the same sample, but dropping the …xed
e¤ects and controlling for di¤erences using the house and neighborhood characteristics in-
stead. The results are essentially identical. The motivation behind this regression is twofold.
First, to highlight that the sample of houses that sell multiple times –used in this section–
is representative, namely, that …ndings for those houses (without …xed e¤ects) are similar
to those for the whole sample. Second, to show that controlling for house characteristics
delivers similar …ndings as those rendered using …xed e¤ects.
   Together these results suggest that there is no bias in the estimates due to an unobserved
house e¤ect that is …xed over time. This should not be surprising. The di¤erences in
the observed characteristics were not large and controlling for them did not make a large
di¤erence. Since most unobserved house characteristics, we can think of, seem (roughly)
…xed over time we conclude that we should not be concerned over the impact of unobserved
household characteristics on our estimates.




                                              19
5.2.2      Seller Selection

If an unobserved seller type a¤ects both the outcome variable and platform choice our es-
timates will be biased. For example, some sellers might be better, or more patient, at
bargaining and therefore able to get a higher price regardless of the platform they use. Be-
ing more patient, according to the model, they are also more likely to list on FSBO. Absent
appropriate controls for seller type we will overestimate the e¤ect of selling on FSBO. We
explore several ways to deal with this problem.


Conditioning on Initial Listing The …rst approach is to compare the di¤erences in
outcomes between those sellers who listed on FSBO and sold on FSBO and those who
initially listed on FSBO but ended up switching to MLS. The results in Table 4 suggest that
conditional on listing on FSBO there is a small, and not statistically signi…cant, increase in
price from also selling on FSBO. If we believe that moves to MLS, after listing on FSBO,
are purely driven by random forces then the estimates suggest that the two platforms deliver
the same prices. There is no gain in the sale price from selling on MLS relative to FSBO.
       Even if moving to MLS depends on seller type the selection bias should be reduced, as
the group of FSBO listers is more homogenous than the population as a whole. Namely,
in the range of sellers, these observations belong to the set that self-selected into FSBO.
Furthermore, it is not clear that the selection indeed dictates a bias. Consider selection on
patience. Is it the more or the less patient seller who moves to MLS? A patient seller may
stay longer on FSBO. On the other hand, moving to MLS entails a long wait (given the
…ndings in the previous section), thus it might be that the more patient sellers are those
that decide to move on to the MLS. In other words, there might be selection, but its relation
to sales price is less clear.13
  13
     For the sample of movers (from FSBO to MLS) we regressed price, time on the market on the MLS,
and probability of selling within the …rst 60 days after moving on the time the house spent on FSBO before
changing platforms. We found that the time spent on FSBO has no explanatory power on any of those
performance variables on the MLS. The lack of correlation between stay in FSBO and MLS performance
seems to suggest as the decision to stay more or less on FSBO does not seem to re‡ect any systematic
selection.




                                                   20
By-Owner Sales on MLS Our second approach to quantify the role of unobservable seller
characteristics is to compare FSBO sales to realtors’ transactions of their own properties.
These transactions provide us with a "sale by owner" using the MLS. Levitt and Syverson
(2006) report that realtors are able to obtain better prices when they sell properties in which
they have an ownership stake relative to properties, sold by the same realtors, where they
are not owners. We assume that realtors are no worse at selling their own properties than
non-agents. In other words, the e¤ect of realtors selling their own homes is an upper bound
on the impact of seller selection.
       The results are presented in Table 8. The variable "Sold by Owner" is a dummy variable
that equals one for all sales by either a realtor selling their own home on the MLS, or a sale
on FSBO. The variable "Sold on FSBO" equals one for sales on FSBO, and therefore its
coe¢ cient measures directly the di¤erence between the performance of FSBO sales and sales
by owner/agents on MLS. The regressions in columns (i) and (iii) include only properties
that sold on the platform where they were initially listed. The results in the other columns
include all properties that sold.
       As in Levitt and Syverson we …nd that owners obtain a premium when selling properties
in which they have an ownership share. However, for price, time to sell and probability of
sale within 180 days there is no statistically signi…cant di¤erence between agent/owner and
sales on FSBO. FSBO sales on the other hand are less likely to happen within 60 or 90 days.


Seller Fixed E¤ects Our …nal approach is based on using multiple sales by the same
seller. We use the observed multiple sales to control for unobserved seller heterogeneity.
Matching names across transactions we identi…ed 265 sellers who listed properties using
di¤erent platforms, these involved 744 sales.14 The results are presented in Table 9.
       In the …rst column we regress the logarithm of price on a dummy variable that equals
one if the seller listed a property on FSBO any time during the sample, not necessarily at
that observation. The sample includes all the sales in the sample and the regression includes
the usual time, house and neighborhood controls. We see that most of the e¤ect of FSBO
  14
    There are two possible mistakes in matching names. Sellers that register transactions with somehow
di¤erent names (e.g., with or without initials, or with spouse vs without) may be overlooked. We may miss
those valid matches. On the other hand, we may misclassify as a match two sellers with identical names.


                                                   21
we saw in Table 4 can be explained by this dummy variable.
   This might not be too surprising since this coe¢ cient is a weighted average of the sellers
that sold only once using FSBO and those that sold more than once and used FSBO at least
once. Since the …rst group is larger they might explain most of the e¤ect. For that reason
in column (ii) we run the same regression but for MLS transaction only. Since the sample
includes exclusively MLS transactions the coe¢ cient on FSBO lister re‡ects the selection
e¤ect and not a platform e¤ect.
   The results suggest that FSBO sellers are indeed likely to get a higher price even when
selling through MLS. On average they get 0.9% more. Note, that they take slightly longer to
sell, although the e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant, suggesting that they are more patient.
All this points out to seller selection is indeed present. Consistent with Claim 2 selection
is creating a positive correlation between price and propensity to list on FSBO. However,
selection is not enough to fully reverse the result that MLS does not command a premium.
   In the last two columns in the table we restrict the sample to the properties sold by sellers
who had multiple sales/listings. There are 216 di¤erent sellers that sold multiple properties
using di¤erent platforms involving 608 sales. In column (iii) we report the result of regressing
the log of price, and time to sell, of the properties sold by these sellers on a dummy variable
that equals one if the property was listed on FSBO, and the usual controls. We include also
…xed e¤ects for the sellers. The results suggest that when listing on FSBO these sellers get
1.65% higher price, but the e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant. On average it takes 16 days
longer to sell the house when listing on FSBO. In column (iv) we repeat the analysis with a
dummy variable that equals one if the property is listed and sold using FSBO. As in column
(iii) we include seller …xed e¤ects. The results suggest that there is no statistical di¤erence
in the price or the time to sell.
   We also examined instrumental variables regressions to control for the potential corre-
lation between FSBO and the unobserved characteristics. In all these cases the impact of
FSBO was not statistically di¤erent than zero. However, depending on the exact functional
form, the standard errors were very large, which is consistent with the instrumental variables
being only weakly correlated with the decision to use FSBO. Indeed the "…rst stage" veri…es
this. The instruments we tried include the neighbors’propensity to list, or their success, on

                                              22
FSBO.
    In summary, we explored various ways to control for seller selection in the decision to use
FSBO. The results suggest that indeed selection is present. After controlling for selection
we …nd that the FSBO premium disappears. We …nd no evidence that MLS provides any
premium relative to FSBO.



6     Welfare Implications
We now discuss the welfare implications of the entry of a FSBO platform implied by our
results. FSBO listings di¤er from MLS listings in two distinct ways: FSBO involves no
commissions and the FSBO platform potentially delivers a di¤erent matching propensity
(due to network size). Consider both elements. We argue the former represents a welfare
neutral transfer, while the latter impacts total welfare (through slower matching, longer
spells on the market, and perhaps poorer matches).
    Commissions, as any price, may impact total welfare through a change in the quantity of
houses transacted. We assume that, in the relevant range of commissions, their impact on the
number of transactions is negligible. Thus, commission avoidance represents redistribution
from realtors to FSBO users. Sellers on FSBO enjoy a substantial reduction in the cost
of transacting in the real estate market. While they have to put in more e¤ort, revealed
preferences tell us FSBO users must be better o¤, at the expense of realtors who lose part of
their rents. The lesson from the Madison case is that this welfare transfer can be achieved
with a relatively small initial investment. The key to the success of the platform resides in
coordination needed to generate a critical mass. Competition from independent alternative
networks may preclude generating a critical mass.
    The second welfare consideration is that FSBO, or any competing platform, may preclude
fully exploiting scale economies in network size. In the presence of network e¤ects, depend-
ing on the environment, only one platform can survive (Cantillon and Yin, 2006). However,
the countervailing force, which calls for multiple platforms, is product di¤erentiation (Arm-
strong, 2006, and Rochet and Tirole, forthcoming). We evaluate the implications of our
…ndings regarding these two determinants of the optimal market structure: di¤erentiation


                                              23
and network e¤ects. We ask what our …ndings say about the welfare consequences of FSBO.
       The overall picture coming out of the …ndings presented in the previous sections is that
although FSBO does not entail a price penalty, it is a less e¤ective platform. The larger
network, the MLS, does better in terms of both expected time to sell and probability of
a transaction within a time period. The e¤ectiveness of the larger platform suggests scale
economies appear not to be fully achieved by FSBO. The …nding from our analysis that
MLS is more e¤ective is a key for welfare. Absent di¤erentiation across platforms we could
conclude that a single platform would lead to higher aggregate welfare. However, platform
di¤erentiation may justify the coexistence of several platforms.
       What can we say about platform di¤erentiation? There are two dimensions in which the
platforms di¤er. One is the matching e¤ectiveness of the platforms, which is a¤ected by
the size of the network. The second di¤erence across platforms is the service provided by
the agent (showing, pricing, conditioning the house). There is a sense in which both these
dimensions are vertical (i.e., at equal prices all consumers prefer a more e¤ective platform
and one that o¤ers a higher level of service). Sellers di¤er in their willingness to pay for
these services. The key distinction between the two dimensions of di¤erentiation involves
network e¤ects. Platform e¤ectiveness, involves network economies while the other services
do not. Other things equal a larger platform bene…ts all traders. On the other hand, the
other services involve no externality; no platform is required for their e¢ cient provision.
       If FSBO was di¤erentiated from MLS only in its e¤ectiveness, then its entry would
decrease total welfare. However, FSBO is also di¤erentiated in the level of service. Therefore,
it might be socially e¢ cient to have multiple platforms, o¤ering di¤erent service levels,
catering to di¤erent types of sellers.
       Realtors have historically bundled their services with the MLS.15 But there is no techno-
logical reason for this bundling. In case of unbundling the additional services, and o¤ering
di¤erent service levels, welfare gains can be accrued by having a single network. The single
platform would exploit network economies, delivering higher welfare relative to the current
allocation which involves a substantial fraction of the population listing in a less e¤ective
  15
    There are many reasons why realtors historically bundled their services. Regardless of the reason, they
are quite reluctant to unbundle them (e.g., see foreclosure cases mentioned above). Unbundled services
although becoming more common are still rarely o¤ered (see Nadel 2007).


                                                    24
platform. In addition, the add-on services can be separately marketed to those willing to
pay for them, allowing to exploit network scale economies without imposing an ine¢ cient
provision of services (too high for some).
    There is an additional dimension of e¢ ciency gains rendered by unbundling. As pointed
out by Hsie and Moretti (2003) the …xed commission leads to: excess realtor entry (especially
in expensive areas) and to rent dissipation through non-price competition among agents (see
DOJ, 2007). Unbundling the services from the MLS could resolve both. Agent prices will
be tied to the type and quality of the services they o¤er. Moreover, entry will not be tied to
the rents generated by the access to the MLS.



7     Concluding Remarks
In this paper we examine the relative performance of two competing networks: MLS and
FSBO. After controlling for di¤erences in house and seller characteristics we …nd that MLS
delivers no price premium. MLS does, however, lead to faster transactions. The longer time
to sell on FSBO is driven by two factors. First, a proportion of FSBO listings fails and have
to move to the MLS. Second, the probability of a quick sell is larger for houses initially listed
on the MLS. The lack of a MLS premium means that the cost of the commission charged by
realtors is not compensated by a higher sale price, on average.
    The empirical …ndings are consistent with the stock and ‡ow matching framework dis-
cussed in Section 3. Consistent with Claim 1, matching is more e¤ective in the platform with
the largest inventory, MLS. The type of selection we found in 5.2.2 is consistent with Claim
2, by which FSBO listing is associated with higher house prices (e.g., better bargainers or
more patient sellers). Table 1 shows support for the prediction that FSBO listers move to
MLS (and stay) in order to explore the bigger stock of MLS buyers, but MLS listers won’t
move to FSBO (Claim 3). While over 22% of FSBO listers eventually move to the MLS only
0.2% of MLS listers move to FSBO. Finally, the lack of price di¤erences across platforms
can be interpreted, in light of Claim 4, as lack of frictions. In a frictionless environment,
with patient enough buyers shopping on both platforms, we should not expect a platform
premium. In other words, it is the sellers for whom platform choice matters (due to service


                                               25
and convenience) that will carry the burden of the commission.
   What do our results imply for market structure in the brokerage industry in Madison? If
one believes that sellers are aware of the FSBO option, and know that there is no premium
associated with MLS, then our results suggest that a large fraction of the population is
willing to pay a signi…cant amount for the services provided by realtors. Thus, despite the
6% commission rate, realtors are going to continue to maintain a high market share. An
alternative view is that FSBOMadison.com is still di¤using. As more people become aware
of it, and realize that there might not be a price penalty associated with FSBO, its share of
the market will increase.
   The data set we use in this paper comes from one market. We selected this market
because of the availability of data and the willingness of FSBOMadison.com and the local
realtors association to cooperate with us and share their data. At this point we cannot
generalize beyond this market. Without further data and analysis we do not know if our
results hold more broadly. As we show the penetration rates of FSBOMadison.com vary
widely across neighborhoods. It is our impression, based on casual observation, that the
penetration rates of FSBO vary across markets. Understanding what drives this variation
and the forces behind the di¤usion of FSBO is key to understanding the broader implications
of our …ndings.
   The data we analyzed so far end at 2004. It would be interesting to study a market
during a more di¢ cult time, during a cooler housing market. We could see if the cost or,
returns to, using a realtor vary with the cyclicality of the market.




                                              26
References
 [1] Armstrong, Mark. ”Competition in Two-Sided Markets” Rand Journal of Economics,
    2006.

 [2] Bernheim, Douglas and Jonathan Meer. 2007. “How Much Value do Real Estate Brokers
    Add: A Case Study”mimeo Stanford University.

 [3] Cantillon, Estelle and Pai-Ling Yin, 2006 ”How and When do Markets Tip? Lessons
    from the Battle of the Bund”mimeo ULB.

 [4] Coles, Melvyn and Abhinay Muthoo. “Strategic Bargaining and Competitive Bidding
    in a Dynamic Market Equilibrium”Review of Economic Studies 1998, 65, 235-60.

 [5] Coles, Melvyn and Eric Smith. “Marketplace and Matching” International Economic
    Review, 1998, Vol 39, No 1.

 [6] Department of Justice. “Competition in the Real Estate Brokerage Industry”A Report
    by the FTC and DOJ, April 2007.

 [7] House, Christopher and Emre Ozdenoren. 2007. “Durable Goods and Conformity”
    mimeo University of Michigan.

 [8] Hsieh, Chang Tai and Enrico Moretti. “Can Free Entry be Ine¢ cient? Fixed Com-
    missions and Social Waste in the Real Estate Industry” Journal of Political Economy
    111(5), 2003

 [9] Levitt, Steven and Chad Syverson. “Market Distortions When Agents are Better In-
    formed: The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions”, University of Chicago
    mimeo.

[10] Merlo, Antonio and François Ortalo-Magné. ”Bargaining over Residential Real Estate:
    Evidence from England”Journal of Urban Economics, September 2004, 192-216.




                                          27
[11] Merlo, Antonio, François Ortalo-Magné and John Rust. ”Models of Bargaining and
    Price Determination of Residential Real Estate: Theory and Evidence” 2006 mimeo
    University of Maryland.

[12] Munneke, Henry and Abdullah Yavas. “Incentives and Performance in Real Estate Bro-
    kerage: Theory and Evidence” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2001,
    22, 5-21.

[13] Nadel, Mark. 2007. “A Critical Assessment of the Standard Traditional Residential Real
    Estate Broker COmmission Rate Structure" Brookings Institute mimeo.

[14] Rochet, Jean -Charles and Jean Tirole, ”Two sided markets: A progress report” forth-
    coming Rand Journal of Economics.

[15] Salant, Stephen. “For Sale by Owner: When to Use a Broker and How to Price the
    House”The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 1991, 4, 157-173.

[16] Taylor, Curtis. “The Long Side of the Market and The Short End of the Stick: bar-
    gaining Power and Price Formation in Buyers’, Sellers’ and Balanced Markets” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1995, 837-855.

[17] Yavas, Abdullah and Peter Colwell. “Buyer Brokerage: Incentive and E¢ ciency Impli-
    cations”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 1999, 18: 259-277




                                            28
    Table 1: Properties by Initial Listing Platform and Outcome, By Year
    ListnOutcome         MLS          FSBO          Unsold         Total
    1998 to 2004
               MLS 10,725 (86.0%)      30 (0.2%) 1,713 (13.7%) 12,468 (79.9%)
             FSBO      697 (22.2%) 2,153 (68.6%)    288 (9.2%) 3,138 (20.1%)
              Total 11,422 (73.2%) 2,183 (14.0%) 2,001 (12.8%)     15,606
    1998
               MLS 1,806 (84.2%)        3 (0.1%)   336 (15.7%) 2,145 (94.0%)
             FSBO       43 (31.2%)    77 (55.8%)    18 (13.0%)     138 (6.0%)
              Total 1,849 (81.0%)      80 (3.5%)   354 (15.5%)      2,283
    2000
               MLS 1,285 (87.0%)        4 (0.3%)   187 (12.7%) 1,476 (80.3%)
             FSBO      106 (29.3%)   226 (62.4%)     30 (8.3%)    362 (19.7%)
              Total 1,391 (75.6%)    230 (12.5%)     217 (11.8)     1,838
    2002
               MLS 1,458 (86.9%)        3 (0.2%)   216 (12.9%) 1,677 (76.6%)
             FSBO      101 (19.7%)   381 (74.4%)     30 (5.9%)    512 (23.4%)
              Total 1,559 (71.2%)    384 (17.5%)   246 (11.2%)      2,189
    2004
               MLS 1,564 (81.3%)        9 (0.5%)   352 (18.3%) 1,925 (74.4%)
             FSBO      102 (15.4%)   480 (72.6%)    79 (12.0%)    661 (25.6%)
              Total 1,666 (64.4%)    489 (18.9%)     431 (16.7)     2,586

    The year is de…ned by initial listing date. An unsold property is de…ned as not having a
sales price in the city data.




                                            29
                      Table 2: FSBO Penetration Rates, By Area
                  FSBO Listing Share (%) FSBO Outcome Share(%) Properties Sold
 Area   70                 43.6                   33.7              101
 Area   28                 39.3                   25.0               56
 Area   17                 37.7                   28.1              231
 Area   89                 33.8                   27.0              148
 Area   19                 27.3                   18.2              154
 Area   1                  26.5                   18.7              219
 Area   21                 24.5                   16.1              143
 Area   2                  20.9                   14.1              206
 Area   88                 19.4                   12.6              326
 Area   76                 17.8                   12.9              309
 Area   39                 12.2                    7.7              181
 Area   73                  9.4                    7.3              382
 Area   86                  7.9                    2.4              165
          Overall          20.1                   14.0             15,606

   An area is de…ned by the City of Madison for assessment purposes. The above areas are a
sample out of areas de…ned by the city.




                                           30
             Table 3: Sample Property Characteristics by Listing Channel
                                 MLS                FSBO
     Characteristic       Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev. Di¤erence t-stat
age (as of 2007)            46.32      24.37    48.27      26.46       1.95  3.73
# of bedrooms                3.07       0.72     3.05       0.68      -0.02 -1.47
# of full bath rooms         1.59       0.67     1.58       0.65      -0.01 -0.60
# of rooms                   3.66       1.20     3.68       1.15       0.02  0.95
total sq footage         1,736.10     697.85 1,717.09     582.36     -19.00 -1.34
lot size                 9,606.95   5,391.42 9,017.61   5,260.97    -586.50 -5.19
basement sq footage        998.46     381.79   959.40     329.74     -39.06 -4.99
inside condition             3.71       0.55     3.64       0.60      -0.07 -5.53
outside condition            3.75       0.49     3.75       0.51      -0.01 -0.92
roof age (as of 2007)       26.12      23.94    24.89      24.26      -1.23 -2.43
furnace age (as of 2007)    26.23      23.34    24.90      23.40      -1.33 -2.71
central air                  0.81       0.39     0.82       0.38       0.01  1.61
quality class                4.79       1.16     4.84       1.07       0.05  1.88
street noise                16.12      26.90    15.35      26.47      -0.77 -1.37
water front                  0.39       5.31     0.26       3.96      -0.13 -1.25
parcel view                  2.03       0.20     2.02       0.18     -0.004 -0.96

 The above characteristics are a sample of those available to us from the city data.




                                          31
                     Table 4: The E¤ect of platform on Price
                           (i)     (ii)      (iii)  (iv)   (v)    (vi)   (vii)
 Dependent variable: logarithm of price
 Sold on FSBO/100        10.75     4.02     3.96    3.19     –    0.67    0.31
                         (0.92)   (0.85)   (0.35) (0.28)         (0.45) (0.47)
 Initially Listed           –        –         –      –    3.07   2.59   2.87
     on FSBO/100                                          (0.24) (0.40) (0.41)
 MLS Listing,               –        –         –      –      –      –    6.41
      Sold on FSBO/100                                                  (1.98)
                  R2 = 0.015      0.190     0.870  0.924 0.925 0.925 0.925
 Dependent variable: price (in 1000’s of dollars)
 Sold on FSBO            14.81     2.93     5.21    5.09     –    0.23   -0.64
                         (2.02)   (1.93)   (0.85) (0.71)         (1.18) (1.08)
 Initially Listed           –        –         –      –    5.09   4.92   5.60
      on FSBO                                             (0.62) (1.05) (1.08)
 MLS Listing,                                                           15.55
      Sold on FSBO                                                      (5.15)
                  R2 = 0.007      0.124     0.842  0.893 0.894 0.894 0.894
 Time Controls             no      yes       yes    yes    yes    yes     yes
 House Characteristics     no       no       yes    yes    yes    yes     yes
 Neighborhood E¤ects       no       no        no    yes    yes    yes     yes
                  N = 12,878     12,878    12,878 12,878 13,605 13,605 13,605

    All columns report results from OLS regressions. In columns (i)-(iv), the sample includes only
properties that sold on the platform they originally listed. The sample in column (v) -(vii) also
includes properties that sold on a di¤erent platform than originally listed. Time controls include
year and month dummy variables and a linear time trend.




                                               32
                    Table 5: The E¤ect of platform on Time to Sell
                               (i)    (ii)   (iii) (iv)   (v)     (vi)  (vii)
    Sold on FSBO              -3.83  -3.76  -0.16  1.42     –   -61.08 -67.52
                             (1.68) (1.67) (1.63) (1.65)        (2.83) (2.57)
    Initially Listed            –      –       –     –   20.07 63.92    68.95
         on FSBO                                         (1.51) (2.52) (2.90)
    MLS Listing,                                                       115.13
         Sold on FSBO                                                  (12.28)
    Time Controls              no     yes    yes   yes    yes      yes   yes
    House Characteristics      no     no     yes   yes    yes      yes   yes
    Neighborhood E¤ects        no     no      no   yes    yes      yes   yes
                      N = 12,877 12,877 12,877 12,877 13,604 13,604 13,604
                      R2 = 0.001 0.018 0.148 0.174 0.181 0.209          0.214

     All columns report results from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is total time to sell,
measured in days, from the date of the initial listing until the sale date, recorded in the city data.
In columns (i)-(iv), the sample includes only houses that sold on the platform they originally listed.
The sample in column (v) -(vii) also includes houses that sold on a di¤erent platform than originally
listed. Time controls include year and month dummy variables.




                                                 33
                   Table 6: The E¤ect of platform on Probability of Sale
                                  (i)      (ii)   (iii)      (iv)   (v)      (vi)            (vii)    (viii)
   Dependent variable: dummy                              Conditional on sale, sold         within:
    variable equal to 1 if:           Sold          180 days          90 days                   60 days
 Initially Listed                1.90        –   -7.43         –  -11.74      –             -10.07      –
      on FSBO/100               (0.69)          (0.73)            (1.10)                    (0.96)
 FSBO listing                      –       1.03     –       0.56     –      -2.51              –      -5.93
       stayed on FSBO/100                (0.78)            (0.81)          (1.25)                    (1.09)
 FSBO listing                      –       4.19     –      -28.34    –     -35.70              –     -20.91
       moved to MLS/100                  (1.21)            (1.23)          (1.90)                    (1.65)
 MLS listing                       –      -4.31     –      -18.21    –      -5.72              –      -9.60
       moved to FSBO/100                 (5.29)            (5.75)          (8.80)                    (7.68)
 Mean of dependent variable(%)        87.1              87.5            53.0                      23.5
                            N =      15,605                            13,605
                             2
                            R = 0.132 0.134 0.132 0.160 0.118 0.134                         0.083      0.088

    All columns report results from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is a dummy variable,
which varies by column. In columns (i) and (ii), the sample includes properties that were not sold,
while in columns (iii)-(viii) the sample is only properties that a sale was eventually observed. All
regressions include year and month dummy variables, a linear time trend, house and neighborhood
characteristics.




                                                34
                          Table 7: House Fixed E¤ects Regressions
      Dependent variable:              log of price                  time                  to sell
 Initially Listed              2.48   2.65       –      –   25.33  19.73                       –        –
      on FSBO/100*            (0.49) (0.41)                 (3.47) (2.48)
 FSBO listing                    –      –      2.38   2.73     –      –                       9.50   3.65
       sold on FSBO/100*                      (0.55) (0.46)                                  (3.88) (2.70)
 FSBO listing                    –      –      2.83   2.43     –      –                      67.75   69.80
       moved to MLS/100*                      (0.86) (0.76)                                  (5.99) (4.41)
 MLS listing                     –      –      9.15   3.49     –      –                      24.31   51.81
       moved to FSBO/100*                     (4.24) (3.88)                                 (45.00) (34.01)
 House Fixed E¤ects            yes     no      yes     no    yes     no                       yes     no
 House+Neighborhood Char        no    yes       no    yes     no    yes                        no     yes

 Dependent variable: dummy                         Conditional on sale, sold                within:
    variable equal to 1 if:      Sold            90 days                                    60 days
 Initially Listed            0.30    0.45 -14.45     –       –       -7.35                     –        –
      on FSBO/100           (0.34) (0.24) (2.79)                    (2.50)
 FSBO listing                  –       –     –     -6.05   -1.28                              -2.46  -1.45
       sold on FSBO/100                           (3.15) (2.23)                              (2.84) (2.01)
 FSBO listing                  –       –     –    -36.42 -37.60                              -20.30 -22.44
       moved to MLS/100                           (4.87) (3.65)                              (4.38) (3.30)
 MLS listing                   –       –     –    -31.82   33.89                               6.64  -0.93
       moved to FSBO/100                         (24.14) (18.75)                            (21.75) (16.94)
 House Fixed E¤ects          yes      no    yes     yes     no        yes                      yes    no
 House+Neighborhood Char      no      yes   no      no      yes       no                        no    yes

   *In columns where the dependent variable is "time to sell" the independent variables are not
divided by 100.
    All columns report results from OLS regressions. The sample includes properties where multiple
sales were observed, there are 2023 such properties involving 4202 sales. In columns where "sold"
is the dependent variable the sample also includes properties that were listed more than once, at
di¤erent times even if they did not sell, there are 2728 such properties involving 4921 listings. All
regressions include year and month dummy variables and a linear time trend.




                                                 35
              Table 8: FSBO versus Sales by Agent/Owner on MLS
                       (i)      (ii)  (iii)    (iv)     (v)        (vi)       (vii)
 Dependent variable:   log of price    time to sell sold in 60 sold in 90 sold in 180
 Sold by Owner/100    2.12     1.84  -0.95    -3.47    2.41       7.27        1.95
                     (0.70) (0.68) (4.19) (4.35)      (2.74)     (3.17)      (2.19)
 Sold on FSBO/100     1.12     1.22   2.35     0.28    -6.75      -6.93       0.51
                     (0.74) (0.72) (4.41) (4.60)      (2.89)     (3.34)      (2.19)
                N= 12,878 13,605 12,877 13,604        13,605     13,605     13,605

    All columns report results from OLS regressions. In columns (i) and (iii), the sample includes
only houses that sold on the platform they originally listed. The sample in columns (ii) and (iv) -(vii)
also includes houses that sold on a di¤erent platform than originally listed. All regressions include
year and month dummy variables, a linear time trend, house and neighborhood characteristics.




                                                  36
              Table 9: Controlling for Unobserved Seller Heterogeneity
                                      (i)       (ii)        (iii)       (iv)
            Dependent variable: logarithm of price
            Initially Listed                                1.65
                 on FSBO/100                               (1.86)
            FSBO listing                                                1.96
                  sold on FSBO/100                                     (2.59)
            FSBO Seller/100          2.58       0.92
                                    (0.25)     (0.54)
            Dependent variable: time to sell
            Initially Listed                               16.47
                 on FSBO                                  (10.87)
            FSBO listing                                               -16.66
                  sold on FSBO                                        (15.38)
            FSBO Seller              -2.65      4.33
                                    (1.57)     (3.32)
            Sample                 all sales MLS listings sellers w/ multiple
                                                              listings/sales
            Fixed E¤ects              no         no         yes          yes
                               N= 13,605       10,755       742         608

    All columns report results from OLS regressions. In column (ii) the sample includes only
properties there were listed on MLS. In columns (iii) and (iv) the samples include properties sold
by sellers with multiple sales between 1998 and 2004, there are 265 sellers that sold properties listed
using di¤erent platforms, involving 744 sales, 216 seller sold properties using di¤erent platforms,
involving 608 sales. The regressions in columns (iii) and (iv) include seller …xed e¤ects. All
regressions include year and month dummy variables. a linear time trend, house and neighborhood
characteristics.




                                                  37
