NBER WORKING PAPER 3ERIES

EXTERNAL DEBT, BUDGET DEFICITS
AND DISEQUILIBRIUM EXCHANGE RATES

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper No. 1336

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1984

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1336
April 19814

External Debt, Budget Deficits and
Disequilibrium Exchange Rates
ABSTRACT

The paper investigates the sources of debt and debt difficulties for

a group of Latin American countries. It is argued that external shocks——
oil, interest rates, world recession and the fall in real commodity prices—-.

cannot account by themselves for the problems. Budget deficits that
accommodate terms of trade deterioration and disequilibrium exchange rates

are central to a complete explanation. The paper documents that in Chile an
extreme currency overva'luation led to a massive shift into imported consumer

durables while in Argentina overvaluation in conjunction with financial

instability led to large—scale capital flight. In the case of Brazil the
budget deficit is the explanation for the growth in external indebtedness.

The difference in the experience of the three countries reflects the difference in their openness to the world economy.

Rudiger Dornbusch
Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
M.I.T. E52—357

Cambridge, MA 02139
(6ii) 66l—882

Revised, April 1984

EXTERNAL DEBT, BUDGET DEFICITS AND DISEQUILIBRUJM EXCHANGE RATES*

Rudiger Dornbusch
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This paper explores the role of disequilibrium exchange rates and budget

deficits in promoting external indebtedness and the current debt crisis. Oil,
interest rates and world recession are often isolated as the chief causes of

the world debt crisis. But these factors only have made much more apparent
and unsustainable an underlying disequilibrium in which exchange rate
overvaluation and/or budget deficits were perpetuated by continuing and
excessive recourse to the world capital market.
The details of the disequilibrium differ, however, quite a bit between

countries. For that reason we look at three different episodes: Argentina,
Chile and Brazil. In one case capital flight plays a key role in the growth
in debt, in the other cases the level and composition of spending assume

primary importance. We investigate these determinants to the period 1978-82.
The period is chosen to coincide with major changes in the world economy and
with disequilibrium real exchange rate policies in several countries.
We start by laying out a framework and some facts concerning the debt
accumulation.

1. Some Facts and a Framework
Latin American debt problems are not new, and a year after the Mexican
and Brazilian problems became apparent the literature abounds with references

*An earlier version of this paper was presented at the ISPE Seminar on public
economics at the University of Santa Cruz, February 1994. I am indebted to
Domingo Cavallo, Eliana Cardoso and Stan Fischer for helpful comments.

to the earlier episodes of overlending in the 1930s and before. Here is a
typical quote from 1937:1

"The history of investment in South America throughout the last century has
been one of confidence followed by disillusionment, of borrowing cycles
followed by widespread defaults, and of a series of alternating repudiations
and recognitions of external debts. Willingness to maintain service payments
has certainly been less high than in the British pire, and excesses were
inevitable under the conditions which existed while the United States was
investing such huge sums in these countries.. .The ability of the most
credit-worthy governments to avoid default must necessarily be impaired if any
considerable part of the nominal value of loans has not, in fact, been put to
the use for which it was intended."

After the wholesale default on external debt in the l930s there was a
long gap during which current account imbalances were financed by a reduction
in reserves (accumulated during the war), by direct capital inflows, official

aid and by borrowing conducted through international institutions.2 Table 1
shows external debt data for benchmark years for several countries. The data
problems, even for the very recent years, remain q.uite overwhelming. But even
SO

the

table conveys a notion of the very rapid growth of external

indebtedness in the 1970s.

1See Royal Institute (1937) p.266.
2For a discussion see Sachs (1983), United Nations (1964) and the annual
reports of the Foreign Bond Holders Protective Council.

3

Table 1

External Public or Publicly Guaranteed Debt
(Billion su.s.)

1945

1956

1960

1970

1975

1983

Argentina

0.9

0.7

1.5

5.0

7.9

38.5

Brazil

0.4

1.5

1.8

5.5

22.2

93.7

Chile

0.4

0.3

0.6

3.2

5.3

18.7

Mexico

0.5

0.5

1.0

9.7

19.5

86.6

Price Level
(1970=100 )

41

68

75

100

137

235

Note: The data for 1945, 1956 and 1960 only include debt in excess of 1 year
maturity. The price level reported in the last row is the US GNP
deflator. The unit value index in dollars for world trade would show a
somewhat larger cumulative increase.
Source: United Nations (1964) and Morgan Guaranty.

From the supply side the conventional explanatio.n for the lending burst

is the oilshock that made possible financial intermediation by commercial

banks. This is brought out by the fact that over the period 1970 to 1983 the
share of bank lending in total debt increased from only 25% to nearly 75%. On
the demand side the reasons for the debt build—up are much less clearcut.

Oil, interest rates and the world recession are often cited and are certainly
a good part of the story in some countries.
Table 2 and Figure 1 show the important differences in the world

macroeconomic setting for the debtorsin the early l970s and in the 1978—83

period. The former period is clearly a debtors paradise with high growth and
inflation, sharp real commodity price increases and low nominal interest

rates. The 1978-82 period is precisely the reverse and to that extent must
account for some of the debt problems. Even so it remains interesting to know

3a

Figure 1

INtLJSTRIAL PRO1irIw AD REAL TE?JAL PR1ES

(Irsflces l975—7=1OO)

0

R°.al Materials prices

0
1*

0

00

0

NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN-NNNNNNNN

-

4

what the precise channels are. We will show in particular that domestic
policies and the degree and particular kind
free trade in goods, both or

of openness-..capjtal mobility,

neither__influence the way in which households

and firms respond to exchange rate, commercial and fiscal policy.

Table 2: Prime Rate, World Growth md Price Inflation in World Trade
(Average Annual Percentage Rate)
Prime Rate

1970—73

1979-82

President,

Inflation Rate
in World Trade

World Growth

6.7

12.4

4.7

15.5

4.4

1.1

1984.

A Framework. The balance of

payments accounts provide a link between the

increase in gross external debt and the portfolio and spending decisions
of

the economy. In equation (1) we show the change in official
reserves (9 or
the balance of payments) equal to the current account surplus,
CA, plus the

capital account surplus. The latter is broken up in three components: net
direct and longterm portfolio

capital inflows, LCD, foreign borrowing, B, and

gross private capital outflows, KO.

(i) R =

CA

Surplus +

LCD

+ B - KO

Rearranging terms we can then identify the

components or proximate

sources of the increase in gross external debt as follows:

(2) B = CA Deficit + (9

Increased

+ 1(0)

—

KD

gross external debt, from (2) reflects a current account

deficit, reserve build-up or private capital outflows, or a net outflow of
direct and portfolio capital.

Equation (2) immediately draws attention to the

5

fact that the debt build—up does not correspond one—for—one to a resource

transfer from lending countries to the borrowers. Part of the increased gross
debt merely reflects capital flight and thus no change in aggregate net

foreign assets. Another part reflects the capitalization through increased
borrowing of the inflation component in nominal interest payments. The
resource transfer is limited to the inflation—adjusted current account.3
We now look at the period 1978-82 to identify empirically the various

components in (2) for Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico. In Table 3 we show
an estimate of the components of the gross debt increase. We use balance of
payments and external debt data, from different sources, to try and piece

together the "proximate sources" of the increase in gross external debt. The
difference in data sources and the precariousness of debt and balance of

payments data imply that these estimates cannot be very precise. Bearing in
mind tiese limitations the data still give a good idea of the difference in
patterns between countries.
In the case of Argentina the current account deficit is almost entirely

financed by direct investment and portfolio capital inflows. The increase in
debt therefore corresponds to a large extent to the financing of capital
flight—-the Central Bank borrows abroad and sells foreign exchange to private

residents who use the proceeds to acquire foreign assets. The breakdown is of
course not entirely precise because the current account certainly
underestimates military imports and, in the case of Argentina, perhaps to a

very significant extent. It has been suggested the underestimate maybe $7

3Iet A/F' be net real foreign assets measured in terms of world prices. Then
the change in real net foreign assets is:

(/p*) =

-

=

-

which is the inflation-adjusted current account.

48.8

11.5

55.1

Brazil

Chile

Mexico
—33.6

—11.4

—58.4

—10.6

(—4.6)

(—3.9)

(—4.7)

(6.8)

Note:

9.

)
)

9.6

1.3

11.5

7.2

36.1

1.4

1.9

23.4

Direct and
Residual
Portfolio
(Reserve Gains +
Capital Inflow Capital Outflows)

This column is calculated as the
of debt increase not accounted for by the
current account deficit or the net part
capital (direct and portfolio)outflows.
Interest payments are not adjusted for inflation.

(—26.3)

(—5.

(—33.7)

(—

Current Account
Total
Trad e
Interest

Sources: organ Guaranty, Data Resources,Inc. and I.M.F.

26.8

Increase in Cross
External Debt

Coponcnts of the Increase in Gross External Debt: 1978—82
(Bi1ion $ U.S.)

Argentina

Table 3

6

billion. Underinvoicing of exports and overinvoicing of imports and smuggling

further distort the data
The table makes it clear that in the Argentinian case we are looking
primarily at an increased debt to finance capital flight, not current account

imbalances. Thus the government incurs external debts and uses the proceeds
to finance private capital outflows or private acquisition of foreign assets.
The increase in gross external debt misrepresents the net foreign asset
position of the country, since increased public debts are largely matched by

larger private foreign assets. But since the latter are largely removed from
the control and disposition of the authorities there is nevertheless a debt
problem.

In the case of Brazil and Chile the residual item in the last column

accounts for very little. The increased debt reflects current account
deficits, not capital flight. In both cases direct investment and portfolio
capital flows finance only part of the current account deficits and hence

external debt increases by the difference. Both countries, unlike Argentina,

have cumulative trade deficits, and of course deficits on service account. In
both cases interest payments account for half or more of the increase in debt.

We have shown now, in accounting terms, that increased gross external
debt may correspond to increased net external indebtedness, as is the case of
cumulative current account deficits, or it can simply reflect capital flight

with no change in the country's net foreign assets. This reshuffling between
the private sectcr and the government is relevant whenever the private
sector's foreign assets are beyond the reach of the authorities.

7

2. Theory.
Cumulative current account deficits are the more common counterpart of
increased external indebtedness.

Equation (3) shows the linkage between the

national income accounts and the current account:

(3) Decline in Aggregate =
Net Foreign Assets

CA Deficit =

(I

-

s)

+

Budget Deficit

Episodes of current account deficits can, in this perspective, be
analyzed in terms of the shocks to which the

economy is exposed and the impact

they exert on saving, investment and the budget. We now discuss the channels
through which saving, investment and the budget are affected. Throughout we
use standard neoclassical macroeconomics

as the relevant framework. We will

try to identify transitorily high levels of investment and budget deficits or
transitorily low levels of saving.

Saving: Household Saving behavior takes

framework. Saving is
after—tax

interest

place in the standard multi—period

governed by wealth which is the present value of

labor income plus the value of initial assets, and by the real

rate. The real interest rate is the world nominal rate adjusted for

depreciation and the domestic rate of
that abroad to the extent that

inflation. The latter can differ from

traded/nontraded goods or export/import prices

change over time or through changes in

exchange rate or ccmmerical policy.4

There are several channels through which events in the
eccromy can lead
to a reduction in saving:

this point see Bruno (1972), Obstfeld
(1933), Razin and Svensson (1983),
and Dornbusch (1983).

8

— An increase in wealth because of perceived higher future incomes or an

increase in the future rental on domestic real capital. Since by assumption
the gains in output occur only in the future, but consumers are forward

looking, the anticipations lead to higher current spending and thus to
dissaving.

— The effect of expected future income gains on current spending is

reinforced if these anticipated gains come together with the removal of
borrowing constraints and increases in wealth that make it possible to spend
at the level of normal income.
—

Dissaving may be the counterpart of intertemporal resource allocation

by the household in response to intertemporal relative price and hence real

interest rate movements. With high intertemporal substitutability consumption
occurs in period where interest rates are low and inflation is high.
Purchases of consumer durables are an important reason for variations in

measured saving. Intertemporal variations in the real price of durables (and
even more strongly of the availability of durables) affect the timing of

purchases. They lead to purchases in periods where the real price is low.
This effect is more strongly at work the higher the rate of price increase on

durables relative to interest and the rate of physical depreciation. If
consumers perceive of themselves as "renting" durables the confidence in a
strong resale market and liquidity of durables reinforces the tendency for
intertemporal substitution of purchases, as does reduction of credit
constraints
In the context of an open economy a transitory real appreciation, or an
overvalued exchange rate, would therefore lead us to predict dissaving.

5See

Mishkin

(1976) and Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), Chapter 1.

9

Consumers would concentrate purchases of imported durables in those
periods
and hence current account deficits would tend to be large.
A critical question is to what extent private saving behavior is

affected by government budget deficits. In other words do households, in
response to deficits, build up assets in the anticipation of future taxes on

their own incomes and those of their heirs. We assume that these effects are
limited to taxes directly borne by the current generations and do not extend

further. Thus deficits are by and large not offset by increased current and

future saving. Effects on saving result only from directly anticipated
taxation or from a reduction in the value of assets reflecting future taxes on
the income from those assets.
Investment: There are three channels through which investment is affected.

We

are particularly concerned with the link between exchange rates and

investment. Inventory investment is influenced by the cost of carrying
inventories relative to the return on the foods being carried. Business fixed
investment is influenced by changes in the desired capital stock and by

changes in the adjustment costs associated with capital formation. In the
appendix we sketch a formal model and focus here simply on the main ideas.
An anticipated depreciation implies capital gains on imported goods,

specifically on materials and foreign consumer or producer durables. Firms
would, other things equal, purchase importables prior to an anticipated

depreciation and hold them to collect capital gains. But that tendency is
dampened by three factors: First, there will after a point be increasing

marginal costs to carrying inventories. Second, there is uncertainty about
the future price. Third, carrying inventories involves an alternative cost in

terms of nominal interest foregone. The optimal inventory for risk averse

10

investors firms, given these considerations, will depend on the mean and
variance of the expected real return on inventories——inflation relative to

interest rates and on the marginal cost of carrying. Increased anticipated
depreciation that is not reflected in interest rates and reduced variance will
raise inventory investment and hence imports of materials or imported producer
and consumer goods.
To discuss business fixed investment we can think of a standard

neoclassical adjustment cost—based investment theory. Real exchange rates
here play a role because they determine the desired capital stock by
influencing the user cost of capital or by affecting the adjustment cost.
Real exchange rates affect adjustment costs because investment has import
content, specifically in the form of imported machinery.
What are the effects of a transitory real appreciation or, equivalently,

an anticipated real depreciation? While the real exchange rate is overvalued
the real price of imported goods is low and, for that reason, investment is

high. During the period of overvaluation capital is being accumulated because
the overvaluation in fact constitutes an investment subsidy for those

investment activities that have import content. Once the real depreciation
occurs the accumulation of capital is reversed.
A second channel through which overvaluation or anticipated real
depreciation influence investment is via the desired stock of capital.
Suppose investment has significant import content and that capital is used in

the production of tradeables. A transitory overvaluation and anticipated real

depreciation now exerts opposing effects on investment. The lOW real price of
tradeables depresses the stock demand for capital, but the investment subsidy

implicit in overvaluation tends to promote investment. The net result depends

11

on how significant the subsidy is as a determinant of investment. Then import
content is important the net result will still be a transitory investment boom
and hence an import boom of investment goods.
Once again we have assumed an anticipated real depreciation that is not

fully matched by interest rates. To the extent that nominal interest rates
rise in anticipation of depreciation this raises the user cost and reduces
therefore any impact on investment.
In the case of investment, therefore, there are strong links between the
timepath of the real price of imports and the level of investment goods

imports. Anticipation of real depreciation must produce an import bulge.

The Budget: The government, in principle, obeys the intertemporal budget
constraint. The budget constraint states that the present value of tax
revenues (including the inflation tax) must equal the initial debt plus the

present value of outlays. Subject o political constraints on the rate of cut
in outlays or the rate of increase in taxes the government would practice tax
smoothing as suggested in Barro (1983). A permanent loss in revenues would be
immediately and fully offset through increased tax rates or reduced outlays,

leaving debt unchanged. Transitory shocks to revenue or to outlays would be
substantially met by debt finance. The increase in debt in turn is amortized
over the longterm by a small increase in taxes and cut in outlays.

An increase in interest rates reduces the present value of the excess of
taxes over outlays and hence requires an adjustment in the path of taxes and

expenditures. Once again, if the shock is transitory debt finance will bridge
the gap in the shortterm and small tax and outlay changes assure intertemporaJ.

solvency of the government. If the increase in rates is permanent then
immediate adjustment of tax rates relative to outlays occurs and debt rema.uw
unchanged.

12

The tightness of the debt finance model must be relaxed to recognize

three practical considerations. First, there are constraints on the rates at
which politicians can or will change taxes and outlays. Secondly, the
identification of disturbances as transitory or permanent may in itself take
time, a11 disturbances being assumed transitory, particularly when they are

adverse. Third, debt default both internal and external is a way of assuring
the intertemporal budget constraint although such a "policy" would of course
be reflected in the interest rate required by holders of the public debt.6
The government budget problem is made more specific when we introduce

specific standard of living constraints. Such constraints inply that in the
presence of adverse shocks to the real income of the favored group additional
outlays are required to support the standard of living. If tax adjustments or
reductions in the standard of living can occur only over time there is a

built—in link between (adverse) economic shocks and the budget. Adverse
shocks therefore involve invariably an early stage of deficit finance, even if
they are persistent.

A failure to smooth taxes and outlays as well as benefits in the case of

a permanent disturbance does need justification. Why would tax payers be
willing to see low tax rates now and pay for those low rates by higher future

rates yielding equal present value tax collection? Why would those who
receive government benefits claim a front-loaded flow of benefits rather than

a steady stream of equal present value? The tax smoothing model rejects such
behavior as irrational and predicts that government following noxious policies

along these patterns would be thrown out of office for failing to maximize

6 note in passing that wealth taxes or levies as a way of resonding to
shocks have been insufficiently considered in the recent deficit finance
literature, though not, of course, in the interwar writings.

13

voters' welfare. But the moment the public discounts at a rate in excess of
the market rate of interest the future is systematically undervalued and

biased toward debt finance. The argument is reinforced when liquidity
constraints lead part of the population to discount at exceptionally high
rates.

There is, of course, an interdependence between the model of debt finance
and the private sector's optimal intertemporal allocation of resources and

portfolio choice. The more the government chooses debt finance, postponing
required tax increases, the more the private sector can adjust to the future
increased taxes or debt default by holding non-taxable assets (dollars and

washing machines). This raises the cost to the government of delaying
adjustment, but does not eliminate altogether the tendency toward shortrun
deficit finance.

In concluding on the issue of the budget it is worth noting important
linkages between the exchange rate and government outlays. These arise in two
respects. First, to the extent that there is an external public debt a real
depreciation raises the real value of debt service in terms of domestic output

and hence is likely to increase the budget deficit. There is thus a potential
trade-off between international competitiveness and budget balance.
The second link between exchange rates and the budget arises in case of

exchange rate guarantees. If the government has guaranteed a given exchange
rate, sometime in the past, but has since found it necessary to depreciate
then the resulting exchange rate subsidy will deteriorate the budget. In a

situation where exchange rate guarantees and external debt exist, and it is
difficult to adjust taxes, there is thus a tendency to seek overvaluation as
of the ways to minimize debt finance.

14

We have now reviewed the various channel3 through which the current
account is affected as a consequence of transitory and permanent disturbances.

The point that emerges is that anticipated real depreciation acts in a most

forceful way to generate current deficits in the external balance. In
addition, through the budget, current and transitory shocks to receipts and
outlays tend to translate into deficit finance and hence into external

deficits. We now consider how these considerations help explain the current
accounts and external debt accumulation of Brazil and Chile.

3.

Application

to Chile and Brazil.

In Brazil and Chile external debt increases are the counterpart of

current account deficits. They respresent levels of spending and resource
absorption in excess of current income. But the details of the process
differ. In Chile overvaluation is the key while in Brazil the budget deficit
assumes a central role.

Chile: Following hyperinflation Chile had undergone in 1973-77 economic
stabilization and reform in respect to fiscal policy and commercial policy.

The budget deficit was reduced from more than ten percent (asa fraction of
GNP) in the early 1970's to actual surplusses. Tariffs were reduced from
average nominal rates near 100 percent, with individual rates widely

dispersed, to a uniform rate of only 10 percent by 1978. Inflation was
reduced from over 500 percent per year to practically zero, and to top it off

growth in 1977—81 averaged 8 percent per year. Today the country bears little

resemblence to that performance: Output has declined since 19a1 by 10

percent,

and unemployment stands at 30 percent. Exchange rate policy and

excessive recourse to external debt finance are at the center of an
explanation.

15

In an effort to speed up the process of disinflation the Chilean
authorities decided in early 1979 to give a try to the "law of cne price".
The exchange rate was fixed at 39 pesos •to the U.S. dollar, in the hope that

the pegging would directly cut down the rate of inflation but also break

inflationary expectations. But at the time Chilean inflation was still more
than 30 percent, far above the rate in the U.S.. Moreover, formal indexing
arrangements linked wage increases to past inflation. As Corbo (1983) has
documented the combination of inflation and indexation led over time to
growing overvaluation as wages were pushed up relative to the prices of

importables and the world prices of exportables. The growth in real wages,
for those employed, of course implied a sharp gain in the standard of living.
The loss in employment in response to overvaluation was slow to build up and
thus the period 1977—80 offered a spectacle of yet another "miracle".
The Chilean boom conditions in the early stage of overvaluation lend
support to the notion that real depreciation, in the shortrun is deflationary.
Here the real appreciation, by raising real wages has expansionary effects on
aggregate demand before the employment effects and bankruptcy start making

their inroads. This point has been emphasized by Diaz Alejandro (1963) and
more recently by Calvo (1982) in the Argentinian context.
In Table 4 we show the ratio of consumption and of gross fixed investment

to GDP (in constant 1977 prices), as well as the budget deficit ratio. It is
clear that 198.0—82 is the period to focus on since consumption sharply rises

as does the investment ratio and the budget deficit. Investment and saving
behavior explain the sharp deterioration in the current account.

16

Table 4: Consumption, Fixed Investment and the Budget Deficit in Chile
(Percent of GDP)

1960—69 1970—79

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

Investment

20.2

15.7

16.5

19.6

23.9

23.9

9.6

Consumption

79.7

75.8

72.4

71.1

70.5

76.2

76.1

Budget Deficit

2.9

6.8

0.8

-1.7

—3.1

-1.6

2.4

Current Account

NA

NA

7.7

5.7

7.2

14.6

9.4

Source: Banco Central de Chile and International Financial Statistics.
We now focus on the mechanism through which consumption and investment

spending increased so sharply. Figure 2 shows the real exchange rate —-

import

prices relative to the prices of nontradeables -—

for

the period. The

real appreciation, on this measure, amounted to 25 percent by early 1982.

Table 4 shows some of the implications. Imports of all goods increased very
sharply over the period peaking in 1981. As a particular exanpie we see
automobiles. Import growth was immense both in percentage terms and as a
fraction of the existing stock. Imports peaked in 1981 falling off sharply
afterwards.

Table 5 Chile: Imports and the Real Exchange Rate

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

3.00

4.22

5.82

6.78

3.83

Trade Balance (sus Billions) —0.52

—0.32

—0.45

—2.41

0.29

Imports (sus Billions)

Real Exchange Rate
(1978 = lao)

Automobiles (bOOs)
Stock
Imports
Production

100

100.6

90.7

76.9

92.0

335.8
11.4

386.0
33.6

17.1

16.5

458.7
51.6
25.2

573.8
79.5
20.6

NA
30.3
7.9

1 6a

Figure 2 The Chilean Real Exchange Rate
(Index 1972:11=100)

135

125

115

105

95

85

75
-.

H
65

1977

1978

1979

1980

Source: Corbo and dc M1o (19S3)

1981

1932

17

Table 6 shows the same pattern in more detail. The Table reports the
quantity indices for different groups of imports. In each case we observe the
sharp 1981 peak and the decline in 1982-83. The pattern is significantly more
pronounced for capital goods than for intermediates, even though in the latter
category automobile parts and pieces and intermediate industrial goods, unlike

primary commodities, show very high growth rates.7

Table 6: Import Quantity Indices for Chile
(January—June of each period)

1980

1981

1982

1983

Total

100

133

92

68

Consumption Goods:
Automobiles
Electric Domestic

100

175
226
156

125

75
38
NA

Capital Goods:
Machinery
Transport Equipment
Breeding Stock

100
100
100
100

Intermediate Goods:

100

100
100

90
68

134

90

58

128
140

119
53

52
20

328

85

50

117

81

76

Source: Banco Central de Chile

The pattern of strongly growing imports through 1981 reflects in part the

very strong performance of the Chilean economy. In addition the increase in
asset prices that took place in 1977—81 implied increased wealth and hence the

allocation of part of the gain in wealth to increased consumption. Harberger

71n interpreting these numbers we bear in mind that from 1980 to 1981
industrial production was approximately flat while from 1981 to 1982 it
declined by around 20%. GDP growth in 1981 was 5.7 percent, -14.3 percent in
1982 and -0.5 in 1983.

18

(1983) in particular has emphasized this point.
In addition to the growth and wealth impact on consumption and investment

there appears to be a strong real exchange rate effect on the composition and

level of spending. By 1981 the sustainability of the increasingly overvalued
exchange rate was becoming an open question. While the goevernnent was sworn
to sustaining the exchange rate, the growing problems of export and import
competing firms, and growing unemployment made it more and more plausible that

depreciation would take place. Moreover, along with depreciation a return to
protection was not out of the question. In these circumstances it is clear
that we would expect to observe a sharp increase in purchases of importables.
Tables 3, 4 and 5, of course, bear that out in a massive way. (See, too, in

Figure 3 the trade balance for 1981 that shows an all time deficit). They
also show that once the overvaluation came to an end, in June 1982, the import
boom collapses.

The real exchange rate affects directly saving and investment and hence

the current account. But it also works through a separate char.el.
Overvaluation, once the shortrun expansionary effects have passed, leads to a

change in the composition of spending. Demand for domestic goods declines and
demand for importables rises. The shift implies a reduction in domestic
output and employment. The fall in income reduces saving of the private
sector and it also leads to an increased budget deficit. Accordingly the

indirect effects further deteriorate the external balance. The steep decline
in world copper prices in 1981—82 further reinforced the effect of declining

income on the external balance. If the decline is perceived as transitory it
leads to dissaving both by households and by the public sector and hence

enlarges the external deficit and borrowing. The copper price aecline is, of
course, often cited as an explanation for the external deficit and debt

18a

0/

10

——

Figure

-l ,-4 ..-i .-4 l .

3 chile: Ratio of Trade Surplus to Exports

19

accumulation. But the explanation cannot be taken too far. Even in 1982 the
dollar value of copper exports still exceeded the 1978 level by a large

.8

margin.

One further factor, which we will see in particular at work in the
Brazilian case, is the effect of increased interest rates in the world market.

For a debtor •ountry this implies a deterioration in the terms of trade and

hence an adverse real income effect. An estimate of the direct contribution
to the deficit of higher interest rates in the world market is S3.2 billion.
To a large extent the increase in Chile's external debt is the

counterpart of a domestic accumulation or consumer and producer capital. This
invites the question whether there is any lack of optiniality involved in what

happened in 1978-82 and where does the "debt problem" reside? Did consumers
and firms benefit froi the disequilibrium exchange rate and if so at whose

expense? Furthermore, assuming that the debt ultimately must be serviced is
there a welfare loss from disequilibrium exchange rate policy, setting aside
the implications for financial stability and economic activity?
The welfare economics of disequilibrium exchange rates appear quite

straight forward. We can think that the government borrows in the first
period in the world market and uses the proceeds to finance a transitory

consumption or investment subsidy on importables. In the second or more

8The dollar value of copper exports and the real price of copper (1980=100)
show the following pattern
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
Exports ($ billion)
1.27
1.9
2.15
1.72
1.73
Real Price (1980=100)
81
102
100
82
73
The real price of copper here is measured in terms of the unit value of
industrial countries' exports.

20

distant period taxes are collected to discharge the external debt. This
represents the public finance aspects of the overvaluation policy, neglecting

all macroeconomic side effects. It is apparent that a large subsidy of this
kind will have net adverse welfare effects and this is all the more the case

when we take into account the macroeconomic effects. The actual story is
somewhat more complicated because we must take into account the private

capital market. Consumers and firms perceive a net subsidy only to the extent
that market interest rates do not reflect the anticipated depreciation. Since
the government did not, in fact, lend itself at negative expected real
interest rates we must conclude that interest rates not fully reflecting
anticipated depreciation imply disagreement in the capital market about the

likely timing and magnitude of depreciation. Those anticipating large and
certain depreciation borrow and import, those anticipating small and unlikely

depreciation are the lenders. But the government comes back into the act when
we recognize that a policy of bailing out banks that are in trouble serves as
a safety net for the domestic financial operation and, effectively, makes the
whole operation almost exactly like the pure public finance scheme laid out
above.

Brazil The deterioration of the Brazilian external indebtedness is largely
due to failure to adjust the budget to the combined external shocks of higher

world interest rates and increased real oil prices. Higher interest rates and
increased oil prices were almost automatically reflected in larger deficits
through two channels: government subsidies that maintained a low domestic
price of oil and government external borrowing through state enterprises to

finance the increased debt service. Domestic adjustment through tight money
served to raise interest rates and stop growth, but its primary purpose was to

stimulate external borrowing to finance the current account. Failure to

21

depreciate the real exchange rate meant that the economy stagnated despite
growing external deficits and debt.

Table 7 shows the external shocks. The terms of traded, as a consequence
of oil and the world recession deteriorated vastly. In addition interest
rates, including spreads, nearly doubled. The combined effect immediately
implied a very significant deterioration in the external balance unless

drastic domestic adjustment policies were pursued. Table 7 shows the
cumulative actual increase in debt between 1978 and 1982 as well as a
calculation of the effect of higher oil prices and interest rates.
In the calculation we cumulate the difference between the cost of
servicing the 1978 debt level at actual rather than at the 1978 Libor rates.
We also take the difference between the actual and the 1978 level of oil

imports. The sum, cumulated at actual interest rates is reported in the last
column. It measures approximately the increase in debt "due to external
shocks". It turns out to amount, cumulatively, almost exactly to the actual
increase in external debt. The calculation supports the notion that the debt
problem is due to the shocks; but it leaves open the question of the
macroeconomic channels through which the shocks are translated into external

deficits and debt accumulation. The budget deficit is an essential channel.

22

Table 7 The External Shock to the Brazilian Economy

1978

1979

1980

1981

8.9

12.1

14.2

16.8

13.2

76

79

65

55

54

101

127

238

275

260

Lihor
Terms of Trade

1982

(1977=100)
Oil Price
(sus, 1977=100)

Acutal Debt Increase
(Cumulative, Billion $ us)

7.4

16.7

27.1

35.2

Oil & Interest Effect*
(Cumulative, Billion $ us)

3.6

11.7

23.5

34.8

*For

method see text
Source: IFS, Data Resources, Inc. and Conjunctura Economia.
In Table 8 we show the budget deficit as a fraction of GD? as well as the

growth r&te of real output. Budget data are not available before 1980. Since
then data are available both for the operational budget and the separate
category of interest (monetary correction).

Table 8 The Brazilian Public Sector Deficit and Growth
(Percent of GDP)

Public Sector Deficit
Operational
Monetary Correction
Real

Diesel Price

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

NA

NA

7.5

12.7

6.0

15.8
6.8

6.7

9.0

139

154

158

(1973=1 00 )
GDP Growth

Source:
The

4.8

6.7

7.9

190

...9

188

1.4

I.1F. Data Resources, Inc. and Gazeta Mercantil, and Lauro Rainos.

link between

external sector the budget and current account deficits

stems in large part from extensive subsidies. The government subsidizies

diesel oil because supply of merchandise in the interior is dependent on road

transport. While the real price of oil in the 1963—82 period increased
six—fold in the world market, the domestic price did not even double. But
subsidies also applied to a range of other goods especially food products. At
the same time there were agricultural subsidies at fixed nominal rates,

implying real interest rates of —60 percent and even more. The fact that the
budget deficit absorbed the external shocks meant that there was no automatic
private adjustment to increased world interest rates and increased real oil

prices. Nor did the increased budget deficit lead to offsetting domestic
saving in the anticipation of future taxes. Thus the externa. shocks
translated fully and automatically into the current account. The increased
interest costs were financed by increased external borrowing through state
enterprises and so was the increased budget deficit stemming from higher real
oil prices.

Brazil is certainly not a case where the increased external deficit

reflected an increase in investment. In 1965—77 investment as a fraction of
GDP averaged 21.7 percent. In the period 1978-81 it averaged cnly 20.5
percent. The increased deficit thus reflects consumption and the budget, not
an investment boom. In fact, the increasing monetary tightness that was
pursued in order to raise interest rates and thus attract capital flows cut
into investment.

The poor external performance of the country was not only due to a
failure to adjust the budget for increased costs of debt and subsidized

profams.

A good part of the poor performance stems from a systenatic

overvaluatjon of the exchange rate. Figure 4 shows 'the real rate exchange
measured by non—coffee export prices relative to the domestic price level.

2 3a

FIGURE 4 BRAZILIAN EXPORT PROFITABILITY
(Index 1975=100)

1

0
I

N N N N N N. N N N N N N N N N N 0 Cii Ct CO CU CD CO CO I CD I I CO CO0'CO
0' 0' 0' 0'-4 4 ( 0'
0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' . Q- 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' C" 0'-4 0'4 0'
4 '-I
4 0' 0' 0' 0' 0'
.4 ,-i 4 .-I ..-4
.4 ,.4 .4 ,-I .-l ,-4 .-4 - 4 .-4 —

1 4 - -l

1ote:

Export profitability is measured by the price of
non—coffee exports relative to the domestic price level.

24

The exchange rate policy of the post-1968 period had been to maintain a PPP

relation relative to the US WPI. But that policy of course implied that there
was no adjustment for increased real oil prices and interest rates, nor for
the vagaries of the dollar in terms of other major currencies.
The balance of payments consequences of the external shocks were
contained by increasing domestic oil production and by the domestic stop to
growth that reduced non-oil imports sharply. At the same time the
overvaluation of Argentina and the growth in oil exporting countries' imports

from Brazil led to a temporary export boom. In 1979—81 export revenue grew at
an average annual rate of 23 percent. The strong export growth and the poor
experience with the late—1979 maxi devaluation--inflation and no persistence

of the real depreciation because of preannounced depreciation belo the full,
accelerated irtdexation—-misled policy makers into maintaining a constant real

exchange rate. Failure to seek a large real depreciation as the longrun
adjustment to the deterioration in the external sector thus ultimately led to
the 1982 debt crisis and the catastrophic collapse of activity since.
Unlike in Chile and in Argentina there was no capital flight or flight into

imported durables. In part this is a consequence of the fact that the country
is closed both on trade and capital account. Imports are severely restricted
and thus a Chilean style flight into imported durables is inconceivable. The
only capital flight, leaving aside under and overinvoicing, iust take place
through the black market or through special accounts in the central bank where
exchange rate guarantees are offered to capital importers. But on neither,
account does the capital flight lead to an increased external deficit and

debt. In one case it is reflected in the increased premium in the black

25

market. In the other case firms and banks that have borrowed abroad in
dollars and wish to repay their loans prior to maturity can liquidate their
dollar debts by making a deposit in the central bank, with the central bank

carrying the loan and the exchange rate risk to maturity. In this case
capital flight takes the form of paying off dollar loans by making deposits in

the central bank. There is no impact on foreign exchange reserves. The only
effects are a monetary contraction and, should a devaluation take place prior

tomturity, a futurc increased budget deficit as the central bank purchases
foreign exchange to service the debt.9
The only place where real exchange rate effects are quite apparent is in

respect to tourism. Here the respective over and undervaluation of currencies
in Argentina and Brazil is significant as is the interaction of the respective

black mar1ets. In the first quarter of 1981 the massive Argentinian
overvaluation leads to a surplus in Brazil's net travel balance, in the second
and third quarter of 1982 a huge black market premium in Brazil, together with

a $2000 tourist allowance at the official rate lead to a huge deficit. But
these swings in the tourist balance stay within less than one billion dollars
and thus are more an indication of exchange rate mismanagement than a
substantive part of the debt story.
In 1973—75 LDCs were generally applauded for sustaining growth in the
face of world recession by running external deficits financed in the world

capital market. Brazil followed that pattern at the time and, again in the
1978-82 period. The experience raises the question how a country should
decide between financing and adjustment in the face of transitory shocks such

9See R. Dornbusch and A. Moura da Silva (1983).

26

as interest rate increases or more permanent shocks such as increased real oil

prices. Moreover, if longterm domestic energy projects are present——Brazil's
alcohol program and oil production-—is it sensible to sustain growth even, if

that means debt in the interim rises to a higher longrun level? The Brazilian
experience brings out particularly clearly the fact that we do not have a

sensible model of the optimal level of external debt. Our models merely tell
us that debt trajectories are unsustainable when the trend growth rate of

exports, say, falls short of the rate of interest. Brazil's case suggests
that the automatic capitalization of transitory interest rate shocks or terms

of trade shocks runs into risks if rolling over is not automatic. In such a
model the joint probability of adverse shocks and credit rationing, and their
persistence may lead to exactly the opposite pattern of the 1973-75 period.
Debt is retired through a deflationary strategy before the costly credit
rationing occurs or, aggressive export promotion and import substitution

measures accompany the continued borrowing. The philosophy "debt does not get
paid, debt gets rolled" then is poor advice.

4. Argentina: Capital Flight
In the case of Argentina external debt accumulation financed primarily

capital flight, not current account inbalances. Unlike Chile, Argentina had
severe political instability, continuing high protection, but completely

unrestricted capital flows. For these reasons purchases of external assets
rather than imported durables were the obvious way to escape from instability

and expected depreciation. Moreover, again unlike in Chile, there was clearly

no sharp increase in investment. Thus the trade deterioration in 1979-80 is
not a significant part of the story. Nor does the $ 1 billion deterioration
in the travel account explain much of the increased debt. The large outflow
of shortterm capital indicated in Table 9

is

more central to the explanation

27

of the debt build-up. Of course, one must leave the reservation that the
trade data do not include all military imports——as much as $7 billion are
missing in one estimate-—and to that extent may lead us to apportion too large
a part of the debt increase to the capital account.

Table 9 Argentina: Trade, Capital Flows and Debt

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

Trade Balance

2.9

1.8

-1.4

0.7

2.7

Current Account

1.9

-0.5

-4.8

-4.7

-2.5

Increase in Debt

2.8

6.5

8.0

8.5

0.9

Longterm Capital and
Direct Investment

0.4

0.5

0.9

2.0

3.3

—1.3

1.5

—2.4

—8.5

—4.9

Shortterm Capital and
Errors 'and Omissions

Source: IMF
Figure 5 shows the Argentinian real exchange rate that is central to an

explanation of the capital flows. Under finance minister Martinez de Hoz the
exchange rate was used systematically to stabilize inflation. First, until
December 1978 the rate was managed by the central bank allowing deliberate

real appreciation. Then, from December 1978 until March 1981 the rate
followed a preannounced "tablita". In 1980 the continued prefixing of the
exchange rate became doubtful. Overvaluation was apparent and the coming
change in the presidency led to the belief in depreciation and instability.

With no limitations on private capital outflows there was a massive shift into

foreign assets. The flight into foreign assets included purchases of US
currency, bank deposits and securities abroad as well as real estate
especially in the US and in Brazil.

27a

Figure 5

TUE ARGENTINIAN REAL [XCAi'G1Y RATE

(Index 1978—83400)

150

100

50

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Note: Batio of importprices to domestic prices

1982

1983

28

The source of capital flight is the combination of currency overvaluation

and ongoing and increasing domestic financial instability. The domestic
instability derives from an inability to bring fiscal deficits under control

and stop the inflationary process in a decisive way. In fact, in 1980—81 the
deficit, even setting aside debt service, strongly deteriorated. Table 10
shows some of the results.

Table 10: Argentinian Financial Instability

1982

1978

1979

1980

1981

92

68

66

78

109

Inflation
(Dec. to Dec. )

176

160

101

105

165

Real Interest
(Passive Rate )

—15.6

—9.5

—4.4

6.6

—26.2

Budget Deficit

10.1

9.0

11.3

16.4

17.2

1.8

2.4

7.2

8.2

5.3

Real Exchange Rate
(1978-83=100 )

(

of

GDP)

Exci. Debt Service
Source:

1101983), Data Resources Inc., International
Statistics and Indicadores de Coyuntura.

By 1982 the Malvinas war and the resulting inability to further tap the world
capital market, combined with domestic exchange control end the episode. The

most interesting aspect of the Argentinian public external indebtedness is
that it appears to be matched, one for one or better, by increased private

holdings of external assets. But because the authorities have no access to
these assets there is nevertheless an acute debt problem. In the aftermath of
these disturbances the question remains whether any significant portion of the
capital would return in case of an effective stabilization program.
Experience indicates that this is not the case.

29

Concluding Remarks

The popular view of growing LDC debts is that they reflect unsound

budgetary policies or unsustainable growth programs. Sachs (1983) by contrast
has argued that current account imbalances of the 1970s reflect high,

productive investment that fully justify external borrowing. Bankers who have
poured money into these countries certainly favor the view that they have
supported productive investment thus making it plausible that debts should be

serviced. In this review of the debt experience of Argentina, Brazil and
Chile, we find a much more mixed story. Only in Chile does investment play
any significant part in the current account deterioration. But clearly
imports of consumer goods play at least as significant a role. Moreover, the
burst in imports and the resulting current account deterioration is primarily
due to currency overvaluation.

In Argentina and Brazil increased investment plays absolutely no role in

the debt increase. In the case of Brazil the budget deficit and the lack of
an adjustment of the public sector to external shocks are behind the debt

growth. The failure to adjust the real exchange rate, in this case, explains
the longterm debt difficulties. In the case of Argentina currency
overvaluation in conjunction with prosepcts of political instability and

international capital mobility explain the increased debt. Here the current
account plays little role and capital flight is behind increased debt.

The examples in no way suggest that investment is unimportant in the

context of current account inbalances. But whether it does play a significant
role depends in part on whether trade and/or capital are free to move and in

part on the prospects for economic stability. when trade is relatively
unhampered and prospects are bright investment may be central. In other cases
public sector dissaving or capital flight are more plausible sources of

30

external imbalance.

There are important differences in the three episodes studied. The
countries differ, in the 1978-82 period, in terms of financial and political

stability, and in terms of openness. Argentina is the most unstable and the
most open on capital account. Capital flight, therefore, is the obvious
response to exchange rate instability and deteriorating expected returns on

domestic assets. While some trade liberalization accompanied the
overvaluation experience flight into importables still seems to have been

minor. Chile is at the other extreme with domestic policitcal stability and,
at least initially, a budget surplus. The complete liberalization of trade
together with initial prosperity of households and firms leads to an import

boom that makes up for years of high tariff walls. But because there is no
expectation of a financial collapse, currency reform, wealth taxes etc.,
capital outflows never, come into play in a major way.

Brazil shares Argentina's financial instability; the budget deficit is
vast and any attempt at stabilization takes the form of tight money which, in
the context of indexation, aggravates the condition of the financial system by
causing debt to be growing more rapidly, the tax base to shrink and firms to

go bankrupt. The 1979 change in the economic team signals a direction of
fiscal irresponsibility, but even so the Chilean or Argentinian style flight
into foreign assets or goods remain impossible because the economy is firmly

closed. Even though the economy is severely closed the financial instability
can only be sustained by raising interest rates to force items into the world
capital market, renewing loans and taking f'esh credit, thus financing the

budget and current account deficit. The closeness of the economy in respect
to trade, combined with the interest rate policy assure that the system

continues until the external borrowing constraints of 1982 emerge. Failure to

31

allow a real depreciation in time then meant that the country was unprepared
to absorb the drying up of external credit expect through a severe depression.

32

APPENDI X

Investment: Significant changes in investment can come about through two
channels. The first is a transitory increase in investment as a result of an
increased desired capital stock; the other is a change in the timing of

investment in response to intertemporal relative price variations. We draw up
a standard investment model to isolate these effects.

The desired capital stock depends on the required rate of return net of

capital depreciation, i + d — Q/Q, and on the real price of capital (Q/P)
as can be derived from the standard arbitrage condition:
i + d

(4) Pf'(k)/Q

Q/Q

or

(5) k =

g((i

+ d -

Q/Q)Q/P))

;

g' < o

On the investment side we assume adjustment costs and also assume that

imports as well as domestic output are inputs in the production of

investment. We assume a proportional import requirement and an increasing
marginal domestic input requirement. The solution to the investment problem
then is a rate of investment that depends positively on the real price of
capital in terms of imports, Q/Pin.1

(6) I = h(Q/P,v)

;

v = pm/p

where v is the real exchange rate or the real price of domestic goods in terms

of importables. The investment model is completed by the capital accumulation

1Suppose firms in the investment business maximize the value of profits
Z = QI — aPmI — Pb(I) with b', b" > 0. The coefficient a denotes the constant

unit import content of investment. The first order condition is b'(I) = (Q/P
- av) or I = h(Q/P,v) with v = Pm/P.

33

equation:

(7) k = h(Q/P,v) - dk
The rational expectations equilibrium, given a constant real exchange
rate and interest rate, can be visualized in terms of the conventional phase

diagram. The equilibrium capital stock and the real price of capital follow a
saddlepath to the steady state.
Consider now the anticipation of an increase in the real cost of imports

which acts as a temporary investment stimulus. This is shown in Figure 1.
Starting from an initial equilibrium at point E there is an expectation that
the real exchange rate will depreciate or the real price of imports in terms

of domestic goods will rise in the future. There is an immediate jump in the
real price of assets and that higher real price promotes a transitory

investment boom. Once the real depreciation does take place (point E") the
real price of capital keeps rising but now disinvestment takes place. Pending
an anticipated real depreciation, therefore, we expect investment and hence

investment goods imports, to be high. The same analysis, of course, applies
to a transitory decline in the real price of imports.

The exposition so far assumed that capital is used to produce domestic

goods but has itself import content. There is another case in which
anticipated real depreciation has a significant impact on investment. In this
case capital is used to produce tradeables and investment has an import

content. A real depreciation, in the longrun must raise the real price of
capital but the capital stock may rise or fall. However, pending the
anticipated increase in the real price of tradeables there will be an
investment boom and hence a boom of investment goods imports.

33a

0

Q

P

k

Fi gur cA-i

The Investment Effects of an
Anticipated ReaL depreciation

34

Consumer Durables: Consider a much simplified of durables where we neglect
time preference, depreciation and resale as well as non-durables. The
consumer's welfare depends on the services from durables in two period, the
second period being denoted by a prime.

(8) U =

v(s)

+

v(s')

Services are given by the cumulative stock

()

D+

S = D, S' =

D'

where D denotes durable purchases.
The budget constraint is
(10) Y - T = PD +

P'D'

where Y — T denotes the present value of income net of taxes and P' is the

discounted second period price. We assume P < F' < P' where F' is the
equilibrium real price under a correctly valued real exchange rate while P is
the price consumers actual face.

For the economy, in the aggregate, tax payments are T =

(p*

- P)D but the

individual household takes taxes as unrelated to purchases. The individual
faces the budget line obtained by adding D to both sides of (10) to obtain:

(lOa) S' = (Y

-

T)/P'

+

(1-D/D')s

Figure A—2 shows the consumer equilibrium. The consumer views the budget
line as having a slope dS'/dS =

1

-

PIP' which is flatter than the slope of

the social budget line dS'/dS =

1

—

P*/P'.

Consumer equilibrium, including

the subsidy distortion due to overvaluation, is at point A' on indifference
curve U with excessive purchases of durables in the first period and a level

of welfare lower than at A" on indifference curve U. It is apparent that the
larger is the subsidy the further the equilibrium lies to the south—east of
A", thus further deteriorating welfare.

If the consumer does not take into account the fact of taxes the

34a

s,
YIP,

U

Y/P*

Figure A-t Conser Ilirables and Disequi1ibritnii

S

Exchange Rates

35

consumption point A would be chosen in the first period, leading to second
period distress once the taxes are collected. This consideration is of
interest because it helps explain the collapse of durable purchases after 1981.

36

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barro, R. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net
Economy, December.

Wealth,"

Journal of Political

_____ (1983), Microeconomics, Wiley.
Blanchard, 0. (1983), "Debts, Deficits and Finite Horizons," unpublished
manuscript, MIT.

_____ (1983a), "Debt and the Current Account Deficit in Brazil," in P. Aspe

Armella, et.al. (ed.), Financial Policies and the World CaDital Market:
The Case of Latin American Countries, University of Chicago Press.

Borenzstein, E. (1984), "Fiscal Policy and Foreign Debt," unpublished
manuscript, MIT.
Bruno, M. (1976), "The Two—Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange Rate,"
American Economic Review, 66, pp.566—577.
Cardoso, E. (1983), "Stabilization in Latin America: Popular Models and
Unhappy Experience," unpublished manuscript, Boston University.
Cavallo, D., "Deficit Fiscal, endeudamiento del Gobierno y tasa de inflacion:
Argentina 1940—1982," Estudios, April/June 1983.

Cavallo, D. and Y. Mundlak (1983), "Real Exchange Rate, Trade Policies and
Sectoral Growth—The Case of Argentina (1946-82)," unpublished manuscript,
Hebrew University.
Cline, W. (1983), International Debt and the Stability of the World Economy,
Institute for International Economics, No. 4, Washington, 0.

_____ (1983a), "International Financial Rescue: Viability and Options,"
unpublished manuscript, Institute for International Econonics,
Washington, DC.

Corbo, V. (1983), "An Overview of Macroeconmic Developments in the Last Twenty
Years," Universidad Catolica de Chile.

_____ and J. de Melo (1983), "Liberalization and Stabilization in Chile:
1974—82," unpublished manuscript, World Bank.

_____ and R. Matte (1983), "Flujos de Capitales Y El Rol de la Politica
Montearia: El Case de Chile," unpublished manuscript, Pontifica
Universidad Catolica do Chile0

Dagnino Pastore, J (1983), "Progress and Prospects of the Latin American
Adjustment Program," unpublished manuscript, Buenos Aires.

____ (1982),

"The Anti-Inflationary Experiment, Argentina 1979-Si: An
Assessment," forthcoming in Liberalization and Stabilizaticn: Recent
Experience in the Southern Cone, World Bank.

37

Calvo, G. (1982), "Real Exchange Rate with Fixed Parities," unpublished
manuscript, Columbia University.
Deaton, A. and J. Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior,
Cambridge University Press.
Diaz Alejandro, C. (1983), "Studies of the 1930s to the 1980s," in P. Aspe
Armrella, et al., (eds.) Financial Policies and the World Capital Market:
The Problem of Latin American Countries, University of Chicago Press.

__________ (1963), "A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and the Redistributive
Effect," Journal of Political Economy, June.

_____ (1981), "Southern Cone Stabilization Policies," in Cline, W. and S.
Weintraub (eds.), Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries,

Brookings.

_____ (1983), "The Brazilian Debt Crisis," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2
Dooley, M. et. al. (1983), "An Analysis of External Debt Positions of Eight
Developing Countries Through 1990," unpublished manuscript, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Dornbusch, R. (1983a), "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods and Optimal External
Borrowing," Journal of Political Economy, Feb.

______ (1983b), "Discussion, in J. Williamson (ed.) Prospects for Adjustment,
Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC. June 1983.

______ (1982), "Stabilization Policy in LDCs: What Lessons Have We
World Development, September.

Learned?"

_____ aridA. Moura da Silva (1983), "Dollar Deposits in Brazil: The 432
Effect," Revista Brasilera de Econoinia, March 1984.

Edwards, 3. (1983), "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten
Years of Chile's Experience with Free Market Policies: 1973-83,"
unpublished manuscript, UCLA.
Enders, T. and R. Mattione (1983), "Latin American: The Crisis of Debt and
Growth," unpublished manuscript, Brookings.
Fernandez, R. (1983), "The Expectations Management Approach to Stabilization:
Argentina 1976—81," unpublished manuscript, CEMA.
French-Davis, R. (1983), "Deuda Externa Y Apertura Financeira en Chile,"
Collection Estudios Cieplan, 11, December 1983.

38

Harberger, A. (1983), "Welfare Consequences of Capital Inflows," unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.

_____ (1983a), "A Primer on Chile," unpublished manuscript, University of
Chicago.

Hause, J. (1966), "The Welfare Cost of Disequilibrium Exchange Rates," Journal
of Political Economy, October.
Johnson, H.G. (1966), "The Welfare Cost of Exchange Rate Stabilization,"
Journal of Political Economy, October.
Martin, R. and M. Selowski (1981), "Energy Prices, Substitution and Optimal
Borrowing in the Shortrun," unpublished manuscript, World Bank, Journal
of Development Economics), forthcoming.
Mishkin, P. (1976), "Liquidity, Consumer Durable Expenditure and Monetary
Policy," American Economic Review, Sept.
-

Murphy, R. (1983), "Tariffs, Real Exchange Rates and Fiscal Policy: An
Intertemporal Analysis," unpublished manuscript, MIT.

_____ (1984), "Essays on Macroeconomic Adjustment in Open Economies,"
unpublished manuscript, MIT.
Obstfeld, M. (1983a), "Intertemporal Price Speculation and the Optimal
Current—Account Deficit," Journal of International Money arid Finance, 2,
pp.1 35-145.

Rodriquez, C. (1982), "The Argentine Stabilization Plan of December 20th,"
World Development, September 1982.

_____ (1982), "Politicas de Estabilizacion en la Economia Argentina 1978—82,"
unpublished manuscript, CEMA.
Royal Institute of International Affairs (1937), The Problem of International
Investment, Frank Cass & Co., London.
Sachs, J. (1982), "LDC Debt in the 1980s: Risk and Reform," in P. Wachtel
(ed.), Crises in Economic and Financial Structure, Lexington Books, 1982.

_____ (1982a), "The Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment Process,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics.
Simonsen, N. (1983a), "Brazil: External Adjustment and Economic Perspectives,"
unpublished manuscript, Fundacao Getulio Vargas.
United Naticns (1964), El Financiamento Externo de America Latir.a, New York.

