                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      EAST ASIA AND GLOBAL IMBALANCES:
                SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT

                                             Hiro Ito
                                           Menzie Chinn

                                       Working Paper 13364
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13364


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




Paper prepared for the 18th Annual NBER-East Asian Seminar on Economics, "Financial Sector Development
in the Pacific Rim," Singapore Management University, on June 22-24, 2007, organized by Takatoshi
Ito and Andy Rose. We thank the discussants, Edwin Lai and Edward Robinson, and the conference
participants, for their comments. The financial support of faculty research funds of the University
of Wisconsin, Madison and Portland State University is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Hiro Ito and Menzie Chinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
East Asia and Global Imbalances: Saving, Investment, and Financial Development
Hiro Ito and Menzie Chinn
NBER Working Paper No. 13364
September 2007
JEL No. F32,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the role of budget balances, financial development and openness, in the evolution of
global imbalances. Financial development -- or the lack thereof -- has received considerable attention
as a possible contributing factor to the development of persistent and expanding current account imbalances.
Several observers have argued that the depth and sophistication of US capital markets have caused
capital to flow from relatively underdeveloped East Asian financial markets. In this paper, we extend
our previous work by examining the effect of different types and aspects of financial development.
Our cross-country analysis, encompassing a sample of 19 industrialized countries and 70 developing
countries for the period of 1986 through 2005, yields a number of new results. First, we confirm a
role for budget balances in industrial countries when bond markets are incorporated. Second, empirically
both credit to the private sector and stock market capitalization appear to be equally important determinants
of current account behavior. Third, while increases in the size of financial markets induce a decline
in the current account balance in industrial countries, the reverse is more often the case for developing
countries, especially when other measures of financial development are included. However, because
of nonlinearities incorporated into the specifications, this characterization is conditional upon other
factors. Fourth, a greater degree of financial openness is typically associated with a smaller current
account balance in developing countries.

Hiro Ito
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, Oregon 97201
ito@pdx.edu

Menzie Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
1. Introduction

           The implications of persistent and widening global current account imbalances have

been at the center of policy debates over the last half decade. While the concerns subside each

year, as a rapid unraveling of the imbalances fails to materialize, the intellectual challenge of

determining what drives these imbalances remains. To the extent that some policymakers view

the configuration of imbalances to be undesirable, a salient question remains what policies would

cause those imbalances shrink.


           These imbalances are large. The U.S. deficit was 6.5% of GDP, while China’s surplus

was 9.1%, with balances in the next two years projected at 10%. The rest of the Developing

Asian region is running an average current account surplus of 5.4%.1 Finally, the sustained

elevation in oil prices has added oil exporters to the list of surplus countries. Figure 1 highlights

the lopsided nature of imbalances, with the U.S. deficit primarily financed by East Asia and the

Middle East.


           As a consequence of the magnitude of their surpluses, China and other Asian emerging

market countries have often been identified as the main causes of the widening U.S. current

account deficits. More specifically, these economies’ underdeveloped and closed financial

markets are alleged to be insufficiently attractive enough to absorb the excess saving in the

region, resulting in a “saving glut”. Clarida (2005a,b) argues that East Asian, particularly

Chinese, financial markets are less sophisticated, deep, and open so that Asian excess saving

inevitably flows into the highly developed U.S. financial market. Bernanke (2005) contends that

“some of the key reasons for the large U.S. current account deficit are external to the United

States” and remediable only in the long run. That is, it is the saving glut of the Asian emerging

1
    Figures from IMF, World Economic Outlook (April 2007).


                                                       1
market countries, driven by rising savings and collapsing investment in the aftermath of the

financial crisis, that is the direct cause of the U.S. current account deficit. Therefore, the long

term solution is to encourage developing countries, especially those in the East Asian region, to

develop financial markets so that the saving rate would fall. Once policies improving institutions

and legal systems amenable to financial development and liberalizing the markets are

implemented, “a greater share of global saving can be redirected away from the United States

and toward the developing nations.”


         Standing in stark contrast to the saving glut thesis is the more parochial view that a fall

in the U.S. national saving, most notably in the form of its government budget deficit, is the main

cause of the ongoing current account deficits – the “twin deficit” argument. While the twin

deficit effect has been empirically investigated in the literature (e.g., Gale and Orszag, 2004), as

far as we are aware, very little investigation has been made to shed light on the effect of financial

development on current account balances, with the exception of Chinn and Ito (2007a).2 In this

investigation encompassing a sample of 89 countries over the 1971-2004 period, we found that

more financial development leads to higher saving for countries with underdevelopment

institutions and closed financial markets that includes most of East Asian emerging market

countries.3

         This paper takes a closer look at the effect of financial development on current account

balances and the saving-investment determination. Financial development cannot be defined and

measured simply (see Beck et al., 2001). Chinn and Ito (2007b) used private credit creation (as a


2
  Theoretical explanations for this phenomenon now abound. See Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2006) and
Mendoza et al. (2006).
3
  Among East Asian countries, most of countries (except for Hong Kong and Singapore) could experience worsening
current account balances if financial markets develop further, but that effect is achieved, not through a reduction in
savings rates, but through higher increases in the levels of investment than those of national savings.


                                                          2
ratio to GDP) as a shorthand proxy measure for financial development. Clearly this is a

simplification with implications that should be investigated. Hence, in this paper, we undertake a

closer look at the effect of different types of financial development – whether banking, equity,

bond, or insurance market sector – to gain different insights. Additionally, we investigate various

dimensions of financial development, such as size, degree of activity, and efficiency. Given the

ongoing asset market booms in China and other emerging market countries in East Asia, size

measures alone might lead to misleading inferences.


        Other factors are suggested by the current debate. Bernanke argues that the openness of

financial markets can also affect the direction of cross-border capital flows. Alfaro et al. (2003),

on the other hand, show that institutional development may explain the Lucas paradox, i.e., why

capital flows from developing countries with presumably high marginal products of capital to

developed countries with low ones. In short, financial development might be mediated by

financial openness and institutional development. Hence, we will examine interaction effects as

well.


        Our empirical analysis relies upon a dataset composed of 19 industrialized countries and

70 developing countries for the period of 1986 through 2005. Financial development is assessed

from various perspectives: different types of financial markets such as banking, equity, and bond

markets, as well as different aspects of financial development such as the size, activeness, and

cost performance of the industry. The analysis involves making one key trade-off: in refining the

measures of financial development, we reduce the set of countries covered, as well as the time

sample. We believe that the payoff to making this trade-off is on net positive.


        To anticipate our findings, we find the following. First, we confirm a role for budget

balances in industrial countries when bond markets are incorporated. Second, empirically both


                                                  3
credit to the private sector and stock market capitalization appear to be equally important

determinants of current account behavior. Third, while increases in the size of financial markets

induce a decline in the current account balance in industrial countries, the reverse is more often

the case for developing countries, especially when other measures of financial development are

included. However, because of nonlinearities incorporated into the specifications, this

characterization is contingent. Fourth, a greater degree of financial openness is typically

associated with a smaller current account balance in developing countries.


       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 recaps the debate over financial

development, openness and institutions, and how those factors are related to the current pattern

of current account imbalances, and saving and investment flows. Section 3 details the empirical

methodology and results. Section 4 draws out the policy implications; Section 5 concludes.



2. Financial and Institutional Development and the Global Saving Glut


2.1. Theoretical Perspectives

        We adopt a medium run prospect approach to evaluate current account behavior.

Specifically, we view the current account as being driven by saving and investment behavior.

Consequently, factors that affect either of these two flows – such as demographics, trend income

growth, terms of trade volatility – should in principal affect the current account. The resulting

empirical approach was implemented in Chinn and Prasad (2003).


        The proposition that financial development or deepening influences saving and

investment behavior is by now well established. Financial development could enhance both

saving and investment by raising returns as well as lowering the cost of capital and the risk of



                                                 4
investment. The mitigation of information asymmetries, the reduction of information and

transaction costs, the improvement of corporate governance, and/or facilitation of risk

management are all potential channels highlighted in the literature.4

         However, while the effect of financial development on investment is relatively

unambiguous (i.e., positive), that on saving is not, since higher returns and lower risk of financial

investment create effects on saving akin to income and substitution effects. The traditional view

on the effect of financial development on saving (such as Edwards, 1996) suggests a positive

association between the two variables; further financial deepening could induce more saving

through more depth and sophistication of the financial system. A contrasting view suggests that

more developed financial markets lessen the need for precautionary saving, and thereby lower

the saving rate. This last observation is the basis for the saving glut thesis, leading to Bernanke’s

(2005) argument for greater financial development and liberalization as a long run remedy to the

global saving glut.5


        Financial liberalization takes a central role in Kose et al. (2006). Liberalization can bring

about more efficient allocation of capital across countries. Another key aspect of financial

opening is that financial liberalization directly affects international risk sharing. In an idealized

world with complete financial markets (and only tradable goods), the location of investment

should be independent of saving, in order to ensure state independent consumption-smoothing

(Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1996). However, as Feldstein and Horioka (1980) originally pointed out,


4
  See King and Levine (1993), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Wurgler (2000). This is the basis for the argument that
financial development leads to economic growth. Levine (2005) provides an extensive review on the “finance-growth
link. ”
5
  If one views the effect of financial development on saving as that of asset markets on consumption, the arguments
about the wealth effect of asset market performance as well as the balance sheet effects can be relevant to our
discussion. However, our main focus in this paper is to examine the medium-run dynamics of the determinants of
current account balances and saving and investment. Therefore, we focus on the comparison between the financial
deepening view and the saving-glut view.


                                                         5
investment and saving are highly correlated. Although that correlation has diminished over the

years, the extent of the correlation remains nontrivial. In this environment, further international

portfolio diversification afforded by greater financial liberalization could yield potentially large

benefits.6

         Most directly related to the issue at hand, financial openness can affect saving and

investment determination, and hence capital flows across borders. According to the global saving

glut thesis, financial development coupled with comprehensive financial liberalization policies in

East Asia would mitigate savings levels, and further allow excess saving to be “recycled” within

the region, instead of flowing into the U.S. Similarly, Dooley et al. (2005) argue that, in the

absence of a well-functioning domestic and/or regional financial system, East Asian countries

essentially lend capital to the United States at low interest rates, in exchange for efficient

financial intermediation. The capital returns to East Asia in the form of direct investment.


         The efficacy and integrity of legal environment and the level of institutional development

should also be important determinants for saving and investment decisions. A society’s legal

foundations and institutions define the context wherein financial transactions and economic

decisions are made. Levine, et al. (2000) find that the cross-country differences in legal and

regulatory systems influence the development of financial intermediation.7 The literature

identifies a number of channels by which legal and institutional development can affect

investment and saving decisions. Whether the legal system clearly establishes law and order,

minimizes corruption, or whether the administrative branch of the government protects property

rights efficiently are all important determinants of the incentives to save and invest. Decisions by

6
  Tesar (1995) finds that the possible gains from further international risk sharing is minimal for developed countries,
where financial markets are well-developed and relatively open and whose economies are relatively more
synchronized with the world economy, while the gains for developing countries are possibly significant.
7
  See also Beck and Levine (2004), Johnson, et al. (2002), and Levine (2005) among others.


                                                           6
foreign residents will also be affected.8

2.2   Stylized Facts: Financial Development, Openness, and Institutions

          Figure 2 illustrates development of financial markets in terms of the market size, which

we measure using SIZE, the sum of private credit creation and stock market capitalization (both

measured as ratios to GDP).9,10 Throughout the period, most markets, notably the U.S., Western

European, and Chinese markets (relative to GDP), have steadily grown. The exceptions are

Japanese and ex-China East Asian financial markets experienced some retrenchment after the

bursting of the bubble at the end of the 1980s and the financial crisis of 1997-98, respectively.

After the first half of the 1990s, U.S. financial markets have been the sole winner in terms of the

market size. The relative sizes of Western European and Japanese markets are both about 58% of

those of the U.S., and those of East Asian and Chinese markets are about half of the U.S.

financial markets.11


          Beck et al. (2001) argue that the size of the financial system alone may not present a

complete picture of financial development – a large financial market could be a relatively

sedentary one involving few market activity. Hence, one needs to examine the activeness of

financial markets, for which we use stock market total value traded (as the ratio to GDP; SMTV).

Figure 3 compares SMTV across different countries and regions. In this figure also, we can make
8
   Chinn and Ito (2006) find that financial openness leads to financial development especially when a country is
equipped with developed legal systems and institutions.
9
   All the measures of financial development are retrieved from the financial structure dataset created and subsequently
updated by Beck et al. (2001).
10
   Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001) measures the overall size of the financial system by summing domestic assets of
deposit money banks with stock market capitalization (both as ratios of GDP). However, since we want to focus on the
private sector development of financial markets, that is more in line with financial development in real sense, we use
private credit creation instead.
11
   Disaggregated pictures of the size of financial markets show that the relative size of financial markets in terms of
either private credit creation or stock market capitalization individually are consistent with what is shown in Table 2.
However, ex-China East Asian countries’ and Chinese financial market developments differ from each other. While
Chinese financial markets are more developed in the banking sector (its relative size to U.S. counterparts is about
63%), other East Asian countries are, on average, equipped with more developed equity markets (its relative size is
about 81%).


                                                           7
the same generalizations as we did in Figure 2. The biggest difference from the previous figure is

that the strength of U.S. financial markets is more pronounced when stock market total value is

used as the measure of financial development; even the second most active financial markets,

those in East Asia and Pacific, are only less than 40% of U.S. stock market total value (as a ratio

to GDP).12 This is clear evidence that U.S. stock markets are far more liquid than those in other

regions and countries.


         Figure 4 shows that the characterization of U.S. capital markets extends to private bond

markets.13 Even the private bond markets of Western European countries and Japan are less than

half of U.S. counterparts, and only 22% and 9% for ex-China East Asia and China, respectively,

showing overwhelming strength of U.S. capital markets.


         Public bond market development presents a different picture, as shown in Figure 5.

While oil exporting countries have had large public bond markets, Japan’s public bond market

size is also increasing rapidly, reflecting the sustained period of deficit spending in response to

years of stagnant growth. The U.S. public bond market is still large compared to other regions,

but not as large as these two regions.14

         Following Chinn and Ito (2007a), we measure legal and institutional development using

LEGAL, which is the first principal component of law and order (LAO), corruption (CORRUPT),



12
   Stock market turnover (SMTO) can be a measure of market activeness as well. We will use the variable later as a
measure of market activeness. When SMTO is compared in the same way as other financial development measures, it
is shown that China’s stock market turnover was impressively high in the 1991-1995 and 1996-2000 periods, more
than one and a half times as high as the U.S. figures. But this only reflects the fact that Chinese stock markets grew
from a small market size.
13
   The variables for private and public bond market capitalization (PVBM and PBBM, respectively) are only available
after 1990 and for industrialized countries and emerging market countries.
14
   In later sections, we use other measures of financial development, those pertaining to the cost performance or
efficiency of the financial (mainly banking) industry. INVNETINT is an accounting value of bank's net interest revenue
as a share of its interest-bearing (total earning) assets, inverted. OVERHEAD is an accounting value of a bank's
overhead costs as a share of its total assets. For more details of data definitions, refer to Data Appendix.


                                                          8
and bureaucracy quality (BQ).15 Figure 7 compares the level of legal and institutional

development of different regions and countries with the U.S., whose value is normalized as 100.

As one can expect, Western Europe and Japan have achieved levels of legal and institutional

development comparable to the U.S. The other regions lag the developed countries; their relative

levels of legal and institutional development are about 60% at most.


          The degree of financial openness is compared in Figure 8 using the Chinn-Ito capital

account openness index (KAOPEN). This index is based upon the IMF’s categorical enumeration

pertaining to cross-border financial transactions reported in Annual Report on Exchange

Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). Higher values of this index indicate greater

financial openness.16 Like the LEGAL variable, financial openness is compared relatively to the

U.S. While East Asian countries slowed down the level of financial openness after the Asian

crisis, both the Latin American and Middle East/North African regions have been steadily

opening their financial markets throughout the sample period. One outlier is China. Not only is

the pace of financial liberalization slow, so too is its level low.


          The above observations lead us to conclude that China and other East Asian developing

countries have achieved impressive – but uneven – financial development. Especially when it

comes to the bond market sector, East Asian economies continue to lag, despite initiatives to

develop these markets. Interestingly, while the extent of legal and institutional development is

comparable to other developing countries, China’s financial opening significantly lags behind

others as is evidenced by the U.S. persistent demand to China for further financial opening.

Below, we will examine the effects of further development in financial markets and legal systems


15
   Higher values indicate better conditions. The choice of these variables is motivated by the literature on the finance
and growth, as well as the wide coverage afforded by their use.
16
   More details about the data are found in Chinn and Ito (2007b).


                                                           9
with an eye to drawing out the implications of further opening of financial markets in East Asian

emerging market countries.




3. Empirics

3.1 Specification and Estimation

       We estimate regressions of the general form:

        yi ,t = α + β1 FDi ,t + β 2 LEGALi ,t + β 3 KAOPEN i ,t
                        + β 4 (FDi ,t × LEGALi ,t ) + β 5 (LEGALi ,t × KAOPEN i ,t ) + β 6 (KAOPEN i ,t × FDi ,t )
                        + X i ,t Γ + ui ,t                                                                  (1)

where three dependent variables (y), the current account balance, national saving, and investment,

all expressed as a share of GDP, are regressed on FD, a measure of financial development;

KAOPEN, a measure of financial openness; LEGAL a measure of legal/institutional

development; and X, a vector of macroeconomic and policy control variables. For FD, we will

include a variable pertaining to financial development depending on an analysis of our interest.

Following Chinn and Prasad (2003), the vector X contains control variables of “usual suspects”

as the determinants of current account balances, namely, net foreign assets as a ratio to GDP;

relative income (to the U.S.); its quadratic term; relative dependency ratios on you and old

population; terms of trade volatility; output growth rates; trade openness (=

exports+imports/GDP); dummies for oil exporting countries; and time fixed effects. The sample

for our analysis covers both industrial and developing countries. The underlying database has

annual data for 19 industrial and 70 developing countries covering the last twenty-year period

1986-2005.


       For our empirical analysis, we use a panel that contains non-overlapping 5-year averages


                                                       10
of the data for each country. This approach mitigates the effect of measurement errors in annual

data likely to be particularly problematic in data for developing countries. It also allows us to

focus our interest in medium-term rather than business cycle variations in current account

balances.17 All the variables, except for net foreign assets to GDP, are converted into the

deviations from their GDP-weighted world mean prior to the calculation of five year averages –

net foreign asset ratios are sampled from the first year of each five-year panel as the initial

conditions. The use of demeaned series controls for rest-of-world effects. In other words, a

country’s current account balance is determined by developments at home relative to the

rest-of-the-world.


         As the above arguments have made it clear, it is important to examine not only the effects

of each of financial development, financial openness, and legal/institutional development, but

also the interactions of these variables. Hence, we include in the estimation the interactions

between financial development and legal variables (PCGDP × LEGAL), those between the

financial development and financial openness variables (PCGDP × KAOPEN), and those

between legal development and financial openness (LEGAL × KAOPEN). The financial and legal

interaction effect is motivated by the conjecture that deepening financial markets might lead to

higher saving rates, but the effect might be magnified under conditions of better developed legal

institutions. Alternatively, if greater financial deepening leads to a lower saving rate or a lower

investment rate, that effect could be mitigated when financial markets are equipped with highly

developed legal systems. A similar argument can be applied to the effect of financial openness on



17
   Because we focus on medium term dynamics, the predictions of the Mundell-Fleming model are of limited
relevance in this framework. For the same reason, we do not control for the type of the exchange rate regime; it is not
directly relevant to the level of current account balances, but to the speed of current account adjustment. However, we
will examine the effect of different exchange rate regimes in the robustness checks. For the short-term current account
dynamics, refer to Chinn and Lee (2006).


                                                         11
current account balances.18,19



3.2 Results from the Basic Model: Does Market Size Matter?

          We first examine whether the size of financial markets (namely the sum of bank lending

and equity markets as a ratio to GDP) matters for current account balances. Since these results

are sensitive to the inclusion of the African countries, we also report separate sets of results with

and without the African countries included for the developing country sample. We also report

separate results for an emerging market group that differs somewhat from the developing country

sample.20

          Table 1 reports the results for the current account regressions for different subgroups.

First, in contrast to the findings in Chinn and Ito (2007a), the budget balance variable is not

statistically significant at conventional levels for any of the samples. A one percentage point

increase (above the world GDP-weighted average) in the budget balance would lead to a 0.24

percentage point increase in the current account balance for industrialized countries (IDC) and a

little smaller effect for developing country groups, though none of them are statistically

significant (with its p-value being 15% for IDC and ranging from 12% to 17% for developing

country groups).

          This result differs from the results obtained in Chinn and Ito (2007a) where a one

percentage point increase in the budget balance would lead to a 0.15 percentage point increase in

18
   Bailliu (2000) shows that capital inflows, a proxy to capital account openness, can foster economic growth only if
the level of domestic financial development is above a certain threshold whereas Chinn and Ito (2006) find that
financial openness leads to financial development especially when a country achieves a certain level of legal and
institutional development.
19
   As Chinn and Ito (2006) have shown, financial development and financial openness can be highly correlated.
However, inclusion of the interaction terms makes the model setting nonlinear and thereby collinearity between these
variables less of an issue, thereby allowing us to identify independent effects of these variables.
20
   The definition of emerging market countries relies upon the International Financial Corporation’s (IFC) indices.
The group of emerging market countries in this study refers to the countries which were included in either the IFC’s
Global, Investible, or Frontier Index as of 1995.


                                                        12
the current account balance for industrialized countries (IDC) and a little higher results for

developing country groups. The differing results are ascribable to the use of a different measure

of financial development – private credit – and longer sample period.21

            SIZE exhibits a negative coefficient only in the industrial countries while its interaction

with LEGAL is significantly positive for ex-Africa LDC and EMG groups, and its interaction

with KAOPEN is significantly positive for industrial countries and significantly negative for

developing and emerging market countries. This finding indicates that, for industrial countries,

an expansion of the size of financial markets tends to decrease the current account balance. This

effect is mitigated if the country is more financially open. The coefficient on the interaction term

involving financial development and financial openness implies that greater financial openness

will increase an industrial country’s propensity to export capital. Given these estimated

relationships, U.S. behavior appears even more anomalous.

            The dynamics between financial development, financial openness, and institutional

development are different for developing countries. The estimated coefficients for both financial

development and legal/institutional variables are significantly positive, while none of the SIZE

coefficients are significant for financial development in any developing country grouping.

LEGAL is marginally significant for LDC and ex-Africa LDC (its p-value being 12% and 13%,

respectively) and significant for EMG. The level variable for financial openness is significantly

negative for all developing country samples, suggesting that a financially closed country such as

China is more likely to run current account surpluses (or smaller deficits). The significantly

positive coefficient for the interaction between financial development and legal development

indicates that a larger financial market enhances the effect of legal development. The

significantly negative coefficient for the interaction between financial development and financial

21
     Also the LEGAL variable was included as a time-invariant variable.


                                                          13
openness indicates that a larger financial market lessens the effect of financial openness.

            The interpretation of the regression coefficients is complicated by the inclusion of the

interaction terms. Below, we will present some intuitive interpretations using some numerical

examples. For now, the key stylized facts are that among developing countries, those with

developed financial markets (in terms of their size), more advanced legal systems and institutions,

and/or closed financial markets tend to run current account surpluses. With this generalization, it

is unsurprising that China, with a large but closed financial market, equipped with a mediocre

index of institutional development, is running a large current account surplus.22 In this respect,

China at first glance appears to fit the saving glut thesis. We return to this issue later.

            The significantly positive coefficient for the oil exporting country dummy in the LDC

and EMG samples are consistent with the recent rise in current account surpluses (and the

accumulation foreign exchange reserves). Figure 1 demonstrates that the current account

balances of “Middle East and N. Africa” rise and fall with oil price movements.

            We also estimate the regressions for both the national saving and investment equations

(results not reported). While the results of the current account regression for industrial countries

and ex-Africa LDCs are more consistent with the national saving regression (in terms of the

significance levels of the estimated coefficients of our interest and the goodness of fit of the

model), those of less developed and emerging market country groups show greater consistency

with the results from the investment regressions than from those of the national saving regression.

In other words, financial development and its interactions with legal development and financial

openness affect current account balances through national saving for the IDC and ex-Africa LDC

groups, and through investment for the LDC and EMG groups.

            Given that the SIZE variable is the sum of PCGDP and SMKC, we also ran regressions

22
     The estimation results for the EMG group are found to be robust to exclusion of China from the sample.


                                                          14
using each of the two variables in place of FD in equation (1) to identify which of the

components of SIZE is driving the results for the regressions shown in Table 1 (results not

reported).23 In terms of the goodness of fit, it seems slightly more likely that the regressions with

PCGDP have a better fit than those with SMKC. However, in terms of the statistical significance

and economic magnitude of the estimated coefficients, we cannot determine which of the

variables yield more consistent results with those in Table 1. At the very least, as far as the

sample period in this study is concerned, banking sector and equity market development seem to

be equally important.



3.2 Results for Extended Models: Activity and Efficiency

          Clearly, SIZE is unlikely to convey the full complexity of financial development. To

capture how active financial markets are, we use stock market turnover ratios (SMTO) as the

measure.24 Since an active market is not necessarily an efficient market, we also seek an

efficiency measure. We are not able to obtain such a measure for equity markets, but rely upon a

banking sector indicator, the net interest margin (NETINT). This variable is the banks’ net

interest revenues as a share of their interest-bearing (total earning) assets.25 We invert this series

(INVNETINT), and use it as a measure of market competitiveness of financial markets. We

re-estimate the equation (1) model using these two variables. Also, since one can expect that

market efficiency might affect international investors in a manner dependent upon market

23
   Both PCGDP and SMKC together cannot be included in the regressions because these two variables are highly
correlated with each other and thereby yielding the issue of multicollinearity.
24
   In the previous section, we used SMTV as the measure of stock market activeness. However, this variable is so
highly correlated with SIZE that including both variables would not yield meaningful results. Stock market turnover
(SMTO) can be a misleading indicator of stock market activeness since it is normalized by the market size, not the size
of the economy. However, since the estimation model already controls for the size of financial markets, SMTO can be
a useful indicator of market activeness.
25
   Originally, a higher value of NETINT indicates more interest rate margin, i.e., less competitive market conditions.
However, to make its interpretation easier, we inverted the variable such that a higher value of INVNETINT means less
interest margin opportunities, and more competitive market conditions.


                                                         15
openness, we also include an interactive term between INVNETINT and KAOPEN.26

          The results shown in Table 2 are promising.27 Interestingly, inclusion of SMTO,

INVNETINT, and interaction terms, has resulted in many heretofore marginally significant

variables becoming more statistically and economically significant. Now, the estimated

coefficients for financial development in all samples are significant – negative for industrial

countries and positive for developing country groups.28


          For all developing country groups, SMTO’s coefficients turn out to be significantly

positive. This result suggests that countries with active financial (more particularly equity)

markets might become capital exporters, instead of importers, contrary to the saving glut thesis

or Dooley et al’s “Bretton Woods II” hypothesis. When the national saving and investment

regressions are examined (results not reported), the results indicate that the positive effect of

stock market turnover is driven by its significantly positive entry to the national saving

regression (with no corresponding effect in the investment regression). This result implies that

more active financial markets can enhance national saving.


          In industrial countries, a reduction in the net interest margin contributes to a lower

current account balance, although the interaction terms seem to cancel out the linear effect for

financially open countries. This means that an industrial country with more competitive, but less

open, financial markets tends to have more smaller current account balances. For developing

countries, more competitive financial markets seem to contribute to higher net saving; the level

term of INVNETINT is found to be significantly positive for the LDC and ex-African LDC


26
   The results shown below are generally unchanged if we use OVERHEAD, banks’ overhead costs as a share of their
total assets, instead of INVNETINT.
27
   To conserve space in Table 2, we report the results only for the variables of interest. Complete results are available
from the authors upon request.
28
   The magnitude and statistical significance for the oil exporter dummy increases as well.


                                                          16
groups (and marginally so for EMG). This result is driven more by the results in the investment

regression, where both the INVNETINT level and interaction variables turn out to have

significantly negative coefficients for the LDC and ex-African LDC groups, and only the

interaction term for the EMG group.29

          Inclusion of SMTO, INVNETINT, and interaction terms increases the statistical

significance and the magnitude of the variables of our main interest, especially for the LEGAL

variable and its interaction with SIZE and KAOPEN. Given the obvious policy implications, we

assess the sensitivity of these results more extensively in the next section.




 3.3 Robustness Checks

          Before discussing the policy implications of our regression results, we conduct a few

robustness checks. These checks include accounting for endogeneity of financial development,

alternative measures of financial development, accounting for the exchange rate regime,

excluding periods of financial crises and aftermaths, and separating out oil exporters from our

sample. We address each of these aspects in turn.


          With respect to the first issue, financial development itself could be endogenous with

respect to a country’s political and social infrastructure. Although we have used non-overlapping,

five-year window panels to mitigate the problem of reverse-causality, it may still be worthwhile

to conduct some robustness checks. To examine this flow of causality, we conduct 2SLS analysis

by instrumenting the SIZE variable with some variables that can be the determinants of financial

development. Boyd, et al. (2001) show that inflation significantly negatively affect both the

29
  The results found in this exercise are robust when the U.S. is removed from the IDC group and also when China is
removed from the EMG group.


                                                       17
banking sector development and equity market activity. La Porta, et al. (1998) demonstrate that

the national legal origin (whether English, French, German, or Scandinavian) strongly explains

cross-country differences in financial development. Therefore, we conduct 2SLS using inflation

rates and the dummies for the national legal origin as instruments.30

          The instrumental variables regression analysis yielded qualitatively similar results to

those obtained before. In general, the estimation results are slightly weaker for the industrial

country group. For less developed country groups, the statistical significance rose for many of

the variables of our interest, so did the magnitude in some cases. At least, for developing and

emerging market countries, we can safely conclude that our results shown in Table 1 are not

driven by endogeneity between the dependent variable and the financial development variable

and its interactions.

          There remain other types of financial markets we have not yet examined, such as private

and public bond markets, and insurance markets. In an effort to fill that void, we construct an

index that incorporates information on other aspects of financial development; we then

re-estimate the regressions using this index (SIZE2) in the stead of SIZE. SIZE2 is the first

principle component of private credit creation (PCGDP), stock market capitalization (SMKC),

stock market total value (SMTV), private bond market capitalization (PVBM), public bond

market capitalization (PBBM), inverted net interest rate margin (INVNETINT), and life insurance

premium as a ratio to GDP (LIFEINS). Figure 8 compares regions using this financial

development index while normalizing the index of the U.S. as 100. The historical patterns of

financial development are similar to those displayed in Figure 2. However, the underperformance

of developing countries’ financial markets as well as the U.S. relative strength appear more

30
   All instruments were included as five year averages of the deviations from world weighted averages. Also, the
instruments found to be insignificant in the first stage regressions were dropped.


                                                        18
distinct, reflecting that developing countries lag behind in bond and life insurance markets.

          We repeat the exercise in Table 1, using the composite index in place of SIZE.31

Interestingly, the estimated coefficients in the current account regressions becomes more

significant for developing country groups, but not so for the regressions involving IDC group.

For the LDC groups, all the variables of our interest except for the interaction between KAOPEN

and LEGAL become more than 5% significant.32 We also conduct the 2SLS analysis by

instrumenting in the same way as described above. Although the estimated coefficient for the

composite index becomes insignificant, other coefficients behave similarly. The results are

almost unaffected for the national saving and investment regressions.

          There is a concern that one of the variables we have relied upon, private credit creation

as a ratio to GDP (PCGDP), might provide an inaccurate depiction of financial development. In

some economies, a large portion of financial intermediary is provided by public financial

institutions, and the credit provided by such state-owned financial institutions to the private

sector is included in PCGDP. This issue can become a concern when one uses this variable to

proxy financial development in China, a country where the state has played a central role in the

financial system. In order to address this concern, we adjust our measure by following the

procedure outlined by Bekaert et al. (2006). Specifically, we take the La Porta et al. (2002)

estimates of the ratios of government ownership of banks, and interpolate data over our sample

period.33 PCGDP is then multiplied by (1 minus the ratio of government ownership of banks).

31
   The sample size is substantially reduced as PVBM and PBBM are available only after 1990 for a much smaller
number of countries (especially for developing countries). Hence, the LDC group becomes the same as the EMG
group.
32
   The coefficient estimates in the national saving regression become more significant for the IDC, whereas those of
the investment become slightly less significant. However, the results are qualitatively the same as what we have found
for IDC and LDC groups.
33
   La Porta et al. (2002) provide the estimates of the ratios of government ownership of banks for 92 developed and
developing countries for 1970 and 1995. Bekaert et al. (2006) use La Porta et al’s data and interpolate the ratios for
their sample period. Obviously, this method is not perfect; efforts of privatization are often discrete (e.g., after
experiencing a crisis) and also are not necessarily monotonic in movement.


                                                         19
Using this “adjusted” PCGDP, we reconstruct the SIZE variable (SIZE2A).

         The SIZE2A series are compared across different regions and with the U.S. in Figure 9.

The effect of the adjustment for government ownership of banks is striking for developing

countries. In the 2001-05 period, the size of financial markets for China, Latin America, and

other countries is less than 20% of U.S. In fact, China’s size of financial markets is merely

13.1% of the U.S., confirming that China still has a long road to financial development.

         Last, we re-estimate the regressions using the adjusted SIZE variable. Interestingly, the

results (not reported) are little changed, especially for developing countries. In other words, the

results we have in Table 1 are robust to the adjustment for government’s involvement in the

financial sector. This result is somewhat surprising.

         We also assessed the importance of the exchange rate regime. In our model setting, there

is no obvious reason why different exchange rate regimes should affect the level of current

account balances, though they may affect the speed of current account adjustment. While we do

find the estimated coefficient on the dummy for the crawling exchange rate regime to be

significantly positive for emerging market countries, inclusion of two other exchange rate

dummies has little quantitative or qualitative impact upon the results shown in Tables 1 and 2.

         Edwards (2002) argues that current account deficits are correlated with the probability

of financial crises occurring, suggesting that current account dynamics surrounding crisis years

might exhibit anomalous behavior. Taking the 1997-98 period as one characterized as crisis years,

we reconstruct the 5-year panels to exclude this period, and re-estimate our model. The

estimation results remain intact. Similarly, we find that excluding post-1995 data does not make

a substantial impact on the results.

         We also consider whether oil exporters behave in a fundamentally different manner than

non-oil exporters. While we included an “oil exporter” dummy variable in our basic regression


                                                 20
specification, if being an oil exporter means that the slope coefficients are substantially different

than those obtaining for non-oil exporters, then a dummy variable is not sufficient to address the

issue of heterogeneity. When we exclude oil exporters from either the LDC or EMG subsample,

the results are virtually unchanged.



4. Policy Implications

          One question that immediately arises is whether one should be surprised at the current

set of global imbalances, given the estimates reported above. Figure 10 displays both actual and

predicted current account balances for the industrial country group (Panel A) and the emerging

market group (Panel B). In Panel A, we can see that the U.S. is one of the countries that

experienced a larger current account deficit than predicted by the model.34 Panel B shows that

many of emerging East Asian countries appear in the area above the 45 degree line; they

experienced larger current account surpluses than predicted by the model.35

          A second question that can be asked is what will happen to East Asian current account

balances if financial development and liberalization accelerates. Thus far, we have found some

evidence that financial development affects current account balances. Here, we need to interpret

how the estimated coefficients on financial development variable (SIZE) would affect current

account balances, national saving, and investment in interaction with other institutional variables

(LEGAL and KAOPEN). Also, we examine the effect of financial opening conditional upon the

levels of financial and legal/institutional development.

34
   The 45 degree line refers to the points where both actual and predicted values are the same. Hence, in the area above
the 45 degree line, actual values are higher than predicted ones, meaning that countries’ current account balances are
underpredicted by the model.
35
   The prediction errors shown in Figure 10 are consistent with either model misspecification or current account
behavior being delinked from the fundamentals (and hence being unsustainable). Determination of which
interpretation is more appropriate is outside the scope of this paper. Refer to Clarida (2007) for a debate regarding the
issue of current account sustainability.


                                                          21
          Panels A, B, and C in Figure 11 shows the total effect on current account, national

saving, and investment (in terms of percentage points as a ratio to GDP), respectively, if the size

of financial markets (SIZE) rises by 10% point above the world weighted average conditional on

the levels of LEGAL and KAOPEN for emerging market countries.36,37 The calculation is made

based on the regression results shown in Column 4 of Table 2, and depending on whether the

levels of LEGAL and KAOPEN are in the low decile, mean, or high decile in each subsample.

This exercise illustrates how the impact of financial development can vary with the level of these

two variables. For example, Panel A shows that a 10% point increase in SIZE (expressed as the

deviation from the world weighted average) can lead an emerging market country equipped with

both legal development and financial openness levels above the low 10 percentile (i.e., the bar at

the northwest corner on the floor) to lower its current account as a ratio to GDP by a 0.186

percentage point. Examining the bars at the same location in the other two panels allows us to

determine whether the effect of such as a change comes from national saving or investment, or

both.

          Theoretically, the total effects of financial development shown in the panels on national

saving and investment should add up exactly to that on current account balances. However, as

can be seen in the figures, this is not the case. At least, two reasons can be identified for this

outcome. First, while the current account regressions account for the covariance of national

savings and investment, simply adding two coefficients does not.38 Second, due to differing data


36
   Between the 1996-2000 and 2001-05 time periods, the (five-year average of relative) SIZE level – the level of
financial deepening above or below the weighted world average – increased by 16.3 percentage points for Asian
emerging market countries, and an astounding 39 percentage points for China. Therefore, examining the effect of a
10% percentage point is not too unrealistic.
37
   This calculation holds other variables constant, including the level of stock market activeness (SMTO) and market
efficiency (INVNETINT).
38
   If some change in one variable affects national saving and investment independently, as long as the change in
national saving and investment does not affect each other, the net effect of the change ( ΔNS − ΔI ) would be the same
as that on current account balances. However, if national saving and investment are highly correlated, as has been


                                                         22
conventions (Balance of Payments accounting versus national income accounting definition), the

flows may not add up exactly. However, it is still worthwhile to examine the total effect on all

three variables.

          For emerging market countries, we can generalize the total effect of financial

development on current account balances as that the more financially open and the less

legally/institutionally developed an emerging market country is, the more negative the total

effect of financial development on the current account balance is to be. The result seems to be

driven by the effects on both national saving and investment. Those countries that experience

current account deterioration experience both deterioration in national saving and improvement

in investment (except for those with mean KAOPEN and mean LEGAL).

          Panel D of Figure 11 categorizes emerging market countries in East Asia depending on

the level of legal development and financial openness. The matrix shows that only Hong Kong

and Singapore are categorized as countries with highest 10 percentile legal development and

highest 10 percentile financial openness, while many Asian emerging market countries, including

China, are categorized in the groups with the middle or lower level of legal development and

financial openness. For these economies, financial development might lead to deterioration of

current account balances if the economy is more open than the bottom decile and its legal

systems are not in the top decile.

          What about financial opening? We have seen that China in particular has kept its

financial markets closed, sparking considerable debate over what would occur in the event of

capital account liberalization. Figure 12 presents a parallel analysis to what we did in Figure 11,

but this time, we examine the total effect of financial opening, a one unit increase in KAOPEN,



found in many studies such as Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Frankel et al. (1987), simply adding two coefficients
does not yield the coefficient in the current account regression.


                                                        23
conditional upon the level of legal/institutional development and the size of financial markets.

Panels A, B, and C report the total effect of financial opening on current account balances,

national saving, and investment, respectively, for emerging market countries, and Panel D ranks

East Asian emerging market countries by the level of financial openness measured by KAOPEN.

         Panel A of Figure 12 indicates that financial opening, holding the levels of both legal

and financial development constant, would result in a typical emerging market economy

experiencing a deteriorating current account balances, except when the economy is financially

underdeveloped. Panels B and C show that the deterioration can be driven by either a large

decrease in national saving combined with a smaller decrease in investment or a relatively

smaller decrease in national saving combined with an improvement in investment. Either

outcome is consistent with the saving glut hypothesis, although our results lead to a more

nuanced view of the sources of the current account shift.

         A one unit increase in KAOPEN is equivalent to China increasing its level of financial

openness to that of Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand. If one uses the observed Chinese values of

SIZE, LEGAL, and KAOPEN, the implied impact on China’s current account balance would be a

one percentage point decline. Considering that the size of current account surplus for the

2001-05 period is 3.5%, this is not a non-trivial effect, although it must be kept in mind that the

posited change in openness is very large.

         One caveat involves the proper measure of financial development in China, a

particularly salient issue. If one measures financial market size adjusting for government bank

ownership, the effect would be considerably smaller, about 0.35 percentage points. Thus, we

believe the question of how much the Chinese current account balance would be affected by

capital account opening remains an open one.




                                                 24
4.3 A Magnification Effect of Bond Markets?

           Our discussion thus far has focused on the Western side of the Pacific Ocean, with little

reference to the U.S. The observation that the U.S. attracts capital from the rest of the world

because of its deep and sophisticated financial markets has become something of a cliche. One

separate, but related, line of argument is that for such an economy, financial development can

function as a magnifier for the effect of other saving-investment determinants, especially budget

balances. The idea is that a country with highly developed financial markets may find its budget

constraint relaxed because its highly developed financial markets make it easier for the

government to finance its budget. Chinn and Ito (2007a) were unable to find any evidence for

this conjecture. Here, we take the opportunity to re-examine the magnifier effect with reference

to the link between the budget and current account balances.

           Table 5 reports the regression results that incorporate the effect of public bond market

development (measured by PBBM, public bond market capitalization as a ratio to GDP) and its

interactive, i.e., magnifier, effect with budget balances. Columns (1) and (2) show the results for

industrialized and emerging market countries, respectively, when the PBBM variable and its

interaction with the budget balance variable are added to our basic model.39 Since the PBBM

data are limited, there is only an EMG group among the developing country groups. Columns (3)

and (4) include stock market turnover, net interest margin, and its interaction with KAOPEN.

Interestingly, for the industrial country group, whether in Column (1) or (3), the interaction term

enters significantly. For emerging market countries, the level term for PBBM is significantly

negative, but the interaction term is insignificant. The significant coefficient on PBBM for

emerging market countries may reflect the tendency that emerging market countries attempt to

39
   We also include a dummy for Japan since, as Figure 5 shows, Japan, a country with not only a big public bond
market, but also big current account surpluses, can be driving the results as an outlier. In fact, the estimated coefficient
for the dummy is found to be significantly positive.


                                                            25
borrow abroad to finance their budgetary programs. Using the actual 5-year average of the U.S.

budget balance and the estimates from Columns (1) and (3), the estimated coefficient of is found

to be as high as 0.487 and 0.642, respectively. These figures are around the high end of the value

range of 0.10-0.49 found in Chinn and Ito (2007a).

         As was shown in Figure 5, Japan and oil exporting countries in the Middle East, both of

which are big current account surplus countries, could be driving the results as outliers. Also, the

magnifier effect of financial development can be more important for those countries that try to

finance themselves from foreign capital. Therefore, we re-estimated by restricting our sample to

only country-years when the net foreign assets (that are included only from the first year of each

five-year panel) are negative. The results are shown in Columns (5) and (6) for industrial and

emerging market countries, respectively. Now in these specifications, the significance of the

estimated coefficient on the interaction term disappears for the IDC group, though the significant

coefficient for the PBBM variable remains for the EMG group. However, interestingly, the

estimated coefficient on budget balances for industrial countries remain significant and its

magnitude is still high, 0.48. (the p-value for the interaction term is now 22%). At the very least,

budget balances seem to play an important role for current account balances for industrial

countries.



5. Concluding Remarks
         In this paper, we have taken a closer look at the effect of financial development on the

present configuration of global imbalances. In particular, we scrutinized the effect of financial

development from various perspectives: different types of financial markets such as equity, bond,

and insurance markets as well as different aspects of financial development such as the cost

performance, size, and activeness of the industry. We also examined the role of nonlinearities, in


                                                 26
terms of interactions with financial openness and institutional development.

         The empirical results from our basic model suggest that the size of financial markets

does matter for saving and investment determination. Among developing countries, those with

developed financial markets (in terms of their size), better legal systems and institutions, and/or

closed financial markets tend to run current account surpluses. We also found that banking sector

and equity market development seem to be equally important.

         We also extended our basic model by including variables that control for the degree of

activity of financial markets, as well as for market competitiveness. Based upon the results from

this extended model, we determined that that an industrial country with more competitive, but

less open, financial markets tends to run larger current account surpluses. For developing

countries, more competitive financial markets result in a tendency to run larger current account

surpluses, a finding in contradiction to the saving glut thesis. Also, developing countries with

active equity markets tend to become capital exporters, largely because more active equity

markets induce greater national savings. This result is again in contradiction to the saving glut

hypothesis.

         Generally, we found that for emerging market countries, financial development may

lead to deterioration of current account balances if the economy exhibits greater than the average

openness and a legal system not in the top decile. In other cases, this linkage is not apparent.

Moreover, greater financial opening tends to make an emerging market economy run a smaller

current account surplus, especially if the economy is financially underdeveloped.

         We also investigated whether financial development – rather than shifting the saving and

investment schedules –magnifies the impact of other determinants of saving and investment

behavior. More specifically, we examined whether public bond markets contribute to relaxing

budget constraints and jointly to affecting current account balances. We find some limited


                                                 27
evidence in favor of such a magnification effect. One interesting finding is that inclusion of a

bond market variable results in an estimated impact of the budget balance on the current account

balance that is substantially higher than that obtained in many other studies, including our

previous study (Chinn and Ito, 2007a).

         Overall, our investigation revealed numerous results relevant to the debate over the

sources of global imbalances. At the minimum, we have demonstrated that these two hypotheses

might have not be exclusionary. First, as we have shown in our previous study, budget balances

should not be ruled out as a determinant of current account balances. A one-percentage point

improvement in the budget balance can lead to about half a percentage point improvement in

current account balances for industrialized countries. Second, when we focus on the

competitiveness of banking markets or the activeness of capital markets as a measure of financial

development, we find the evidence against the saving glut hypothesis. That is, more competitive

banking markets or more active equity markets do not necessarily lead countries to become

greater capital importers. Third, in terms of the size, financial development does matter for

current account balances, but the effect is conditional upon other institutional factors such as

capital account openness and legal or institutional development. Fourth, financial openness leads

to current account deterioration in a manner consistent with some aspects of the saving glut

hypothesis predicts. That is, countries with more developed legal systems and more developed

financial markets (in terms of the size) tend to experience smaller current account surpluses.




                                                 28
Data Appendix

The data used in this paper were drawn from a number of different sources. We provide below a listing of
the mnemonics for the variables used in the analysis, descriptions of these variables and the source(s)
from which the primary data for constructing these variables were taken. A listing of the countries in the
final sample, along with the country groupings used in the analysis, is provided in the working paper
version of this paper. For most countries, data were available from 1971 through 2004.

Mnemonic            Source*                    Variable description
CURRENT             WDI, IFS, WEO              Current account to GDP ratio
NATL_SAVING         WDI                        National saving to GDP ratio
GROSS_KF            WDI                        Capital formation to GDP ratio
GSUR                WDI, IFS                   General government budget balance, ratio to GDP
NFA                 LM                         Stock of net foreign assets, ratio to GDP
RELY                WDI                        Relative per capita income, adjusted by PPP exchange
                                               rates, Measured relative to the U.S., range (0 to 1)
RELDEPY             WDI                        Youth dependency ratio, Population under 15 / Population
                                               between 15 and 65
RELDEPO             WDI                        Old dependency ratio, Population
                                               over 65 / Population between 15 and 65
YGRAVG              WDI                        Average real GDP growth
TOTSD               WDI                        Standard deviation of terms of trade
OPEN                WDI                        Openness indicator: ratio of exports plus imports of goods
                                               and nonfactor services to GDP
SIZE                BDL, Authors’ calc.        Financial Market Development in terms of its size,
                                               PCGDP + SMKC
PCGDP               BDL                        Private credit creation as a ratio to GDP
SMTV                BDL                        Stock market total value as a ratio to GDP, as a measure of
                                               financial market activeness
SMTO                BDL                        Stock market turnover
PVBM                BDL                        Private bond market capitalization as a ratio to GDP
PBBM                BDL                        Public bond market capitalization as a ratio to GDP
LIFEINS             BDL                        Life insurance premium as a ratio to GDP
OVERHEAD            BDL                        Accounting value of a bank’s overhead costs as a share of
                                               its total assets
(INV)NETINT         BDL                        Accounting value of bank’s net interest revenue as a share
                                               of its interest-bearing (total earning) assets.
SIZE2               BDL, Authors’ calc.        General level of financial development, first principal
                                               component of PCGDP, SMKC, SMTV, PVBM, PBBM,
                                               INVNETINT, and LIFEINS
SIZE2A              BDL, Authors’ calc.        SIZE adjusted for the size of public sector involvement
KAOPEN              Chinn-Ito                  Capital account openness
BQ                  ICRG                       Quality of Bureaucracy
LAO                 ICRG                       Law and order
CORRUPT             ICRG                       Corruption index
LEGAL               Authors’ calculations      General level of legal development, first principal
                                               component of BQ, LAO, and CORRUPT.

* These are mnemonics for the sources used to construct the corresponding. BDL: Beck, Demirgüc-Kunt,



                                                   29
and Levine (2001, updated in following years); CI: Chinn and Ito (2006); ICRG: International Country
Risk Guide; IFS: IMF’s International Financial Statistics; IMF: Other IMF databases; LM: Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2006); and WDI: World Development Indicators (2006).




                                                30
References

Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. , and Volosovych, V. 2003. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich
to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” manuscript,, University of Houston.


Bailliu, J. N., 2000. Private Capital Flows, Financial Development, and Economic Growth in
Developing Countries, Working Papers 00-15, Bank of Canada.


Beck, T., Levine, R., 2004. Legal Institutions and Financial Development, in: Claude Menard
and Shirley M. (Eds.), Handbook of New Institutional Economics. Kluwer Dordrecht, The
Netherlands.


Beck, T., Demirgüc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2001. A new database on financial development and
structure. In Demirgüc-Kunt, A., Levine, R. (Eds.) Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A
Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.


Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., Lundblad, C., 2006. “Financial Openness and the Chinese Growth
Experience.” mimeo.


Bernanke, B., 2005. The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account. Remarks at the
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, VA, March 10.


Boyd, J. H., Levine, R., Smith, B. D., 2001. The Impact of Inflation on Financial Sector
Performance. Journal of Monetary Economics 47, pp. 221-248.


Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2006, An Equilibrium
Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates, NBER Working Paper No. 11996.


Chinn, M. Lee, J., 2006. Current Account and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics in the G-7
Countries, Journal of International Money and Finance 25 (March): p. 257-274.


Chinn, M. Prasad, E., 2003. Medium-Term Determinants of Current Accounts in Industrial and
Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration. Journal of International Economics 59(1)
(January): 47-76. Also NBER Working Paper #7581 (March 2000).


Chinn, M. Ito, H., 2007a. Current Account Balances, Financial Development and Institutions:


                                             31
Assaying the World ‘Savings Glut,’ Journal of International Money and Finance, Volume 26,
Issue 4 (June), p.546-569.


Chinn, M. Ito, H., 2007b. “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” mimeo.


Chinn, M. Ito, H., 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions,
and Interactions. Journal of Development Economics Vol. 82, p. 163 – 192, also NBER
Working Paper #11370.

Clarida, R. 2005a. Japan, China, and the U.S. Current account deficit. CATO Journal Vol. 25, No.
1 (Winter).


Clarida, R., 2005b. Some Thoughts on ‘The Sustainability and Adjustment of Global Current
Account Imbalances.’ Speech given at the Council on Foreign Relations, March 28.


Clarida, R. H., Ed., 2007. G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.


Demirguc-Kunt, Asli & Levine, Ross, 2001. “Bank-based and market-based financial systems -
cross-country comparisons,” In Demirgüc-Kunt, A., Levine, R. (Eds.) Financial Structure and
Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.


Dooley, M., Folkerts-Landau, D., and Garber, P. 2005. International Financial Stability: Asia,
Interest Rates, and the Dollar, Deutsche Bank Global Research.


Edwards, S., 2005. Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And if not, How Costly Is
Adjustment Likely to be? NBER Working Paper #11541.


Edwards, S., 2002: “Does the Current Account Matter?”, in Preventing Currency Crises in
Emerging Markets, Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel (editors), The University of
Chicago Press.


Edwards, S., 1996. Why Are Latin America’s Saving Rates So Low: An International
Comparative Analysis. Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 51.



                                              32
Feldstein, M., Horioka, C., 1980. Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows. Economic
Journal 90, p. 314 – 329.


Frankel, J., Dooley, M., Mathieson, D., 1987. International Capital Mobility in Developing
Countries vs. Industrialized Countries: What Do Saving-Investment Correlations Tell Us? IMF
Staff Papers, 34, no. 3 (September), p. 503 – 530.


Gale, W., Orszag, P., 2004. Budget Deficits, National Saving, and Interest Rates. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: 2. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. p. 101 – 210.


Johnson, S., McMillan, J., and Woodruff, C., 2002. Property rights and finance. American
Economic Review 92, 1335 – 56.


King, R. G. and Levine, R., 1993. Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108: 717 – 738.


Kose, M. A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2006, “Financial Globalization: A
Reappraisal,” IMF Working Paper, WP/06/189.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2002. “Government Ownership of Banks.”
Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 1 (February), p. 265-301.


La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. W., 1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal
of Political Economy, 106(6): 1113 – 1155.


Lane, P., Milesi-Ferretti, G. M., 2006. The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and
Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970 - 2004. IMF Working Paper,
WP/06/69.


Levine, R., 2005. Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence. In: Aghion, P. Durlauf, S. (Eds.)
Handbook of Economic Growth. The Netherlands: Elsevier Science.


Levine, R., Loayza, N., Beck, T., 2000. Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
Causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46: 31-77.




                                               33
Mendoza, E.G., Quadrini, V., and Ríos-Rull, J.-V., 2006. Financial Integration, Financial
Deepness and Global Imbalances. Paper presented at the 7th Jacques Polak Annual Research
Conference, November 9-10.


Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K., 1996. Foundations of International Macroeconomics. Cambridge:
MIT Press.


Rajan, R.G., and Zingales, L., 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic
Review, 88: 559 – 586.


Tesar, L., 1995. Evaluating the Gains from International Risksharing,. Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 42, pp. 95-143.


Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital, Journal of Financial
Economics, 58, 187 – 214.




                                              34
       Table 1: Current Account Regressions with the SIZE Variable

                                        Industrial  Less                LDC          Emerging
                                        Countries Developed             w/out         Market
                                          (IDC)    (LDC)                Africa        (EMG)
                                            (1)      (2)                 (3)            (4)
Government budget balance                   0.236         0.151     0.211        0.146
                                                 15%
                                        [0.162]         [0.112]   [0.134]      [0.117]
Net foreign assets (initial)                0.058         0.042     0.037        0.043
                                        [0.017]*** [0.007]*** [0.012]*** [0.008]***
Relative income                             0.101        -0.122    -0.028       -0.126
                                        [0.038]***      [0.097]   [0.098]      [0.113]
Relative income squared                    -0.452        -0.123     0.012       -0.139
                                         [0.195]**      [0.114]   [0.118]      [0.128]
Dependency ratio (young)                    0.028        -0.012     -0.02        0.011
                                          [0.038]       [0.020]   [0.021]      [0.023]
Dependency ratio (old)                       0.07        -0.016    -0.023       -0.011
                                         [0.034]**      [0.017]   [0.017]      [0.023]
Financial Develop. (SIZE)                  -0.032         0.015     0.015        0.014
                                         [0.015]**      [0.010]   [0.012]      [0.009]
Legal development (LEGAL)                   0.023         0.017     0.02         0.021
                                         [0.012]**     [0.009]*  [0.011]*     [0.010]**
SIZE x LEGAL                                0.014         0.015     0.013        0.019
                                                                         11%
                                          [0.012]     [0.006]** [0.008]      [0.007]***
Financial open. (KAOPEN)                    0.016        -0.013    -0.014       -0.014
                                          [0.012]     [0.006]**  [0.008]*     [0.007]**
KAOPEN x LEGAL                               0.01         0.001     0.001          0
                                          [0.008]       [0.002]   [0.002]      [0.002]
KAOPEN x SIZE                                0.03        -0.006    -0.009       -0.008
                                         [0.014]**     [0.003]* [0.004]** [0.003]**
TOT volatility                              0.107         0.012     0.017        0.02
                                          [0.071]       [0.025]   [0.024]      [0.028]
Avg. GDP growth                             0.146         -0.04    -0.229        0.069
                                          [0.311]       [0.151]   [0.145]      [0.163]
Trade openness                              0.024         0.032     0.021        0.037
                                          [0.016]    [0.011]*** [0.013]* [0.013]***
Oil exporting countries                        –          0.041     0.027        0.043
                                               –     [0.013]***   [0.018]    [0.013]***
Observations                                  81           156       125          125
Adjusted R-squared                           0.52         0.55      0.52         0.59
All the variables to be included in the estimation, except for net foreign assets to GDP, are
converted into the deviations from the GDP-weighted world mean before being calculated
into the five year averages. Robust standard errors in brackets, * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients for the time-fixed
dummies and constant are not shown.



                                               35
    Table 2: Current Account Regressions with the SIZE, SMTO, and NETINT Variables

                                                        Industrial  Less               LDC          Emerging
                                                        Countries Developed            w/out         Market
                                                          (IDC)    (LDC)               Africa        (EMG)
                                                            (1)      (2)                (3)            (4)
     Government budget balance                             0.187          0.228      0.231      0.237
                                                          [0.191]      [0.113]**   [0.152]    [0.126]*
     Financial Develop. (SIZE)                             -0.03          0.019      0.02        0.02
                                                        [0.013]**      [0.009]**  [0.011]*   [0.009]**
     Stock Market Activeness (SMTO)                        0.015          0.009      0.007      0.009
                                                          [0.012]      [0.004]**  [0.004]*    [0.005]*
     Net Interest Margin (INVNETINT)                      -0.901          0.374      0.376      0.246
                                                         [0.505]*      [0.152]**  [0.197]*   [0.152]11%
     INVNETINT x KAOPEN                                    0.809          0.042      0.081      0.018
                                                        [0.367]**       [0.066]    [0.076]     [0.062]
     Legal/Inst. development (LEGAL)                       0.025          0.031      0.032      0.032
                                                        [0.011]**     [0.009]*** [0.012]*** [0.009]***
     SIZE x LEGAL                                           0.01          0.024      0.022      0.027
                                                          [0.012]     [0.006]*** [0.008]*** [0.006]***
     Financial openness (KAOPEN)                           0.019         -0.016     -0.017     -0.019
                                                         [0.010]*     [0.006]*** [0.008]** [0.007]***
     KAOPEN x LEGAL                                        0.002            0        0.002         0
                                                          [0.008]       [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]
     KAOPEN x SIZE                                         0.029         -0.009     -0.012      -0.011
                                                        [0.013]**     [0.003]*** [0.004]*** [0.003]***
     Oil exporting countries                                  –           0.054      0.05       0.048
                                                              –       [0.015]*** [0.020]** [0.016]***
     Observations                                            77            140        114        112
     Adjusted R-squared                                     0.56          0.63       0.58        0.65
     All the variables to be included in the estimation, except for net foreign assets to GDP, are converted into
     the deviations from the GDP-weighted world mean before being calculated into the five year averages.
     Robust standard errors in brackets, * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The
     estimated coefficients for relative income, its quadratic term, young dependency ratio, old dependency
     ratio, TOT volatility, output growth, trade openness, the time-fixed dummies and constant are not shown.




.




                                                         36
                    Table 3: The Impact of Public Bond Market Development
                                 in Current Account Regressions
                                                                                                   Debtor       Debtor
                                               Industrial Emerging Industrial Emerging
                                                                                                 Industrial Emerging
                                               Countries Market Countries Market
                                                                                                 Countries Market
                                                  (IDC)      (EMG)         (IDC)      (EMG)
                                                                                                    (IDC)       (EMG)
                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)
Government budget balance                         0.503       0.105        0.619        0.199       0.481         0.076
                                              [0.153]*** [0.300] [0.176]*** [0.309]               [0.241]*      [0.366]
Budget balance x PBBM                            -0.767      -0.216         -1.11       0.628      -0.741         0.952
                                                [0.394]*     [1.116] [0.278]*** [1.375]            [0.590]      [1.664]
Public Bond Mkt. Dev. (PBBM)                      0.005      -0.054       -0.004       -0.135       0.016        -0.144
                                                 [0.017]     [0.038]     [0.015] [0.036]*** [0.019] [0.038]***
Financial Develop. (SIZE)                        -0.022       0.013       -0.027        0.02       -0.034         0.038
                                                [0.011]*     [0.014] [0.012]** [0.012] [0.015]** [0.016]**
Stock Market Activeness (SMTO)                                             0.022        0.016       0.027         0.015
                                                                        [0.009]** [0.006]*** [0.012]** [0.006]**
Net Interest Margin (INVNETINT)                                           -0.332        0.686      -0.309         0.616
                                                                         [0.445] [0.238]*** [0.460]            [0.306]*
NETINT x KAOPEN                                                           -0.395        0.226      -0.327         0.208
                                                                         [0.493] [0.083]*** [0.518]            [0.108]*
Legal/Inst. development (LEGAL)                    0.02       0.019        0.016        0.032       0.026         0.027
                                               [0.010]** [0.013]          [0.011] [0.010]*** [0.015]* [0.013]**
SIZE x LEGAL                                      0.024       0.016        0.031        0.028       0.034         0.025
                                                [0.012]* [0.009]* [0.012]** [0.007]*** [0.014]** [0.010]**
Financial openness (KAOPEN)                      -0.008      -0.024       -0.011       -0.026      -0.015        -0.022
                                                 [0.009] [0.010]** [0.009] [0.009]*** [0.011] [0.010]**
KAOPEN x LEGAL                                    0.022      -0.002        0.022       -0.001       0.022        -0.002
                                              [0.006]*** [0.003] [0.009]** [0.003] [0.010]** [0.003]
KAOPEN x SIZE                                     0.005      -0.009        0.001       -0.017      -0.003        -0.012
                                                 [0.011] [0.004]** [0.010] [0.003]*** [0.011] [0.006]**
Observations                                        80          72           76           65          55            58
Adjusted R-squared                                 0.65        0.60         0.71         0.77        0.63          0.49
All the variables to be included in the estimation, except for net foreign assets to GDP, are converted into the
deviations from the GDP-weighted world mean before being calculated into the five year averages. Robust standard
errors in brackets, * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients for
relative income, its quadratic term, young dependency ratio, old dependency ratio, TOT volatility, output growth,
trade openness, the time-fixed dummies and constant are not shown. There is no oil exporting countries in any of the
subsamples.




                                                         37
                                                     Figure 1: Current Account Balances by Region

                                                     Current Account Balances (% of GDP)
                              0.06


                              0.04
Current Accout Balances/GDP




                              0.02


                                 0


                              -0.02
                                        1981-1985           1986-1990         1991-1995          1996-2000   2001-2005
                              -0.04


                              -0.06


                              -0.08

                                 D eveloping A sia, ex-C hina      C hina                            Japan
                                 W estern E urope                  M iddle E ast & N . A frica       US
                                 O thers




                                                                              38
                                  Figure 2: Financial Market Development (Size)                                                                         Figure 4: Private Bond Market Development
                                                     Fin. Market Development (SIZE)                                                                        Private Bond Market Capitalization (% of GDP)
                            400




                                                                                                                                                100
      SIZE (PCGDP + SMKC)
                            300




                                                                                                                              PVBM (% of GDP)
                            200




                                                                                                                                                50
                            100
                            0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                     1981-1985            1986-1990         1991-1995   1996-2000            2001-2005                                     1986-1990                 1991-1995          1996-2000                 2001-2005

                             US                                  W estern E urope          Japan                                                 US                                  W estern E urope               Japan
                             E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina   C hina                    Latin A m erica                                       E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina   C hina                         Latin A m erica
                             M iddle E ast & N . A frica         O thers                                                                         M iddle E ast & N . A frica         O thers



                            Figure 3: Financial Market Development (Activeness)                                                                          Figure 5: Public Bond Market Development
                                               Stock Market Total Value (% of GDP)                                                                          Public Bond Market Capitalization (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                150
                       250
                       200




                                                                                                                              PBBM (% of GDP)
SMTV (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                100
                       150
                       100




                                                                                                                                                50
                       50




                                                                                                                                                0
                       0




                                                                                                                                                           1986-1990                 1991-1995          1996-2000                 2001-2005
                                    1981-1985             1986-1990         1991-1995   1996-2000            2001-2005

                                                                                                                                                 US                                  W estern E urope               Japan
                            US                                   W estern E urope          Japan
                                                                                                                                                 E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina   C hina                         Latin A m erica
                            E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina    C hina                    Latin A m erica
                                                                                                                                                 M iddle E ast & N . A frica         O thers
                            M iddle E ast & N . A frica          O thers




                                                                                                                         39
                                           Figure 6: Legal and Institutional Development                                                 Figure 8: Comparison by “Financial Development Index”
                                                         Legal/Inst. Development, US=100                                                                                                                       Financial Development Index, US=100




                                                                                                                                                                                   150
                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                128.1




                                                                                                                                                      Financial Development (FD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    115.6
                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        83.2
LEGAL
                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                            73.6                                 74.9                                                                          74.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         70.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65.4                                  66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              61.3                                60.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      56.1                               55.2
                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            47.6     46.4                                  48.3                       47.6      49.2




                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                       44.8       44.2                                                           43.6             42                                39.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 29.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                               25.3                                                                    24.9                                 25.1
                                    20
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                            1981-1985       1986-1990          1991-1995   1996-2000           2001-2005                                                                           1986-1990                            1991-1995                             1996-2000                          2001-2005

                                      W estern E urope             Japan                      E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina                                                      W estern E urope                                    Japan                                                 E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina
                                      C hina                       Latin A m erica            M iddle E ast & N . A frica                                                            C hina                                              Latin A m erica                                       M iddle E ast & N . A frica
                                      O thers                                                                                                                                        O thers



                                                Figure 7: Financial Openness by Region                                                                                                          Figure 9: “Adjusted” Financial Market Size
                                                           Financial Openness, US=100                                                                                                           Adjusted Fin. Market Development (SIZE2A), US=100
Capital Account Openness (KAOPEN)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         159.3
                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                                       SIZE2 (Adj. PCGDP+SMKC)
                                                                                                                                                                                            127                                                      130.1
                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                       100
                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          78.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     72.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        62.4                      60.6
                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55.9                         52.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                51.6                         50.2                                               49.2                       51.450.7
                                                                                                                                                                                         47.6
                                                                                                                                                                       50

                                                                                                                                                                                                             33.3                         30.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                          25.9                                                         26.8                                                     26.7
                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       24.1                          22                          22.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17.3                         14.3 17.5                            17.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                        14.4                        13.8                                                                                 13.116.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2.9
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                    0




                                            1981-1985       1986-1990          1991-1995   1996-2000           2001-2005                                                                    1981-1985                     1986-1990                     1991-1995                     1996-2000                   2001-2005

                                      W estern E urope             Japan                      E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina                                                    W estern E urope                                     Japan                                              E ast A sia & P acific ex. C hina
                                      C hina                       Latin A m erica            M iddle E ast & N . A frica                                                          C hina                                               Latin A m erica                                    M iddle E ast & N . A frica
                                      O thers                                                                                                                                      O thers




                                                                                                                                  40
 Figure 10: Actual Current Account Balances and In-Sample Predictions

                                                                     (A) Industrialized Countries


                                                  Actual vs. Predicted Current Account Balances
                                                                          Industrialized Countries
-8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8


                                                                                       FIN

                                                                                                                                SWE
       Actual CA Balances (% of GDP)




                                                                                                              NLD

                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                       JPN    DNK
                                                                                                      DEU
                                                                                                    CAN

                                                                                       FRA
                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                 ITA         IRL
                                                                                                        GBR



                                                                         AUS   ESP
                                                                           USA


                                                   GRC
                                                 PRT

                                            -8   -7   -6   -5      -4 -3 -2 -1 0         1   2    3   4         5    6    7      8
                                                                     Predicted CA Balances (% of GDP)



                                                                   (B) Emerging Market Countries

                                                  Actual vs. Predicted Current Account Balances
                                                                        Emerging Market Countries
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12




                                                                                         MYS
       Actual CA Balances (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                    HKG




                                                               THA     CHN
                                                                              IDN
                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                   PAK

                                                           PHLIND


                                                         LKA



                                            -3   -2   -1       0     1   2    3   4    5    6    7  8          9    10    11    12
                                                                     Predicted CA Balances (% of GDP)



                                                                                 41
                                  Figure 11: Total Effect of Financial Development for Emerging Market Countries
                 A: On Current Account Balances                                                                                               C: On Investment
                                                                                                                                                                 0.216
0.6                                                                                                               0.25
             0.45                                                                                                                                   0.130
                        0.113              -0.028
                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                         0.079
 0.4
                            0.31                                    LE G A L Low 10 percentile                    0.15                                                            LE G A L Low 10 percentile
                                                                    LE G A L M ean                                 0.1                                                            LE G A L M ean
 0.2
                                                                    LE G A L H igh 10 percentile                             -0.054              -0.003                           LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
                                           0.071                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                                                                   0.084
   0                                                                                                                  0
                 -0.186
                                                                                                                  -0.05
 -0.2
                                  -0.327 -0.267
                                                                                                                   -0.1                                   -0.066
                                                                                                                  -0.15
 -0.4                                        -0.565         LE G A L Low 10 percentile                                                     -0.153                           LE G A L Low 10 percentile
                                                         LE G A L M ean
                                                                                                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                              -0.204                                     LE G A L M ean
 -0.6                                                                                                              -0.25
                                                     LE G A L H igh 10 percentile                                                                                  LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
         KAO PEN                                                                                                           KAO PEN
                        KAO PEN                                                                                                          KAO PEN
           Low 10                   KAO PEN                                                                                  Low 10                 KAO PEN
                         M ean                                                                                                            M ean
         percentile                  H igh 10                                                                              percentile                H igh 10
                                    percentile                                                                                                      percentile



                          B: On National Saving                                                                                         D: Matrix for Emerging Asia

 0.1                                                                                                                                                                     KAOPEN
          0.066
                           0.053             0.032                                                                                                      Low                                     High
0.05                                                                                                                                                                         Mean
                                                                    LE G A L Low 10 percentile                                                      10 percentile                           10 percentile
   0                                                                LE G A L M ean
              -0.071           -0.084                               LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
                                                                                                                                                                          Indonesia,
                                            -0.106
                                                                                                                                   Low
-0.05                                                                                                                                               Bangladesh           Philippines,
                                                                                                                               10 percentile
 -0.1                 -0.193                                                                                                                                              Sri Lanka
                                  -0.206
                                                                                                                                                                     India, Korea,
-0.15                                        -0.227
                                                                                                                                                                       Malaysia,
  -0.2
                                                             LE G A L Low 10 percentile                       LEGAL                 Mean                  China
                                                                                                                                                                       Thailand,
                                                         LE G A L M ean
 -0.25                                                                                                                                                               ex-China EA
                                                      LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
         KAO PEN
                        KAO PEN
           Low 10                   KAO PEN                                                                                        High                                                      Hong Kong,
                         M ean
         percentile                  H igh 10                                                                                  10 percentile                                                  Singapore
                                    percentile

                                                                                                        NOTE: The mean and 10 and 90 percentiles of LEGAL and KAOPEN used
                                                                                                        for calculation are based on the data of the 1996-2000 and 2001-05 periods.


                                                                                                   42
                                        Figure 12: Total Effect of Financial Liberalization for Emerging Market Countries

                    A: On Current Account Balances                                                                                               C: On Investment
                     0.216
                0.216                    -0.607                                                                                                                             0.959
0.5        0.216                                                                                                   1
                      -0.607
  0
                                                                                                                                                       0.263
                                                                         LE G A L Low 10 percentile               0.5                   -0.036                                            LE G A L Low 10 percentile
-0.5                                                                     LE G A L M ean                                    -0.589                                                         LE G A L M ean
                            -0.607                                       LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
                                                                                                                    0                                                    0.406            LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
 -1


-1.5
                                                                                                                  -0.5                                 -0.290
                                                                                                                                                                       -0.220
  -2                                                        -2.520
                                                                                                                    -1
 -2.5                                                   -2.520    LE G A L Low 10 percentile                                                 -0.915                                LE G A L Low 10 percentile
                                                               LE G A L M ean
                                                                                                                            -1.214                                              LE G A L M ean
   -3                                       -2.520                                                                -1.5
                                                           LE G A L H igh 10 percentile                                                                                   LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
            F in. D ev.                                                                                                   F in. D ev.
                          F in. D ev.                                                                                                    F in. D ev.
             Low 10                       F in. D ev.                                                                      Low 10                        F in. D ev.
                             M ean                                                                                                          M ean
           percentile                      H igh 10                                                                      percentile                       H igh 10
                                         percentile                                                                                                     percentile



                             B: On National Saving                                                               D: Ranking of Financial Openness for Emerging Asia
             -0.927            -0.374       -0.449          -0.623
                                                                                                                                Country                           KAOPEN [0, 4.37]
  0
                                                                                                                                Hong Kong                            4.37
-0.2

                                                                         LE G A L Low 10 percentile
                                                                                                                                Singapore                            4.37
-0.4

-0.6
                                                                         LE G A L M ean                                         Indonesia                            2.99
                                                                         LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
 -0.8                                                     -1.176                                                                Philippines                          1.95
  -1                                    -1.002                                                                                  Korea                                1.71
 -1.2                                                                                                                           Malaysia                             1.71
 -1.4
                                                                                                                                Thailand                             1.71
 -1.6         -1.553                                             LE G A L Low 10 percentile
  -1.8                        -1.627                                                                                            China                                0.66
                                                              LE G A L M ean
      -2                                       -1.801                                                        NOTE: The mean and 10 and 90 percentiles of LEGAL and SIZE used
                                                           LE G A L H igh 10 percentile
            F in. D ev.
                          F in. D ev.                                                                        for calculation are based on the data of the 1996-2000 and 2001-05
             Low 10                      F in. D ev.
           percentile
                             M ean
                                          H igh 10
                                                                                                             periods. KAOPEN ranges [0, 4.37]. For the construction of KAOPEN,
                                        percentile                                                           refer to the text and Chinn and Ito (2007).




                                                                                                        43
