                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CULTURE AS LEARNING:
 THE EVOLUTION OF FEMALE LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION OVER A CENTURY

                                           Raquel Fernandez

                                         Working Paper 13373
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13373


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2007




An earlier version of the model and simulation in this paper were presented in my Marshall Lecture
at the EEA, Vienna, August 2006. The slides for this presentation are available at http://homepages.nyu.edu/
~rf2/Research/EEAslidesFinal.pdf (pp 48-52). I thank Liz Potamites for excellent research assistance,
and Christophe Chamley, John Knowles, Gianluca Violante, Elisabeth Schulte, and George Tridimas
for helpful comments. I also wish to thank seminar audiences at the LAEF "Households, Gender and
Fertility" conference, the NY/Philadelphia feds.' "Quantitative Macroeconomics" Workshop, the NBER
Summer Institute, the Silvaplana Political Economy workshop, and the "Family Behavior and the Aggregate
Economy" SITE workshop for many helpful remarks. Lastly, I thank the NSF for financial support
and the Russell Sage Foundation for its hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Raquel Fernandez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Culture as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Participation over a Century
Raquel Fernandez
NBER Working Paper No. 13373
September 2007
JEL No. E2,J21,Z1

                                                ABSTRACT

Married women's labor force participation has increased dramatically over the last century. Why this
has occurred has been the subject of much debate. This paper investigates the role of culture as learning
in this change. To do so, it develops a dynamic model of culture in which individuals hold heterogeneous
beliefs regarding the relative long-run payoffs for women who work in the market versus the home.
These beliefs evolve rationally via an intergenerational learning process. Women are assumed to learn
about the long-term payoffs of working by observing (noisy) private and public signals. They then
make a work decision. This process generically generates an S-shaped figure for female labor force
participation, which is what is found in the data. The S shape results from the dynamics of learning.
I calibrate the model to several key statistics and show that it does a good job in replicating the quantitative
evolution of female LFP in the US over the last 120 years. The model highlights a new dynamic role
for changes in wages via their effect on intergenerational learning. The calibration shows that this
role was quantitatively important in several decades.

Raquel Fernandez
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu
1     Introduction
A fundamental change over the last century has been the vast increase in female labor force
participation.     In particular, married women’s participation in the formal labor market
increased dramatically–from around 2% in 1880 to over 70% in 2000–though the pace of
change was markedly uneven. As shown in …gure 1, married women’s labor force partici-
pation increased very slowly from 1880 to 1920, grew a bit more rapidly between 1920 and
1950, then accelerated between 1950 and 1990, and has since stayed relatively constant.1
    Many explanations have been given for this transformation.                   Depending on the par-
ticular time period under consideration, potential causal factors have included structural
change in the economy (the rise of the clerical sector), technological change in the workplace
and in the household, medical advances (including the introduction and dissemination of
the oral contraceptive), decreases in discrimination, institutional changes in divorce law,
and the greater availability of childcare.2
    A popular alternative explanation (though not with economists) is that changes in cul-
ture or social norms have exerted great in‡uence on the evolution of women’s role in the
market work.3 And, from multiple sources of evidence, it certainly appears that opinions
about the role of women in the workplace have changed radically over time.                        Figure 2,
for example, shows the evolution of the percentage of the population that answered a¢ r-
matively to the question "Do you approve of a married woman earning money in business
or industry if she has a husband capable of supporting her?"4 In 1936 fewer than 20%
of individuals sampled agreed with the statement; in 1998 fewer than 20% of individuals
disagreed with it.5
    Merely pointing to the fact that society has changed the way in which it regards women,
however, is not particularly enlightening. It begs the question as to why culture changed and
why these changes a¤ected work behavior in such a gradual and uneven fashion. Indeed, one
   1
     These LFP numbers were calculated by the author from the US Census for white, married women
between the ages of 25-44, born in the US, not in agriculture, non-farm, non-institutional quarters.
   2
     The classic source for an economic history of female labor force participation is Goldin (1990). For
various explanations for this change see, among others, Goldin (1990), Galor and Weil (1996), Costa (2000),
Goldin and Katz (2002), Jones, Manuelli, and McGrattan (2003), Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu
(2005), Gayle and Golan (2006), Albanesi and Olivetti (2006, 2007), and Knowles (2007).
   3
     The reluctance of economists to believe in cultural explanations stems, in large part, from the absence
of empirical evidence that convincingly isolates cultural in‡uences from their economic and institutional
environment. There has been recent progress in this area, however (see Fernández (2007a) and Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2006) for partial reviews of this literature). For example, Fernández and Fogli
(2005) show that the variation in the work behavior of second-generation American women can be explained,
in part, by the level of female LFP in their parents’country of origin (see also Antecol (2000)). Moreover,
Fernández (2007b) shows that the attitudes towards women’s work in the parental country of origin has
important explanatory value for second-generation American women’s work behavior in the US. These
papers show that there are di¤erences in culture across societies that matter for women’s work decisions,
but they are silent on the evolution of culture. Fernández, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) give an indication for
one way that culture may evolve over time by showing that working mothers seem to transmit a di¤erent
set of beliefs or preferences to their sons, which then makes it more attractive for the wives of these men to
work (relative to the wives of men whose mothers did not work).
   4
     The exact wording of this question varied a bit over time. See The Gallup Poll; public opinion, 1935-
1971.
   5
     For additional evidence that individual attitudes and work behavior are correlated see, for example,
Levine (1993), Vella (1994) , Fortin (2005), and Farré-Olalla and Vella (2007).


                                                      1
Figure 1: U.S. Census data 1880-2000. Percentage of white, married (spouse present)
women born in the U.S., 25-44 years old (non-agricultural, non-group quarters), who report
being in the labor force.



might be tempted, as surely some are, to dismiss the evolution of beliefs as mere changes
in the superstructure of the economy that simply accompany and re‡ect the changes in
material conditions brought about by technological change.6 Viewed from this perspective,
as technological advances altered women’s work behavior, beliefs simply marched right along
in step and changed with them. An alternative view of culture often provided in economic
theory— that of a selection mechanism among multiple equilibria— likewise does not provide
a very useful framework in which to think about questions of cultural change. Without a
more developed theory of why culture changes, one is left with either sunspots causing a
switch among equilibria or an evolutionary theory of gradual changes over time.7
       Taking inspiration from the fact that women’s labor force participation changed in a
very uneven fashion over time in a form that resembles an "S-shape", this paper explores the
idea that in some contexts it may be useful to think about cultural change as the evolution
of beliefs that occurs over time as part of a rational, intergenerational learning process.8
In particular, the S-shaped curve of female labor force dynamics is reminiscent of similarly
   6
     See, e.g., Guner and Greenwood (2006) who argue that the change in sexual mores re‡ect changes in
the e¢ cacy of contraception.
   7
     For an interesting example of evolutionary theory applied to culture see Bowles (1998). Alternatively,
social norms can be passed on from parents to children in an optimizing fashion as in Bisin and Verdier
(2000) and Tabellini (2007).
   8
     The idea that cultural change may be modelled as a learning process is already present in the seminal
paper of Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992), though the focus there is on information cascades in
which individuals stop learning.


                                                    2
Figure 2: Sources: 1936-1938 and 1969 numbers are from the Gallup Poll (1972), 1945 is
from Benjamin I. Page and Robert Y. Shapiro, The Rational Public, University of Chicago
Press, 1992; pp. 101, 403-4. 1972 onwards are from the General Social Survey.



shaped curves that are common in the process of technology adoption and may constitute
an important clue that a similar mechanism of information di¤usion is also at play in this
context, though on a very di¤erent time scale.9
       Where might learning play a role in the transformation of women’s work? It is not an
exaggeration to state that, throughout the last century, women’s work has been a subject
of great contention.      As industrialization and urbanization progressed over time, so did
specialization. Younger men and (unmarried) women were drawn into the paid workplace
and away from sharing household chores, and the spheres of work and home became in-
creasingly separate.     This process left the wife in charge of the domestic realm and her
husband in charge of supporting the family, and kicked o¤ a debate on the e¤ect of a wife
working (outside the home) on her family and marriage as well as on her psyche and im-
age (and on those of her husband’s) that continues, in di¤erent guises, to this day.10 For
example, as noted by Goldin (1990), at the turn of the 20th century most working women
were employed as domestic servants or in manufacturing. In this environment, a married
woman’s employment signalled that her husband was unable to provide adequately for his
family and, consequently, most women exited the workplace upon marriage.11 Over time,
   9
     There is a large literature on learning and technology adoption. See, for example, Griliches (1957),
Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), Conley and Udry (2003), Munshi (2004), Munshi and Myaux (2006), and
Bandiera and Rasul (2006). See Chamley (2004) for a review of this literature.
  10
     See Goldin (1990) for a very interesting account of this process of separation and specialization.
  11
     Over 80% of married women, not employed in 1939 but had worked at some point prior to marriage,


                                                   3
the debate shifted to the e¤ect of a married woman working on family stability and to the
general suitability of women for various types of work and careers.                    More recently, pub-
lic anxiety regarding working women centers around the e¤ect of a working mother on a
child’s intellectual achievements and emotional health             12   For example, a recent …nding by
Belsky et al. (2007) of a positive relationship between day care and subsequent behavioral
problems became headline news all over the US. Thus, throughout the last century the
expected payo¤ to a woman working has been the subject of an evolving debate.
    In this paper I develop a simple model of women’s work decisions in which beliefs about
the (long-run) payo¤ to working evolve endogenously over time.13;14 Using a framework
broadly similar to Vives (1993) and Chamley (1999), I assume that women possess a private
signal about how costly it is to work (e.g., how negative the outcome is for a woman’s
marriage, children, etc.) and that they also observe a noisy public signal indicatory of past
beliefs concerning this value. This signal is a simple linear function of the proportion of
women who worked in the previous generation and is equivalent to observing a noisy signal
of the average utility of working women in the past. Women use this information to update
their prior beliefs and then make a decision whether to work. In the following period, the
next generation once again observes a noisy public signal generated by the decisions of
women in the preceding generation, each woman obtains her individual private signal (or
equivalently inherits that of her mother’s), and makes her work decision.                      Thus, beliefs
evolve endogenously via a process of intergenerational learning.
    The model described above generically generates an S-shaped …gure for female labor
force participation. The S shape results from the dynamics of learning. When very few
women participate in the labor market (as a result of initial priors that are pessimistic about
the payo¤ from working), learning is very slow since the noisiness of the signal swamps the
information content given by small di¤erences in the proportion of women who would work
in di¤erent states of the world. As the proportion of women who work increases and beliefs
about work become more positive, the information content in the signal improves. Once
exited the workplace at the precise time of marriage. These numbers are cited in Goldin (1990, p. 34) from
the 1939 Retrospective Survey.
   12
      See, for example, Bernal (2007), Keane and Bernal (2005) and Ruhm (2006) for reviews and recent
…ndings of this literature.
   13
      Whether preferences or beliefs changed is often impossible to distinguish and, in a reduced-form setup, it
is also unnecessary. The assumption that changes in beliefs were driven by learning is important, however,
as Bayesian updating thus constrains the path taken by beliefs. An additional advantage of this modelling
choice is that is straightforward to think about social welfare, which is not the case if preferences themselves
are a¤ected (see Fernández (2007a) for a discussion of these issues).
   14
      A recent paper by Fogli and Veldkamp (2007) independently develops a related idea. They study the
labor force participation of women with children from 1940-2000 and assume that women learn about the
ability cost to a child from having a working mother. Learning occurs through sampling the ability outcomes
of a small number of other women. Whereas in my model actions change because people modify their beliefs
about the cost of working, in their model beliefs change only because of a reduction of uncertainty about
the cost. Also related is Munshi and Myaux (2006) who model the change in contraceptive practice in
rural Bangladesh as learning about the the preferences of individuals in one’s social network. They too use
a sampling model but there is, in addition, a strategic aspect to individual choices since an agent’s payo¤
depends on the contraceptive choices of the other individual sampled. Lastly, Mira (2005) examines the
links between fertility and infant mortality in a model which mothers are learning about a family-speci…c
component of infant mortality risk.



                                                       4
a large enough proportion of women work though, once again, the informational content
in the public signal falls since the di¤erences in the proportion of women who would work
under di¤erent states of the world is small and thus swamped by the noise.
         The model also introduces a new role for changes in wages or technological change,
which to my knowledge has not been noted in the learning literature. Unlike in traditional
models, increases in women’s wages or new technologies that make it easier for women to
work outside the home, have not only a static e¤ect of making work more attractive and
thereby increasing female LFP, but they also have a dynamic e¤ect since they a¤ect the
informativeness of the public signal and hence the degree of intergenerational updating of
beliefs.15 In particular, when the average woman is pessimistic about the payo¤ to women’s
work, increasing the attractiveness of work improves the informativeness of the public signal
by moderating the private signal that she requires in order to be willing to work.
         To evaluate the ability of such a model to explain the quantitative evolution of female
LFP, I …rst calibrate a version of the model without any learning to a few key statistics
for the year 2000.        I show that such a model performs very badly and that it grossly
overestimates the proportion of women who would have worked for basically every time
period.       I then introduce learning as discussed above, calibrate the model incorporating
additional statistics, and show that introducing learning greatly improves the capacity of
the model to replicate the historical path of female LFP.
         The calibrated model indicates that the paths of both beliefs and earnings played im-
portant roles in the transformation of women’s work. In the decades between 1880-1950
the growth in female LFP was small, and most of the change in LFP was the result of
changes in wages. From 1950 to 1970, both the dynamic and static e¤ects of wage changes
played a role in increasing female LFP, and from 1970 to 1990 the dynamic e¤ect on beliefs
of changes in earnings is critical in accounting for the large increase in the proportion of
working women over that time period.
         The paper is organized as follows.     Section 2 presents a simple model of a woman’s
work decision in which the dynamics is generated by changes in wages. The next section
introduces beliefs and learning into the simple model and explains why the intergenerational
evolution of beliefs naturally generates an S-shaped curve for LFP. Section 4 calibrates
the model with and without learning and decomposes the changes in LFP into a beliefs
component, a static wage component, and a dynamic wage-belief component.                       Section 5
discusses the roles of various assumptions and concludes.


2         A Simple Model of a Woman’s Work Decision
We start with a very simple model of a woman’s work decision. We include the two main
variables that are typically assumed to play a role in this decision, namely her consumption
possibilities as a function of her decision and her disutility from working.                 As we are
    15
    Of course, changes in wages may have dynamic e¤ects by changing borrowing constraints, parental
education, schooling choices, etc. The point that is being emphasized here is that they have an additional
dynamic e¤ect in the learning model as they will also change the informativeness of the public signal.


                                                    5
interested in the di¤erence in the long-run payo¤s from working versus not working, we
view the disutility from working as stemming not only from labor-leisure preferences, but
also from what might happen to her identity, marriage, or her children as a result of her
decision.         In this …rst model, we assume that the di¤erence in disutility is known and
constant. What is critical though is that its expected value does not evolve endogenously
over time; whether it is known for sure is otherwise irrelevant.
         A woman makes her work decision to maximize:16

                                                                    c1
                                            Ui (wf ; wh ; vi ) =                 1vi                              (1)
                                                                    1

where             0 and 1 is an indicator function that takes the value one if she works and zero
otherwise.         A woman’s consumption is the sum of her earnings, wf , (which are positive
only if she works) and her husband’s earnings, wh . Husbands are assumed to always work,
i.e.,
                                                     c = wh + 1wf                                                 (2)

The disutility of work, vi , is assumed to consist of two parts,

                                                       vi =        + li                                           (3)

where the …rst component                is common to all women and the second component is idiosyn-
cratic and normally distributed, l                N (0;     2 ).
                                                            l
         Clearly, a woman will work i¤

                                        1                              1
                                            [(wht + wf t )1           wht ]             li                        (4)
                                    1

and thus, assuming that there is a continuum of agents of mass one in each period, the
aggregate number and proportion of women who work at time t is given by

                                                    ! t = G (lt ;         l)                                      (5)

where G( ) is the cdf of the l distribution and lt is the value of l such that (4) is a strict
equality.
         Note that in this simple model, the dynamics of female labor force participation is
determined entirely by the dynamics of earnings.                               As earnings evolve, so does l .    In
                                                                                             @l
particular, women’s LFP is increasing in their own earnings, i.e.,                           @wf   > 0, whereas it is
                                                      @l
decreasing in their husbands’earnings,                @wh    < 0.


3         The Simple Work Model with Learning
We next incorporate beliefs and learning in the simple model above. Women are assumed to
be uncertain about the common value of the disutility of labor, ; e.g., they are unsure how
    16
         We consider only the extensive margin, i.e., she either works or not.


                                                              6
bad working will be for their marriage, children, identity, etc. This is not something that can
be learned by entering the labor market for a short period of time nor by experimentation,
but rather reveals its e¤ects over a lifetime.
       For simplicity, we assume that                can take on only two values, high (H) and low (L),
i.e.,    2f     H;    L   g.17   Note that      L   is the good state of nature in which working is not so
costly, i.e.,    H   >      L     0. An individual woman now makes her work decision to maximize
her expected utility, i.e., equation (1) is modi…ed to re‡ect uncertainty about the payo¤ to
working:
                                                    c1
                                                                        1(Eit vi )                                               (6)
                                                    1
where E is the expectations operator and Eit vi = Eit ( ) + li .
       The model incorporates two sources of learning. One is a private signal regarding the
true value of ,             . The second is a public intergenerational signal of the decisions taken
by women in the preceding generation. It is the latter social source of learning that is key.
The exact mechanics are made more precise below.
       Consider a woman in period t who has a prior belief about                                             as summarized in the
                                                    P r(       =    L)
log likelihood ratio (LLR)              t   = ln    P r(       =       .         Prior to making her work decision, she
                                                                    H)
receives a private signal sit regarding                        .    This signal can be thought of as arising from
many sources (e.g., the scienti…c literature that existed at that time regarding the e¤ect
of a woman working) and can be either newly generated each period or inherited from the
woman’s mother.18 The private signal is given by:

                                                         sit =               +   it                                              (7)

where         N (0;       2)   and its cumulative and probability distribution functions are denoted by
F( ;     ) and f ( ;        ), respectively. The private signals are assumed to be iid across women.
       After receiving (or inheriting) her private signal, s, each woman i updates her prior
belief accordingly using Bayes’rule, resulting in a new LLR,                                       it (s),   given by

                                                                             P r(sj       =   L)
                                       it (s)   =          t   + ln
                                                                             P r(sj       =   H)
                                                                            H         L
                                                =          t                     2
                                                                                          s                                      (8)

                                 19                  @     it (s)
where      =(    L+        H )=2.     Note that            @s       < 0 since observing higher values of s increases
the likelihood that the true value of                 is           H.       Note also that the revision of              is decreasing
with the variance of the noise term,                 2,        since it lowers the informativeness of the signal.
                                                     2
  17
     Alternatively, one can think of individuals obtaining an ex-post realization i of a random variable with
a mean equal to either H or L . Individuals would thus be learning about the true mean over time (hence
even if one were able to observe an individual realization of , it would convey little information about the
bene…ts of working).
  18
     In the calibration of the model we use the latter interpretation.
  19
     To obtain (8) one uses the fact that P r(sj ) is equal to the probability of observing a signal s generated
by a normal distribution N ( ; 2 ):



                                                                        7
         Assume that women have a common prior in period t,                                                     20
                                                                                                              t.      What proportion of women
will choose to work that period? A woman will work in period t i¤

                                         1                                                      1
                                                 [(wht + wf t )1                               wht ]     Eit ( )          li                     (9)
                                   1

that is, the expected net bene…t from working must exceed the idiosyncratic disutility of
work.          For notational ease, we henceforth denote the di¤erence in consumption utility
    1                             1
1        [(wht + wf t )1         wht ] by W (wht ; wf t ).
         Note …rst that given f              H;      Lg       and earnings (wht ; wf t ), irrespective of their beliefs and
thus of the signal they receive, women with very low l’s (l                                                          l(wht ; wf t )) will always work
and women with very high l’s (l                               l(wht ; wf t )) will never work, where

                                              l(wht ; wf t )                          W (wht ; wf t )           H                               (10)
                                              l(wht ; wf t )                          W (wht ; wf t )           L                               (11)

         Next, for each women of type lj , l < lj < l, we can solve for the critical value of the
private signal sj ( ) such that, for any s                                         sj , given her prior belief , she would be willing
to work. Let p = P r(                  =       L)        and let pj be the critical probability such that a woman of
type lj is indi¤erent between working and not, i.e.,


                                         pj      L   + (1                 pj )     H      = W (wht ; wf t )          lj                         (12)
                                                                      lj l(wht ;wf t )
Using (10), we obtain pj (wht ; wf t ) =                                                         and hence,
                                                                               H       L


                                                                           pj                    lj l
                                                              ln                       = ln                                                     (13)
                                                                      1          pj              l lj

         Thus, the critical value, sj , of the private signal a woman of type lj must receive in
order to work, given a prior of                          t,   is given by

                                                                      H               L                              lj l
                                 t (sj )     =       t                         2
                                                                                               (sj     ) = ln
                                                                                                                     l lj

and hence
                                                                      2                                l(wht ; wf t ) lj
               sj ( t ; wht ; wf t ) =        +                                            t   + ln                                 sj ( t )    (14)
                                                              H            L                           lj l(wht ; wf t )

         We can conclude from the derivation above that the proportion of women of type lj ,
l < lj < l, that will work in time t given a prior of                                                     t   and a true state of nature            ,
! jt ( ;      t ),   is the proportion of this type that receives signals lower than sj ( t ), i.e.,


                                                 ! jt (           ;       t)   = F (sj ( t )             ;     )                                (15)
    20
         The structure of the model will ensure that this is the case.




                                                                                       8
Thus, the total proportion of women that will work in period t is given by:
                                                         Z       l
                               !t(    ;   t ) = G(l) +               F (sj ( t )                ;   )g(lj )dl                      (16)
                                                             l

                                                                                                                            @! t
where g ( ) is the pdf of the l distribution G ( ). Note that, as in the prior model,                                       @wf    >0
        @! t
and     @wh    < 0.

3.1       Intergenerational Transmission
What information is passed on from generation t to generation t + 1?                                                We assume that
each woman passes on to her child her prior,                             it (s).    Equivalently, generation t + 1 inherits
the prior of generation t (its "culture"),                   t,      which each individual then updates with her
private signal (which can be assumed to be either inherited from her mother or the result
of a new random draw s). If solely this information was transmitted intergenerationally,
then the learning model would behave in the same way as the earnings only model since
we would have         it (s)   =     it+1 (s);   the only change in work behavior over time would result
from changes in wages. There is, however, an additional source of information available to
women in t + 1 that was not available to women at time t –the proportion of women who
worked in period t:
       If generation t + 1 were able to observe perfectly the aggregate proportion of women
who worked in period t, ! t , they would be able to back out the true state of nature,                                                ,
as a result of the law of large numbers (i.e., using equation (16)).                                            While assuming that
information about how many women worked in the past is totally unavailable seems extreme,
the notion that this knowledge is completely informative seems equally implausible.                                                We
employ instead the conventional tactic in this literature and assume that women are able
to observe a noisy function of the aggregate proportion of women worked.21 One way to
think about this assumption is that it is a shorthand for agents knowing the proportion
of women who worked but uncertain about the distribution of married men and women’s
incomes. Alternatively, one could model individuals as observing LFP perfectly, but being
uncertain about the distribution of an idiosyncratic utility factor a¤ecting the disutility of
work and whose distribution could change randomly every period (e.g. by depending on
an unobservable aggregate factor in the economy).22                                     The route chosen below saves on a
considerable amount of additional notation.
       In particular, we assume that women observe a noisy signal of ! t , yt , where

                                            yt (    ;   t)   = !t ( ;              t)   +   t                                      (17)
  21
     An alternative assumption, pursued in Fernández and Potamites (2007), is that agents know the work
behavior of a small number of other women in their social circle (as in Banerjee and Fudenberg (2004)).
This yields similar results. It has the advantage, for the calibration, of not requiring a speci…cation of
an aggregate shock but the disadvantage of being sensitive to assumptions about the size of a woman’s
social group. Amador and Weill (2006) also obtain an S shape in the behavior of aggregate investment
by assuming that agents observe a noisy private signal of other’s actions as well as a noisy public signal of
aggregate behavior. They are interested in the welfare properties of the two sources of information.
  22
     See, for example, Chamley (1999).


                                                                     9
                                        Figure 3: Timeline of Learning Model




and where            t   N (0;    2)   with a pdf denoted by h( ;                 ).23 Thus, given a common inherited
prior of        t,   after observing last period’s signal of aggregate female LFP, yt , Bayes’ law
implies an updated common belief for generation t + 1 of:

                                              h(yt j     =    L)
         t+1 ( t ; yt )    =       t   + ln
                                              h(yt j     =    H)

                                              !t(   L;   t)       !t(   H;   t)           !t(   L;   t)   + !t(   H;   t)
                           =       t   +                      2
                                                                                    yt                                      (18)
                                                                                                          2

Note that (18) is the law of motion of aggregate beliefs (culture) for the economy.
       Figure 3 summarizes the time line for the economy.                                Individuals start period t with
a common (updated) prior,                      t.    Each woman then updates the common prior with her
(inherited or observed) private signal and makes her work decision, generating an aggregate
! t and a noisy signal yt . Generation t + 1 observes yt and uses it to update the old common
prior ( t ), generating            t+1     – the "culture" of generation t + 1.24                    The process continues
as described in each period. It should be noted that instead of assuming women in t + 1
inherit     t   which they update with the information contained in yt , we can assume that
women observe the entire history of y ,                           = 0; 1; 2:::; t: This would yield the same value of
 t+1 .


3.2      Some Properties of the Learning Model
In additional to generating qualitatively similar comparative statics as in the model with
                          @! t             @! t
no learning (i.e.,        @wf t   > 0,     @wht     < 0), the learning model has several important properties
that will be prove useful when we try to match the data in …gure 1.
       Note …rst that beliefs in this model are unbounded. Hence, in the long run beliefs must
converge to the truth.25 Since female LFP has been increasing over time, this implies that
  23
     The assumption that is distributed normally implies, as usual, that some observations of yt will be
negative (and some greater than one) and so should be taken as an approximation for analytical simplicity.
Alternatively, one can assume that the distribution is a truncated normal and allow the truncation to
change with the range, for example, but this just renders the analytical expressions and computations more
cumbersome.
  24
     Thus, we can think of generation as having a shared culture given by         with the individual deviations
around       (given by the normal distribution of i (s)) constituting the distribution of beliefs induced by
di¤erent individual’s dynastic histories (i.e., by their inheritance of di¤erent realizations of s).
  25
     See, e.g., Smith and Sorensen (2001). Chamley (2004) gives an excellent explanation of the conditions


                                                                    10
it is likely that       =       L   and we shall henceforth assume that this is the case.
    A key characteristic of this model is that it naturally generates an S-shaped LFP curve.
To see why, note that given                           =    L,      we can rewrite (18) as

                                    !t(          L;   t)          !t(     H;   t)                      !t(    L;    t)        !t(     H;    t)
             t+1    =   t   +                                 2                                t   +                                                      (19)
                                                                                                                          2

Hence, the change in the LLR is increasing in the di¤erence between the aggregate propor-
tion of women who work when                               =       L   relative to the proportion who work when                                        =    H.
A large change in the LLR will, ceteris paribus, imply a relatively large change in the pro-
portion of proportion of women who change their work decisions; if beliefs hardly change,
there will be few women who change their work decision over time (for given wages).
    To understand when the aggregate work di¤erence ! t (                                                    L;    t)      !t(       H;    t)   will be large
or small, we can start by noting that for a given lj 2 l; l type this di¤erence is equal to:

                                        F (sj ( t )                L;      )        F (sj ( t )              H;     )                                     (20)

Taking the derivative with respect to sj yields the f.o.c.

                                                  f sj                L        f sj                H    =0                                                (21)

                                                                               (sj        )2
Recalling that f sj                      =       p 1       exp                        2                , (20) is minimized when sj =                       1
                                                  2                              2

and it is at a maximum at sj = .
                                                                                               0
    Thus, if the critical signal sj ( t ) is far from the                                          s in absolute value, (20) will be small.
This implies that the di¤erence in the value of the aggregate signal yt (                                                            ; ) across the two
states will be swamped by the variance of the aggregate noise term                                                         t.       Thus, the amount of
intergenerational updating will be small and hence the change in the proportion of women
who work that period, ceteris paribus, will likewise be small.
    This property of the normal distribution is illustrated in …gure 4 which depicts the
distribution of , N 0;              2    . As can be seen in the …gure, when s                                                      is far from zero, the
di¤erence in proportion of women who work in the two states is small, i.e., the di¤erence
between ! j at s                L   and s                     H,      (i.e., the shaded area) is small, and thus not very
informative, given the noise, about the true state of nature. The opposite is true at s 0 .
Again, as shown in the …gure for the same two values of , when s                                                                0         is close to zero,
the di¤erence between           ! 0j    at the two states of nature is large.
    Note that a similar conclusion holds once we aggregate over the lj types. Taking the
derivative of (16) we obtain
                                        Z    l
                        @! t
                             =                    f sj ( t )               L         f sj ( t )               L         g(lj )dlj                         (22)
                        @s               l


Thus, if the critical signal sj ( t ) is, for the average individual, far from                                                              , (22) will be

required for cascades to occur.


                                                                               11
                                       Figure 4: Normal PDF



small in absolute value, intergenerational updating will be small, and the evolution of LFP
over time will be slow.26 The opposite is true when the critical signal is close to                 for the
average individual.
       It follows from the logic above that if parameter values are such that few women would
choose to work if they assigned a low probability to               =    L   (   t   is low) whereas many
women would choose to work if they assigned a high probability to this state (                 t   is high),
then the amount of intergenerational learning that occurs when female LFP is either very
low or very high will be small as the average woman would require a very low realization of
s to convince her to work in the …rst case, and a very high realization of s to convince her
not to work in the second case. In both of these cases, the aggregate noise term dominates
in (18) and hence the period to period change in female LFP will be likewise small. So,
in these cases learning occurs, but it takes time.           When, instead, the di¤erence in the
proportion of women who choose to work across states is large, i.e., when sj is close to
         H+ L
           2    for lj = 0 (see footnote 26), then observing the aggregate signal tends to be
informative, intergenerational learning is rapid, and the period to period change in female
LFP will be large. Putting these statements together, it is easy to see that in this model
the evolution of beliefs on their own (i.e., independently of earnings dynamics) will tend to
  26
     The assumption of heterogeneous types complicates matters since one must also be concerned about the
size of g (l). Thus, in order for the change in ! to be large, we need sj to be close to for types with a
large frequency, i.e., types close to lj = 0.



                                                   12
generate an S-shaped curve, with a slow evolution of female LFP at the beginning, followed
by rapid increases over time, and then tapering o¤ again to small increases in female LFP
until there is no more learning. At that point, any further changes in female LFP result
solely from changes in earnings.27

3.3         Wages, Technology, and Learning
The learning model generates a novel role for changes in wages or for technological change
that facilitates women’s market work (e.g., the washing machine in Greenwood et al (2005)
or the introduction of infant formula as in Albanesi and Olivetti (2007)). An increase in
female wages, for example, will have the traditional static e¤ect of increasing female LFP.
In this model, however, it will an additional, dynamic e¤ect; it will also a¤ect the amount
of intergenerational updating that takes place, i.e.,           t+1      t.   This occurs not because it
increases the proportion of women who work, but rather because it increases sj .
         If, for example, the average individual requires a very low value of the signal in order to
work, the increase in s induced by the an increase in women’s wages will render yt more
informative for the next generation. As explained in the preceding section, an increase in s
for the average individual increases the di¤erence across states in the proportion of women
who work (when           is low) and hence increases the informativeness of the aggregate signal
for the next generation. Thus, increases in female earnings and changes in technology or in
policies that make it more attractive for women to work have a positive dynamic externality
when the average woman requires a very low value of s in order to work, and have a negative
dynamic externality under the opposite circumstances (i.e., when it would take a very large
value of s for the average woman not to work).               This gives a very di¤erent lens through
which to evaluate the e¤ects of changes in earnings, technology, and policy and one of the
objectives of the next section will be to ask whether this e¤ect is quantitatively important
in explaining the historical evolution of female LFP.


4         Empirical Analysis
In this section we examine the ability of the simple learning model to replicate the dynamic
path of female labor force participation over the last 120 years. We start with the model
with no learning which we calibrate to three key statistics of female LFP in the year 2000.
This gives us a benchmark with which to measure by how much the incorporation of en-
dogenously evolving beliefs is able to add to the ability of the model to replicate the data.
We next calibrate the learning model to four additional statistics and show that the fully
calibrated model does a good job of predicting the historical LFP series. We conclude by
examining the quantitative roles of beliefs relative to wages in the evolution of female LFP
and distinguishing between the static and dynamic contribution of the changes in earnings.
    27
     As should be clear from the intuition provided above, a normal distribution of the noise term is not
critical. Rather the distribution needs to be able to give rise to a cdf that is increasing very slowly at the
beginning, rapidly towards the middle, and then slowly once again towards the end.



                                                     13
       It should be noted from the outset that the empirical analysis is not a "test" of the model.
In particular, the paper does not attempt to quantify the contributions of other potentially
important factors discussed in the introduction to explain the data, except insofar as these
are re‡ected in earnings changes (e.g., as would be the case for many forms of technological
change or changes in wage discrimination).              On the other hand, it should be clear that
some of these alternative drivers of change, while considered exogenous and "belief free"
in much of the literature, also re‡ect changed beliefs about the desirability of employing
women and thus nesting these explanations is far from trivial.28               To given an example,
the pace of technological change in the household is likely to have been in‡uenced by the
perceived potential demand for these implements, which in turn is in‡uenced by whether
women are working outside the home. The literature tends to ignore the e¤ect of beliefs
on the demand for household technological innovation. The contribution of this section is
thus to evaluate the potential ability of a simple learning model to replicate the dynamics
of female LFP and to examine the quantitative role of wages and beliefs in that process,
abstracting from other, possibly complementary, channels.

4.1       Calibration Strategy
In both variants of the model, married women decide whether to engage in market work.
Taken their husbands’earnings as given, they are faced with increasing their consumption
with their own earnings if they choose to work or foregoing the consumption increase and
not bearing the disutility of being a working woman. Thus, calibrating the models requires
parameter values for the chosen analytical forms and an earnings or wage series for men and
women. Since the model does not incorporate an intensive work margin, it is not clear how
we should measure the opportunity cost of women’s work. Given the paucity of data prior
to 1940, we decided to use the (median) earnings of full time (white) men and women for
which some data was available as of 1890. This choice exaggerates the earnings of working
women in general, as many work less than full time. As will be clear further on, however,
our main conclusions are robust to reasonable alternatives.
       For earnings data prior to 1940, we rely on numbers provided in Goldin (1990) who uses
a variety of sources (Economic Report of the president (1986), Current Population Reports,
P-60 series, and the U.S. Census among others) to calculate earnings for men and women.
We use the data for white men and women.29 As Goldin does not provide data for earnings
in 1880 and 1910, we construct these using a cubic approximation with the data from 1890
-1930 (inclusive).
       As of 1940 we use the 1% IPUMS samples of the U.S. Census for yearly earnings (in-
cwage) and calculate the median earnings of white 25-44 years old men and women who
were working full time (35 or more hours a week) and year round (40 or more weeks a year)
  28
     See Gayle and Golan (2006) for the estimation of a dynamic model in which …rms (statistically) dis-
criminate against women and beliefs evolve endogenously over time.
  29
     See Goldin (1990) pages 64-65 and 129 for greater detail about the earnings construction for various
years. We restrict our sample to white women as black women have had a di¤erent LFP trajectory with
much higher participation rates earlier on.


                                                   14
Figure 5: Crosses (blue) represent the yearly median earnings data from Goldin (1990),
Table 5.1. Dots represent our calculations using U.S. Census data (red). They are the
median earnings of white men and women between the ages of 25-44 in non-farm occupations
and not living in group quarters. All earnings are expressed in 1967 $. See text for more
detail.


and were in non-farm occupations and not in group quarters.30                   As is commonly done,
we exclude observations that report weekly earnings less than a cuto¤.                   For this weekly
wage cuto¤ we use half the nominal minimum wage times 35 hours a week and calculate
nominal weekly wages by dividing total wage and salary income last year by weeks worked
last year.31
    Figure 5 shows the evolution of female and male median earnings as calculated above
over the 120 year period 1880-2000 (with earnings expressed in 1967 dollars). In order to
compare our data with Goldin’s we also plot her …gures (which continue to 1980 and are
shown in (blue) x’s). The numbers we use as of 1940 are shown in (red) dots. The only
signi…cant di¤erence is with male earnings in 1950 which are higher for Goldin.32
    Both to calibrate the models and to compare the predictions to the data, we require
   30
      We limited our sample to full-time year-round workers because hourly wages are not reported. Even
with this restriction, the usual issues remain (see Appendix). We could have used data for only married
men and women, but chose not to in order to be consistent with the data from the earlier time period.
   31
      See, for example, Katz and Autor (1999). This procedure is somewhat more problematic for the decades
1940-1960, when the federal minimum wage did not apply to all workers (prior to the 1961 amendment,
it only a¤ected those involved in interstate commerce). Nonetheless, as in Goldin and Margo (1992), we
use the same cuto¤ rule as a way to eliminate unreasonably low wages. Note that since we are calculating
median earnings, we do not have to concern ourselves with top-coding in the Census.
   32
      Goldin’s 1950 number is from the Current Population Reports, series P-60 number 41 (January 1962).
It is for all men over 14 which may explain the discrepancy since our census …gure leaves out men older than
44 who would, on average, have higher earnings.



                                                    15
female LFP numbers from 1980-2000.               We use the numbers shown in …gure 1 calculated
from the US Census, which are for married white women (with spouse present), born in the
US, between the age of 25 and 44, who report being in the labor force (non-farm occupations
and non-group quarters).
       We calibrate both models to match female LFP in the year 2000 as well as the own and
cross wage elasticity of female LFP in that same year.                For the learning model, we also
match the cross-wage elasticity in 1990, female LFP in 1990, the relative probability of a
woman working in 1980 (conditional on whether her mother worked), and female LFP in
1980. See table 1 for a list of the targets.
       For the elasticity estimates we use those reported in Blau and Kahn (2006). The authors
use the March CPS 1989-1991 and 1999-2001 and compute married women’s own-wage and
husband’s-wage elasticities along the extensive margin restricting their sample to married
women of age 25-54 (with spouses in the same age range).33 We use the results obtained
from the basic probit speci…cation, which does not control for education, as this way the
elasticity measure obtained does not control for a measure of permanent income. This is
preferable since we are more interested in an elasticity with respect to some measure of
lifetime earnings.      The speci…cation we chose also did not control for children which we
consider an endogenous variable. Blau and Kahn estimate an own-wage elasticity of 0.30
and the cross-elasticity (husband’s wage) of -0.13 for our preferred speci…cation in the year
2000 and a cross elasticity of -0.14 in 1990.34
       To calculate the probability that a woman worked in 1980 conditional on her mother’s
work behavior, we used the General Social Survey (GSS) from 1977, 1978, 1980, 1982, and
1983.35 We included in our sample all white married women between the ages 25-45 who
were born in the U.S.36 This is the sample of daughters and, for this sample, a woman was
de…ned as working if she reported being in the labor force.                The GSS asked a variety of
questions regarding these individuals’mothers’work behavior. We used the response to the
question “Did your mother ever work for pay for as long as a year, after she was married?”
(MAWORK) to indicate whether a woman’s mother worked. For each year, we calculated
the ratio of the probability of a woman (daughter) working given that her mother worked
relative to the probability of her working given that her mother didn’t work (henceforth
referred to as the work risk ratio). We averaged this ratio across the years in the sample
to obtain an average risk ratio of 1.13.
       We will interpret each period as a decade and, for the purposes of calculating a correla-
  33
     They impute wages for non-working wives using a sample of women who worked less than 20 weeks per
year, controlling for age, education, race and region, and a metropolitian area indicator (page 42). They
run a probit on work (positive hours) including log hourly wages (own and husband’s), non-wage income,
along with the variables used to impute wages, both including and excluding education.
  34
     Using instead the speci…cation with education controls does not a¤ect our results; the elasticities are
very similar to the ones we chose (0.28 and -0.12 for 2000 and -.15 in 1990).
  35
     We used the ratio of the conditional probabilities rather than a conditional probability on its own since
the latter is not consistent with the proportion of women who worked the previous generation. This is due
to the fact that women in the GSS are more likely to report that their mother worked (given our lenient
work requirement) than what would be consistent with the Census numbers.
  36
     Women who were students or retired were not included.



                                                     16
tion, we will have daughters make their work decisions two periods after their mothers (i.e.,
a separation of 20 years).

4.2     Calibrating the Model Without Learning
We start out by calibrating the model without learning (which we will also call the "earnings
only" model).       In that model, only changes in earnings (male and female) can explain
why labor supply changed over time.                The unknown parameters are              ; ; and        l   which
we calibrate to female LFP, a woman’s own-wage elasticity, and her cross-wage (husband’s
wage) elasticity, all in the year 2000. These are useful statistics as the ratio of the elasticities
gives information about the curvature of the utility function and an elasticity and LFP
value combined give information about how dispersed the l types must be and about the
magnitude of the common disutility of working, . The simplicity of the model allows us
to solve for the parameter values analytically.
   Note that the wage elasticity " (own, f , or cross, h) is given by:

                                                              @l wk
                                            "k = g (l )                                                        (23)
                                                              @wk !

k = f; h: Taking the ratio of the two elasticities and manipulating the expression, yields
a closed-form expression for , from which we can obtain a parameter value by using the
elasticity numbers in 2000, i.e.,

                                                      wf "h
                                            log 1     wh "f
                                       =                  wf
                                                                    = 0:503                                    (24)
                                                log 1 +   wh


   Next we can use the elasticity expression and the requirement that G (l ;                         l)   = ! in
2000 to solve for      and    l.   Note that since G is a normal distribution, we can write:

                                                              1
                                                l =   l           (!)

where     1   is the inverse of a standard normal distribution N (0; 1). After some manipula-
tion of (23), we obtain:
                                                      A
                                        l   =             1 (!)2
                                                                     = 2:29                                    (25)
                                                exp       2

              wf (wf +wh )
where A =         p
                    2 "f !
                             . We can then solve for               directly from the de…nition of l , yielding
  = 0:321. To interpret this value, note that this is 9.4% of the consumption utility from
working in 1880 or 46.8% of the di¤erence in the consumption utility between working and
not working in that year.
   As can be seen in …gure 6, the calibrated model does a terrible job of matching the female
LFP data (the data is shown in small circles and the (blue) line is the model’s predicted
LFP). It grossly overestimates the amount of female LFP that should exist in all decades
other than 1990 and 2000.

                                                      17
       This basic inability of the earnings only model to match the historical data is robust to
a wide range of values for the elasticities (we explored with values twice and half that of
Blau and Kahn). It is also robust to alternative speci…cations of the share of consumption
that a woman obtains from her husband’s earnings.               In particular, one can modify the
model so that the wife obtains only a share 0 <                1 of her husband’s earnings as joint
consumption. Figure 7 shows the results obtained from recalibrating the model using values
of         that vary from 0.1 to 1.   As is clear from this …gure, this does little to remedy the
basic problem. Furthermore, introducing any sensible time variation in this share would
also not help matters as it would require women to have obtained a much larger share of
husband’s earnings in the past then in the present in order to explain why they worked
so much less then. Since women’s earnings relative to men’s are higher now than in the
past, most reasonable bargaining models would predict the opposite, i.e., a greater ability
to obtain a higher share of male earnings now than in the past.37
       We also checked the robustness of our results to our choice of earnings series.             Over
time, the average hours worked by women has changed and this intensive margin is not
incorporated into the model. In order to more fully account for this margin, rather than
use the median earnings of full-time women we constructed a series of the median annual
earnings for all working women from 1940 to the year 2000, independently of whether they
worked full time.        The sample consisted of 25-44 year old women who were born in the
U.S., not living in group quarters, and working in a non-farm occupation. The adjustment
to earnings was sizeable, ranging from 18% to 30% lower depending on the decade. Our
calibrated parameter values changed (           = 0:49,      = :25,    l   = 2:01) but the predicted
path of LFP was similar to the one obtained with the original series and hence still did an
abysmal job of predicting the historical LFP path.


4.3         Calibrating the Learning Model
We now turn to calibrating the learning model. As LFP has been increasing throughout
and, from the results of the previous section we know that changes in wages alone are
unlikely to explain this phenomenon, we assume that the true state of nature is given by
       =     L.   In this case, learning over time about the true cost of working would, ceteris
paribus, increase female LFP.
       There is an additional complication in estimating this model that was not present in the
earnings only model – the presence of an aggregate observation shock in each period (i.e.,
individuals observe a noisy public signal of aggregate female LFP). This implies that the
path taken by the economy depends on the realization of this shock. Each realization                    t
of the public shock generates a corresponding di¤erent public belief              t+1   in the following
period, and consequently a di¤erent proportion of women who choose to work after receiving
their private signals. Note that we cannot simply evaluate the model at the mean of the
  37
    Note that, in any case, to obtain the very low LFP numbers in 1880 would require women to fully share
husband’s earnings in that decade and to obtain a share of only 0.0001 of husband’s earnings in the year
2000.


                                                   18
                         Earnings Only Model, Calibrated to the year 2000
                   0.8


                   0.7


                   0.6


                   0.5


                   0.4


                   0.3


                   0.2


                   0.1


                     0
                    1880        1900          1920       1940      1960     1980         2000




                   Figure 6: Parameters:             = 0.503,   = 0.321, and     L   = 2.293




               Earnings Only Model, Calibrated to the year 2000
        0.8


        0.7


        0.6          α=1


        0.5                α = 0.1


        0.4


        0.3


        0.2


        0.1


             0
            1880         1900          1920          1940       1960      1980         2000



Figure 7:     is the fraction of husband’s earnings that enters a wife’s utility via consumption.


                                                         19
expected       shocks (i.e., at zero) since, although                t+1   is linear in , the work outcomes ! t+1
are not.
       We deal with the aggregate shock in the following way.                          For each period t, given the
labor force participation in the previous period ! t                  1,   we calculate the proportion of women
who would work, ! t , for each possible realization of the shock,                            t 1,   i.e., for each induced
belief     t   t 1   . Integrating over the shocks, we …nd the expected value of LFP for that
period, E! t         t   t 1   , and then back out the public belief (or shock) that would lead to
exactly that same proportion of women working, i.e., we …nd,                                t ( t 1)   such that:38

                                            E! t   t    t 1    = !t        t ( t 1)                                       (26)

Performing this exercise in each period determines the path of beliefs.39
                                                                                                     @l        @l
       Continuing with the calibration, after some algebra and noting that                          @wk   =   @wk ,   k = f; h,
one can show that the ratio of the elasticities in this model can be written as
                                                                @l
                                                       "wf     @wf   wf
                                                           =    @l
                                                       "wh           wh
                                                               @wh

                            @l        @l
Noting further that        @wk   =    @wk ,   this implies that performing the same manipulations as in
the previous section we obtain (24), and thus the same value of                                 as in the earnings only
model, i.e.,     = 0:503.
       Before turning to the remaining calibration targets, it may be useful to …rst examine
the maximum potential of this model by calibrating it solely to the same set of statistics
from 2000 as the earnings only model. As the earnings only model is in this way nested
within the learning model, it is not possible for the latter to do a worse job. How much
better it can do, however, is not clear ex ante. As we show below, it greatly improves the
ability of the model to match the data.
       The results of this partial calibration exercise are shown in …gure 8; table 1 reports the
parameter values under the column "partially calibrated". The (blue) solid line in …gure 8
shows the evolution of the expected value of female LFP and the (red) dashed line(labeled
P ) shows the evolution of public beliefs, i.e., the belief, pt                       t 1    , that the true state is        L
in period t (derived from            t ).    As can be seen from …gure 8, what we henceforth denote the
"partially calibrated model" does an excellent job of replicating the LFP time series.


  38
     In order to do this computationally, we take a large number of draws of entire histories for        (500
histories). See the Appendix for details.
  39
     An alternative interpretation of this exercise is to model the economy as populated by a large number (or
continuum) of communities k, each of which observes yt 1;k = ! t 1 + t 1;k where is an iid draw from the
normal distribution N 0; 2 . Given a common prior, t 1 (and the same distribution of individual signals
as before), the proportion of individuals that work in period t is obtained by integrating over the t 1;k
                                                                     R
and thus yields the aggregate labor force as equation (26), i.e.,        ! t tk t 1;k = ! t t ( t 1 ) . To
                                                                       k
maintain the common prior assumption, in each period each community would need to inherit the common
"average" prior of the previous generation consistent with the aggregate work decision, i.e., generation t + 1
would inherit the average cultural belief t ( t 1 ).


                                                              20
                                                   Table 1

                                                Earnings        Partially               Learning
 Calibration Targets                              Model         Calibrated                Model
 Own-Wage Elasticity (2000)           0.30         0.30           0.30                    0.29
 Cross-Wage Elasticity (2000)         -0.13       -0.13           -0.13                   -0.13
 Female LFP (2000)                    0.734       0.734           0.736                   0.744
 Female LFP (1990)                    0.725       0.725           0.696                   0.716
 Cross-Wage Elasticity (1990)         -0.14       -0.13           -0.14                   -0.14
 Female LFP (1980)                    0.586       0.687           0.601                   0.585
 Work Risk Ratio (1980)               1.132          1             1.27                   1.13


 Parameters
                                                  0.503           0.503                   0.503
  L                                               2.293           2.067                   2.085
                                                  0.321
  H                                                               7.481                   4.935
  L                                                               .0004                    .001
 P0 ( =    L)                                                     0.110                   0.057
                                                                  5.408                   5.288
                                                                  0.157                   0.055
 All elasticities are from Blau & Kahn (2006). The work risk ratio uses data from GSS (see text). The values
 in bold (…rst panel) are the model’s predicted values for its calibration targets.



   We now return to the full calibration exercise in order to impose more discipline on the
free parameters of the model. In addition to the statistics discussed above, we choose to
also match the cross-wage elasticity in 1990, female LFP in 1990, the work risk ratio in
1980 if her mother worked, and female LFP in 1980.                  The values of these are shown in
table 1. As in the earnings only model, the additional elasticities and values of female LFP
give us information about how dispersed women should be in their willingness to work and
how bad it is to work.       Unlike before, however, this dispersion is given not only by that
of the l types,   l,   but also by the dispersion of private information,             . Furthermore, as
the expected value of       is evolving over time with the beliefs , the values of LFP over the
three decades is giving us information as well on how rapidly                needs to evolve and hence
on how noisy the signal       needs to be (i.e., on        ).
   In order to calculate a daughter’s conditional probability of working (as a function of
her mother’s work behavior), we need to specify an inherited characteristic; otherwise, the
conditional probability of working is the same as the non-conditional probability, which is
not true in the data. In the learning model, either the private information (the signal) or
the lj type could be inherited.        We assume that the signal is perfectly passed on across
generations whereas the lj type is a random draw from the normal distribution G ( ) that

                                                    21
                                    Partially Calibrated Learning Model
                1


               0.9


               0.8


               0.7


               0.6                                                                                         LFP


               0.5                                                                 P


               0.4


               0.3


               0.2


               0.1


                0
                1880      1900           1920            1940                  1960                 1980           2000


Figure 8: x indicates the predicted LFP path (blue). The dashed (red) line (p) is the belief
path. Sum of squared errors (distance of predicted LFP from actual LFP) is 0.009.



is iid across generations.40
       Thus, given a signal s we can de…ne ls as the lj type that is just indi¤erent between
working and not at that signal value (i.e., sls = s). Hence, the probability that a woman
with signal s works is G (ls ), i.e., it is the probability that her l type is smaller than ls .
Rearranging the expression for sj in (14), we obtain

                                      lt + lt exp        t
                                                                   H
                                                                           2
                                                                               L
                                                                                       (s       )
                            lst =                                                                                         (27)
                                       1 + exp       t
                                                                  H
                                                                       2
                                                                           L
                                                                                   (s       )

And, using Bayes rule and         =      L,   we can calculate the probability that a daughter works
given that her mother worked as:

                                                Pr(DWt and M Wt 2 )
                Pr(DWt jM Wt     2)     =
                                                    P (M Wt 2 )
                                                R1
                                                  1 Pr(DWt and M Wt                         2 js)f (s            L )ds
                                        =                                                                                 (28)
                                                                           !t      2( L)
                                                R1
                                                 1 G(lst )G(ls;t 2 )f (s                        L )ds
                                        =
                                                                  !t   2( L)
  40
     See Farré-Olalla and Vella (2007) for recent evidence on the correlation of mother’s and daughter’s
attitudes towards work. Vella …nds that a woman’s attitudes towards work (instrumented by whether her
mother worked) have important explanatory power for the variance in work outcomes.


                                                             22
                                       Calibrated Learning Model
             1


            0.9


            0.8                                                                              P


            0.7


            0.6                                                                                   LFP


            0.5


            0.4


            0.3


            0.2


            0.1


              0
             1880         1900        1920             1940              1960              1980           2000


Figure 9: The dashed red line (p) is the belief path. The sum of squared errors (distance
of predicted LFP from actual LFP) is 0.052.



where DW and M W stand for daughter works and mother worked, respectively. We use
the predicted LFP from two periods earlier to calculate the probability that mothers worked
(hence the t        2 in expressions such as G(ls;t       2 )).       Note that in (28), the probability that
both mother and daughter worked, Pr(DWt and M Wt                             2 js),   is multiplied by f (s      L)   as
this is the proportion of daughters (or mothers) who have a private signal s in any time
period.
      A similar calculation to the one above yields
                                                R1
                                                  1 G(lst )(1          G(ls;t     2 ))f (s        L )ds
                    Pr(DWt jM N Wt     2)   =                                                                    (29)
                                                                  1     !t    2( L)

where M N W denotes a mother who did not work. The work risk ratio is thus given by

                                                 Pr(DWt jM Wt 2 )
                                      Rt =                                                                       (30)
                                                Pr(DWt jM N Wt 2 )

      The results of the fully calibrated model are shown in …gure 9; table 1 reports the
parameter values and calibration targets.              As in …gure 8, the (blue) solid line shows the
evolution of the expected value of female LFP and the (red) dashed line shows the evolution
of the probability that the true state is         L.    See table 1 for a comparison of the calibration
targets and the model’s predicted values.
      The calibrated model does a good job of replicating the historical path of female LFP.41
 41
      The sum of squared errors (between actual and model predicted LFP) is 0.052.


                                                       23
                                                A Few Belief Paths
              1


             0.9


             0.8


             0.7


             0.6

                     P -2 σ
             0.5              ε




             0.4


             0.3


             0.2                                                                            P 2σ
                                           Pmedian                                                 ε



             0.1


               0
              1880                1900   1920             1940         1960                 1980             2000


           Figure 10: This shows Pr(            =    L)   for agents with s =              and s =             2    ":




It under-predicts LFP from 1940 to 1970, however, and slightly over predicts it from 1880 to
1900. Individuals start out in 1880 with pessimistic beliefs about how costly it is to work.
They assign around a 6% probability to the event                   =    L.        These beliefs are very dispersed
by private information as the private signal is very noisy, so individuals hold heterogeneous
beliefs. Beliefs evolves very slowly over the …rst seventy years or so (remaining no higher
than 10% for this period). Then, as of 1960, the change in beliefs accelerate, jumping from
assigning a probability of 18.6% to              L   in 1960, to 37.7% in 1970, to 77.0% in 1980.                        By
2000, the public belief assigns a probability of 92.0% to                             =    L.          Figure 10 shows the
path of beliefs once again, but this time for the individual with the median or mean LLR,
 it (s),   as well as for the individuals two standard deviations below and above this mean.42
      The fact that the model’s predictions are too low in the period 1940-1970 may indicate
that another factor, such as technological change in the household, was also responsible.
Note that a characteristic of the learning model is that any technological change that oc-
curred in the 1930s and 1940s (e.g., the clothes washer and other housework savings devices
discussed in Greenwood et al (2005)) would have had repercussions in later decades through
the dynamic impact of technological change on learning discussed earlier.
      It is also of interest to examine the pattern of own and cross wage elasticities predicted
by the model. These are shown in …gure 11. As can be seen from the picture, over time
both elasticities are …rst increasing (in absolute value) and then decreasing. This pattern
is similar to the historical one reported in Goldin (1990) with respect to women’s own wage
                                                                                               2
 42                                                                                   ( L   H)
      Using (8), note that the median individual has a LLR given by           t   +      2 2
                                                                                                 .
                                                                                           2




                                                           24
                                       Predicted Own and Cross Wage Elasticities

              0.8




              0.6
                                                   Own Wage Elasticity



              0.4




              0.2




               0



                                  Cross Wage Elasticity (husband's wage)
            -0.2




            -0.4
               1880             1900            1920              1940     1960        1980       2000


Figure 11: Parameter values from calibrated model. See the Appendix for a description of
how the elasticities were calculated.


elasticity.         One can speculate that it re‡ects, in the early decades, the unwillingness of
women to work unless required to by a husband’s low income. Over time, however, women
become less pessimistic about the disutility of working and thus exhibit more sensitivity to
their own (and husband’s) wages until, further on in the process, by the 1960s, there is a
much more widespread belief that it is not bad for a woman to work (recall that we …nd
that indeed          L   is very close to zero) and there is a large drop with respect to the sensitivity
to both her own and her husband’s wages.43
       A comparison of the earnings only model with the learning model is instructive. Why
do they obtain such di¤erent LFP paths? As noted previously, the calibration implies that
both models must have the same value of . Furthermore, the di¤erence in the standard
deviation of the normal distribution of types is relatively small: 2.29 versus 2.09. Lastly,
the expected value of              in 2000 (a constant, of course, in the earnings only model) is also
not very di¤erent across models: 0.32 as opposed to 0.40 in the learning model.44                        Thus,
it is the endogenous evolution of the expected value of                           in the learning model that is
responsible for the di¤erence in LFP behavior observed over time across the two models.
Whereas by construction this remains constant in the earnings only model, in the learning
model the expected value of                  is close to 4.65 in 1880 and then evolves over time to 0.40 in
  43
      See table 5.2 and the discussion in chapter 5 in Goldin (1990) . The correspondence between the model
predictions and the data for the pattern of cross-wage elasticities is less clear as the studies reported in the
table start in 1900 and show only a trend of becoming smaller in absolute value.
   44
      Note that the calibration does not require both models to have the same values of l and (for 2000)
since the learning model has an additional source of heterogeneity (intra-generational heterogeneity in beliefs
induced by private signals) which a¤ects the elasticity.


                                                                  25
2000.
    It may be also be instructive to examine where the calibrated model does worse than the
partially calibrated one. As can be seen from …gures 8 and 9, the main decades in which
the partially calibrated model does signi…cantly better are 1950-1970.                    The requirement
that the parameters be able to match the work risk ratio appears to be mostly responsible
for this. In the partially calibrated model, this ratio is quite a bit higher than the target
for the calibrated model (1.26 rather than 1.13).45
    As a last exercise, we can use the calibrated learning model to generate a prediction for
future female LFP and the elasticities. Using median earnings for men and women in 2005
as our guess for 2010 earnings ($7518 and $5959, respectively, in 1967 dollars and calculated
as described earlier), our model predicts that 76.8% of women would work in 2010 with an
own-wage elasticity of 0.29 and a cross-wage elasticity of             0:12.
    From the discussion in this section, one can conclude that overall the simple learning
model does a good job in predicting the historical path of LFP. We next turn to a quanti-
tative assessment of the traditional static and non-traditional dynamic roles of changes in
wages in generating the model’s predicted LFP path.

4.4     The Roles of Wages and Beliefs
To investigate the roles of changes in earnings and in beliefs, we can start by not allowing
public beliefs to evolve (i.e., the public signal is shut down). First, we can freeze beliefs
at the 1880 level (i.e., a prior of approximately 6% that               =    L)     and ask how labor force
participation would have evolved in the absence of any updating of beliefs using the public
signal. Thus, in each period women receive a private signal and decide how much to work
but there is no intergenerational evolution of beliefs.            As show by the bottom line (with
the caption "LFP if no public updating") in …gure 12, female LFP would barely exceeded
10% by the year 2000.
    Alternatively, one can ask what female LFP would have been if, throughout the entire
time period, agents had known the true value of , i.e.,                 =      L.    This scenario is shown
for the parameters of the calibrated model by the top (red) line (with the caption "full
information LFP"). It predicts a very di¤erent trajectory than the one we estimated, with
LFP starting close to 63% in 1880 and slowly evolving to 80% by 2000. Thus, as can be
seen from contemplating either of the two extremes regarding constant public beliefs, the
actual dynamics of beliefs induced by learning is essential to producing the predicted path
of female LFP also reproduced in …gure 12. The model with dynamics induced solely by
changes in male and female earnings along with unchanged beliefs grossly under or over
estimates female labor supply over the entire time period.46
    Next, we can distinguish between the static and dynamic e¤ects of changes in earnings
on female LFP by performing the following instructive exercise. First, as before, we can
  45
     See table 2 for a comparison of the predictions of the calibration targets for the three models (earnings
only, partially calibrated learning, and fully calibrated learning).
  46
     This is simply a repetition, with slightly di¤erent parameter values, of the …nding that earnings only
model does a very bad job of replicating the LFP trajectory.


                                                     26
         0.8



         0.7



         0.6     Full Information LFP



         0.5                                          Predicted LFP



         0.4



         0.3



         0.2



         0.1

                                                          LFP if No Public Updating
           0
          1880             1900         1920   1940       1960            1980        2000


Figure 12: Uses the solution parameters from calibrated model but without public learning.



keep earnings constant at their initial 1880 levels and let beliefs change endogenously. The
LFP path obtained in this fashion, denoted LF P (p1880 ; w1880 ) in …gure 13, results only
from the changes in beliefs that would have occurred had earnings stayed constant. It is
thus a measure of the quantitative importance of the evolution of beliefs for female LFP
dynamics in which changes in earnings play no part. This LFP path is given by the bottom
(magenta) line in …gure 13. Hence, the di¤erence between the level of LFP in 1880 (given
by the dotted horizontal line) and LF P (p1880 ; w1880 ) measures the contribution of beliefs
to the historical evolution of female LFP.
   Next, we can combine the belief path obtained from the exercise above, p1880 , with
the actual historical earnings path, w, and calculate the proportion of women that would
have worked in each period. In this exercise, the changes in earnings have the traditional
direct e¤ect of changing the attractiveness of working vs not working, but they do not
have the dynamic e¤ect on intergenerational beliefs since, by construction, these beliefs
were derived from a constant wage path.        We denote the (red) LFP curve obtained this
was by LF P (p1880 ; w) and it is shown with x’s in the …gure.           Note that the di¤erence
between LF P (p1880 ; w1880 ) and LF P (p1880 ; w) measures the static contribution of wages to
the evolution of LFP (as beliefs change over time in the same way for both curves whereas
earnings change only in LF P (p1880 ; w)).
   Lastly, we allow wages to also in‡uence learning and thus beliefs and denote the LFP
path obtained this way LF P (p; w)). Note that this LFP path is the one predicted by the
model and depicted previously in …gure 9. It is the top (blue) curve shown in …gure 13.


                                               27
                              Static vs Dynam ic Effects of Wage C hanges I

              0. 8



              0. 7



              0. 6



                                                                                  dynam ic
              0. 5



              0. 4



              0. 3



              0. 2
                                                                                  s tati c



              0. 1                                                                beliefs




               0
               188 0      190 0       192 0         194 0           196 0      198 0         200 0


                Figure 13: Decomposition of LFP. See the text for notation.



The di¤erence between LF P (p; w) and LF P (p1880 ; w) measures the dynamic contribution
of wages to changing LFP by changing beliefs (i.e., both series have the same historical
earnings series, w, but LF P (p; w) allows beliefs to respond to these changes and thus a¤ect
LFP whereas LF P (p1880 ; w) keeps the belief path that would have occurred had wages
remained at their 1880 level).
   As can be seen in …gure 13, for the …rst several decades the static e¤ect of wages is mostly
responsible for the (small) increase in LFP. Over time, both the dynamic e¤ect of wages
on beliefs and the evolution of beliefs independently of wage changes become increasingly
important, with the dynamic e¤ect of wages accounting for over 50% of the change in LFP
between 1970 to 1990, which are decades of large LFP increases.
   To understand why the dynamic e¤ect of wages is more important in some decades than
others, it is useful to compare the two belief paths, p and p1880 , depicted in …gure 14. Note
that the di¤erence in the probability assigned to           =   L    is especially large in 1980 and
1990; these probabilities would have been 22.9 and 38.7 if earnings had not changed rather
than 77.0% and 89.5% respectively. By 2000, however, the di¤erence in probability assigned
by the two belief paths diminishes considerably, which explains the decreased importance
of the dynamic e¤ect of earnings on beliefs.
   The decomposition of LFP is not unique. Alternatively, we could eliminate the LF P (p1880 ; w)


                                               28
                                          Belief Paths
          1


         0.9


         0.8


         0.7


         0.6


         0.5


         0.4


         0.3


         0.2


         0.1


           0
          1880       1900         1920        1940       1960        1980       2000


Figure 14: P (   =   L)   for historical earnings series and for earnings constant at the 1880
levels.


curve and replace it with the LFP path that would result if the beliefs followed the ones
obtained from the historical earnings series, p, but wages were kept constant at their 1880
levels. This curve is shown in …gure 15 as LF P (p; w1880 ). The e¤ect on LFP of beliefs
with unchanged earnings (LF P (p1880 ; w1880 )) remains as before, but the dynamic e¤ect of
wages is now given by the di¤erence between LF P (p; w1880 ) and LF P (p1880 ; w1880 ). These
paths are obtained from the same constant 1980 earnings, w1880 , but in the …rst trajectory
beliefs evolve as they would with the historical earnings pro…le, whereas in p1880 beliefs
follow the path they would have taken had wages not changed over time. The static e¤ect
of earnings is now measured as the di¤erence between LF P (p; w1880 ) and LF P (p; w), as
now beliefs evolve the same way for both series whereas earnings follow di¤erent paths.
   With this alternative decomposition we obtain the same basic pattern as the one de-
scribed above, with both the static and dynamic e¤ect of wages becoming increasingly
important over time, and with the dynamic e¤ect accounting for between 40% to 60% of
LFP in the decades 1970-1990. Thus, the way in which we decompose the wage e¤ect into
static and dynamic matters, but the basic conclusion remains the same as above.
   We conclude from our decomposition of LFP that in some decades the dynamics of
learning as induced by higher earnings was critical to the increases in female LFP. Overall,
at di¤erent time periods, all three factors played important roles in the changes in female
LFP.




                                              29
                               Static vs Dynamic Effects of Wage Changes II

                0.8



                0.7



                0.6


                                                                                static
                0.5



                0.4


                                                                                dynamic
                0.3



                0.2



                0.1                                                             beliefs




                 0
                 1880       1900       1920         1940       1960           1980         2000


                        Figure 15: Alternative decomposition of LFP.



5    Discussion and Conclusion
This paper models the dynamics of married women’s labor force participation as re‡ecting
a process of cultural change brought about by intergenerational learning. In this process,
married women compare the bene…ts of increased consumption from labor earnings with the
expected utility cost of working. This cost is unknown and women’s beliefs about it evolve
endogenously over time in a Bayesian fashion through the observation of noisy signals of
the labor supply choices of women in the past and through the inheritance, through their
mothers, of private information. I show that a simple model with these features, calibrated
to key statistics from the later part of the 20th century, is capable of generating a time
trend of female labor force participation that is similar to the historical one in the US over
the last 120 years.
    This model naturally generates the S-shaped curve of female LFP found in the data,
shown in …gure 1. This shape results from the dynamics of learning. When very few women
participate in the labor market (as a result of initial priors that are very negative about
the payo¤ from working), learning is very slow since the noisiness of the signal swamps the
information content given by di¤erences in the proportion of women who would work in
di¤erent states of the world. As the proportion of women who work increases and beliefs
about work become more positive, the information in the signal improves.                  Once a large
enough proportion of women work though, once again, the informational content in the
public signal falls since the di¤erence in the proportion of women who would work under



                                               30
di¤erent states of the world is swamped by the variance in the noise.
      To evaluate the ability of such a model to explain the quantitative evolution of female
LFP, I …rst calibrate a version of the model without any evolution of beliefs to a few
key statistics for the year 2000, namely married women’s LFP, and the own and cross-wage
elasticities of LFP. In this model, only changes in earnings over time can explain changes in
female LFP. I show that such a model performs very badly and that it grossly overestimates
the proportion of women who would have worked in virtually every decade since 1880.
Introducing learning in this simple model and calibrating the model to additional statistics
greatly improves its capacity to predict the historical path of female LFP.
      The model also indicates a novel role for increases in women’s wages (or for technological
change), beyond the traditional direct e¤ect of making it more attractive for women to
work outside the home. In particular, when beliefs are relatively pessimistic, increases in
women’s wages make the private information (signal) required by the average woman in
order to work less extreme, and thus render the public signal more informative.                  Thus,
factors that make working more attractive when women are, on average, pessimistic, have
an additional dynamic impact though the increased intergenerational updating of beliefs.
Analysis of the calibrated model indicates that the dynamic e¤ect of wages on beliefs played
a quantitatively important role in changing female LFP, particularly over the period 1970-
1990.
      The model makes some heroic simplifying assumptions, including an unchanged true
(psychic) cost of working over 120 years. It would not be di¢ cult to incorporate changes
in the cost structure, but without direct empirical evidence it seemed better to leave it
constant and not introduce additional parameters.              The model also ignored costs that
are endogenous in nature.          In particular, by modeling changes in culture arising solely
as a process of learning about exogenous costs, it neglected the endogenous, socially im-
posed, costs stemming from social (cultural) reactions to married women in the work force.
Questions of identity (as emphasized in the economics literature by Akerlof and Kranton
(2000)), and society’s reactions to and portrayals of working women, most likely also played
an important role in determining the path of female LFP, as might have changes in vested
economic interests. Other assumptions in the model, such as the normal distributions of
the noise terms, could easily be replaced with others (e.g., single-peaked distributions and
relatively thin tails on both sides of the modal frequency) that would preserve the same
qualitative features, particularly the S-shaped curve.
      The calibrated model …nds that at the outset women were very pessimistic about the
true cost of working.        This lack of neutrality may indicate that particular social forces
were at play in determining culture.           Common economic interests for certain groups in
industrial societies at that time (e.g., men?), may help explain why most countries shared
the view that women working outside the home was harmful. Endogenizing this initial
prior, however, is outside the model presented here and would require, in my opinion,
a political economy framework to explain why certain opinions become dominant.47                     In
 47
      As the economy changed, so may have the interests of …rms (capitalists) and perhaps men in general


                                                   31
future work, therefore, in addition to exploring the informational role of di¤erent social
networks, it would also be of interest to incorporate the contribution that social rewards
and punishments may play in changing behavior over time and to …nd a way to quantify
their importance relative to learning.48 Some interesting initial work in this area has been
done by Munshi and Myaux (2006) who incorporate strategic interactions in the context
of a learning model with multiple equilibria in which individuals are deciding whether to
adopt modern contraception.49
    In future research, it would be interesting to explore also the potential ine¢ ciencies that
arise because individuals do not take into account the e¤ect of their actions on learning and
to examine the role that policy could play. At the empirical level, it is important to depart
from focussing exclusively on aggregate features of the data over a very long time horizon.
In particular, sharper hypotheses about cultural change over a shorter time period would
allow a greater use of microdata and permit one to learn more about the process of cultural
di¤usion.50 Lastly, if one could reliably identify variation in policies or technologies across
otherwise similar economic space, this could allow us to empirically quantify the dynamic
e¤ect of these on beliefs.


with respect to having women in the work force. For economic theories of changes in women’s conditions
(e.g. voting) see, for example, Doepke and Tertilt (2007) and Edlund and Pande (2002).
   48
      The interaction of social networks and endogenous punishments is the topic explored in Fernández and
Potamites (2007).
   49
      In their model, the payo¤ in a period to an individual using birth control depends on her type (whether
she is a "reformer" or not) and the contraceptive choice of the woman she interacts with in that period (this
is a model with random matching). Thus, there is a strategic aspect to a woman’s choice as her payo¤
depends upon the choice of the woman she meets. The authors show that if society starts in an equilibrium
with no modern contraceptive use, whether it can transit to an equilibrium with contraceptive use will
depend upon the proportion of individuals who are reformers, a constant fraction of which are assumed to
use (for exogenous reasons) modern contraception every period. Reformers preferences are such that they
obtain a higher payo¤ from using modern contraception.
   50
      Munshi and Myaux test their hypothesis, for example, using microdata from a 10 year interval in
Bangladeshi villages. Bandiera and Rasul (2006) and Conley and Udry (2003) use self-reported data on
social contacts to construct networks to test their models of learning about new technologies. Mira (2005)
structurally estimates his model using Malaysian panel data.




                                                     32
6         Appendix
6.1         Data
To construct the earnings sample from 1940 onwards we used the 1% IPUMS samples of
the U.S. Census.            We limited our sample to full-time year-round workers because hourly
wages are not reported. Even with this restriction, there are some issues as has been noted
by all who use this data. In particular, individuals report earnings from the previous year,
weeks worked last year, and hours worked last week.                               We included earnings from those
individuals who worked 35 or more hours last week and 40 or more weeks last year. From
1980 onwards, individuals are asked to report the "usual hours worked in a week last year."
Hence for these years we require that people answer 35 or more hours to that question and
we drop the restriction on hours worked last week. In 1960 and 1970, the weeks and hours
worked information was reported in intervals. We take the midpoint of each interval for
those years.
         Sample weights (PERWT) were used as required in 1940, 1990, 2000. In 1950 sample
line weights were used since earnings and weeks worked are sample line questions.                                    The
1960-1980 samples are designed to be nationally representative without weights.
         For the LFP numbers we used the 1% IPUMS samples for 1880, 1900-1920, 1940-1950,
1980-2000, and the 0.5% sample in 1930 and the 1970 1% Form 2 metro sample. For 1890,
we use the midpoint between 1880 and 1900.51 We restricted our sample to married white
women (with spouse present), born in the US, between the ages of 25 and 44 who report
being in the labor force (non-farm occupations and non-group quarters).

6.2         Calibration of the learning model
In order to estimate           0;      ;       ,    H;   L;   and   l   we minimized the sum of the squared errors
between the predicted and actual values of our calibration targets (see table 1). All statistics
were weighted equally.
         The simplex algorithm was used to search for an optimal set of parameters. Multiple
starting values throughout the parameter space were tried (speci…cally over 2,000 di¤erent
starting values with           0   ranging between [-10, -.01],                in [0.1, 5],   in [0.01, 2],   l   between
[0.5, 4],       L   in [.01, 1], and       H       to be between [1, 10] units greater than        L.
         A period is 10 years. 500 di¤erent public shocks were generated for each period (these
draws were held constant throughout the minimization process). For each shock, there is
a corresponding public belief that subjects begin the next period with. For each belief, a
di¤erent percentage of women will choose to work after they receive their private signals.
         300 discrete types were assumed between l(wh ; wf ) and l(wh ; wf ) in each year to ap-
proximate the integral in equation 16. Then we average over the                                 shocks to determine
the expected number of women working. We then back out the belief that would lead to
exactly that many women working. This determines the path of beliefs.
    51
         The individual census data is missing for this year.



                                                                    33
   The elasticities were calculated computationally by assuming either a 1% increase in
female wages or male wages and calculating the corresponding changes in LFP predicted
by the model in those histories in which the (original) predicted LFP was close to the true
LFP value (speci…cally those histories in which the predicted LFP was within                       .05 of the
true LFP that year). These elasticities were calculated individually for all histories meeting
this criterion and were then averaged.
   In order to approximate the integrals that are needed to compute Pr(DWt jM Wt                      2)   and
Pr(DWt jM N Wt    2)   400 discrete signals from       L       4    to    L    +4     were used.
   Lastly, in the partial calibration of the learning model to the same three statistics as in
the earnings only model, we estimated      0;      ;       ,   H;   L;   and    l   by minimizing the sum of
the squared errors between predicted and actual LFP (12 observations).




                                                34
References
 [1] Akerlof, G. and Kranton, R. E. (2000), “Economics and identity,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 115, 715–33.

 [2] Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti (2006), “Home Production, Market Production
    and the Gender Wage Gap: Incentives and Expectations,” Working Paper.

 [3] Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti (2007), “Gender Roles and Technological
    Progress,” working Paper.

 [4] Amador, Manuel and Pierre-Oliver Weill (2006), “Learning from Private and Public
    Observations of Others’Actions,” UCLA working paper.

 [5] Antecol, H. (2000), “An Examination of Cross-Country Di¤erences in the Gender Gap
    in Labor Force Participation Rates,” Labour Economics 7, 409-426.

 [6] Bandiera, Oriana and Imran Rasul (2006), “Social Networks and Technology Adoption
    in Northern Mozambique,” Economic Journal, Forthcoming

 [7] Belsky, Jay, Deborah Lowe Vandell, Margaret Burchinal, K. Alison Clarke-Stewart,
    Kathleen McCartney, and Margaret Tresch Owen (2007), “Are There Long-Term Ef-
    fects of Early Child Care?” Child Development 78 (2), 681-701.

 [8] Bernal, Raquel and Michael Keane (2006), “Child Care Choices and Children’s Cogni-
    tive Achievement: The Case of Single Mothers,” Working Paper.

 [9] Bernal, Raquel (2007), “The E¤ect of Maternal Employment and Child Care on Chil-
    dren’s Cognitive Development,” Northwestern Working Paper.

[10] Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch (1992), “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Cus-
    tom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy,
    100, 992-1026.

[11] Bisin, A., and T. Verdier (2000), “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission,
    Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 115(3), 955-988.

[12] Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2006), “Changes in the Labor Supply
    Behavior of Married Women: 1980-2000,” IZA Discussion Paper.

[13] Bowles, S. (1998), “Endogenous preferences: the cultural consequences of markets and
    other economic institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature 36, 75–111.

[14] Chamley, Christophe (1999), “Coordinating Regime Switches,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 114, 869-905.

[15] Chamley, Christophe (2004), Rational Herds, Cambridge University Press.


                                            35
[16] Conley, T. and Chris Udry (2003), “Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in
    Ghana,” mimeo Yale University.

[17] Costa, Dora (2000), “From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women’s Paid
    Labor,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4), 101-122.

[18] Doepke, Matthias and Michele Tertilt (2007), “Women’s Liberation: What Was in It
    for Men?,” working paper.

[19] Edlund, Lena and Rohini Pande (2002), “Why have Women Become Left-Wing: the
    Political Gender Gap and the Decline in Marriage,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    117, 917-961.

[20] Farré-Olalla, Lidia and Francis Vella (2007), “The Intergenerational Transmission of
    Gender Role Attitudes and its Implications for Female Labor Force Participation,”.
    IZA Discussion Paper No. 2802.

[21] Fernández, Raquel (2007a), “Culture and Economics," in the New Palgrave Dictio-
    nary of Economics, 2nd edition, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume,
    Palgrave Macmillan (Basingstoke and New York), forthcoming.

[22] Fernández, Raquel (2007b), “Women, Work, and Culture,” Journal of the European
    Economic Association, forthcoming.

[23] Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2005), “Culture: An Empirical Investigation
    of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” NBER Working Paper No. 11268.

[24] Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti (2004), “Mothers and Sons:
    Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 119(4), 1249-1299.

[25] Fernández, Raquel and Elizabeth Potamites (2007) “Learning, Social Networks, and
    Changes in Female Labor Force Participation,” work in progress, NYU.

[26] Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp (2007), “Nature or Nurture? Learning and
    Female Labor Force Participation,” Working Paper.

[27] Fortin, Nicole (2005), "Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour Market Outcomes of
    Women Across OECD Countries," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21, 416-438.

[28] Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig (1995), “Learning by Doing and Learning from
    Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political
    Economy 103, 1176-1209.

[29] Gallup, George H. (1972), The Gallup Poll; public opinion, 1935-1971 New York:
    Random House.



                                           36
[30] Galor, Oded and David Weil (1996), “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth,”Amer-
    ican Economic Review 86(3), 374-87.

[31] Gayle, George-Levi and Limor Golan (2006), “Estimating a Dynamic Adverse Selection
    Model: Labor Force Experience and the Changing Gender Earnings Gap,” Carnegie
    Mellon Working Paper.

[32] Goldin, Claudia (1990), Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of
    American Women, New York: Oxford University Press.

[33] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (2002), “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contracep-
    tives and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy
    110(4), 730-770.

[34] Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo (1992),“The Great Compression: The Wage
    Structure in the United States at Mid-century,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    107(1), 1-34.

[35] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu (2005), "Engines of
    Liberation," Review of Economic Studies 72(1) 109-133.

[36] Griliches, Zvi (1957), “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
    Change”, Econometrica 25, 501-22.

[37] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2006), “Does Culture A¤ect Economic
    Outcomes,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23-48.

[38] Guner, Nezih and Jeremy Greenwood (2006), “Social Change,” working paper.

[39] Jones, Larry, Rodolfo Manuelli, and Ellen McGrattan (2003), “Why are Married
    Women Working so much?” Working Paper.

[40] Katz, Lawrence and David Autor (1999), “Changes in the wage structure and earnings
    inequality,”in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, edition
    1, vol. 3, chap. 26, 1463-1555, Elsevier.

[41] Knowles, John (2007), “High-Powered Jobs: Can Contraception Technology Explain
    Trends in Women’s Occupational Choice?” Working Paper.

[42] Levine, David (1993), “The E¤ect of Non-Traditional Attitudes on Married Women’s
    Labor Supply,” Journal of Economic Psychology 14, 665-679.

[43] Mira, Pedro (2005), “Uncertain infant mortality, learning and life-cycle fertility,”work-
    ing paper.

[44] Munshi, Kaivan (2004), “Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population: Social Learn-
    ing in the Indian Green Revolution,” Journal of Development Economics, 73, 185-213



                                                37
[45] Munshi, Kaivan and Myaux, J. (2006), “Social norms and the fertility transition,”
    Journal of Development Economics, 80, 1–38

[46] Ruhm, Christopher J. (2004), “Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Develop-
    ment,” Journal of Human Resources 39(1), 155-192.

[47] Smith, Lones and P. Sorensen (2001), “Pathological Outcomes of Observational Learn-
    ing,” Econometrica, 68, 371-398.

[48] Tabellini, Guido, (2007), “The Scope of Cooperation: norms and incentives,” working
    paper, IGIER.

[49] Vella, Francis (1994), “Gender Roles and Human Capital Investment: The Relationship
    between Traditional Attitudes and Female Labour Force Performance,”Economica 61,
    191-211.

[50] Vives, Xavier (1993), “How Fast do Rational Agents Learn,”The Review of Economic
    Studies, 60 (2), 329-347.




                                          38
