                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE EFFECT OF ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION ON MORTALITY:
  REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY EVIDENCE FROM THE MINIMUM DRINKING AGE

                                        Christopher Carpenter
                                           Carlos Dobkin

                                        Working Paper 13374
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13374


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




Carpenter: The Paul Merage School of Business, University of California Irvine, kittc@uci.edu. Dobkin:
Department of Economics, University of California Santa Cruz, cdobkin@ucsc.edu. We thank Phil
Cook, Tom Dee, and Bob Kaestner for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Christopher Carpenter and Carlos Dobkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Alcohol Consumption on Mortality: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from
the Minimum Drinking Age
Christopher Carpenter and Carlos Dobkin
NBER Working Paper No. 13374
September 2007
JEL No. I1

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the effect of alcohol consumption on mortality using the minimum drinking age
in a regression discontinuity design. We find that granting legal access to alcohol at age 21 leads to
large and immediate increases in several measures of alcohol consumption, including a 21 percent
increase in the number of days on which people drink. This increase in alcohol consumption results
in a discrete 9 percent increase in the mortality rate at age 21. The overall increase in deaths is due
primarily to a 14 percent increase in deaths due to motor vehicle accidents, a 30 percent increase in
alcohol overdoses and alcohol-related deaths, and a 15 percent increase in suicides. Combining the
reduced-form estimates reveals that a 1 percent increase in the number of days a young adult drinks
or drinks heavily results in a .4 percent increase in total mortality. Given that mortality due to external
causes peaks at about age 21 and that young adults report very high levels of alcohol consumption,
our results suggest that public policy interventions to reduce youth drinking can have substantial public
health benefits.

Christopher Carpenter
University of California, Irvine
The Paul Merage School of Business
443 SB
Irvine, CA 92697-3125
and NBER
kittc@uci.edu

Carlos Dobkin
Engineering 2
UC, Santa Cruz Dept. of Economics
1156 High St.
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
cdobkin@ucsc.edu
Introduction
         Does alcohol consumption by young adults increase mortality, and if so, by how
much? These questions are highly relevant for public policy given that over half of
young adults drink and about one-third drink heavily (i.e., 5 or more drinks at one time). 2
But providing credible answers to these questions is complicated by the usual problem of
unobserved heterogeneity among individuals that is likely related both to alcohol
consumption and to the determinants of mortality. Some of the most credible research to
date has made use of the changes in the minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) that
occurred in the 1970s and 1980s. Specifically, the majority of states experimented with
drinking ages of 18, 19, and 20 before federal legislation required that all states adopt an
MLDA of 21. Several studies that focus on the effect of these policy changes find that a
higher drinking age reduces alcohol consumption by young adults and fatalities from
motor vehicle accidents (see Wagenaar and Toomey 2002 for a review).3 However, there
is much less research on how the drinking age affects the other leading causes of death
among young adults – suicide, drug overdose, alcohol overdose, and homicide – and what
research does exist reaches contradictory conclusions. Moreover, the literature lacks
credible estimates of the underlying structural relationship between alcohol consumption
and mortality. 4 Estimates of how much a 1 percent reduction in alcohol consumption
will reduce mortality are vital for policymakers evaluating the benefits of interventions
intended to reduce alcohol consumption.
         In this paper we estimate the causal effect of alcohol consumption on mortality
using a regression discontinuity (RD) design. This RD design uses the fact that the
MLDA produces sharp differences in alcohol access for young adults on either side of
age 21. Since the observed and unobserved determinants of alcohol consumption and


2
  Young adults are of particular policy interest with respect to alcohol consumption and its adverse effects.
A 2004 Institute of Medicine report, for example, estimates that excessive alcohol consumption by young
adults costs society billions of dollars each year in the form of traffic accidents, crime, and unintentional
injury (Bonnie and O’Connell 2004).
3
  In addition to substantial changes in drinking behavior in the last 25 years, major technological
innovations have made motor vehicles much safer. As such, it is not clear how relevant older estimates are
for guiding current policy.
4
  Below, we briefly review other approaches that researchers have used to disentangle causality in the
alcohol consumption and mortality relationship in the US. This includes research that relies on alcohol
taxes and other alcohol prohibitions for identification.


                                                     2
mortality are likely to trend smoothly across the age-21 threshold, we can use the
estimates of discontinuous jumps in alcohol consumption and mortality at age 21 to
identify the causal effect of alcohol consumption on mortality among young adults. To
implement the design we estimate the reduced-form impact of the MLDA on alcohol
consumption and mortality using both parametric and nonparametric regression
discontinuity models.           We then combine these estimates to obtain the implied
instrumental variables estimate of the impact of alcohol consumption on mortality.
         The RD design is very well suited for this research question. We are able to use
detailed survey data on alcohol consumption and a census of deaths in the United States
to provide compelling graphical and regression-based evidence that the MLDA laws
result in sharp differences in alcohol consumption and mortality for youths on either side
of the age-21 threshold.             The RD design also addresses concerns about policy
endogeneity that have been raised as criticisms of the research designs used in much of
the prior literature. Specifically, it may be that places with strict alcohol control policies
differ systematically in their unobserved determinants of alcohol consumption (e.g., anti-
drinking sentiment) and mortality from places with weak alcohol control policies. Even
research designs that leverage changes in state alcohol control policies are subject to the
concern that the policy changes may coincide with changes in population preferences or
state public health campaigns. By implementing an RD design we can be confident that
our results are not biased by unobserved factors that determine policy. 5
         In addition to using a research design that we believe generates more credible
estimates than the designs used in the prior literature, our paper makes several other
important contributions. 6 First, we show that the MLDA laws reduce drinking by 16-21
percent depending on the consumption measure being examined. These estimates are
new and interesting in their own right and are substantially larger than most of the

5
  As we describe below, all states have had an MLDA of 21 since the mid-1980s. An additional benefit of
using such a long-standing policy is that we largely avoid problems related to the substantial cross-state
alcohol consumption by youths in the 1970s and 1980s that was related to differences in MLDAs across
states at a point in time. Saffer and Grossman (1987) show that their estimates on motor vehicle mortality
are sensitive to the drinking age in nearby border states. We also avoid the issue of how to deal with
different state policies that were “grandfathered” for some youths when the state drinking age increased.
6
   The RD design has the advantage over the cross-section and panel approaches typically used in this
literature in that it is possible to indirectly check the assumptions under which the model is identified (that
potentially confounding variables evolve smoothly through the discontinuity) and visually check the fit of
the regression model.


                                                      3
existing estimates from the literature on drinking ages.         Second, we show that the
increase in alcohol consumption that occurs at age 21 results in an immediate 9 percent
increase in mortality. Unlike the prior literature, we examine all the major causes of death
and find that the overall increase is due to increases in deaths due to motor vehicle
accidents, suicides, and deaths with an explicit mention of alcohol (such as overdoses and
alcohol poisoning). Third, we use the large samples of deaths to stratify the mortality
analysis by sex, race, and education group and find that the increase in mortality at age 21
is largest for males, whites, and high school graduates. Finally, we combine our reduced-
form estimates of the effect of the MLDA laws on alcohol consumption with the
estimates of their impact on mortality to obtain the implied instrumental variables
estimate of the impact of alcohol consumption on the probability of dying. Specifically,
we find that a 1 percent increase in the number of days on which 21-year-olds drink or
drink heavily is associated with a .4 percent increase in mortality. This is the first direct
estimate of this elasticity in the large literature on drinking ages, alcohol consumption,
and mortality that we are aware of, and it is of significant value to policymakers
designing interventions intended to reduce alcohol consumption and its adverse effects,
particularly among young adults.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides a brief
review of the relevant literature that has used state drinking age policy experiments to
evaluate the effects of alcohol access on alcohol consumption and mortality. Section 2
describes the National Health Interview Survey alcohol consumption data and the
National Center for Health Statistics mortality detail data that we use for this study.
Section 3 provides a detailed description of the empirical methods, Section 4 presents the
main results, and Section 5 offers a discussion and concludes.


1.     Literature Review

       There is a large literature on alcohol consumption and its effect on mortality,
particularly from alcohol-related traffic accidents. Many of the papers in this literature
leverage changes in state alcohol control policies. For example, a large number of studies
have used state variation in alcohol excise taxes to identify the effects of alcohol



                                             4
consumption on mortality rates. 7 Others have used the variation in the availability of
alcohol generated by liquor outlet density or county-level prohibitions on alcohol sales. 8
A full review of the literature is beyond the scope of this paper; instead, we focus on a
class of studies that – like ours – relies on MLDA laws to analyze the effects of drinking
on mortality. The intuition behind the literature reviewed here is that reductions in the
total cost of drinking will increase alcohol consumption and alcohol-related harms (to the
extent that such harms arise directly from alcohol consumption).
         A large literature has studied the effects of minimum drinking ages, though no
previous work uses an RD framework. Instead, the most credible existing work has used
state policy experiments with changes in the MLDA. These historical policy changes
carry a few advantages in the context of identifying causal effects of alcohol access on
consumption and mortality. First, there is substantial variation in state policies over time.
Specifically, a majority of states experimented with reducing their MLDA to 18 or 19
(down from 21) in the 1970s, although all states eventually reinstated the age-21 MLDA
by the late 1980s. Second, unlike beer taxes or wet/dry prohibitions, the use of MLDA
laws creates natural age-based predictions about which groups should and should not
have been affected by the minimum drinking age. Third, using changes in the MLDA
laws alleviates some concerns about policy endogeneity because the federal government
threatened states with the loss of federal highway funds if they did not adopt an MLDA
of 21. As such, researchers have argued that states were “compelled” against their will to



7
  See, for example, Grossman et al. (1994), Kenkel (1993), Ruhm (1996), and Cook and Moore (2001).
These studies generally show that higher beer taxes are associated with lower alcohol consumption by
youths and young adults, though the magnitude of the price/consumption relationship varies across studies.
With respect to mortality, studies have found negative relationships between alcohol taxes and cirrhosis
mortality (Cook and Tauchen 1982), traffic fatalities (Saffer and Grossman 1987), and all-cause mortality
(Cook et al. 2005). There has been some disagreement, however, regarding the ability of panel data
evaluations to credibly estimate effects of state beer taxes on consumption and mortality (see Dee 1999 and
others).
8
  Baughman et al. (2001), for example, consider numerous county-level changes in “wet” and “dry” status
in Texas from the 1970s to the 1990s. They find that the sale of alcohol for on-premises consumption at
bars and restaurants does increase traffic fatalities, though off-premises consumption availability appears to
reduce traffic fatalities. Research has also used variations in the physical access to alcohol associated with
differences in the density of alcohol and liquor outlets. Using data on liquor outlet density in communities
in New Mexico, Escobedo and Ortiz (2002) found statistically significant associations with suicide,
alcohol-related crashes, and alcohol-related fatalities. They did not, however, find significant relationships
between liquor outlet density and other adverse outcomes such as homicide, drug-related mortality, or
alcohol-related mortality (e.g., overdoses).


                                                      5
impose stricter alcohol control policies. 9 Finally, there is credible evidence that MLDA
policies induced changes in alcohol use. Cook and Moore (2001) used the National
Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY) to show that changes in the MLDA were
associated with sharp changes in alcohol consumption, and Dee (1999) and Carpenter et
al. (2007) find a similar result using the Monitoring the Future (MTF) study.
         There are, however, at least three remaining criticisms of the work on drinking
ages and alcohol consumption. First, one may still be concerned that bias due to policy
preferences is not completely eliminated even when using state changes in the MLDA
that were “induced” by the federal compulsion. For example, the states that initially
reduced their MLDA down from 21 – the only states for whom federal compulsion
creates meaningful variation – are arguably different from those states that never changed
their MLDA in unobserved ways that may be related to the determinants of drinking
(e.g., anti-drinking sentiment). Similarly, the speed with which states chose to comply
with the federal directive is also plausibly nonrandom. Second, there is not universal
consensus that the national movement toward an MLDA of 21 did, in fact, significantly
reduce alcohol consumption among the targeted groups. Kaestner (2000), for example,
finds much weaker support for the idea that a higher drinking age reduces consumption
after accounting for time-varying state effects in a triple difference framework that makes
use of youths over and under the drinking age threshold. And a Wagenaar and Toomey
(2000) review of all published drinking age studies between 1960 and 1999 noted that
only 11 of 33 studies meeting the criteria for “high quality” (i.e., those peer-reviewed
studies with pre/post designs, treatment/control groups, and probability samples) found a
significant inverse relationship between the legal drinking age and alcohol consumption
(Wagenaar and Toomey 2002). 10 Finally, the literature that does find significant effects
of drinking age on consumption produces a wide range of effect sizes. Cook and Moore
(2001) find that a binding MLDA reduces drinking participation by 9 percent and binge
drinking by about 17 percent.             Dee (1999) finds smaller effects on heavy episodic
9
  In the case of the MLDA, this was done through the 1984 Minimum Legal Drinking Age Act. This stands
in marked contrast to policies such as direct increases in state alcohol taxes and other forms of availability
regulation, which are often instituted explicitly as a response to public health concerns.
10
   Wagenaar and Toomey’s (2002) review included a comprehensive search of four databases, including:
the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism’s alcohol problems science database (1960-1999),
MEDLINE (1966-1999), Current Contents (1994-1999), and Social Science Abstracts (1983-1999). Their
analysis yielded 132 drinking age studies.


                                                      6
drinking of about 8 percent among high school seniors, while Carpenter et al. (2007) find
drinking age effects of about 4 percent. Thus, it is fair to say that the questions of
whether and how much the drinking age affects alcohol consumption are not settled.
        Other research has examined the impact of changes in the MLDA policies on
mortality. Studies that use these age-based policies generally employ state/year panels of
age-specific mortality outcomes that are plausibly linked to alcohol use to estimate
reduced-form models that control for state and year fixed effects, other state
demographics, and the MLDA. The literature on MLDA and age-specific traffic fatalities
is far too large to review here, but the consensus is that age-based restrictions reduce
motor vehicle fatalities. Wagenaar and Toomey’s review, for example, noted that 58
percent of the 79 higher-quality studies found a significant inverse relationship between
the legal drinking age and traffic accidents.
        In contrast to the drinking age literature on highway fatalities, there is much less
research on – and as a result less agreement about – the effects of the drinking age on
other types of mortality. 11 With respect to suicides, for example, existing drinking age
research reveals conflicting evidence, with some studies finding a strong relationship
(e.g., Birckmayer and Hemenway 1999; Carpenter 2004) while other research with a
similar design fails to find effects (Hingson et al. 1985). Similar null findings with
respect to the drinking age have been found for pedestrian fatalities, other injury-related
fatalities, homicides, and drownings (see, for example, Jones et al. 1992; Joksch and
Jones 1993; and Howland et al. 1998).
        This brief review highlights several key gaps in the literature on drinking ages,
alcohol consumption, and mortality. First, although there is some credible evidence that
the drinking age affects alcohol consumption, a clear consensus has not been reached.
And second, the reviewed studies find only moderate consensus that the drinking age
affects traffic accidents and no consensus that it affects nontraffic mortality. Given these
challenges, it is perhaps not surprising that no previous drinking age study has provided a
unified assessment of the implied magnitude of the effect of alcohol consumption on



11
   Wagenaar and Toomey’s (2002) review, for example, identified only six drinking age studies that
examined mortality outcomes other than traffic fatalities, each focusing on only one or two specific causes
of death.


                                                    7
mortality. 12 We fill these gaps by: 1) using a design that removes bias from unobserved
policy preferences; 2) considering a much more comprehensive range of alcohol
consumption and mortality outcomes than previous research; and 3) directly providing an
instrumental variables estimate of the effect of alcohol consumption on mortality among
young adults.


2.       Data
         This project uses two main data sources. For the consumption analyses, we use
survey data on alcohol consumption from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)
over the period 1997-2005. 13            To evaluate the impact of alcohol consumption on
mortality, we use the National Center for Health Statistics’ mortality detail files for the
1997 to 2004 period. 14 For both parts of the analysis we focus on young adults age 19-
22, inclusive.
         The NHIS is a survey of a stratified random sample of the US population that asks
respondents about a variety of health outcomes and behaviors, including alcohol
consumption. The questions about alcohol consumption were included as part of the
sample adult survey from 1997 to 2005. 15 We have obtained access to a confidential
version of these data with information on the respondents’ exact date of birth and exact
interview date, which we use to compute the exact age at which an individual was
surveyed. Each NHIS survey asked a variety of questions about alcohol consumption.
Two screening questions were asked of all respondents. First: “In any one year, have you
had at least 12 drinks of any type of alcoholic beverage?” And second: “In your entire

12
   One relevant study worth noting that does provide estimates of the elasticity of total mortality to per
capita alcohol consumption is by Cook, Ostermann, and Sloan (2005). They use a 30-year state panel of
total mortality and control directly for per capita ethanol consumption, producing an elasticity of .23. They
also use an index of state alcohol taxes to estimate the reduced-form association with both total mortality
and per capita ethanol consumption, producing an implied IV estimate of .33. They do not separately
consider young adults.
13
   Our choice of data sources for evaluating the effects of age-based alcohol restrictions on consumption
was driven by our need for large samples and the exact age in days of youths in the age range 19-22. The
latter requirement eliminated nearly all standard sources of information on alcohol consumption, such as
the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The former requirement eliminated one-time
surveys such as the National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey (NLAES) and the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol Related Conditions (NESARC).
14
   We also use population estimates from the census to convert mortality counts into rates.
15
   More detailed questions about alcohol consumption were asked as supplements in a handful of years.
However, the sample sizes from these years are too small for meaningful analysis in the RD context.


                                                     8
life, have you had at least 12 drinks of any type of alcoholic beverage?” Individuals who
had at least 12 drinks were then asked about the frequency and intensity of their alcohol
consumption over the past year. We consider six main outcomes using responses to these
questions. The first three outcomes are measures of drinking participation: whether the
respondent reported having consumed 12 or more drinks in her lifetime, whether the
respondent reported having consumed 12 or more drinks in any one year, and whether the
respondent reported engaging in any “heavy” drinking in the previous year. 16 We also
examine three measures of drinking frequency and intensity: the percentage of days on
which an individual drinks, the percentage of days on which an individual engages in
“heavy” drinking, and the average number of drinks a person has on the days on which
they drink. 17
        There are two potentially serious problems with estimating the change in alcohol
consumption behavior that occurs at age 21 using the NHIS.                        The first is that the
questions on alcohol consumption typically refer to the prior 12 months. 18 This feature
implies that in the first months after turning 21 the reference period is largely composed
of the person’s 20th year. However, despite being asked about their behavior over the
past year, respondents can choose to report on their alcohol consumption over the past
year, the past month, or the past week. Fortunately, when asked how many days they
drank in the past year, 75 percent of the respondents answered using a reference period of
either the past week or the past month. 19 A careful examination of Figures 1 and 2
reveals that the reference period creates a significant measurement problem only for

16
   A common variable in alcohol research is “binge” or “heavy episodic” drinking, which measures the
consumption of 5 or more drinks at one sitting. The NHIS question asks respondents: “In the past year, on
how many days did you have 5 or more drinks of any alcoholic beverage?” It is possible, though unlikely,
that individuals could have consumed their 5 drinks evenly spaced across the day. For this reason we refer
to this behavior as heavy drinking rather than binge drinking.
17
   These outcomes are constructed logically as follows: individuals who reported that they consumed
alcohol on one day in the past week are assigned a value of 1/7, individuals who reported that they
consumed alcohol on three days in the past month are assigned a value of 3/30, and so forth.
18
   The actual NHIS drinking frequency and intensity questions are as follows. Respondents who have
consumed at least 12 drinks in their lifetime (based on the screening questions described above) are asked:
“In the past year, how often did you drink any type of alcoholic beverage?” Here, the respondents could
report their past year’s consumption in terms of the number of drinks over the past year, the past month, or
the past week. Drinkers were then asked: “In the past year, on those days you drank alcoholic beverages,
on the average, how many drinks did you have?” Finally, individuals are asked: “In the past year, on how
many days did you have 5 or more drinks of any alcoholic beverage?”
19
   For the question “In the past year, on how many days did you have 5 or more drinks of any alcoholic
beverage?” 37 percent of respondents used a reference period of one week or one month rather than a year.


                                                     9
people just over 21. For all the measures of drinking intensity we examine, people
interviewed in the first month after they turned 21 reported rates very similar to people
interviewed just before they turned 21 and substantially lower than other 21-year-olds.
The figures also reveal that people interviewed in the second month after turning 21
reported alcohol consumption levels very similar to their 21-year-old peers. This suggests
that the “reference period effect” does not persist past the first month. To adjust for this
problem we include a dummy variable in our regression models for individuals surveyed
in the first month after they turned 21.
       The other potentially serious problem is the possibility that alcohol consumption
is underreported due to desirability bias. This is a particular problem for this research
design because there may be a discontinuous change in the desirability bias at age 21
since the behavior in question is illegal for people under 21. This could generate a
discrete increase in the reported level of alcohol consumption at age 21 even if there is no
true change in behavior. Fortunately, there are three compelling pieces of evidence that
the increase in alcohol consumption we document in this paper is not due to desirability
bias. First, as we will show below, there is a large discrete increase in alcohol-related
deaths (e.g., alcohol overdoses) at age 21. This is indirect but compelling evidence of a
change in alcohol consumption. Second, we show below that a majority of young adults
under age 21 reports that they have consumed at least 12 drinks in their lifetime and that
there is essentially no change in reported lifetime drinking participation rates at age 21.
Both of these facts are inconsistent with desirability bias driving our consumption results.
Finally, as documented above, individuals interviewed in the month just after their 21st
birthday reported alcohol consumption behavior that is much more similar to that of 20-
year-olds than of 21-year-olds. If the increase in reported alcohol consumption we
document were due to desirability bias, the reported consumption would change
immediately at age 21. The pattern we actually observe is consistent with honest
responses to a retrospective question.
       The mortality data come from the NCHS confidential national mortality detail
files and include the decedent’s date of birth and date of death. These data are derived
from death certificates and include the universe of all deaths in the United States over the




                                            10
period 1997-2004. 20 We use information on the cause of death as reported on the death
certificate to create two categories: deaths due to internal causes and deaths due to
external causes. 21 We then split the deaths due to external causes into the following
mutually exclusive subcategories: homicides, suicides, motor vehicle accidents, deaths
with a mention of alcohol, deaths with a mention of drug use, and deaths due to other
external causes. 22 To account for a pronounced 21st-birthday mortality effect (see the
day-specific death rates in Appendix A), for all outcomes we report estimates from
regression models that include dummy variables for the 21st birthday and the day after. 23
In nearly all cases the inclusion of these birthday dummies does not change the main
results.


3.         Methods

           In this section we begin by describing how we estimate the reduced-form impact
of the MLDA laws on alcohol consumption and mortality. We then describe how the
reduced-form estimates can be combined to obtain the implied instrumental variables
estimate of the impact of alcohol consumption on mortality.


3.1 Reduced Form


20
   The 2005 mortality data are not yet available. However, estimates using data from 1990-1996 are very
similar to estimates using the 1997-2004 data (see Appendix I), suggesting that including the 2005 data –
so as to match the data available from the NHIS exactly – would not significantly affect our results.
21
   The one exception to this coding rule is that we code deaths with an explicit mention of alcohol on the
death certificate as “alcohol-related” deaths, regardless of whether the originating cause was internal or
external. That is, we code a death due to alcoholic fatty liver – an internal cause – as an external death with
a mention of alcohol. We use this terminology because “alcohol-related” causes of death are fairly standard
in the literature (Escobedo and Ortiz 2002, and others).
22
   Throughout, we use the International Classification of Diseases, 9th and 10th revisions. A full list of the
cause-of-death codes is provided in Appendix E. We code “alcohol-related” deaths to include: alcoholic
psychoses, alcohol dependence syndrome, nondependent abuse of alcohol, alcoholic neuropathy, alcoholic
cardiomyopathy, alcoholic gastritis, alcoholic fatty liver, acute alcoholic hepatitis, alcoholic cirrhosis of the
liver, other alcoholic-related liver toxicity, and overdose by ethyl alcohol. The use of “alcohol-related”
therefore refers to a death for which there was a strong likelihood that alcohol played an important and
direct role in the outcome. When more than one cause of death was included on the death certificate we
created mutually exclusive categories in the following order: homicide, suicide, MVA, mention of alcohol,
mention of drug use, and other external causes. Deaths due to “other external causes” include mortality
from falls, burns, and drownings – all of which are strongly associated with alcohol consumption.
23
   The means in the figures include these observations, though their effect is not particularly discernible
because averaging over 30 days largely masks the birthday effect. For the local linear regressions we drop
deaths occurring on the 21st birthday and the day immediately after the 21st birthday from the analysis.


                                                       11
           Consider a simple reduced-form model:

(1)        yi = Xi βy + gy(a) + Da πy + vyi,.
where yi is an outcome measure for individual i at age a, Xi represents a set of measured
characteristics of individual i, gy(a) is a smooth function representing the age profile of
the outcome y (e.g., a low-order polynomial), Da is an indicator for being 21 or older, and
vyi is an unobserved error component. The parameter πy measures any discrete change in
the expectation of yi that occurs precisely at age 21. Since the age profile and the dummy
Da are the same for all individuals with the same age, identification of πyj arises from
variation across age cells. Let y denote the population mean of the outcome variable y in
age cell a. Ignoring variation in the X’s or assuming the data have been adjusted for such
variation, equation (1) implies:

(2)         y = E[yi ] = k + gy(a) + Da πy ,

where k is a constant. We will estimate the model above by modeling gy(a) as a low-order
polynomial. 24
           In addition to estimating the discontinuity parametrically as described above, we
also estimate it nonparametrically using local linear regression as detailed in Hahn, Todd,
and van der Klaauw (2001). To estimate the discontinuity nonparametrically we
implement a local linear regression procedure using the bandwidth selection procedure
suggested in Fan and Gijbels (1996). We then use this bandwidth and a triangular kernel
to fit local linear regressions on each side of age 21, and we estimate the limit of the
expectation function from the left and the right of age 21.                            We compare the
nonparametric estimates with the polynomial estimates to ensure that the results are
robust to specification.


3.2 Implied Instrumental Variables Estimate
           The reduced-form approach of equation (2) will let us estimate the impact of the
MLDA laws on alcohol consumption and mortality. For other purposes it is helpful to
interpret the discontinuity in y in the context of an underlying causal structure. In
particular, a structural model is needed to estimate how much mortality rates will increase

24
     We assess the fit of the polynomial both graphically and by comparing a series of nested models.


                                                      12
when alcohol consumption increases. Suppose that an increase in alcohol consumption is
hypothesized to increase the probability that a person will die. Then an appropriate
causal model is

(3)     yi = Xiα + f(a) + Ciδ + ui        ,

where yi is the mortality probability of individual i, Ci is a measure of alcohol
consumption by individual i, f(a) is the structural age profile, and ui is an idiosyncratic
error. Suppose in addition that alcohol consumption is determined by a simple (first-
stage) model of the form

(4)     Ci = Xi βC + gC(a) + Da πC + vCi ,

where βC is a vector of coefficients, gC(a) is the age profile of alcohol consumption, and
πC represents the discrete increase in alcohol consumption that results from the increase
in alcohol availability at age 21. Equations (3) and (4) imply a reduced-form model of
the form of equation (1) in which the reduced-form effect of reaching age 21 on outcome
y is πy = πC × δ. The causal effect of alcohol consumption on mortality, δ, can be
estimated by forming the ratio of the estimated discontinuity in mortality at age 21 to the
estimated discontinuity in alcohol consumption.


4.      Results
        This section is divided into two subsections. In the first subsection we document
the substantial increase in alcohol consumption that occurs when people turn 21. In the
second subsection we estimate how much the age-specific mortality rate increases after
age 21 and determine what particular causes of death are driving the increase. We also
examine how the increase in mortality is distributed across gender, race, and educational
attainment.

4.1 Alcohol Consumption
        In this subsection we document how the frequency and intensity of alcohol
consumption change when people turn 21. 25 In Figure 1 we present the age profiles for

25
  We note that estimating the effect of the current minimum drinking age (21) on alcohol consumption is
an independently interesting exercise, since much previous research has used data on high school youths to
evaluate historical changes in drinking ages. Since only a handful of high school youths are age 20 or 21,


                                                   13
the proportion of respondents who reported consuming 12 or more alcoholic drinks in
any one year, those who reported consuming 12 or more drinks over their entire lifetime,
and those who reported any heavy drinking in the past year. To make the age profile less
noisy, the proportions have been calculated for 30-day blocks of age rather than
individual days. Over these proportions we have superimposed the fitted lines from
regressions on the underlying micro data. 26 The figure shows that about 65 percent of
20-year-olds in the NHIS reported having consumed 12 or more drinks in their lifetime,
and that there was not much increase in drinking at age 21. The figure also shows that
people interviewed in the first month after their 21st birthday reported drinking behavior
very similar to that reported by 20-year-olds. As noted above, this is probably due to the
retrospective nature of the question. For this reason, in all the empirical specifications for
the alcohol consumption variables we include a dummy variable for people interviewed
in the 30 days after they turned 21. 27
         In the first panel of Table 1 we present the regression estimates of the increase in
the proportion of people who reported having had 12 or more drinks in their lifetime.
The regression in the first column of the panel is the one that generated the fitted line in
Figure 1. This regression confirms that the increase in the figure is about 4 percentage
points and is statistically insignificant. 28 In the second column of the panel we present
the same regression using the NHIS sample weights to obtain the predicted jump at age
21 for the entire US population. 29               Adjusting for the sampling weights modestly
decreases the point estimate of the age-21 discontinuity and increases the standard errors
because some individuals have very large weights. In the third specification we include
dummy variables for people interviewed on their 21st birthday or the day immediately

these samples cannot be used to identify the effects of an age-21 drinking age. Moreover, one of the few
studies to explicitly make use of young adults over age 21 to evaluate the effects of the drinking age on
alcohol consumption found little evidence that drinking age laws significantly affect youth drinking
(Kaestner 2000).
26
   The regression is a quadratic polynomial in age fully interacted with a dummy for over 21. In addition
there is a dummy for people interviewed in the month after their birthday. An examination of the figure
suggests that the quadratic polynomial fits the data well.
27
   Note that this reference window problem is not an issue for the mortality analysis; we therefore do not
include this dummy variable in the mortality regressions.
28
   Since the age variable in the regression is the number of days until (or since) the person’s 21st birthday at
the time of the interview, the “Over 21” dummy gives the estimate of the discrete increase in the outcome
that occurs at age 21.
29
   The means in all the figures derived from the NHIS are unweighted. Adjusting for sample weights
increases the variance of the estimate and visibly increases the variation visible in the figure.


                                                      14
after. We also add dummy variables for the four census regions, male, black, Hispanic,
no high school diploma, employment status, and health insurance coverage. Though
these covariates are correlated with alcohol consumption, their inclusion has little impact
on the estimated size of the discontinuous jump at age 21. 30 In the fourth specification
we add a cubic term to the polynomial model, which substantially reduces the size of the
estimated jump. The p-values from the Wald statistic (bottom row) suggest that the third
specification is the preferred model of the four parametric models – a pattern that holds
for all the measures of alcohol consumption we examine. 31 Finally, in column 5 we
present the results from a local linear regression with the rule-of-thumb bandwidth for
each side of the age-21 cutoff (Fan and Gijbels 1996). This estimate also indicates a
small and statistically insignificant discontinuity at age 21 in the likelihood of ever
having consumed 12 alcoholic drinks. We focus on the results from the parametric
models because they are less sensitive to the retrospective nature of the questions than the
nonparametric models. That the discontinuity in lifetime drinking participation at age 21
is very small and statistically insignificant is important because it suggests that the abrupt
increase in mortality at age 21 that we document below is not due to people having their
first experience with alcohol. 32
        Figure 1 also plots the age profile of the proportion of people who reported having
12 or more drinks in one year. The regression line superimposed on the dark circles
shows that there is a substantial jump in the proportion of people who reported having 12
or more drinks in one year. We present the corresponding regression results in the
second panel of Table 1. The first specification confirms that the increase we saw in
Figure 1 is about 8 percentage points and is statistically significant. The inclusion of
weights in the second specification reduces the point estimate slightly, but the estimate
remains statistically significant. The inclusion of covariates in the third specification has
very little effect on the point estimate, again suggesting that these variables evolve

30
   Below, we directly show that these covariates are smoothly distributed across the age-21 discontinuity.
31
   The cubic polynomial is likely much more sensitive to the fact that (as observed in Figure 1) people
interviewed just after their 21st birthday reported levels of alcohol consumption very similar to those
reported by 20-year-olds.
32
   Note that lifetime abstainers are included in our analyses of all alcohol consumption outcomes; our only
sample restriction is to drop those who refused to answer the alcohol screener questions. This is
appropriate because we are interested in the effects of age-based restrictions on population outcomes
(alcohol consumption and mortality).


                                                    15
smoothly through the discontinuity.                The fourth specification reveals that the
discontinuity estimate is somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of a cubic term in the
polynomial. As with the lifetime drinking outcome, this is likely due to the retrospective
nature of the question. Similarly, the local linear regression also returns a somewhat
smaller estimate of the age 21 discontinuity than the preferred specification in column 3.
        The third outcome in Figure 1 – represented by the crosses – shows the fraction of
the sample reporting that they consumed 5 or more drinks on a single day at least once in
the previous year (i.e., some “heavy” drinking). This variable exhibits a sharp increase at
age 21 of about 7 percentage points. The corresponding regression estimates in the first
column of the last panel of Table 1 confirm that the increase we observe in the figure is
statistically significant. Even after we allow for the inclusion of covariates, the age-21
discontinuity estimate suggests a large increase (approximately16 percent relative to
people just under 21) in the proportion of people who reported ever having engaged in
heavy drinking. 33 Allowing for a cubic term in age in column 4 reduces the discontinuity
estimate substantially, though again this is probably because this more flexible
specification is more sensitive to the retrospective nature of the question.
        In Figure 2 we present the age profiles of various measures of drinking intensity.
In this figure the hollow squares denote the proportion of days on which a person drinks
any alcohol. The figure reveals a discrete jump of about 2 percentage points in the
proportion of days drinking. In the first column of the first panel of Table 2 we present
the corresponding regression, which confirms that the increase we observe in the figure is
about 2.5 percentage points.          This is substantial given that the average 20-year-old
reported drinking on 8.5 percent of days. 34 The inclusion of weights in the second
specification has a substantial impact on the point estimate, though it remains significant
at the 10 percent level. In the third specification we observe that the inclusion of birthday
dummies and covariates does not further change the estimates (still indicating a 21
percent increase relative to people just under 21), while the fourth column reveals that the
addition of a cubic term reduces the estimate of the jump at age 21 substantially. Again,


33
  This increase – though it is clearly visible in the figure – is only significant at the 10 percent level.
34
   That there is a discrete jump may be surprising given the long reference window (the past year).
However, as described above, respondents were able to choose their reference period, and 75 percent of
respondents reported about their behavior in the past week or month.


                                                    16
however, Figure 2 shows that this is likely due to the low level of reported drinking
among people interviewed just after their 21st birthday – and importantly, the model with
the cubic in age is not supported by the data.           Finally, column 5 shows that,
unsurprisingly, the local linear regression estimate is also smaller than the estimates from
our parametric models.
       Figure 2 also shows evidence of an increase in the proportion of days of heavy
drinking. Though the corresponding regressions presented in the second panel of Table 2
reveal that the 22 percent increase in heavy drinking days at age 21 in the preferred
specification is not statistically significant, the estimated proportional increase is
remarkably similar to the increase in regular drinking days. Together with the evidence
that the probability of any heavy drinking days increases significantly at age 21, these
results suggest that the amount of heavy drinking increases in response to the easier
alcohol availability that results from turning 21.
       Having documented sharp increases at age 21 in a variety of alcohol consumption
measures, we now turn to examining the number of drinks consumed on the days the
individual drank. This outcome is also illustrated in Figure 2 (with units indicated on the
right axis). This figure – and the associated regression estimates in Table 2 – does not
provide evidence of a discrete break in the average number of drinks that people consume
after they turn 21. All of the discontinuity estimates for the “drinks on days drinking”
variable are smaller as a proportion of the age-20 mean than the previous outcomes (with
our preferred specification returning an effect size of about 6.4 percent), and none is
statistically significant. A problem with this analysis, however, is that it may confound
compositional changes in the group of drinkers at age 21, since only people who reported
drinking are included and the number of people who reported drinking changes discretely
at age 21. For this reason we have also created the histogram of the number of average
drinks per day for 20-year-olds and 21-year-olds in the NHIS sample. Figure 3 shows
that – apart from an almost 10 percentage point difference in the likelihood of being a
drinker – the distribution of average drinks per day for 21-year-olds is similar to the
distribution for 20-year-olds.    This is consistent with the similar size, in percentage
terms, of increases in the number of days of drinking and days of heavy drinking
documented in the first two panels of Table 2. Taken together, the evidence suggests that



                                             17
after turning 21 people drink on more days and there is an increase in heavy drinking, but
that the increase in heavy drinking it is not disproportionate.
         Finally, before examining the increase in mortality rates that results from the
increase in alcohol consumption documented above, we examine the possibility that there
are other changes occurring at age 21 that could confound our analysis.                           That the
regression estimates are robust to the inclusion of covariates (i.e., moving from
specification 2 to 3 in Tables 1 and 2) suggests that the observable characteristics are
smoothly distributed across the discontinuity. In Table 3 we provide a more direct test
that demographic characteristics, employment status, insurance status, and educational
attainment all evolve smoothly through the age 21 threshold. 35 We find no evidence of a
discrete change at age 21 in any of these characteristics. While this is not surprising for
the demographic characteristics, the null findings for employment and health insurance
status in particular are comforting. 36 That these observable characteristics are smoothly
distributed across the discontinuity suggests that the unobservable characteristics are also
distributed smoothly across the discontinuity and reduces our concerns about omitted
variables bias.


4.2 Mortality
         In this section we evaluate whether the increase in alcohol consumption
documented above results in an increase in mortality rates. In Figure 4 we present the
overall age profile of deaths per 100,000 person years, and we also show the age profiles
separately for deaths due to internal and external causes. 37 External causes of death
include motor vehicle accidents, suicide, homicide, deaths with a mention of alcohol use,
deaths with a mention of drug use, and other deaths due to external injuries. Figure 4
shows a sharp increase in overall mortality at age 21 of about 10 deaths per 100,000
person years. Grouping the deaths by cause reveals that for this age group the majority of
deaths are due to external causes and the increase in deaths at age 21 is attributable
almost entirely to deaths due to external causes.

35
   We present the corresponding age profiles in Appendix D.
36
   For example, it might be plausible to find a discontinuity in health insurance since in some states people
age out of Medicaid when they turn 21.
37
   The ICD-9 and ICD-10 that compose the external cause group are listed in Appendix E. The internal
death category includes all deaths not coded as due to external causes.


                                                     18
         In Table 4 we present the regression estimates corresponding to Figure 4. The
dependent variable in the regression is the log of the counts of deaths occurring X days
before or after the individual’s 21st birthday, and we estimate the model over the 1,465
days between ages 19 and 22, inclusive. 38 The coefficient of interest on the Over 21
indicator can, for small changes, be interpreted as the percentage change in deaths at age
21. In the first column of each panel we present the estimates from fitting a quadratic
polynomial to the age profile of deaths. 39 In the second column we add a dummy for the
21st birthday and a dummy for the day immediately after.40 In the third specification of
each panel we add a cubic term to the polynomial. In the fourth column we present the
estimate using a local linear regression with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth for each side of
the age-21 cutoff (Fan and Gijbels 1996). 41 The p-values from the Wald statistic (bottom
row) suggest that the second specification is the preferred model of the three parametric
models. However, all four specifications give us very similar estimates and confirm what
we observed in Figure 4: there is a statistically significant 9 percent increase in overall
mortality when people turn 21 that is almost entirely due to a 10 percent increase in
deaths due to external causes.
         Figure 5 plots the age profile of external deaths separately by cause. The figure
shows a large and noticeable increase in motor vehicle accidents at age 21, with smaller
but noticeable discontinuities in alcohol-related deaths (e.g., alcohol overdoses) and
suicides. We find no visual evidence of increases in deaths attributable to drugs or
homicide at age 21. In Tables 5 and 6 we present the corresponding regression results.
These estimates confirm what we saw in Figure 5: deaths with an explicit mention of
alcohol increase by over 30 percent at age 21, homicides exhibit essentially no change,
and the suicide rate increases by over 15 percent. In Table 6 we document that deaths
due to motor vehicle accidents increase by about 14 percent at age 21. 42 Estimates of

38
   We did not use the death rates as the dependent variable because measurement error in the denominator
is likely to reduce the precision of the estimates.
39
   The figures in Appendix F suggest this is a sufficiently flexible model to fit the age profile of the death
rate.
40
   As seen in Appendix A, there is a significant 21st-birthday effect.
41
    In Appendix G we present the sensitivity of the results to varying the bandwidth and show that the
estimates are only sensitive to reducing the bandwidth well below that suggested by the Fan and Gijbels
(1996) procedure described in the footnotes to Table 4.
42
   The estimated discontinuity in motor vehicle accidents at age 21 understates the true effects of alcohol
consumption. To see this, note that this will only capture the true mortality effect of the drinking age if


                                                     19
external deaths attributable to drugs are not precisely estimated, while deaths due to
“other external causes” (i.e., all deaths due to external causes not included elsewhere in
Tables 5 or 6) show evidence of a discrete increase of about 10 percent, an estimate that
nears statistical significance in some of the models. 43 This result for “other external
deaths,” which includes deaths due to fire, falling, and drowning, provides some evidence
that the strong correlation between alcohol consumption and these causes of deaths is
causal.
          In Table 7 we present the estimates of how the increase in total mortality varies
by gender, race, and education. 44 The regressions stratified by gender reveal that men
experience a 10 percent increase in mortality and account for the majority of the entire
increase in mortality. The regressions stratified by race reveal that the increase in deaths
is largely driven by the 14 percent increase in deaths among whites, despite the fact that
they have considerably lower death rates than either blacks or Hispanics. In the final
panel we present the result by educational attainment. These regressions reveal that the
overall increase in deaths is driven largely by a 9 percent increase in deaths among high
school graduates and a 16 percent increase in deaths among people attending college.
The overall increase in mortality rates we observe at age 21 is due to large increases in
mortality among white males who are high school graduates or are attending college.


5.        Discussion and Conclusion

          In this paper we document that age-based restrictions on access to alcohol have a
substantial effect on both alcohol consumption and mortality. Individuals just over age

there are no other individuals involved in the accident (e.g., a one-car crash fatality with one occupant in
the car). To the extent that there are other occupants in the driver’s car or occupants in a different car (in a
multi-car crash), these other fatalities should more properly be attributed to the effects of the drinking age
and alcohol consumption.
43
   For deaths with a mention of alcohol and deaths with a mention of drugs, there are some observations
with zero deaths. In the regressions for these outcomes in Tables 5 and 6 we have added .5 to the
dependent variable before taking the log. Appendix H shows that for these two outcomes the results are
robust to two alternative approaches: adding 1 (instead of .5) to the dependent variable before taking the
log (column 2 under each outcome) and estimating the model in levels instead of logs (column 3 under
each outcome).
44
   For compactness we have included only the results from our preferred specification. The regressions are
robust to specification and the full set of regressions and figures is available on request. Unfortunately,
because of the much smaller sample sizes in the NHIS, the estimates of the changes in alcohol consumption
that occur at age 21 are too imprecise to make strong statements about the differences across subgroups in
alcohol consumption.


                                                      20
21 reported drinking on 21 percent more days than individuals just under 21; those just
over age 21 reported a similar increase in heavy drinking. We find no evidence of an
increase in the average number of drinks people consumed on days of drinking; nor do
we find a shift in the distribution of drinking intensity. We find that this increase in
alcohol consumption results in a 9 percent increase in mortality at age 21. When we
disaggregate by cause of death, we find particularly large increases for alcohol-related
deaths, motor vehicle fatalities, and suicides.
         Our results provide new evidence on some commonly held beliefs about how the
increase in drinking causes an increase in mortality. First, the mortality effects we
observe are not due entirely to “new” drinkers, those without previous exposure to
alcohol. This is borne out by the very small increases (in both absolute and proportional
terms) in first-time use of alcohol at age 21. Second, the mortality effects are also
unlikely to be driven by people’s first experiences with heavy drinking. Figure 1 shows
that people experiment with heavy drinking immediately after they turn 21. If the
increase in mortality were caused by experimentation with heavy drinking, it should rise
discretely at 21 and then return rapidly to the pre-21 level; Figures 4 and 5 show that this
is not the case. As noted above, we do not find any evidence of a disproportionate
increase in drinking intensity, which suggests that the increase in mortality rates is due to
an increase in the number of days on which people drink or drink heavily. 45 If the
increase in mortality is due to the increase in the number of days on which people drink
or drink heavily, then the implied elasticity is .41 for individuals who change their
drinking behavior because of the law.                   This elasticity suggests that a substantial
proportion of deaths among 21-year-olds is directly due to alcohol consumption. It also
suggests that the return to reducing underage drinking is potentially quite high.
         An important question to consider when interpreting these results is: how
persistent are the effects of easing access to alcohol at age 21? It is possible that the




45
  One potential margin that we do not observe in the data is the travel distance to the location at which
people drink. However, the fact that suicides increase by about the same percentage as MVA deaths
suggests that it is not an increase in driving exposure per drink that is responsible for the overall increase in
mortality documented above.


                                                       21
MLDA laws simply shift the timing of deaths instead of reducing the number of deaths. 46
While our research design does not let us answer this question directly, we can provide
some suggestive visual evidence on the degree to which the mortality effects persist after
age 21. Specifically, in Figure 6 we generate a counterfactual age profile for people over
21 based on a quadratic polynomial fitted to the profile for people under 21. Despite the
obvious limitations of this approach, it does suggest how alcohol consumption and
mortality might evolve if the restrictions on alcohol were not lifted at age 21. The figure
suggests that lowering the cost of drinking leads to an increase in alcohol consumption
that persists for at least two years. The increase in deaths due to external causes also
appears persistent. 47     That the increase in both drinking and mortality is persistent
suggests that the MLDA laws are reducing lifetime drinking rather than just changing the
age at which people begin to drink. This also suggests that a higher minimum drinking
age actually reduces mortality, rather than just changing the age at which people die.
        Finally, our finding that alcohol consumption increases mortality among young
adults is extremely relevant for current and ongoing public policy debates about stricter
alcohol control targeted at youths. Given that over half of 18-to-20-year-olds report
recent alcohol consumption, and about one-third report heavy episodic or “binge”
drinking, there is wide latitude to affect alcohol consumption in this age group.
Moreover the majority of acute alcohol-related deaths occur among 18-to-24 year-olds.
Our results therefore suggest that stricter alcohol control targeted toward young adults
could result in meaningful reductions in mortality, substantially reducing the number of
life years lost to alcohol.




46
   For suggestive evidence in favor of the “shifting” hypothesis, see Dee and Evans (2001) and Males
(1986). Other research does not find strong evidence of shifting (see, for example, Saffer and Grossman
1987 and Cook and Tauchen 1984).
47
   The projected mortality rate due to internal causes is very similar to the actual age profile, which
suggests that creating a counterfactual age profile of mortality in this fashion is not unreasonable.


                                                  22
References

Baughman, Reagan, Stacy Dickert-Conlin, Michael Conlin, and John Pepper (2001).
   “Slippery When Wet: The Effects of Local Alcohol Access Laws on Highway
   Safety,” Journal of Health Economics, 20(6): 1089-1096.

Birckmayer, Johanna, and David Hemenway (1999). “Minimum Age Drinking Laws and
   Youth Suicide 1970-1990,” American Journal of Public Health, 89(9): 1365-1368.

Bonnie, R., and M. O’Connell, eds. (2004). Reducing Underage Drinking: A Collective
   Responsibility. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Carpenter, Christopher (2004). “Heavy Alcohol Use and Youth Suicide: Evidence from
   Tougher Drunk Driving Laws,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23(4):
   831-842.

Carpenter, Christopher, Deborah D. Kloska, Patrick O’Malley, and Lloyd Johnston
   (2007). “Alcohol Control Policies and Youth Alcohol Consumption: Evidence from
   28 Years of Monitoring the Future,” Berkeley Electronic Press Journals in Economic
   Analysis and Policy, 7(1 Topics): Article 25.

Cook, Philip, and Michael Moore (2001). “Environment and Persistence in Youthful
   Drinking Patterns,” in Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, J.
   Gruber, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Cook, Philip, and George Tauchen (1984). “The Effect of Minimum Drinking Age
   Legislation on Youthful Auto Fatalities,” The Journal of Legal Studies, 13(1): 169-
   190.

----- (1982). “The Effect of Liquor Taxes on Heavy Drinking,” Bell Journal of
     Economics, 13(2): 379-90

Cook, Philip, Jan Ostermann, and Frank Sloan (2005). “Are Alcohol Taxes Good for Us?
   Short and Long-Term Effects on Mortality Rates,” NBER Working Paper #11138.
   Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dee, Thomas (1999). “State Alcohol Policies, Teen Drinking and Traffic Fatalities,”
   Journal of Public Economics, 72: 289-315.

Dee, Thomas, and William Evans (2001). “Behavioral Policies and Teen Traffic Safety,”
   American Economic Review, 91(2): 91-96.

Escobedo, Luis, and Melchor Ortiz (2002). “The Relationship Between Liquor Outlet
   Density and Injury and Violence in New Mexico,” Accident Analysis and Prevention,
   34: 689-694.


                                         23
Fan, J., and I. Gijbels (1996). Local Polynomial Modeling and Its Applications. London:
   Chapman and Hall.

Grossman, M., F. Chaloupka, H. Saffer, and A. Laixuthai (1994). “Effects of Alcohol
   Price Policy on Youth: A Summary of Economic Research,” Journal of Research on
   Adolescence, 4: 347-364.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2001). “Identification and
   Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,”
   Econometrica, 69(1): 201-209.

Hingson, R., D. Merrigan, and T. Heeren (1985). “Effects of Massachusetts Raising Its
   Legal Drinking Age from 18 to 20 on Deaths from Teenage Homicide, Suicide, and
   Nontraffic accidents,” Pediatric Clinics of North America, 32: 221-232.

Howland, J., J. Birckmayer, D. Hemenway, and J. Cote (1998). “Did Changes in
  Minimum Age Drinking Laws Affect Adolescent Drowning (1970-1990)?” Injury
  Prevention, 4: 288-291.

Johnston, L. D., P. M. O’Malley, J. G. Bachman, and J. E. Schulenberg, (2005).
   Monitoring the Future National Survey Results on Drug Use, 1975-2004. Volume I:
   Secondary School Students (NIH Publication No. 05-5727). Bethesda, MD: National
   Institute on Drug Abuse.

Jones, N., C. Pieper, and L. Robertson (1992). “Effect of Legal Drinking Age on Fatal
   Injuries of Adolescents and Young Adults,” American Journal of Public Health, 82:
   112-115.

Joksch, Hans, and Ralph Jones (1993). “Changes in the Drinking Age and Crime,”
   Journal of Criminal Justice, 21: 209-221.

Kaestner, Robert (2000). “A Note on the Effect of Minimum Drinking Age Laws on
   Youth Alcohol Consumption,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 18(3): 315-325.

Males, Mike (1986). “The Minimum Purchase Age for Alcohol and Young-Driver Fatal
   Crashes: A Long-Term View,” The Journal of Legal Studies, 15(1): 181-211.

Saffer, Henry, and Michael Grossman (1987). “Beer Taxes, the Legal Drinking Age, and
    Youth Motor Vehicle Fatalities,” The Journal of Legal Studies, 16(2): 351-374.

Thistlewaite, D., and D. Campbell (1960). “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis: An
   Alternative to the Ex Post Facto Experiment,” Journal of Educational Psychology,
   51: 309-317.




                                          24
Wagenaar, Alexander, and Traci Toomey (2002). “Effects of Minimum Drinking Age
  Laws: Review and Analyses of the Literature from 1960 to 2000,” Journal of Studies
  on Alcohol, Supplement No. 14: 206-225.

Young, Douglas, and Agnieska Bielinska-Kwapisz (2002).         “Alcohol Taxes and
   Beverage Prices,” National Tax Journal, 55: 57-73.

Zhu, L., D. Gorman, and S. Horel (2004). “Alcohol Outlet Density and Violence: A
   Geospatial Analysis,” Alcohol & Alcoholism, 39(4): 369-37.




                                         25
                                                              Figure 1: Age Profile of Drinking Participation

                                     1


                                    0.9


                                    0.8


                                    0.7
    Proportion Reporting Behavior




                                    0.6


                                    0.5


                                    0.4


                                    0.3
                                                                                                                                  12 or More Drinks in One Year
                                                                                                                                  12 or More Drinks in One Year Fitted
                                    0.2                                                                                           12 or More Drinks in Life
                                                                                                                                  12 or More Drinks in Life Fitted
                                                                                                                                  Some Heavy Drinking in Last Year
                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                  Some Heavy Drinking in Last Year Fitted


                                     0
                                          19   19.5    20                 20.5                  21                  21.5                  22                   22.5                 23
                                                                                               Age



Notes: NHIS Sample Adult 1997-2005. Cells are the proportion of people in a 30-day block that report the behavior. The regression line is a second-order polynomial fitted on unweighted individual
observations on either side of the age 21 cutoff.
                                                                                       Figure 2: Age Profile of Drinking Intensity

                                   0.2                                                                                                                                            5


                                  0.18


                                  0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                  4

                                  0.14
    Proportion of Days Drinking




                                              Drinks Per Day
                                              Drinks Per Day Fitted




                                                                                                                                                                                       Drinks per Day
                                  0.12        Proportion of Days Drinking
                                              Proportion of Days Drinking Fitted                                                                                                  3
                                              Proportion of Days Heavy Drinking (> 5 drinks)
                                   0.1        Proportion of Days Heavy Drinking (> 5 drinks) Fitted


                                  0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                  0.06


                                  0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                  0.02


                                    0                                                                                                                                             0
                                         19            19.5                 20                 20.5       21           21.5          22                 22.5                 23
                                                                                                         Age



Notes: People can report their drinking for the last week, month, or year; 78% reported the number of days they drank in the last week or month rather than the last year. Average number of drinks per
day is for people who reported some drinking.
                                                                         Figure 3: Reported Average Number of Drinks per Day

                                                0.5


                                               0.45


                                                0.4
  Proportion Reporting This Number of Drinks




                                               0.35


                                                0.3                                                                                      Age 20
                                                                                                                                         Age 21

                                               0.25


                                                0.2


                                               0.15


                                                0.1


                                               0.05


                                                 0
                                                       Non-      1   2   3     4      5       6       7        8       9       10   11      12    12+
                                                      drinkers
                                                                                    Number of Drinks per Day




Notes: See notes from Figure 2. There are 3,950 twenty year olds in the sample and 4,206 twenty one year olds in the sample.
                                                                   Figure 4: Age Profile for Death Rates

                                    120




                                    100
  Deaths per 100,000 Person-Years




                                    80




                                    60

                                                                                                                            All                      All Fitted

                                                                                                                            Internal                 Internal Fitted
                                    40
                                                                                                                            External                 External Fitted




                                    20




                                     0
                                          19   19.5   20             20.5                 21                21.5                  22                22.5                 23
                                                                                         Age



Notes: Deaths from the National Vital Statistics Records. Includes all deaths that occurred in the US between 1997-2003. The population denominators are derived from the census. See Appendix
E for a list of causes of death.
                                                        Figure 5: Age Profiles for Death Rates by External Cause

                             40



                             35



                             30
                                       Alcohol               Alcohol Fitted
                                       Homicide              Homicide Fitted
    Death Rate per 100,000




                             25        Suicide               Suicide Fitted
                                       MVA                   MVA Fitted
                                       Drugs                 Drugs Fitted
                                       External Other        External Other Fitted
                             20



                             15



                             10



                             5



                             0
                                  19      19.5          20               20.5              21                 21.5                 22                 22.5                 23
                                                                                          Age



Notes: See notes to Figure 4. The categories are mutually exclusive. The order of precedence is homicide, suicide, MVA, deaths with a mention of alcohol, and deaths with a mention of drugs. The ICD-
9 and ICD-10 Codes are in Appendix E.
                                                                Figure 6: Projections of Alcohol Consumption

                     90
                                                                                                                                            .2


                     80


                     70
                                 External
                                 External Fitted




                                                                                                                                                 Proportion of Days Drinking
                     60          External Projected
                                 Proportion of Days Drinking Means
                                 Proportion of Days Drinking Quadratic Fit
                                 Proportion of Days Drinking Projected
    Mortality Rate




                     50          Internal
                                 Internal Fitted                                                                                            .1
                                 Internal Projected
                     40


                     30


                     20


                     10


                     0                                                                                                                      0
                          19   19.5                  20                 20.5                  21                 21.5      22   22.5   23
                                                                                             Age



Notes: The dotted lines are the projection of the pre-21 age profile, which has been fitted with a quadratic polynomial.
                                                           Table 1: Alcohol Consumption - Measures of Participation
                                12 or More Drinks in Lifetime                          12 or More Drinks in One Year                            Any Heavy Drinking in Last Year
                                                                   Local                                            Local                                                     Local
                                Parametric Models                  Linear               Parametric Models          Linear                         Parametric Models          Linear
                       (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)
Over 21              0.0418       0.0316     0.0268     0.0198     0.0199      0.0796     0.0657     0.0611      0.0603     0.0461      0.0761      0.0527     0.0492     0.0262      0.0398
                     [0.0242]     [0.0301]   [0.0292]   [0.0423]   [0.0179]   [0.0254]   [0.0313]    [0.0301]   [0.0438]   [0.0218]     [0.0248]   [0.0304]   [0.0291]    [0.0430]   [0.0201]
Age                  0.0081       0.0293     0.0244     0.1235                 0.0140     0.0273     0.0229      0.1198                 0.0116      0.0688     0.0623     0.1403
                     [0.0385]     [0.0482]   [0.0471]   [0.1159]              [0.0396]   [0.0491]    [0.0477]   [0.1174]                [0.0361]   [0.0445]   [0.0431]    [0.1080]
Age Sq               -0.0265      -0.0239    -0.0247    0.0980                -0.0176     -0.0173    -0.0167     0.1033                 -0.0141     0.0098     0.0084     0.1048
                     [0.0190]     [0.0236]   [0.0231]   [0.1355]              [0.0194]   [0.0238]    [0.0232]   [0.1366]                [0.0175]   [0.0211]   [0.0205]    [0.1224]
Age*Over21           0.0693       0.0446     0.0597     -0.0874                0.0521     0.0554     0.0675     -0.1058                 -0.0139    -0.0683    -0.0544     -0.0853
                     [0.0544]     [0.0674]   [0.0655]   [0.1727]              [0.0571]   [0.0701]    [0.0678]   [0.1786]                [0.0554]   [0.0673]   [0.0646]    [0.1726]
Age Sq*Over 21       0.0054       0.0096     0.0020     -0.0655               -0.0075     -0.0103    -0.0184    -0.0507                 0.0041     -0.0127    -0.0181     -0.1686
                     [0.0259]     [0.0319]   [0.0311]   [0.1935]              [0.0272]   [0.0332]    [0.0321]   [0.2001]                [0.0261]   [0.0316]   [0.0303]    [0.1905]
Month After 21       -0.0392      -0.0224    -0.0168    -0.0246               -0.0688     -0.0441    -0.0379    -0.0505                 -0.0576    -0.0359    -0.0242     -0.0165
                     [0.0312]     [0.0378]   [0.0367]   [0.0419]              [0.0327]   [0.0394]    [0.0379]   [0.0432]                [0.0318]   [0.0384]   [0.0369]    [0.0424]
21st Birthday                                0.1290     0.1270                                       0.2186      0.2154                                        -0.3156    -0.3136
                                             [0.1405]   [0.1406]                                     [0.1405]   [0.1406]                                      [0.1386]    [0.1387]
21st Birthday + 1                            -0.0470    -0.0487                                      -0.0437    -0.0466                                        0.1374     0.1393
                                             [0.1492]   [0.1493]                                     [0.1592]   [0.1593]                                      [0.1671]    [0.1673]
Age Cubic                                               -0.0582                                                 -0.0677                                                   -0.0148
                                                        [0.0624]                                                [0.0644]                                                  [0.0607]
Age^3*Over 21                                           0.0407                                                   0.0398                                                   0.0320
                                                        [0.0448]                                                [0.0451]                                                  [0.0397]
Constant             0.6483       0.6487     0.5503     0.5671                 0.5503     0.5477     0.4470      0.4635                 0.3150      0.3247     0.2389     0.2522
                     [0.0163]     [0.0204]   [0.0245]   [0.0303]              [0.0169]   [0.0211]    [0.0248]   [0.0308]                [0.0156]   [0.0199]   [0.0225]    [0.0287]
Covariates             No           No         Yes        Yes        No          No         No         Yes        Yes         No          No          No        Yes         Yes         No
Weights                No           Yes        Yes        Yes        No          No         Yes        Yes        Yes         No          No         Yes        Yes         Yes         No
Observations         16,107       16,107     16,107     16,107                 16,107     16,107     16,107      16,107                 16,107      16,107     16,107     16,107
R-squared              0.02        0.03        0.1        0.1                   0.02       0.03        0.11       0.11                    0.01       0.01        0.1        0.1
Prob > Chi-Squared                            0.00       0.61                                          0.00       0.56                                          0.00       0.67

Notes: The first column of each block contains the regression from the corresponding figure. Standard errors in brackets. Birthday is a dummy for 21st birthday and Birthday + 1 is a dummy
for the day after the 21st birthday. Covariates include dummies for Census Region, Race, Gender, Health Insurance, Employment Status and Looking for Work. Weights are the NHIS adult
sample weights and reduce the precision of the regressions significantly as the weights vary substantially across observations. People reporting five or more drinks on one day (not
necessarily in one sitting) are coded as heavy drinkers. Bandwidths from the left and the right for each outcome are: 12 or more One Year (0.81,0.75), 12 or More in Lifetime (1.28, 0.88) and
proportion reporting Heavy Drinking (1.06, 0.72).
                                                                 Table 2: Alcohol Consumption - Measures of Intensity
                                 Proportion of Days Drinking                           Proportion of Days Heavy Drinking                           Drinks per Day on Days Drinking
                                                                     Local                                            Local                                                      Local
                                 Parametric Models                   Linear               Parametric Models           Linear                         Parametric Models           Linear
                         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
Over 21                0.0245      0.0180    0.0182      0.0119      0.0107      0.0120     0.0075     0.0075      0.0021     0.0026       0.2387      0.2068    0.2465      0.2806     0.1886
                      [0.0086]    [0.0097]   [0.0095]   [0.0135]    [0.0072]    [0.0061]   [0.0063]    [0.0062]   [0.0091]   [0.0048]     [0.2810]    [0.3403]   [0.3291]   [0.4782]    [0.2024]
Age                    0.0056      0.0085    0.0068     -0.0071                  0.0056     0.0057     0.0045      0.0134                  0.2774      0.6407    0.4749      0.7006
                      [0.0116]    [0.0138]   [0.0137]   [0.0338]                [0.0081]   [0.0088]    [0.0088]   [0.0216]                [0.3538]    [0.4608]   [0.4358]   [1.1732]
Age Sq                -0.0052     -0.0042    -0.0045    -0.0217                 -0.0007     -0.0007    -0.0013     0.0097                  0.1531      0.3581    0.2595      0.5438
                      [0.0055]    [0.0066]   [0.0065]   [0.0388]                [0.0039]   [0.0041]    [0.0041]   [0.0249]                [0.1730]    [0.2144]   [0.2035]   [1.2958]
Age*Over21             0.0101      0.0140    0.0168      0.0724                 -0.0123     -0.0034    -0.0014     0.0087                 -0.8909      -1.4498   -1.1870    -1.7552
                      [0.0192]    [0.0220]   [0.0216]   [0.0558]                [0.0133]   [0.0144]    [0.0142]   [0.0370]                [0.5763]    [0.6656]   [0.6372]   [1.7127]
Age Sq*Over 21        -0.0029     -0.0055    -0.0065    -0.0371                  0.0019     -0.0012    -0.0012    -0.0340                 -0.0387      -0.1217   -0.0498     0.0571
                      [0.0090]    [0.0104]   [0.0101]   [0.0625]                [0.0062]   [0.0067]    [0.0066]   [0.0408]                [0.2608]    [0.2937]   [0.2836]   [1.8047]
Month After 21        -0.0245     -0.0220    -0.0147    -0.0078                 -0.0163     -0.0118    -0.0070    -0.0039                 -0.3742      -0.5580   -0.3151    -0.3719
                      [0.0111]    [0.0120]   [0.0122]   [0.0138]                [0.0066]   [0.0067]    [0.0067]   [0.0080]                [0.3226]    [0.3317]   [0.3222]   [0.3904]
21st Birthday                                -0.0758    -0.0740                                        -0.0463    -0.0455                                        -2.3836    -2.3989
                                             [0.0200]   [0.0201]                                       [0.0132]   [0.0133]                                       [0.6654]   [0.6681]
21st Birthday + 1                            -0.0497    -0.0481                                        -0.0239    -0.0231                                        -1.7425    -1.7555
                                             [0.0287]   [0.0288]                                       [0.0074]   [0.0075]                                       [0.3517]   [0.3547]
Age Cubic                                                0.0209                                                    0.0033                                                   -0.2196
                                                        [0.0201]                                                  [0.0131]                                                  [0.5550]
Age^3*Over 21                                           -0.0057                                                    0.0036                                                    0.0956
                                                        [0.0127]                                                  [0.0081]                                                  [0.4105]
Constant               0.0853      0.0836    0.0602      0.0579                  0.0371     0.0340     0.0188      0.0203                  3.8570      3.8943    2.9378      2.9747
                      [0.0051]    [0.0059]   [0.0072]   [0.0090]                [0.0036]   [0.0039]    [0.0048]   [0.0058]                [0.1550]    [0.2174]   [0.2161]   [0.2919]
Covariates               No         No         Yes        Yes         No           No         No         Yes        Yes         No           No          No        Yes        Yes         No
Weights                  No         Yes        Yes        Yes         No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes         No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes         No
Observations           16,107      16,107    16,107      16,107                  15,825     15,825     15,825      15,825                  9,906       9,906      9,906      9,906
R-squared               0.02        0.02       0.07       0.07                     0         0.01        0.05       0.05                    0.00        0.00       0.07       0.07
Prob > Chi-Squared                             0.00       0.56                                           0.00       0.72                                           0.00       0.92

Notes: See notes to Table 1. People can report their drinking for the last week, month or year. For people who reported any drinking 78% of people just over 21 reported about their drinking in
the last week or month rather than the last year. The probability of reporting drinking over the last week or last month goes up at age 21. For the dependent variable "Drinks per Day" only
people who reported drinking are included in this analysis, so there is a composition change in the sample at age 21 due to the increase in the number of people who reported that they drink.
The dependant variable is the number of drinks the respondent reported drinking on average on the days that they drank. Bandwidths from the left and the right for each outcome are: percent
days drinking (0.87, 0.75), drinks per day on days drinking (0.64,1.42), and days heavy drinking (1.02, 0.73).
                         Table 3: Age Profile of Demographic Characteristics from the NHIS
                                                            No HS       HS                 Looking No Health
                     Male      White     Black Hispanic Diploma Diploma Employed for Work Insurance
                      (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)      (9)
Over 21             0.0156       0.0172      -0.0250      0.0095      -0.0108      0.0040       0.0019       -0.0061       0.0043
                    [0.0260]    [0.0293]     [0.0211]    [0.0203]     [0.0230]    [0.0291]     [0.0302]      [0.0171]     [0.0293]
Age                 0.0025       0.0152      -0.0139      0.0068      0.0435       0.0074       0.0033       0.0299       -0.0151
                    [0.0395]    [0.0451]     [0.0321]    [0.0296]     [0.0373]    [0.0457]     [0.0475]      [0.0263]     [0.0440]
Age Sq              0.0092       0.0185      -0.0120     -0.0025      0.0403       0.0189       -0.0238      0.0189       -0.0201
                    [0.0194]    [0.0217]     [0.0156]    [0.0143]     [0.0186]    [0.0224]     [0.0232]      [0.0130]     [0.0211]
Age*Over21          -0.0167     -0.0333      0.0571      -0.0406      -0.0934      0.0095       0.0430       -0.0596       0.0289
                    [0.0585]    [0.0657]     [0.0474]    [0.0450]     [0.0519]    [0.0660]     [0.0676]      [0.0382]     [0.0656]
Age Sq*Over 21      -0.0056     -0.0076      -0.0083      0.0144      -0.0225     -0.0365       0.0197       -0.0045       0.0152
                    [0.0278]    [0.0311]     [0.0224]    [0.0212]     [0.0248]    [0.0314]     [0.0320]      [0.0183]     [0.0309]
Constant            0.4405       0.6440      0.1415       0.1638      0.1810       0.2941       0.6453       0.0849        0.2970
                    [0.0168]    [0.0195]     [0.0137]    [0.0129]     [0.0154]    [0.0194]     [0.0203]      [0.0114]     [0.0191]
Observations         16107       16107        16107       16107        16107       16107        16107        16107         16107
R-squared             0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00         0.01        0.00         0.01         0.00          0.00
Notes: Sample from NHIS Sample Adult File (1997-2005). Standard errors in brackets. The regressions do not include covariates. Since
Age = persons age - 21 the constant is the predicted value for people about to turn 21.
                                                    Table 4: Discontinuity in Log Deaths at Age 21
                          Deaths Due to All Causes                   Deaths Due to External Causes                  Deaths Due to Internal Causes
                                                  Local                                          Local                                          Local
                        Parametric Models        Linear                Parametric Models        Linear                 Parametric Models       Linear
                      (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)               (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)               (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)
Over 21            0.0960    0.0870    0.0910    0.0740           0.1100    0.1000    0.0960    0.0824           0.0630     0.0540    0.0940   0.0656
                  [0.018]** [0.017]** [0.023]** [0.0161]         [0.022]** [0.021]** [0.028]** [0.0207]          [0.040]    [0.040]   [0.053] [0.0309]
Age                -0.0270 -0.0270 -0.0740                        -0.0480 -0.0480 -0.0730                        0.0220     0.0220 -0.1280
                   [0.028]   [0.028]   [0.069]                    [0.034]   [0.034]   [0.085]                     [0.066]   [0.066]   [0.174]
Age Sq             -0.0110 -0.0110 -0.0710                        -0.0110 -0.0110 -0.0410                        -0.0280 -0.0280 -0.2160
                   [0.014]   [0.014]   [0.083]                    [0.016]   [0.016]   [0.098]                     [0.032]   [0.032]   [0.201]
Age*Over21         -0.0660 -0.0470 0.0210                         -0.0590 -0.0400 0.0320                         -0.0560 -0.0390 0.0240
                   [0.043]   [0.041]   [0.101]                    [0.050]   [0.048]   [0.119]                     [0.090]   [0.090]   [0.232]
Age Sq*Over 21 0.0340        0.0260    0.0600                     0.0270    0.0190 -0.0100                       0.0700     0.0620    0.3590
                   [0.020]   [0.020]   [0.118]                    [0.024]   [0.023]   [0.137]                     [0.044]   [0.044]   [0.269]
21st Birthday                0.4400    0.4430                               0.4850    0.4930                                0.2720    0.2570
                            [0.013]** [0.018]**                            [0.015]** [0.020]**                             [0.027]** [0.036]**
21st Birthday + 1            0.3390    0.3420                               0.3210    0.3290                                0.4320    0.4180
                            [0.013]** [0.018]**                            [0.015]** [0.019]**                             [0.027]** [0.035]**
Age Cubic                              -0.0200                                        -0.0100                                         -0.0630
                                       [0.027]                                        [0.032]                                         [0.066]
Age^3*Over 21                          0.0280                                         0.0300                                          0.0270
                                       [0.039]                                        [0.045]                                         [0.088]
Constant           4.3790    4.3790    4.3710                     4.1340    4.1340    4.1290                     2.8090     2.8090    2.7840
                  [0.011]** [0.011]** [0.015]**                  [0.015]** [0.015]** [0.020]**                  [0.029]** [0.029]** [0.039]**
Obs                 1460      1460      1460                       1460      1460      1460                        1460      1460      1460
R-squared            0.04     0.05       0.05                       0.06     0.08       0.08                       0.10      0.10       0.10
Prob > Chi-Squared            0.000     0.735                                0.000     0.788                                 0.000     0.525

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. The dependent variable is the log of the number of deaths that occurred x days from the persons 21st
birthday. External deaths include all deaths with mention of an injury, alcohol use, or drug use. The Internal Death category includes all deaths not
coded as external. The first three columns give the estimates from polynomial regressions on age interacted with a dummy for being over 21. The
age variable is centered on 21, so the Over 21 variable gives us an estimate of the discontinuous increase at age 21. In the fourth column we
present the results of a local linear regression procedure with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth for each side of age 21. For this procedure, we follow Fan
and Gijbels (1996) and fit a 4th order polynomial separately on each side of the age-21 cutoff. We use the fit of this regression to estimate the
average second derivative of the expectation function (D), and the mean squared error of this function (σ2). The rule-of-thumb bandwidth is
h = c [ σ2 R / D ], where c is a constant that depends on the kernel (c=3.44 for a triangular kernel), and R is the range of the running variable
(i.e., the range of ages used to estimate the polynomial on each side). We then use this bandwidth, and a triangular kernel, to fit local linear
regressions on each side of age 21, and estimate the limit of the expectation function from the left and the right of age 21. The local linear
regressions have 2 fewer observations because the 21st birthday and the day after the 21st birthday have been dropped. The bottom row gives the
results of a Wald test of the hypothesis that the coefficients on the variables added to the model in that column are all equal to 0. The running
variable, age -21, is measured in years so it has a span of 2 on either side of the discontinuity. For the local linear regression the bandwidth (h) from
the left and from the right for each variable are as follows All Cause (0.55, 0.96); External Causes (0.53, 0.84); Internal Causes (1.07, 1.17). Death
Rate 20 is the death rate at age 20 and 11 months.
                       Table 5: Discontinuity in Log Deaths by External Cause of Death (Alcohol, Homicide, and Suicide)
                                   Alcohol                                    Homicide                                     Suicide
                                                    Local                                       Local                                       Local
                       Parametric Models            Linear          Parametric Models           Linear           Parametric Models          Linear
                     (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)         (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)          (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)
Over 21            0.336     0.297    0.440         0.427       0.009     0.002   -0.003       -0.014        0.160     0.154    0.135       0.105
                  [0.115] [0.113] [0.148]          [0.109]     [0.045] [0.045] [0.061]         [0.041]      [0.059] [0.059] [0.086]        [0.045]
Age               -0.216    -0.216   -0.056                     0.077     0.077   -0.046                    -0.041    -0.041   -0.017
                  [0.187] [0.187] [0.455]                      [0.072] [0.072] [0.182]                      [0.103] [0.103] [0.279]
Age Sq            -0.159    -0.159    0.040                     0.026     0.026   -0.127                    -0.015    -0.015    0.015
                  [0.090] [0.090] [0.528]                      [0.034] [0.034] [0.206]                      [0.048] [0.048] [0.309]
Age*Over21        -0.040     0.039   -1.130                    -0.180    -0.165    0.109                    -0.024    -0.012    0.057
                  [0.266] [0.263] [0.652]                      [0.102] [0.102] [0.258]                      [0.133] [0.134] [0.354]
Age Sq*Over 21 0.256         0.223    1.280                     0.004    -0.003   -0.037                     0.022     0.017   -0.127
                  [0.129] [0.128] [0.764]                      [0.048] [0.048] [0.295]                      [0.063] [0.063] [0.398]
21st Birthday                1.738    1.568                               0.607    0.633                               0.166    0.182
                            [0.078] [0.101]                              [0.031] [0.042]                              [0.038] [0.051]
21st Birthday + 1            1.502    1.335                               0.020    0.045                               0.309    0.325
                            [0.078] [0.100]                              [0.031] [0.042]                              [0.037] [0.051]
Age Cubic                             0.066                                       -0.051                                        0.010
                                     [0.174]                                      [0.067]                                      [0.099]
Age^3*Over 21                        -0.484                                        0.113                                        0.028
                                     [0.253]                                      [0.096]                                      [0.128]
Constant           0.216     0.216    0.243                     2.687     2.687    2.667                     2.245     2.245    2.248
                  [0.082] [0.082] [0.108]                      [0.032] [0.032] [0.044]                      [0.046] [0.046] [0.069]
Obs                1460      1460     1460                      1460      1460     1460                      1460      1460     1460
R-squared           0.03      0.03     0.04                      0.01      0.01     0.01                      0.02      0.02     0.02
Prob > Chi-Squared           0.000    0.070                               0.000    0.495                               0.000   0.8922
Notes: See notes to Table 4. There are 188 observations where there are no deaths coded as due to alcohol; for this variable .5 was added to
the dependent variable before taking the log. The running variable, age -21, is measured in years so it has a span of 2 on either side of the
discontinuity. For the local linear regression the bandwidth (h) from the left and from the right for each variable are as follows: alcohol (0.94,
0.56); homicide (0.63, 0.99); suicide (1.68, 0.63).
                     Table 6: Discontinuity in Log Deaths by External Cause of Death (MVA, Drugs, External Causes Other)
                                    MVA                                         Drugs                               External Causes Other
                                                    Local                                       Local                                        Local
                      Parametric Models            Linear            Parametric Models         Linear            Parametric Models          Linear
                    (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)           (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)           (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)
Over 21            0.158    0.143    0.145          0.139        0.097     0.093    0.001      -0.023        0.087     0.098    0.098        0.074
                  [0.033]  [0.032]  [0.044]        [0.032]      [0.082]   [0.083]  [0.107]     [0.081]      [0.060]   [0.059]  [0.075]      [0.043]
Age               -0.133   -0.133    -0.217                      0.102     0.102    0.308                   -0.075    -0.075    0.002
                  [0.052]  [0.052]  [0.136]                     [0.148]   [0.148]  [0.357]                  [0.092]   [0.092]  [0.218]
Age Sq            -0.019   -0.019    -0.124                      0.009     0.009    0.267                   -0.059    -0.059    0.037
                  [0.025]  [0.025]  [0.152]                     [0.074]   [0.074]  [0.431]                  [0.045]   [0.045]  [0.262]
Age*Over21        -0.026    0.004    0.155                      -0.125    -0.118    0.015                   -0.028    -0.051    -0.205
                  [0.078]  [0.075]  [0.187]                     [0.196]   [0.198]  [0.481]                  [0.139]   [0.138]  [0.322]
Age Sq*Over 21     0.026    0.014    0.036                       0.025     0.021    -0.658                   0.098     0.107    0.107
                  [0.037]  [0.036]  [0.216]                     [0.098]   [0.098]  [0.571]                  [0.066]   [0.066]  [0.376]
21st Birthday               0.589    0.600                                 0.386     0.443                             0.075     0.062
                           [0.022]  [0.029]                               [0.055]  [0.074]                            [0.045]  [0.058]
21st Birthday + 1           0.663    0.674                                -0.066    -0.010                            -1.024    -1.036
                           [0.022]  [0.028]                               [0.055]  [0.073]                            [0.045]  [0.057]
Age Cubic                            -0.035                                          0.086                                       0.032
                                    [0.049]                                        [0.145]                                     [0.088]
Age^3*Over 21                        0.063                                           0.054                                      -0.064
                                    [0.071]                                        [0.190]                                     [0.125]
Constant           3.220    3.220    3.206                       1.226     1.226    1.261                    2.024     2.024    2.037
                  [0.023]  [0.023]  [0.033]                     [0.062]   [0.062]  [0.077]                  [0.038]   [0.038]  [0.048]
Obs                1460     1460      1460                       1460      1460      1460                    1460      1460      1460
R-squared          0.15      0.16     0.16                        0.04      0.04     0.04                     0.01      0.01     0.01
Prob > Chi-Squared          0.000    0.666                                 0.000    0.440                              0.000    0.877

Notes: See notes to Table 4. There are 23 observations where there are 0 deaths coded as due to drug use ,for this variable .5 was added to the
count before taking the log. The running variable, age -21, is measured in years so it has a span of 2 on either side of the discontinuity. For the
local Linear Regression the bandwidth (h) from the left and from the right for each variable are as follows: MVA (0.66, 0.67); Drugs (0.59, 0.95);
External Causes Other (0.98, 1.25).
                         Table 7: Discontinuity in Log Deaths by Gender, Race and Education
                         Gender                         Race                            Education
                                                                           HS Drop      HS       Some     Education
                      Male     Female        White     Black    Hispanic      Out   Completed   College    Missing
Over 21               0.097     0.057        0.144     0.019      0.006      0.043    0.088      0.155      0.083
                     [0.021]   [0.035]      [0.022]   [0.039]    [0.044]    [0.039]  [0.027]    [0.039]    [0.050]
Age                  -0.033    -0.005       -0.106     0.054      0.128     -0.009    -0.054    -0.152      0.068
                     [0.033]   [0.063]      [0.036]   [0.061]    [0.074]    [0.056]  [0.042]    [0.070]    [0.081]
Age Sq               -0.016     0.004       -0.033    -0.001      0.040     -0.029    0.032      0.035     -0.284
                     [0.016]   [0.031]      [0.017]   [0.030]    [0.036]    [0.088]  [0.061]    [0.092]    [0.117]
Age*Over21           -0.054    -0.041        0.012    -0.085     -0.231      0.043    0.009     -0.207      0.017
                     [0.048]   [0.085]      [0.053]   [0.090]    [0.105]    [0.027]  [0.020]    [0.034]    [0.039]
Age Sq*Over 21        0.033     0.010        0.044     0.018     -0.008     -0.065    -0.021     0.258      0.080
                     [0.023]   [0.042]      [0.025]   [0.044]    [0.052]    [0.042]  [0.029]    [0.046]    [0.057]
21st Birthday         0.564    -0.106        0.479     0.629      0.069      0.589    0.308      0.609      0.345
                     [0.015]   [0.024]      [0.017]   [0.030]    [0.031]    [0.030]  [0.019]    [0.025]    [0.036]
21st Birthday + 1     0.346     0.336        0.479    -0.218      0.306      0.184    0.388      0.204      0.718
                     [0.015]   [0.024]      [0.017]   [0.029]    [0.031]    [0.030]  [0.019]    [0.025]    [0.036]
Constant              4.100     2.939        3.772     2.908      2.633      2.951    3.475      2.819      2.312
                     [0.014]   [0.026]      [0.015]   [0.025]    [0.032]    [0.025]  [0.018]    [0.030]    [0.035]
Obs                   1460      1460         1460      1460       1460       1460      1460      1460       1460
R-squared              0.06      0.00         0.07      0.03       0.01       0.08     0.05       0.29       0.02
Rate per 100,000       138        46           80       154        102        NA        NA        NA         NA
Notes: See notes to Table 4.
                                                                                               Appendix A: Deaths by Days to Birthday

                       300


                                                                                              21st Birthday

                       250




                       200
    Number of Deaths




                       150



                                                                                                                                                                           20th Birthday
                       100                                                                                                                                                 21st Birthday
                                                                                                                                                                           22nd Birthday



                        50




                         0
                           0
                                  8
                                         6
                                                4
                                                       2
                                                              0
                                                                     8
                                                                            6
                                                                                   4
                                                                                          2
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                     -8
                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                                     -2

                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                               22
                                                                                                                                                                                    24
                                                                                                                                                                                         26
                                                                                                                                                                                              28
                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                        -3
                               -2
                                      -2
                                             -2
                                                    -2
                                                           -2
                                                                  -1
                                                                         -1
                                                                                -1
                                                                                       -1
                                                                                              -1




                                                                                                                    Days from Birthday




Notes: Number of deaths in the US between 1997 and 2003 occurring x days from the person’s birthday.
                                                   Appendix B: Assessing Fit of Different Polynomials on Age Profile of Drinking

                              0.16
                                          Days Drinking Means
                                          Days Drinking Linear Polynomial
                                          Days Drinking Quadratic Polynomial
                              0.14        Days Drinking Quadratic Polynomial First Month Dummy
                                          Days Drinking Cubic Polynomial First Month Dummy
                                          Days Heavy Drinking Means
                                          Days Heavy Drinking Linear Polynomial
                              0.12        Days Heavy Drinking Quadratic Polynomial
                                          Days Heavy Drinking Quadratic Polynomial First Month Dummy
                                          Days Heavy Drinking Cubic Polynomial First Month Dummy
Proportion of Days Drinking




                               0.1



                              0.08



                              0.06



                              0.04



                              0.02



                                0
                                     19        19.5               20               20.5                21    21.5   22         22.5   23
                                                                                                       Age
                                     Appendix C: Evaluating the Sensitivity of the Local Linear Regressions to the Choice of Bandwidth

                           0.08



                           0.06



                           0.04



                           0.02
Estimate of RD at Age 21




                              0
                               05

                                    15

                                         25

                                               35

                                                    45

                                                         55

                                                              65

                                                                    75

                                                                         85

                                                                               95

                                                                                     05

                                                                                           15

                                                                                                 25

                                                                                                        35

                                                                                                             45

                                                                                                                  55

                                                                                                                        65

                                                                                                                              75

                                                                                                                                   85

                                                                                                                                        95
                             0.

                                    0.

                                         0.

                                              0.

                                                    0.

                                                         0.

                                                              0.

                                                                   0.

                                                                         0.

                                                                              0.

                                                                                    1.

                                                                                          1.

                                                                                                1.

                                                                                                        1.

                                                                                                             1.

                                                                                                                  1.

                                                                                                                       1.

                                                                                                                             1.

                                                                                                                                   1.

                                                                                                                                        1.
                           -0.02



                           -0.04
                                                                                           RD 12 or More Drinks in One Year
                                                                                           RD 12 or More Drinks in Lifetime
                           -0.06
                                                                                           RD Proportion of Days Drinking
                                                                                           RD Proportion of Days Heavy Drinking
                                                                                           RD Self Reported Heavy Drinker
                           -0.08



                            -0.1
                                                                          Bandwidth H (Years of Data)
                                              Appendix D: Age Profile of Sample Surveyed in NHIS

              1


             0.9        No HS Diploma                   No HS Diploma Fitted
                        Employed Means                  Employed Fitted
                        Looking for Work Means          Looking for Work Fitted
             0.8        No Health Insurance             No Health Insurance Fitted



             0.7


             0.6
Proportion




             0.5


             0.4


             0.3


             0.2


             0.1


              0
               19.0   19.5              20.0           20.5               21.0       21.5   22.0   22.5   23.0
                                                                          Age
                  Appendix E: ICD-9 and ICD-10 Codes Used to Create Cause-of-Death Categories

                                                   ICD-9                                                               ICD-10
                                                                                          'V', 'W', 'X', 'Y', 'Z', 'F10', 'K70', 'X45', 'X65', 'Y15', 'Y91',
                                                                                          'K70', 'T51', 'X46', 'X65', 'Y15', 'Y90', 'Y91', 'G312',
                      '8', '9', '292', '304', '305', '850', '851', '852', '853', '854',   'G621', 'I426', 'K292', 'R780', 'E244', 'G721', 'K852',
                      '855', '856', '857', '858', '3321', '3576', '291', '303', '305',    'K860', 'Z502', 'Z714', 'Z721', 'K860', 'T518', 'T519', 'F11',
External Deaths       '860', '3575', '4255', '5353', '5710', '5711', '5712', '5713',      'F12', 'F13', 'F14', 'F15', 'F16', 'F17', 'F18', 'F19', 'F55',
                      '7903'                                                              'T40', 'T41', 'T43', 'F55', 'X40', 'X42' and not in 'F116',
                                                                                          'F126', 'F136', 'F146', 'F156', 'F166', 'F176', 'F171',
                                                                                          'F172', 'F186', 'F196'


Subcategories of External Deaths
                                                                                          'F10', 'K70', 'X45', 'X65', 'Y15', 'Y91', 'K70', 'T51', 'X46',
  Mention of          '291', '303', '3050', '860', '3575', '4255', '5353', '5710',        'X65', 'Y15', 'Y90', 'Y91', 'G312', 'G621', 'I426', 'K292',
  Alcohol             '5711', '5712', '5713', '7903'                                      'R780', 'E244', 'G721', 'K852', 'K860', 'Z502', 'Z714',
                                                                                          'Z721', 'K860', 'T518', 'T519'



  Homicide            '96'                                                                'X85', 'X86', 'X87', 'X88', 'X89,''X9', 'Y0'




  Suicide             '95'                                                                'X6', 'X7', 'X80', 'X81', 'X82', 'X83', 'X84', 'X870'




  MVA                 '81', '820', '821', '822', '823', '824', '825'                      'V0', 'V1', 'V2', 'V3', 'V4', 'V5', 'V6', 'V7', 'V8'



  Deaths with a                                                                           'F11', 'F12', 'F13', 'F14', 'F15', 'F16', 'F17', 'F18', 'F19',
                      '292', '304', '305', '850', '851', '852', '853', '854', '855',      'F55', 'T40', 'T41', 'T43', 'F55', 'X40', 'X42' and not in
  Mention of          '856', '857', '858', '3321', '3576'                                 'F116', 'F126', 'F136', 'F146', 'F156', 'F166', 'F176',
  Drugs                                                                                   'F171', 'F172', 'F186', 'F196'


                      External Deaths group - (Mention of alcohol, Homicide,              External Deaths group - (Mention of alcohol, Homicide,
  Other               Suicide, MVA, Deaths with a mention of drugs)                       Suicide, MVA, Deaths with a mention of drugs)


Notes: The order of precedence is homicide, suicide, MVA, deaths with a mention of alcohol, deaths with a mention of drugs. A death is
coded as due to a particular ICD code if the code appears on any line of the death certificate.
                               Appendix F: Comparison of the Fit of Different Polynomials for Internal and External Causes of
                                                                           Death
                     90


                     80


                     70


                                  Internal
                     60
                                  Internal Quadratic Fit
                                  Internal Linear Fit
    Mortality Rate




                                  Internal Cubic Fit
                     50
                                  External
                                  External Quadaratic
                                  External Linear
                     40           External Cubic



                     30


                     20


                     10


                     0
                          19       19.5                    20          20.5                 21         21.5   22   22.5         23
                                                                                           Age




Notes: See notes from Figure 4, All three polynomials are fully interacted with a dummy for over 21.
                                                                   Apppendix G: Nonparametric Estimates of Discontinuity in Internal and External Deaths with
                                                                                                   Different Bandwidths

                                                   0.35



                                                    0.3
                                                                                                                                   Discontinuity in Internal Causes of Death
    Estimate of Increase in ln(deaths) at Age 21




                                                                                                                                   Discontinuity in External Causes of Death

                                                   0.25



                                                    0.2



                                                   0.15



                                                    0.1



                                                   0.05



                                                     0
                                                          1

                                                              2

                                                                     3

                                                                          4

                                                                                5

                                                                                     6

                                                                                           7

                                                                                                8

                                                                                                     9




                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                  6

                                                                                                                                                           7

                                                                                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                     0.

                                                              0.

                                                                    0.

                                                                         0.

                                                                               0.

                                                                                    0.

                                                                                         0.

                                                                                               0.

                                                                                                    0.




                                                                                                               1.

                                                                                                                        1.

                                                                                                                             1.

                                                                                                                                  1.

                                                                                                                                        1.

                                                                                                                                                1.

                                                                                                                                                         1.

                                                                                                                                                                 1.

                                                                                                                                                                          1.
                                                                                                            Bandwidth




Notes: See notes to Table 4. The range of the running variable (age) is equal to 2. The parametric estimate for external deaths is 0.104 and for internal deaths 0.022
                 Appendix H: RDD Estimates for Outcomes With 0 Deaths in Some Periods
                                  Alcohol                                    Drugs
                           Log(x+.5)       Log(x+1)          Level                   Log(x+.5)       Log(x+1)          Level
                              (1)             (2)              (3)                      (1)             (2)              (3)
Over 21                     0.2970          0.2130           0.4990                   0.0930          0.0740          0.2430
                          [0.113]**       [0.081]**        [0.193]**                  [0.083]         [0.068]         [0.279]
Age                        -0.2160         -0.1400          -0.2240                   0.1020          0.0840          0.3370
                            [0.187]         [0.130]          [0.281]                  [0.148]         [0.120]         [0.454]
Age Squared                -0.1590         -0.1050          -0.1850                   0.0090          0.0080          0.0510
                            [0.090]         [0.062]          [0.132]                  [0.074]         [0.060]         [0.222]
Age*Over 21                 0.0390          0.0170          -0.0640                  -0.1180         -0.0950         -0.3870
                            [0.263]         [0.187]          [0.436]                  [0.198]         [0.162]         [0.652]
Age Sq*Ov 21                0.2230          0.1490           0.2820                   0.0210          0.0180          0.0990
                            [0.128]         [0.091]          [0.207]                  [0.098]         [0.080]         [0.321]
Birthday                    1.7380          1.4800           7.4000                   0.3860          0.3340          1.3630
                          [0.078]**       [0.057]**        [0.146]**                [0.055]**       [0.046]**       [0.198]**
Birthday + 1                1.5020          1.2570           5.4010                  -0.0660         -0.0710         -0.6370
                          [0.078]**       [0.057]**        [0.145]**                  [0.055]         [0.046]       [0.197]**
Constant                    0.2160          0.6100           1.1010                   1.2260          1.3840          3.3950
                          [0.082]**       [0.057]**        [0.125]**                [0.062]**       [0.050]**       [0.197]**
Observations                 1460            1460             1460                     1460            1460            1460
R-squared                    0.03            0.04             0.07                      0.04            0.04           0.04
Notes: See notes to Table 5. There are 188 observations with 0 deaths due to alcohol and 23 observations with no deaths due
to drugs. Model (1) in each panel has the log of the number of deaths + .5 which is the same specification as model (2) in for the
corresponding outcome in Table 6 or 7. Model (2) has the log of the number of deaths + 1 as a dependent variable. Model (3) in
has the dependent variable in levels. The level regressions imply a similar sized change in percentage terms as the regressions
in logs. For the alcohol case the levels model implies a 45.3 percent change, which is larger than the 34 percent (%change =
exp(B)-1) change in the regression with Log(x-.5) as a dependent variable. In the Drugs regression the levels model implies a
9.7% change and in the "External Other Deaths" the level model implies a 7.1% change.
                       Appendix I: RDD Estimates of Mortality for Different Time Periods
                           All Deaths               All External Deaths              All Internal Deaths
Years              1990-2004 1990-1996 1997-2004   1990-2004 1990-1996 1997-2004   1990-2004 1990-1996 1997-2004
                       (1)       (2)       (3)        (1)       (2)       (3)         (1)       (2)       (3)
Over 21               0.081    0.073     0.087       0.095     0.089     0.100       0.032     0.011     0.054
                     [0.013]   [0.018]   [0.017]    [0.015]   [0.020]   [0.021]     [0.031]   [0.042]   [0.040]
Age                  -0.030    -0.029    -0.027     -0.051    -0.052    -0.048       0.038     0.063     0.022
                     [0.020]   [0.028]   [0.028]    [0.024]   [0.032]   [0.034]     [0.048]   [0.070]   [0.066]
Age Squared          -0.015    -0.017    -0.011     -0.015    -0.018    -0.011      -0.023    -0.017    -0.028
                     [0.010]   [0.014]   [0.014]    [0.011]   [0.015]   [0.016]     [0.023]   [0.034]   [0.032]
Age*Over 21          -0.025    -0.007    -0.047     -0.023    -0.009    -0.040      -0.013    -0.012    -0.039
                     [0.030]   [0.041]   [0.041]    [0.034]   [0.045]   [0.048]     [0.069]   [0.101]   [0.090]
Age Sq*Ov 21          0.026    0.024     0.026       0.021     0.022     0.019       0.047     0.039     0.062
                     [0.014]   [0.020]   [0.020]    [0.016]   [0.022]   [0.023]     [0.033]   [0.049]   [0.044]
Birthday              0.274    0.061     0.440       0.291     0.039     0.485       0.220     0.181     0.272
                     [0.010]   [0.013]   [0.013]    [0.010]   [0.014]   [0.015]     [0.022]   [0.031]   [0.027]
Birthday + 1          0.423    0.513     0.339       0.407     0.498     0.321       0.502     0.605     0.432
                     [0.010]   [0.013]   [0.013]    [0.010]   [0.014]   [0.015]     [0.022]   [0.031]   [0.027]
Constant              5.034    4.297     4.379       4.802     4.076     4.134       3.436     2.642     2.809
                     [0.009]   [0.012]   [0.011]    [0.011]   [0.014]   [0.015]     [0.021]   [0.029]   [0.029]
Observations          1460     1460      1460        1460      1460      1460        1460      1460      1460
R-squared             0.09      0.05      0.05       0.11      0.04      0.08        0.20      0.12      0.10
Notes: See notes to Table 4.
