NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PARTISAN BIAS IN ECONOMIC NEWS:
EVIDENCE ON THE AGENDA-SETTING BEHAVIOR OF U.S. NEWSPAPERS
Valentino Larcinese
Riccardo Puglisi
James M. Snyder, Jr.
Working Paper 13378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13378

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We thank Radu Ban, Bob Erikson, Raphael Franck, Chap Lawson, Gabe Lenz, Andrea Prat, Carlo
Rosa, Jesse Shapiro, Michiko Ueda and seminar participants at Bristol, Cambridge, Columbia, Durham,
Rome (Ente Einaudi), LSE, MIT, Milan, Suffolk, the World Meeting of the Public Choice Societies
(Amsterdam) for helpful comments. We also give a very special thanks to Michael Naber for making
the data collection possible. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Valentino Larcinese, Riccardo Puglisi, and James M. Snyder, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Partisan Bias in Economic News: Evidence on the Agenda-Setting Behavior of U.S. Newspapers
Valentino Larcinese, Riccardo Puglisi, and James M. Snyder, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 13378
September 2007
JEL No. D72,D78,L82
ABSTRACT
We study the agenda-setting political behavior of a large sample of U.S. newspapers during the last
decade, and the behavior of smaller samples for longer time periods. Our purpose is to examine the
intensity of coverage of economic issues as a function of the underlying economic conditions and the
political affiliation of the incumbent president, focusing on unemployment, inflation, the federal budget
and the trade deficit. We investigate whether there is any significant correlation between the endorsement
policy of newspapers, and the differential coverage of bad/good economic news as a function of the
president's political affiliation. We find evidence that newspapers with pro-Democratic endorsement
pattern systematically give more coverage to high unemployment when the incumbent president is
a Republican than when the president is Democratic, compared to newspapers with pro-Republican
endorsement pattern. This result is not driven by the partisanship of readers. There is on the contrary
no evidence of a partisan bias -- or at least of a bias that is correlated with the endorsement policy
-- for stories on inflation, budget deficit or trade deficit.
Valentino Larcinese
Department of Government and STICERD
London School of Economics
Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK
V.Larcinese@lse.ac.uk
Riccardo Puglisi
Department of Political Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E53-463
Cambridge, MA 02142
rpuglisi@mit.edu

James M. Snyder, Jr.
MIT Department of Economics
E53-457
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
millett@mit.edu

1

Introduction

News provided by the mass media are the most important source of information on public a¤airs in
modern democratic societies. Hence, media outlets play a fundamental role in keeping the public
informed on the decisions of their political representatives as well as on issues and events that are
relevant to public decision-making. Time and space available being limited, journalists exercise
a considerable degree of discretion on the topics covered and the tone of the reports. It would
therefore not be surprising if the political views of individual journalists were re‡ected in news
reported in the mass media.
One of the most important claims about news in the mass media is the agenda-setting hypothesis. The idea is that editors and journalists have a large degree of freedom in deciding what is
newsworthy and what is not, and these choices in‡uence the perception of citizens about which
issues are relevant and to what extent. Cohen [1963] stated it eloquently: the press “may not be
successful much of the time in telling people what to think, but it is stunningly successful in telling
its readers what to think about.”The exploitation of agenda-setting power is potentially one of the
most harmful behaviors by news media, especially if they use this power to suppress information.
The reason is that it is di¢ cult for consumers to distinguish the scenario “I did not see any news
about X today because nothing important happened regarding X” from the scenario “I did not
see any news about X today because, although something important happened, the media decided
not to publish it”. Theoretical models by Anderson and McLaren [2005], Bernhardt, Krasa and
Polborn [2006], Besley and Prat [2006] and Puglisi [2004] incorporate precisely this source of media
bias, and show how this can a¤ect public decisions and possibly lead to suboptimal ones.
In this paper we try to gauge the extent of agenda bias on economic issues for a large number
of U.S. newspapers over the period 1996-2005. For newspapers belonging to chains or with large
circulation we go back to 1988. Exploiting the NewsLibrary electronic archive, we collected monthly
and quarterly data on the number of articles that each newspaper reported on some relevant
economic issues. These data can be matched with the actual economic …gures to try to assess
whether outlets systematically over-report or under-report on given issues as a function of those
…gures and of the party a¢ liation of the incumbent president. For example, an outlet with a proDemocratic bias might devote more (less) space to news on unemployment when the president is

1

Republican (Democrat) and unemployment is high or rising. We focus on the political a¢ liation of
the incumbent president, because - as consistently shown by a large literature (see e.g. Fair [1978],
Tufte [1978], Hibbs [1987], Erikson [1989]) - the performance of the economy under his mandate is
a strong determinant of his (or his party’s) vote during the next presidential elections.1
Di¤erently from other studies on this topic, we do not make any claims about the absolute political bias of U.S. newspapers. Instead, we are interested in the political position of the newspapers
relative to each other. In particular, our strategy consists in detecting agenda-setting behavior by
exploiting prior knowledge on the political leaning of the newspapers. We investigate whether there
is any cross-sectional correlation between the di¤erential coverage of economic issues – as a function of the political a¢ liation of the incumbent president –and more explicit measures of political
orientation, in particular the endorsements of political candidates. In other terms, we want to see
if the political orientation of newspapers “spills over”from the editorial page, where endorsements
are explictly made, to the news section, where di¤erential coverage of the same economic …gures
can then be interpreted as agenda setting.
We focus on four key economic variables: the unemployment rate, the in‡ation rate, the federal
de…cit, and the trade de…cit. These all represent “bads”.·The incumbent president might be blamed
by the public for high values, or rewarded for low values. Hence, we check whether newspapers that
have a higher propensity to endorse Democratic candidates give less coverage to a given economic
issue when the incumbent president is a Democrat and the corresponding economic indicator is
high and/or rising, compared to the coverage of newspapers that have a propensity to endorse
Republicans. Formally, this amounts to using a regression speci…cation containing a three-way
interaction term. Moreover, since we do not know whether levels or changes in the economic …gures
are more newsworthy, we consider both speci…cations that focus on levels and speci…cations that
consider changes.
We …nd fairly robust evidence of political partisanship in the coverage of the unemployment
rate. We …nd that newspapers with a pro-Democratic endorsement pattern systematically publish
fewer pieces about unemployment when the national unemployment rate is high and the president is
1
On this account, MacKuen, Erikson and Stimson [1992] posit an indirect mechanism of in‡uence, whereas the
state of the economy (in particular the unemployment rate and GDP growth) a¤ects the perceptions voters have
about it, which in turn a¤ects the approval rate of the incumbent president and his vote percentage during the next
elections. On the contrary, as discussed by Erikson [1990], there is no robust evidence suggesting that the economy
has any signi…cant e¤ects on congressional elections.

2

Democratic than when the national unemployment is equally high and the president is a Republican.
The size of the estimated e¤ects is not negligible. When the unemployment rate was one percentage
point above the average, newspapers with a strong propensity to endorse Republican candidates
reacted with 15% per month more articles under Clinton than under Bush. For the same one
percent increase, newspapers with a strong pro-Democratic endorsement policy have 9% less news
on unemployment under Clinton than under Bush. We …nd instead no evidence of partisan bias in
the coverage on any of the other economic variables we consider.
Following a recent paper by Gentzkow and Shapiro [2007] on the determinants of the ideological
slant of the language used by U.S. newspapers, we also check whether the agenda bias found for
unemployment coverage depends on demand, i.e. the partisanship of readers.
While newspapers more heavily sold in Democratic areas indeed tend to give more coverage to
high unemployment under Bush than under Clinton as compared to those sold in Republican areas,
this correlation is no longer signi…cant when controlling for the ideological leaning of endorsements,
properly interacted. On the other hand endorsement partisanship still matters, i.e. Democratic
endorsing newspapers ceteris paribus give systematically more coverage to high unemployment
under Bush than under Clinton as compared to Republican endorsing ones. On this account,
agenda bias in economic news seems more connected with the partisan position of editors, i.e. a
supply factor, rather than with the ideological tastes of readers.
A salient feature of our approach is that we code newspaper articles through an automatic
keyword search, instead of a human-based content analysis. One advantage of this procedure is
that, by de…nition, it is not intensive in the usage of human capital. Its low cost means that it can
be used to gather data on a large number of news outlets for a long time span, restricted only by
availabilities in digital archives. More importantly, an automatic search is easily replicated, as it is
based on known set of words and/or sentences that are used as classi…ers. Perhaps a limitation of
this approach is that we only classify articles according to the topic covered, without attempting
to code whether their tone is positive or negative. Our focus is therefore exclusively on the agendasetting behavior of newspapers, not on the framing of issues through an intentional or unintentional
choice of words. Coding for tone is di¢ cult, especially when dealing with such a nuanced object as
a newspaper article, even using human-based content analysis. Unless the analyst provides detailed
instructions, inter-coder reliability typically falls far short of acceptable standards. And when the
3

analyst’s instructions are very detailed, then results are likely to be driven by these instructions.
This suggests that coding for the tone using an automated procedure is also likely to be quite
di¢ cult. We view it as an important challenge for future research, however, since the replicability
of machine-based content analysis constitutes an extremely valuable feature for the scienti…c study
of mass media.

2

Related Literature

The theory of agenda setting is built around the idea that mass media can in‡uence the importance
attached to di¤erent issues by readers and viewers.2 As Lippmann [1922] notes, news provided by
the mass media are a primary source of information about public a¤airs, and sometimes the only
one. Beginning with the seminal contribution by McCombs and Shaw [1972] on Chapel Hill voters,
a host of empirical studies have searched for the presence of agenda-setting e¤ects, i.e. of a causal
relationship that goes from the coverage of issues on the mass media to the priorities of the public.
Experimental evidence, such as that provided by Iyengar, Kinder and Peters [1982], lends the
strongest support to this hypothesis. Importantly, the choice of the topics covered by the media
need not be politically neutral. There are several ways that media sources can try to use their
agenda-setting power to favor one political party or the other.
One way is to exploit the fact that citizens often think that given problems are better handled
by one of the parties. This is the notion of "issue ownership", as introduced by Petrocik [1996],
who found that on some issues a majority of citizens consistently perceives one party to be more
competent than the other. These are the so called “owned issues”. For example, U.S. citizens on
average believe that the Democratic Party is more competent at managing problems related to
welfare and civil rights, while the Republicans are perceived as more competent on defense.3
In some cases citizens lack consistent opinions about which party is better at handling a given
problem, but they can update their beliefs on the basis of the past and current performance of
the incumbent government with respect to that problem. The economy is a primary example of a
“performance issue”. News about the economy are good news for the incumbent government if the
2

For more detailed surveys about the literature on agenda-setting e¤ects, see Erbring, Goldenberg and Miller
[1980], Iyengar, Kinder and Peters [1982], Iyengar and Simon [2000] and McCombs [2002].
3
On the basis of Gallup Polls and NES data, Puglisi [2006] provides some additional evidence on issue ownership
perceptions in the U.S. from 1948 to 1996.

4

economy is going well, and bad news if the economy is going badly.
If mass media outlets have political preferences and can in‡uence the agenda, then there should
be a consistent relationship between the preferences of the outlets and the way economic issues
are covered, as a function of the true economic datum and the “match” between these preferences
and the political a¢ liation of the incumbent administration. From this perspective, our empirical
exercise provides a test of whether newspapers cover economic news in a manner consistent with
the agenda setting hypothesis and with the existence of di¤erences in their political orientation.
Our paper is also related to the growing empirical literature analyzing the political biases of
the mass media in the United States.
Ansolabehere, Lessem and Snyder [2006] use panel data to study the political orientation of
endorsements of U.S. newspapers. They …nd that, while in the 40s and in the 50s Republican candidates received more endorsements, this advantage has constantly declined in subsequent decades:
in the 90s the authors …nd a slight Democrats’lead (10%) in the average endorsement choice. They
also …nd an upward trend in the average propensity to provide endorsement for candidates already
in o¢ ce. In the 1940s incumbent candidates received 60% of the total endorsements, but this …gure
has increased to about 90% today. Fridkin Kahn and Kenney [2002] analyze how large newspapers
covered 67 Senatorial campaigns across three election years, as a function of their explicit endorsement choices. Through human-based content analysis they code the tone of the articles and …nd
that newspapers systematically gave a more favorable coverage to endorsed incumbents.
Lott and Hassett [2004] …nd an overall liberal bias in the U.S. press. They study a panel of
389 U.S. newspapers from 1991 to 2004 (and a sub-sample of them from 1985 to 2004), focusing
on economic news, i.e. looking at how newspapers cover the release of o¢ cial data on a set of
economic indicators. Their identi…cation strategy is based on the fact that newspapers can provide
a more positive or negative account of the same statistical …gure, depending on the party a¢ liation
of the incumbent president. Lott and Hassett …nd that there are, on average, between 9.6 and 14.7
percent fewer positive stories when the incumbent president is a Republican, controlling for the
economic data being released. Di¤erently from our paper, the main focus of Lott and Hassett is on
the tone of coverage and the absolute average political position of U.S. newspapers. They do not
estimate di¤erent positions for di¤erent newspapers.
Groseclose and Milyo [2005] also …nd a liberal bias in the U.S. press. They trace out which
5

think tanks are quoted by each media outlet considered in their sample. The political leaning
of each think tank is recovered by looking at the political position (ADA score) of members of
the U.S. Congress who quote the same think-tank in a non-negative way. The political leaning
of each outlet can then be calculated by looking at the frequency with which the various think
thanks are quoted. Groseclose and Milyo …nd that all the outlets in their sample – except Fox
News’Special Report and the Washington Times –are located to the left of the average Congress
member. At the same time, all outlets but one are located between the average Democrat and the
average Republican Congressmen, hence displaying a high degree of centrism. In a similar fashion,
Gentzkow and Shapiro [2007] provide another measure of media bias based on similarities between
the language used by media outlets and congressmen. Exploiting the Congressional Record, they
identify “partisan” words and phrases – i.e., those expressions that show the largest di¤erence in
the frequency of use between Democratic and Republican representatives. They then measure how
frequently these expressions appear in di¤erent newspapers. They conclude that the partisan bias
of newspapers depends mainly on consumers’ ideological leaning and far less on the identity of
owners.
An account of the agenda setting behavior of the New York Times in the period 1946-1997
is provided by Puglisi [2006], who …nds that the Times displays Democratic partisanship, with
some watchdog aspects. Puglisi …nds that, during presidential campaigns, the New York Times
systematically gives more coverage to Democratic topics (civil rights, health care, labor and social
welfare ) when the incumbent president is a Republican. The New York Times displays a more
symmetric type of watchdog behavior after 1960: in the last four decades, during presidential
campaigns the Times also gives more coverage to the typically Republican issue of Defense when
the incumbent president is a Democrat, and less so when the incumbent is a Republican.
Finally, a di¤erent and less studied type of bias consists in the overprovision of news that are
of interest to a worthy audience, i.e. an audience which is more valuable to advertisers. A formal
model that illustrates this mechanism is provided by Stromberg [2004], while evidence on the UK
is given in Larcinese [2007].
Recent advances have also been made regarding the e¤ects of mass media on political decisions
and attitudes. Gerber, Karlan and Bergan [2006] conduct a randomized control trial just prior to
the November 2005 gubernatorial election in Virginia and randomly assign individuals in Northern
6

Virginia to (a) a treatment group that receives a free subscription to the Washington Post, (b)
a treatment group that receives a free subscription to the Washington Times, or (c) a control
group. They …nd that individuals who were assigned to the Washington Post treatment group
were eight percentage points more likely to vote for the Democrat in the 2005 election, while those
who were assigned the Washington Times were only four percentage points more likely to vote for
the Democrat.4 DellaVigna and Kaplan [2007] use a quasi-experimental approach, and exploit the
gradual introduction of Fox News in cable markets in order to estimate its impact on the vote share
in presidential elections, between 1996 and 2000. They …nd that Republicans gained 0.4 to 0.7
percentage points in the towns which started to broadcast Fox News before 2000.
To sum up, our paper shares with Groseclose and Milyo [2005] and Gentzkow and Shapiro [2007]
the focus on relative rather than absolute political positions of U.S. media outlets and with Lott
and Hassett [2004] the focus on economic news. However, it is the only paper that analyzes the
agenda setting behavior of media outlets.5 On a methodological ground, ours is the …rst paper
that combines machine-based replicable data on news with information on explicit endorsement
patterns.

3

Data and empirical strategy

We collected data from the NewsLibrary electronic archive, recording the monthly number of hits on
unemployment and in‡ation, and the quarterly number of hits on the federal budget de…cit and the
trade de…cit.6 First, through a number of preliminary searches we de…ned the exact wording of the
search strings in order to reduce the number of false positive and false negative hits. Once identi…ed
the appropriate keywords (reported in Table 1), we run an automated search, then retrieving the
number of hits on each topic by time unit. Overall, we collected data on 140 U.S. newspapers for
which electronic archives dating back to 1996 are available to be searched through NewsLibrary.
In this section we will …rst illustrate the procedure used to recover the endorsement propensity of
the various newspapers. We will then present the economic news data and a two-stage preliminary
4

The latter e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant. However, it is not possible to reject at ordinary con…dence levels
the null hypothesis that the e¤ects of the two treatment groups on the probability of voting Democrat are equal.
5
The only exception is Puglisi (2006), who analyses the agenda-setting behavior of the New York Times.
6
The o¢ cial macroeconomic …gure is made available to the public monthly for the unemployment and the in‡ation
rate, and quarterly for the two de…cits.

7

investigation of the data. This illustrates our empirical strategy, although in a less rigorous fashion.
We will then be ready to present our panel speci…cation.

3.1

The endorsement data

We were able to gather endorsement data for 102 newspapers. Table A1 lists the newspapers with
endorsement data, together with the chain to which they belong, if any.
We obtained the endorsement data for 85 newspapers from Ansolabehere, Lessem and Snyder
[2006], and supplemented this with data on 17 additional newspapers searched via the NewsLibrary
archive. For the remaining 38 newspapers, in some cases the newspaper has an explicit policy not to
endorse candidates for political o¢ ces (e.g. the Deseret News in Salt Lake City, the Orange County
Register, and the Colorado Springs Gazette). In addition, many smaller ones do not bother to
make endorsements, even though they may not take an explicit editorial stance on the subject.
Following Ansolabehere, Lessem and Snyder [2006] we can calculate the propensity of each
newspaper to endorse one of the parties during electoral campaigns. We used a linear regression
model to estimate the “partisan bias” in endorsement behavior. Let i index o¢ ces, let j index
newspapers and let t index years. Let

Eijt =

8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:

1

if newspaper j endorses Democrat for o¢ ce i in year t

1 if newspaper j endorses Republican for o¢ ce i in year t
0

if newspaper j makes no endorsement for o¢ ce i in year t

measure the endorsement behavior by each newspaper that makes an endorsement (or an explicit
refusal to endorse) in a race.7 Also, let

Iijt =

8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:

1

if Democrat for o¢ ce i in year t is only incumbent

1 if Republican for o¢ ce i in year t is only incumbent
0

if otherwise

measure the incumbency status of the candidates in each race.8 Finally, we use previous electoral
7

There are a few cases in our sample where a newspaper endorsed both candidates in a race. We drop these from
our analysis.
8
After redistricting there are some U.S. House races with two incumbents running, in which case Iijt = 0. There

8

experience to measure non-incumbent quality. Speci…cally, de…ne a “high-quality” candidate as a
candidate who currently holds a U.S. House seat or an elected statewide o¢ ce other than the o¢ ce
sought. Let

Qijt =

8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:

1

if Democrat for o¢ ce i in year t is only high quality non-incumbent

1 if Republican for o¢ ce i in year t is only high quality non-incumbent
0

otherwise

We estimated the following linear model for the period 1992-2002, exploiting the panel nature
of the data9
Eijt = N Ej +

t

+

1 Iijt

+

2 Qijt

+

ijt

(1)

The newspaper-speci…c …xed e¤ects, N Ej , capture newspapers’ partisanship.10 Figure 1 reports
the histogram of the resulting estimated variable. In the graphic, 0 is the neutral point, positive
values indicate a propensity to endorse Democratic candidates and negative values a propensity
to endorse Republican candidates. The endorsement variable, which is only based on editorials,
indicates a slight prevalence, on average, of pro-Democratic endorsements. On the other hand,
it also shows a wider dispersion on the Republican side: in other words there is a prevalence of
pro-Democratic endorsers but Republican endorsers tend to be more systematic. Overall, however,
most newspapers appear to be centrist, in the sense that they are placed in the range [ 0:5; 0:5] in
the endorsement scale (i.e. within the vertical lines). Figure 2 features a scatter plot in which the
Democratic endorsement score for each newspaper is represented on the horizontal axis, while the
vertical axis displays the average circulation in 1996. Newspapers selling more than 400,000 copies
are represented by their name, and smaller papers are represented with dots. Interestingly, the
larger newspapers tend to be relatively centrist in their endorsement behavior, as they are typically
placed in the range [ 0:5; 0:5] on the endorsement scale. The more partisan newspapers, outside
this range, tend to have more modest circulation.
The question we address is now whether partisanship is only limited to endorsements or rather,
in a less transparent way, it is re‡ected in the coverage of economic news in an agenda-setting
are a few such cases in our sample. If we drop them the results are unchanged.
9
The panel is unbalanced, since we do not have endorsement data on some newspapers in the earlier years.
10
The model also includes year …xed-e¤ects, t , to capture partisan tides.

9

fashion. To do this we need to compare newspapers’ coverage of given issues with the actual
statistical …gures on in‡ation, unemployment, budget de…cit and trade de…cit.

3.2

The economic news data: a preliminary investigation

The key variables in our analysis are the values of the four underlying economic indicators, and the
amount of newspaper coverage devoted to the four economic issues. Since newspapers vary greatly
in size cross-sectionally (total number of pages, stories, and words), and can also vary in size over
time, we focus on the relative frequency of stories in each newspaper. Table 1 reports the keywords
that we use11 .
Let EVti be the value of the economic …gure regarding issue i at time t, where i 2 fU; I; B; T g
and U stands for "unemployment", I for "in‡ation", B for budget de…cit, and T for trade de…cit.
Let nijt be the relative frequency of pieces published by newspaper j during time t about issue i.12
In order to take into account the di¤erences in the average amount of coverage devoted to economic news by the various newspapers, we normalize the relative frequency of stories in newspaper
j on issue i at time t by subtracting the average relative frequency of stories in that newspaper,
i.e. we consider
i
yjt
= nijt

nij

For each newspaper j and each economic issue i 2 fU; I; B; T g, we then run a separate OLS
regression:
i
yjt
=

i
j

+

i
i
j EVt

+

i
j DPt

+

i
i
j (EVt

DPt ) +

i
jt

+

i
j

ln sjt +

i
jt

(2)

where DPt is a dummy variable indicating that the incumbent president is a Democrat. In addition,
we control for a linear time trend and for the logarithm of the total number of articles in each
newspaper at time t, sjt . The coe¢ cient

i
j

represents the di¤erence in how newspaper j reacts

to bad economic news when the president is Democratic compared to when the president is a
Republican. Positive values indicate that the newspaper is more reactive to bad economic news
11

A potential concern is that all the variation in the coverage of economic news might be driven by editorials
themselves. Hence, we have re-run the searches excluding the words “editorial”or “editor”. We explore the robustness
of our results to this narrower de…nition of coverage in section 5.3. We proxy the total number of stories in each
newspaper in each period by running a search on the word “and”.
12
Table 2 displays summary statistics of the relative frequency of stories and the economic …gures of interest for
the 1996-2005 period.

10

when the incumbent president is a Democrat13
Next, we exploit the information we have about the explicit political position of each newspaper,
as proxied by its endorsement pattern. In Figures 3-6 we analyze the relationship between the
estimated interaction terms from equation (2) and the estimated propensity to endorse Democratic
candidates obtained from equation (1). Again, we explicitly report the names of newspapers with
d
circulation above 400,000 copies. The two vertical lines –at N
Ej =

d
0:5 and N
E j = 0:5 –divide

the sample of newspapers, crudely, into those with pro-Republican endorsement pattern, those with
a relative neutral patterns, and those with a pro-Democratic pattern. Each graph also displays a
i
d
bivariate regression line, i.e. the …tted values of a regression of bj over N
E j and a constant.

In the case of unemployment news (Figure 3), the relationship between the endorsement variable

and the estimated interaction term is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 95% con…dence
level, using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. This indicates that newspapers with a proDemocratic editorial partisanship tended to give less coverage to unemployment during periods of
high unemployment under Clinton than under George W. Bush, as compared to newspapers with
a pro-Republican endorsement partisanship. The opposite is true during periods of low unemployment.
Figure 4 displays results regarding the coverage of in‡ation. The …tted values show a mild
and positive relationship between the endorsement variable and the estimated interaction terms.
However, this relationship is statistically insigni…cant (t-value = 0.49). Figure 5 represents the same
relationship for the coverage of the budget de…cit. In this case the estimated slope is negative and
statistically insigni…cant (t-value = 1.24). Finally Figure 6 shows the results for the trade de…cit,
and shows a mildly negative but statistically insigni…cant relationship (t-value = 0.32) between the
estimated interaction terms and the endorsement variable.

3.3

Panel speci…cation

This simple two-stage graphical analysis gives a mixed picture of the link between endorsement
policy and coverage of economic news. On one hand we …nd some evidence of a partisan bias in the
13

If we had data for a period long enough to cover numerous presidents, it would be possible to treat this interaction
term as a measure of the absolute pro-Republican bias of a newspaper. However, given the short time span available,
the time series variation by itself could easily be misleading. In particular, other newsworthy events and issues could
be crowding out economic news more in some years than others.

11

amount of coverage devoted to unemployment. On the other hand, we …nd small and statistically
insigni…cant relationships for in‡ation, the budget and the trade de…cit.
Here, we perform a more structured test. Rather than analyzing newspapers one at a time,
we exploit fully the panel nature of our data. We will therefore estimate three-way speci…cations
containing an interaction term between the economic variable EV i , an indicator for Democratic
d
president DPt and the newspaper-speci…c endorsement propensity N
E j 14 . A basic three-way speci…cation is the following (we omit the indicator i of the economic issue):15

njt =

j

+

1 EVt

+

2

d
EVt + DPt + (EVt DPt ) + (DPt N
Ej ) +

d
d
+#(EVt N
E j ) + (EVt DPt N
Ej ) +
where we include newspaper …xed e¤ects

j,

jt

+ ln sjt +

newspaper-speci…c trends

paper size (in logarithm) . We also control for the change
coe¢ cient of interest is . A negative value of

j

jt

(Speci…cation A)

and sensitivity to news-

EVt in the economic variable. Our

implies that newspapers which tend to endorse

Democratic candidates have a relatively pro-Democratic agenda-setting bias (on economic item i),
compared to newspapers that tend to endorse Republican candidates. In this speci…cation we cannot include time speci…c dummies since we have other variables that, in each given period, do not
vary across newspapers. However, time dummies can be quite important in order to capture the
in‡uence that contemporaneous events can have on the space devoted to economic news. Hence, in
a second speci…cation we include time-dummies

t

but exclude other variables that, in each period,

do not vary across newspapers:

njt =

j

+

t

d
d
d
+ (DPt N
E j ) + #(EVt N
E j ) + (EVt DPt N
Ej ) +

+ j t + ln sjt +

14

(Speci…cation B)

jt

d
d
Finally, in our most demanding speci…cation, we replace (DPt N
E j ) and #(EVt N
E j ) with,

From now on, since all speci…cations include newspaper-speci…c …xed e¤ects, the dependent variable is simply
Also, to take into account the fact that the …xed e¤ects may not absorb the entire within-newspaper correlation
in the error term, we run all regressions clustering the standard errors by newspaper.
15
In the baseline speci…cation we control for the contemporaneous value of the relevant economic …gure (xt ), by
itself and properly interacted. For reasons that will be discussed in Section 5.1, we will also re-run all regressions by
using lagged values of the economic variables.
nijt .

12

respectively, newspaper-speci…c Democratic president e¤ects and newspaper-speci…c issue-variable
e¤ects:

njt =

j

+

t

+

j xt

+

j DPt

d
+ (EVt DPt N
Ej ) +

jt

+ ln sjt +

jt

(Speci…cation C)

This speci…cation is the most general since we allow newspapers to react di¤erently to changes in
the president and in the unemployment rate not just in function of their endorsement partisanship
but also of any other unobserved newspaper characteristics.
Since it is a priori unclear which aspect of an economic …gure is deemed as more newsworthy by
editors and journalists (whether it is the level thereof, or the change, or both), we also re-consider
the same three speci…cations by using the change in the relevant economic …gure rather than the
levels in the interaction terms. In this case we keep the level of the economic variable as a control.
We …nd, however, no signi…cant results when we focus on changes. The tables are therefore not
reported but are available from the authors upon request.

4

Results

Table 3 displays the results about unemployment, in‡ation, budget de…cit and trade de…cit respectively. We report t-statistics in brackets below each coe¢ cient.
The results in Table 3 con…rm that newspapers with a pro-Democratic-endorsement pattern,
compared to pro-Republican newspapers, give less coverage to unemployment in times of high
unemployment under Clinton than under George W. Bush. The three-way interaction between the
level of the unemployment rate, the Democratic President dummy and the Democratic endorsement
variable always comes with the expected negative sign and is signi…cant at the 5% level in all three
speci…cations. The magnitude of the coe¢ cient is also very stable across speci…cations. We …nd,
however, no comparable e¤ect for any of the other economic variables we consider. For in‡ation,
budget de…cit and trade de…cit the three-way interaction is always very far from any acceptable
signi…cance level and therefore statistically indistinguishable from zero.
To calculate the magnitude of the e¤ect for unemployment news we group the newspapers
into quantiles on the basis of their endorsement patterns. Then, for each group, we compute the

13

di¤erence between the average predicted change in the number of unemployment stories under
Clinton and under George W. Bush, if the unemployment rate is one percentage point higher than
the average. The magnitudes refer to newspapers belonging to the …rst, third and …fth quintile in
the endorsement distribution, i.e. newspapers that we de…ne as, respectively, strongly Republican,
“neutral,” and strongly Democratic. The estimated e¤ects are not trivial. Newspapers will react
to a 1% increase in the unemployment rate di¤erently depending on whether the president is
Democratric or Republican: under a Democratic president a strongly Republican newspaper will
provide 15% more news on unemployment than if the same 1% increase in the unemployment rate
happens under a Republican president. On the other side, considering again a 1% increase in the
unemployment rate, a strongly Democratic newspaper will provide 9% less news on unemployment
under a Democratic president than under a Republican president. The di¤erential treatment of the
same change under the two presidents is instead limited to 1% for a "neutral" newspaper.
Some data analysts might be tempted to treat the average di¤erence in slopes across Democratic
and Republican presidents (the s) as a measure of the average absolute level of bias across the
newspapers in our sample. We are not. The reason is that the time sample is too short, so
we are only comparing two presidents; the underlying economic conditions were di¤erent under
the two presidents, so functional form is a major concern; and many other newsworthy events
(terrorist attacks, war in Iraq, Monica Lewinsky scandal, O.J. Simpson trial) might have crowded
out economic news di¤erentially under the two presidents. Compared to recent literature on media
bias (see Lott and Hassett, 2004), we would place little emphasis on such coe¢ cients.16 Finally,
it is interesting to note that the coe¢ cients on the interaction between the unemployment rate
and the endorsement variable (the #s) are positive and statistically signi…cant. In other terms,
coverage by Democratic-endorsing newspapers is more reactive to high unemployment than by
Republican-leaning ones, even when controlling with the triple interaction for the partisan e¤ect.
16

If one did use the coe¢ cients in this way, the picture would be mixed. The estimated di¤erence in slopes is
negative and signi…cantly di¤erent from zero in the case of unemployment, in‡ation and trade de…cit, suggesting
a pro-Democratic bias. That is, newspapers on average devoted more attention to unemployment (in‡ation, trade
de…cit) during periods of high unemployment under George W. Bush than under Clinton, and vice versa for periods
of low unemployment. On the other hand, for the budget de…cit the estimate suggests a Pro-Republican bias. At the
same time, budget de…cit and unemployment were generally decreasing under Clinton and were increasing during the
George W. Bush years. Hence, it is hard to determine whether the coe¢ cients re‡ect a partisan bias in coverage or
simply a judgement about the importance of the direction of a change (i.e. increases vs. decreases) for a particular
economic variable.

14

5

Robustness checks

In this section we check the robustness of our results. We implemented a number of checks for all
the economic variables considered and we noticed no change in our conclusion regarding in‡ation,
budget de…cit and trade de…cit: there is no noticeable statistically signi…cant bias in the covering
of these issues. In this section, therefore, we only report results that concern unemployment, the
only economic variable on which we found agenda setting behavior by part of the newspapers.

5.1

Lagged values of the economic …gures

It is a priori unclear whether newsworthy economic events are more correlated with contemporaneous values of the relevant economic …gures, or lagged values. The Bureau of Economic Analysis and
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (or any statistical agency assigned to similar tasks) can only publish
lagged values of macroeconomic variables. However, newspapers do not only report on the release of
o¢ cial data (which are related to what happened in the past) but also on contemporaneous events
which may be correlated with the current value of the relevant macroeconomic …gure. For example,
with respect to unemployment, there might be news stories on large layo¤s in a given sector or
by a particular large …rm, or reports of large current spikes in applications at local unemployment
agencies. It might be useful, therefore, to check if our results are sensitive or not to the presence
of lags in the economic variables.
The …rst three columns of Tab. 4 parallel the …rst three columns of Table 3 but use lagged
instead of contemporary unemployment. The results previously obtained are all con…rmed and the
magnitudes are also very similar (slightly larger under speci…cations A and B, slightly smaller using
speci…cation C). The R-squared also show that the overall …t is comparable in the two cases.

5.2

Controlling for state-level unemployment

Newspapers typically have a locally concentrated readership that cares about local events, and
local aspects of common phenomena. Since there is noticeable variation in unemployment across
regions and states, the local unemployment rate in an area or state may represent a newsworthy
issue. This can potentially introduce an omitted variables bias. The concern is that, in Democraticvoting areas, the local unemployment rate could be systematically lower than its average when the

15

incumbent president is a Democrat, because of public job-creating projects being targeted to the
area. If the political partisanship of potential readers in the area where a newspaper sells is positively correlated with its endorsement policy, then the less intense coverage of high unemployment
by Democratic-leaning newspapers under a Democratic president could be driven by the fact that
the local unemployment rate is lower in those areas where the newspapers are sold. This would not
indicate a partisan bias trickling down from the editorial page to the economic news section, but
simple reporting on local economic conditions.
To address this issue, we re-ran our regressions controlling for both the level and change of
the unemployment rate in the state where each newspaper is based17 . The results are reported in
columns 4-6 of Table 4. Again we …nd a systematic correlation between the endorsement policy
and the di¤erential coverage of unemployment. The size and signi…cance of the coe¢ cients of the
three-way interaction terms are very similar to those reported in Table 3. The coe¢ cients of the
level of the unemployment rate in the state is positive and signi…cant at standard con…dence levels.
Similarly, the coverage of unemployment is positively and signi…cantly correlated with the change in
the state unemployment rate. Consequently, we will keep state unemployment levels and variations
as control variables in the next checks.

5.3

Excluding editorials

The results found so far could be driven by what is featured on editorial pages themselves. Therefore
we repeat our regressions by excluding editorials from our dependent variable.18 The results are
presented in columns 7-9 of Table 4, again using the same A-B-C speci…cations and including
levels and changes in state unemployment rates. The results are very reassuring: the coe¢ cient of
the three-way interaction is again negative and signi…cant, the magnitude is only slightly inferior
to what we found in the previous cases. To sum up, a large part of the di¤erential coverage of
unemployment takes place on the news pages, not merely on the editorial ones, suggesting that
agenda-setting indeed spills over into the economic news section.
17

Because of multicollinearity problems, while the slope of unemployment news with respect to the national unemployment rate is allowed to be newspaper-speci…c, the slopes with respect to state level unemployment rate and its
change are common across newspapers.
18
We consider news on unemployment excluding the words “editorial” or “editor”. To pin down the size of the
news section of each newspaper during each month, we have run a search on the word “and”, excluding again the
words “editorial” or “editor”.

16

5.4

Chain-based and large newspapers

Given that we rely on electronic archives, there is a trade o¤ between the length of the time span
we can study and the number of newspapers for which data are available. For the period 1996-2005
we can rely on 102 newspapers but this number shrinks rapidly as we extend backward the period
we consider. Using di¤erent time windows, our results turn out not to be always robust:19 however,
we cannot say whether this is due to the usage of a di¤erent sample of newspapers or rather to
features speci…c to the period considered. Hence, to mantain some consistency across periods, we
explore the robustness of our results for the subsample of large-scale newspapers, i.e. those that
sell a large number of copies (above 200,000 copies per day on average in 1996) and/or belong to
large chains.20 It could be the case that managing editors and journalists of large-scale newspapers
are more conscious of the political facets of their agenda setting behavior, and act accordingly. In
other terms, the relationship between the endorsement policy and the coverage of economic news
might be less noisy (and hence less susceptible to sample size) when restricting our attention to
this subset of newspapers.
There are 72 large-scale newspapers if one considers the 1996-2005 time-window. The amount
shrinks to 59 in the period 1992-2005 and to 32 for 1988-2005. Table 5 reports our results for the
three periods respectively. Once again, the three-way interaction comes with the expected negative
sign and acceptable signi…cance levels. For the period 1988-2005 we notice a reduction of about 1/3
in the size of the coe¢ cient compared with the results of Table 3. This reduction is even stronger
for the period 1992-2005. On the contrary, when we consider the 1996-2005 period, the coe¢ cient
turns out to be substantially larger for chain-based and large newspapers (columns 7-9 in Table
5) than for the whole sample (columns 1-3 in Table 3). In brief, although the magnitudes of the
relevant coe¢ cient may vary by a relevant amount, Table 5 substantially con…rms all the results
we found in the previous regressions.
19

The statistical signi…cance of the three-way interaction coe¢ cient disappears if we consider the period 19922005 but reappears at the 5% level for the period 1988-2005. Moreover, regarding the 1992-2005 period, if one
excludes the Washington Times and/or the Manchester Union-Leader from the sample, the triple interaction comes
out strongly signi…cant again. One should notice here that in our sample the Washington Times is the most extreme
newspaper endorsement-wise. Moreover, the Union-Leader, a decidedly Republican paper, is the only one based in
New Hampshire, which in 1992 was hit by the worst depression of the last forty years.
20
Details are provided in Table A1.

17

5.5

Demand-driven coverage?

Gentzkow and Shapiro’s [2007] thorough analysis of language similarity between congressmen and
U.S. newspapers suggests that the ideological position of the latter is strongly correlated with the
political leaning of their readers. On the other hand, once geographical factors are taken into
account, the owner’s identity has very little or no explanatory power on the political leaning of a
given newspaper.
In the previous sections we have investigated whether the explicit political position of a newspaper, as proxied by its endorsement choices, trickles down from the editorial to the news section,
in‡uencing the coverage of economic news. One might be concerned that editors tune their endorsement choices to the ideological leaning of readers, so that our endorsement variable is merely
proxying for a demand factor which also determines economic coverage. According to this view,
both endorsement choices and the partisan coverage of economic news are determined by what
customers would like to read, with no independent role for the newspaper’s editorial position, i.e.
a supply factor.
In order to address this concern we proceed as follows. First, as a proxy for the average political
position of readers of a given newspaper j, we weight the average Democratic vote in presidential,
senatorial and gubernatorial elections in each county during the time period by the relative sales
of that newspaper in that county. Let this variable be N Rj . We then replicate our three baseline
d
speci…cations by replacing the endorsement variable N
E j with the readership variable N Rj . For

d
all three speci…cations, we also consider an extended model where we include both N
E j and N Rj ,
properly interacted with the Democratic President dummy DPt and the level EVt of the economic
variable.
Table displays results for the contemporaneous unemployment rate.21 When not controlling
for the endorsement behaviour, the coe¢ cient on the triple interaction between the unemployment
rate, the Democratic President dummy and the voter partisanship variable is negative and statistically signi…cant. However, this triple interaction is no longer signi…cant when introducing back
the endorsement controls. On the other hand, the coe¢ cient on the triple interaction with the
endorsement score is negative and mildly statistically signi…cant even after controlling for readers’
21

We obtain very similar results (available upon request) when controlling for the lagged level of the unemployment
rate.

18

partisanship. A relevant concern here is the correlation between reader and endorsement partisanship, which might create problems of approximate multicollinearity when these variables are
twice interacted with the same controls (the Democratic president dummy and the level of the
unemployment rate).22
However, the raw correlation between the partisanship of endorsements and that of voters is
just 0.21, i.e. quite low. While positive, and statistically signi…cant (p-value = .031), it is hardly
overwhelming.23 Evidently there is a lot of “slack” between voters and editors.
Since it remains di¢ cult to disentangle the direction of causality with data whose relevant
variation is ultimately cross-sectional, a possible empirical strategy consists in using time series
data and exploit some (possibly) exogenous shock in the partisanship of readers across regions, or
in the editorial position of newspapers, as triggered by a change in ownership or management. An
interesting case in hand is represented by the succession of Otis Chandler in 1960 as publisher of
the Los Angeles Times, the newspaper his family owned since 1884. The LA Times used to have a
clear conservative slant, which was overturned by Chandler, who aimed at making it a credible rival
of the New York Times. Figure 7 shows the time series variation in the propensity of the LA Times
to endorse Democratic candidates, together with the average yearly share of the Democratic vote
in presidential, senatorial and gubernatorial elections in California. In the 60s, after Otis Chandler
took o¢ ce, there was a steep increase in the propensity to endorse Democratic candidates, which
was not matched at all by a comparatively rapid surge in the Democratic vote.
The top two scatter plots in Figure 8 show the relationship between the actual unemployment
rate and the relative frequency of unemployment stories on the LA Times, before and after 1965.
In each graph, coverage-unemployment combinations under a Democratic (Republican) President
are indexed by a one (zero). The bottom two graphs parallel the top ones, showing the same
relationship for the in‡ation rate. Regression lines between the economic variable and its coverage,
as a function of the political a¢ liation of the incumbent President, are reported. The two scatter
22
Indeed, if we introduce newspaper-speci…c controls for newspaper size instead of a common one, under speci…cation
A and B the three way e¤ect with voter partisanship is mildly signi…cant even when controlling for endorsement
partisanship. The triple interaction with the endorsement score stays signi…cant under all three speci…cations. These
results are available upon request.
23
One relevant concern here is that this low correlation might be driven by the presence in the sample of newspapers
that are based in large cities with a politically segmented media market, like Chicago, New York and Los Angeles.
However, if we exclude those newspapers (in our case the Chicago Sun-Times, the Chicago Tribune, the Los Angeles
Times and the New York Times), the resulting correlation slightly drops to 0.2 (p-value = .045).

19

plots on the left show that before 1965 the LA Times systematically gave more coverage to high
unemployment and in‡ation under a Democratic President than a Republican one24 . On the other
hand, according to the two graphs on the right, in the post-1965 period there is no systematic
di¤erence in the slopes under presidents of di¤erent political a¢ liation.
Ideally, this anedoctal evidence should be backed up by the analysis of a large sample of newspapers, with enough time series variation in their ownership and management. However, coupled
with our previous analysis of endorsement patterns, it is indicative of the fact that supply side
factors might play a non-negligible role in determining the political position of mass media outlets,
in this case a¤ecting the partisan coverage of economic news.

6

Discussion and conclusions

In this paper we have analyzed the relationship between the endorsement policy of U.S. newspapers and the coverage of economic issues, as a function of the true economic datum and the
political a¢ liation of the incumbent president. Considering the last decade, there is strong evidence that newspapers endorsing Democratic candidates give less coverage to high unemployment
(and more coverage to low unemployment) under Clinton than under George W. Bush, as compared to Republican-leaning newspapers. This relationship is very robust to a number of alternative
speci…cations and robustness checks. On the other hand, there is no evidence of a systematic correlation between the endorsement policy and the coverage of in‡ation, the budget de…cit and the
trade de…cit.
These …ndings deserve further explorations. On one side, …nding evidence of agenda setting
behavior only on one economic issue out of four could induce us to reject the idea that there is
any relevant ideologically slanted agenda setting in economic news on the U.S. press. On the other
side, unemployment is, of the four considered, the most salient issue. Moreover, as discussed in the
introduction, there is a large body of evidence according to which citizens assess the incumbent
president’s performance on the basis of how strong the economy is, and vote accordingly in the next
presidential elections. Citizens are also better able to grasp the signi…cance of a high unemployment
rate, because of the dire consequences this might have on their personal lives.
24

This is formally con…rmed by proper di¤erence-in-di¤erences regressions, available upon request from the authors.

20

This latter statement likely applies to the in‡ation rate as well, but the independence of the
Federal Reserve makes harder for the public to establish links between presidential policies and its
variation. Also, even if citizens are largely unaware of the institutional independence of the FED,
in the time period under consideration in‡ation was very low25 , so that it was not perceived as a
serious problem policy makers had to tackle. It is also interesting to note that - in the long run
analysis of the LA Times presented in section 5.5 - the succession of Otis Chandler as publisher
seemed to matter not only with regards to the partisan coverage of unemployment, but for in‡ation
as well. It is indeed the case that, during the longer time period we considered there, the in‡ation
rate was often higher than in the more recent period, sometimes much higher, like in the late 40s,
the 70s and the early 80s. At those times the rise in the cost of living was widely perceived as a
very serious issue.
Finally, the budget de…cit and the trade de…cit are more arcane variables, whose in‡uence
on presidential approval is far from clear and whose signi…cance citizens understand much less,
perhaps because of the lack of direct e¤ects on their personal lives, perhaps because the e¤ects are
not immediate and can therefore be heavily discounted. In the American National Election Studies
1992-2004, unemployment came in second as the “most important problem facing the nation”
(crime being …rst). Nearly 10% of respondents mentioned it. By comparison, less than 0.5% of
respondents mentioned in‡ation, and even counting generously, only about 1.5% of respondents
mentioned trade issues (only 0.33% of respondents mentioned the trade de…cit speci…cally, and
more respondents mentioned “international competitiveness” or “outsourcing”, which might be
treated more appropriately as employment issues).26
As mentioned in the introduction, we only study agenda-setting and do not attempt to estimate
any framing of economic events done through tone. Another limitation of our approach is that we
simply count the number of articles featuring the chosen keywords.27
Still, our approach to the study of mass media is very ‡exible and easily replicable. This
25
During the 1996-2005 period, the highest in‡ation rate was about 4.7% (September 2005). In the 1988-2005
period, the peak of around 6.3% was reached in October 1990.
26
Unfortunately, we cannot separate the government de…cit from other mentions about government spending being
too high.
27
One could for example re…ne the search algorithm to code the page number and newspaper section on which
each piece appears. In particular, one could give a higher weight to front page stories, or separately consider them in
the analysis. A further improvement (which is more di¢ cult to implement within an automated search) would be to
weight articles by their length.

21

allows to readily extend the dataset and type of analysis in several directions. First, it would be
worthwhile to try and gather data on additional newspapers for the early 90s and late 80s, in order
to shed some further light on the robustness of our results with respect to the time-window being
considered. Moreover, historical electronic archives like ProQuest can be used to construct long
time series on the coverage of economic issues by a handful of newspapers. Secondly, any debate
on the extent of “mass media bias” in the U.S. should be put into a comparative perspective.28
Given that the economy represents a salient issue in almost all countries, one could use the same
keywords-based search procedure on the electronic archives of newspapers and media outlets in
other countries, and construct similar datasets to the one analyzed here. The purpose of such an
exercise would be to compare –on a cross-country basis –the amount of within-country variation
in the di¤erential coverage of relevant economic …gures, as a function of the political a¢ liation of
the incumbent government and the level itself of the economic …gure.

28
See Gentzkow, Glaeser and Goldin [2006] for a time-series comparison of the extent of bias on the U.S. press in
the coverage of two political scandals, the Crédit Mobilier in the 1870s and the Teapot Dome in the 1920s.

22

References
[1] Anderson, S. P. and McLaren, J. [2005]. “Media Mergers and Media Bias with Rational Consumers”. Mimeo, University of Virginia.
[2] Ansolabehere, S., Lessem, R. and Snyder, J. M. Jr. [2006]. “The Orientation of Newspaper
Endorsements in U.S. Elections, 1940-2002”. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, forthcoming.
[3] Bernhardt, D., Krasa, S. and Polborn, M. K. [2006], “Political Polarization and the Electoral E¤ects of Media Bias”. CESifo Working Paper Series No. 1798, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=892475.
[4] Besley, T. and Prat, A. [2006]. “Handcu¤s for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and
Government Accountability”. American Economic Review, 96(3): 720–736.
[5] Cohen, B. [1963]. The Press and Foreign Policy. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
[6] DellaVigna, S. and Kaplan, E. [2007]. “The Fox News E¤ect: Media Bias and Voting”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[7] Erikson, R. S. [1989]. “Economic Conditions and The Presidential Vote”. American Political
Science Review, 83(2): 567-573.
[8] Erikson, R. S. [1990]. “Economic Conditions and the Congressional Vote: A Review of the
Macrolevel Evidence”. American Journal of Political Science, 34(2): 373-399.
[9] Erbring, L., Goldenberg, E. N. and Miller, A. H. [1980]. “Front-Page News and Real-World
Cues: A New Look at Agenda-Setting by the Media”. American Journal of Political Science,
24(1): 16-49.
[10] Fair, R. C. [1978]. “The E¤ect of Economic Events on Votes for President”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 60(2): 159-173.
[11] Fridkin Kahn, K. and Kenney, P. J. [2002]. “The Slant of the News: How Editorial Endorsements In‡uence Campaign Coverage and Citizens’Views of Candidates”. American Political
Science Review, 96(2): 381-394.
23

[12] Gentzkow, M. A., Glaeser, E. L. and Goldin, C. [2006]. “The Rise of the Fourth Estate: How
Newspapers Became Informative and Why it Mattered”. In Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia
Goldin (Eds.), Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s History. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
[13] Gentzkow, M. A. and Shapiro, J. M. [2007]. “What Drives News Media Slant? Evidence from
U.S. Daily Newspapers”. Mimeo, University of Chicago.
[14] Gerber, A., Karlan, D. and Bergan, D. [2006]. “Does The Media Matter? A Field Experiment
Measuring the E¤ect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions”. Mimeo, Yale
University.
[15] Groseclose, T. and Milyo, J. [2005]. “A Measure of Media Bias”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4): 1191-1237.
[16] Hibbs, D. A, Jr. [1987]. The American Political Economy: Macroeconomic and Electoral Politics in the United States. Cambridge, Harvard University Press.
[17] Iyengar, S., Kinder, D. R., and Peters, M. D. [1982]. “Experimental Demonstrations of the
"Not-So-Minimal" Consequences of Television News Programs”. The American Political Science Review, 76(4): 848-858.
[18] Iyengar, S. and Simon, A. F. [2000]. “New Perspectives and Evidence on Political Communication and Campaign E¤ects”. Annual Review of Psychology 51: 149-169.
[19] Larcinese, V. [2007]: The Instrumental Voter Goes to the News-Agent: Information Acquisition, Marginality, and the Media, Journal of Theoretical Politics, 19(3): 249-276.
[20] Lippmann, W. [1922]. Public Opinion. New York, Harcourt, Brace.
[21] Lott, J. R., Jr. and Hassett, K. A. [2004]. “Is Newspaper Coverage of Economic Events Politically Biased?” Working Paper, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC.
[22] MacKuen, M. B., Erikson, R. S. and Stimson, J. A. [1992]. “Peasants or Bankers? The
American Electorate and the U.S. Economy”. American Political Science Review, 86(3): 597611.
24

[23] McCombs, M. E. [2002]. “The Agenda-Setting Role of the Mass Media in the Shaping of
Public Opinion”. Paper presented at Mass Media Economics 2002 conference, London School
of Economics: http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/dps/extra/McCombs.pdf
[24] McCombs, M. E. and Shaw, D. L. [1972]. “The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass Media”.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 36(2): 176-187.
[25] Petrocik, J. R. [1996]. “Issue Ownership in Presidential Elections, with a 1980 Case Study”.
American Journal of Political Science, 40(3): 825-850.
[26] Puglisi, R. [2004]. “The Spin Doctor Meets the Rational Voter: Electoral Competition with
Agenda-Setting E¤ects”. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=581881.
[27] Puglisi, R. [2006]. “Being the New York Times: the Political Behaviour of a Newspaper”.
Political Economy and Public Policy (PEPP) Working Paper n. 20, STICERD, London School
of Economics.
[28] Strömberg, D. [2004]. “Mass Media Competition, Political Competition, and Public Policy”.
Review of Economic Studies, 71(1): 265-284.
[29] Tufte, E. R. [1978]. Political Control of the Economy. Princeton, Princeton University Press.

25

0

.5

Density

1

1.5

Fig. 1: Histogram of the endorsement propensity: 1992-2005

-1.5

-1

-.5
0
endorsement partisanship

.5

1

1200000

Fig. 2: Average circulation and endorsement partisanship
LAT

800000

WASHINGTON POST
DETROIT FREE PRESS
CHICAGO TRIBUNE

600000

LONG ISLAND NEWSDAY

400000

FRANCISCO CHRONICLE
CHICAGO SUNSAN
TIMES
HOUSTON CHRONICLE
BOSTON GLOBE
DALLAS MORNING NEWS
PHILADELPHIA
INQUIRER
ATLANTA JOURNAL
AND CONSTITUTION
o

o

o

o

200000

o
o
o
o
o

o

o
o

o
o

o
o

-.5

o

o

o

o

-1

o

o

o
o o
oo

oo o
o o
o
oo
o

o

o

oo
o

o
o

o

o

o

o
o

o
o
o

o

o

o
o

oo

o
o

o

o

o o
o

o
o

o

o

o
oo

o

0

Average circulation

1000000

NYT

o

o
o
oo
o
o

o
o
o

o
o o

o

o

o

0

endorsement partisanship

.5

1

.5

Fig. 3: Endorsement policy and partisan coverage of unemployment
o
o
o

0

o o

o

o
o

DETROIT FREE PRESS

o o

o
oo

o
o

o

o

o

o

o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
DALLAS MORNING NEWS
o
o
WASHINGTON
POST
CHICAGO TRIBUNE
CHICAGO SUN
TIMES
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
PHILADELPHIA
INQUIRER
o
SANoFRANCISCO CHRONICLE
o
o LAT
LONG ISLAND
NEWSDAY
o
o
o
NYTo
o
HOUSTON CHRONICLE
BOSTON GLOBE
o
ATLANTA JOURNAL AND CONSTITUTION
o
o
o
o
o
o

o

o
o
o

o

-.5

o
o

o

-1

o

o

o

o
o

o

o
o
o

-1.5

differential slope

o

o
o

o
o

o

o

o

-1

-.5

0

endorsement partisanship

.5

1

Fig. 4: Endorsement policy and partisan coverage of inflation

o
o
o

o

o
o
o
o
o
o
HOUSTON CHRONICLE
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
CHICAGO
TRIBUNE
o
o
DALLAS
MORNING oNEWS
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
oCONSTITUTION
oATLANTA JOURNALSAN
ANDFRANCISCO
o
CHRONICLE
o
o
o
o
o
o
BOSTON
GLOBE
o
o
PHILADELPHIA
INQUIRER
o
oLONG ISLANDLAT
o
NEWSDAY
oo
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
CHICAGO SUN TIMES
o
o
o
o
o
o
DETROIT
FREE
PRESS
o
o
o
WASHINGTON POST
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

0

o

o
o

-.2

o

o

o

o

o
oo

o
NYT

-.4

differential slope

.2

.4

o

-1

-.5

0

endorsement partisanship

.5

1

.25

Fig. 5: Endorsement policy and partisan coverage of budget deficit

.15
.1

o

o
o

o

o
o
o

.05

o

o

o

0

o
o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

oo

o o o
o o
o
o
o
SAN FRANCISCO
CHRONICLE
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
DETROIT
FREE PRESS
o
o
DALLAS
MORNING
NEWS
o
o
o
o
ATLANTA JOURNAL
o o
o AND CONSTITUTION
o
oLONG
o
o
NYT
o
o ISLAND
o o o
PHILADELPHIA
INQUIRER
NEWSDAY
o
o LAT o
o HOUSTON CHRONICLE
o
o
ooo
o
o
o
CHICAGO TRIBUNE
CHICAGO SUN TIMES o BOSTON GLOBE
o
oo
WASHINGTON
POST
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

o

o
o
o

o

-.05

differential slope

.2

o

o

-1

-.5

0

endorsement partisanship

.5

1

.05

Fig. 6: Endorsement policy and partisan coverage of trade deficit

o
o

o

o

o

0

o
o

-.05

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

oo
oo
oo BOSTON
GLOBE
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o oo
o
o
o
oHOUSTON CHRONICLE
o
oo
o o CHICAGO SUNSAN
TIMES
FRANCISCO
CHRONICLE
CHICAGO
o LONG ISLAND NEWSDAY
o
o TRIBUNE
o
o
o
o
oo o
o
o
o
o
PHILADELPHIA
DETROIToFREEINQUIRER
PRESS
o
o
o ATLANTA JOURNAL AND CONSTITUTION o
o
o
DALLAS MORNING NEWS
o
o
WASHINGTON POST
oo o
o o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o
o
o

o

-.15

-.1

LAT
o

o

NYT

-.2

differential slope

o

o

o

-1

-.5

0

endorsement partisanship

.5

1

Figure 7: Dynamics of Democratic vote in California and LA Times endorsements

Net Dem Endorsements

Avg Dem Vote Pct - .5

.5

0

-.5

-1
1940

1950

1960

1970
year2

1980

1990

2000

Figure 8: Coverage of unemployment and inflation on the LA Times.
Predicted hits, Republican Pres

Actual hits (Repub=0, Democ=1)
Predicted hits, Democratic Pres

Predicted hits, Republican Pres

Actual hits (Repub=0, Democ=1)
Predicted hits, Democratic Pres

1

0
1

1
0
0

1
1

0
1

1

1
1

1 1

1
1
1
1
1

0
1 1

1

0
0 1 1 1
1 1
1
0
0
1
0
0 0 0
0
1 0
1
1 1
1
1
1
0 0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0 0
1 1
1
0
1

0
1

1

1

1

1
1
0
1 0 1
1 1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0 0
1
0 0
0 1 0
0 0
0 0
0
1
0
1 1
1 1
0
1 1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1 0
0
0
0
0 1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1 1 0 1
0
0
0 0
0
0 0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0 0 0
0
0
1

1

1
1
0

1

.005

1

0

1 1
1 1
1
1 1
1
1 1

1

1 1

0

1

0
0

1

1

1

1

0
0
0
0

0

(Unemployment Hits)/(Total Hits)

(Unemployment Hits)/(Total Hits)

1

.01

0

0

.015

0
0
0

0

0
0

1
1

.01

1

.005

1
1
0
0
0
1

1
0
1
0
0 1
0

0
1
1
1
1
1

1
0
0
1
1 1
1 1 1 0
1
1
0 0
1
1 1
1 1 1
1 1
1
1 1
1

1 1

1
1 1
1
1 1
0
1
1 1 1
1
1
1
0
1

1
1
0 0
1
1
1 1 0
1
1 1 1
0
0 1
1 0
0
1
1
0 1
1
1 0
0
0
0

0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
0 1
1 1
0

1
0
1 1
1
1
0
0 0
0
0 0
0
0
0 0
0
0
0 0
0
0 0
0
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0

0
1 0
0
0
0
0 0
1 0
1
1
0 0
1
0 1 1
0
1
0 0
0
0
1 1
1 0 1
0 1
0
1 0
1 0 1
0
0 1 0
0
0
0

0
0
1 0

1
1

1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1

0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0 0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1 0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0 0
1

1
1
1
1
1
1 1 1 1 1 0
0
1 0
0
1 0
0
0 0
0
1
0 0
0
0
0 0
1
0

0 1
1
0 1
0
1
1 0
0
0 0
0
0
0 0

0
0
1
0

0
0

0
0
0

0

0
.03

.04

.05
.06
Unemployment Rate

.07

.03

.08

.04

.05
.06
Unemployment Rate

Early Period, 1948-1965

.07

Predicted hits, Republican Pres

Actual hits (Repub=0, Democ=1)
Predicted hits, Democratic Pres

0

.04

0

1
1
1

1

0

1
1

1
1

1
1

1

00

0
0

1
0
0
1 0
0
0

11
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
0

1
1

0
1 1
0
0
0
1
1 0
0
0
0
1

0
0
1 01
10
1 00
111
11
11 00
11

0
1

1
0
001

(Inflation Hits)/(Total Hits)

.01

.005

.08

Later Period, 1966-2005

Predicted hits, Republican Pres

Actual hits (Repub=0, Democ=1)
Predicted hits, Democratic Pres

(Inflation Hits)/(Total Hits)

0
0
1 1
0
0
0 0
0
0 1 0
1 1 1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0 0
0
1
0
0 0
0 0
0
1 0 0 0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
0

1 0 0

0

0

1 1

1

0

1
100
11
11111
11111
110
110
111
1
1

1
1

0

0

0

0

0

1

0
1
0
0

1

0
0
0 0
11
0 0 1
111 00
0 11
11

1

1

0
0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

0

0
0 0
0
0 0

1
1
0

0

.02

.01

0

0

1

.03

1
0

0 1
0 0
0
0
1
0
1
0 0 0
0 0
01 1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0 00 0 000 0 00
1 0
10
0
0 10 0
11
1
00 0
00
0
001 0
00 0 0
0 00 0
0
0
1 11 1
1
10
00
00 0 0 00
0
1
10
0 001
1111111
0 1 100 0 00 0 0 000 0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
00
0
1 010 111
0
0101
0 0
01 01000 100
00 00 0
1
1 1011111
11 11
10
0100111 1 0 0 000 00 0
0 0 000 000
0 11 1 10 101 11
010 1101 0 1 0
00 0
0
00100
0
01010 110
1
0 10 1
001
0 100 1 110 0
0 0 00 0
0
011100000 00
1 0
00
0 0 0 00
000 0 101 10100101 000 1 11
110 11000 0 00 0100 0 00 0 0
0
1
0
0 11
01
0 00 0
0 00100 0 0 000 0 1 1
1
01
111 01
0
1
00
11
11
11 11
11
0

00
0

0
0

1

11

1
0
0

0

0

0

1

0

1

00 1

1

1
00

0
0
0 0
0 0 00 0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0
0

1

0
0

000
0

0

0

0
0

0

0
0

.01

.02

.03

.04

.02

.04

Inflation Rate

Early Period, 1948-1965

.06
Inflation Rate

.08

Later Period, 1966-2005

Los Angeles Times, Pre- and Post- Otis Chandler

.1

.12

Table 1: variable definitions
symbol variable
Unemployment

EVUt

source
BLS, LNS 14000000

EV It

Inflation

Monthly inflation rate, on annual basis

BLS, CPI data, CUUR0000SA0

EV Bt

Budget deficit

Quarterly federal deficit, as percentage of GDP

BEA: NIPA Tables 3.2 and 1.1.5

EV Tt

Trade deficit

Quarterly trade deficit, as percentage of GDP

BEA: NIPA Tables 4.1 and 1.1.5

Relative frequency of unemployment stories

Relative frequency of unemployment stories during month t on newspaper j electronic search on www.NewsLibrary.com: (unemployment OR jobless)

Relative frequency of inflation stories

Relative frequency of inflation stories during month t on newspaper j

electronic search on www.NewsLibrary.com: (inflation)

Relative frequency of budget deficit stories

Relative frequency of budget deficit/surplus stories during quarter t on
newspaper j

Relative frequency of trade deficit stories

Relative frequency of trade deficit/surplus stories during quarter t on
newspaper j

electronic search on www.NewsLibrary.com: "government debt" OR
"government surplus" OR "government deficit" OR "federal debt" OR
"federal surplus" OR "federal deficit"
electronic search on www.NewsLibrary.com: ("trade balance" OR "trade
deficit" OR "trade surplus")

U
jt

n

n Ijt
B
jt

n

n Tjt

n

definition
U.S. monthly unemployment rate

x

x

Ut
Tt

Bt It

jt

jt
jt

Table 2: summary statistics, 1996-2005
symbol variable
EV Ut
Monthly unemployment rate
EV It
Monthly inflation rate
EV Bt
Quarterly budget deficit
EV Tt
Quarterly trade deficit
n Ujt
Relative frequency of unemployment stories
n Ijt
Relative frequency of inflation stories
n Bjt
Relative frequency of budget deficit stories
n Tjt
Relative frequency of trade deficit stories

Obs.
120
120
40
40
12124
12124
4049
4049

Mean
5.013
2.514
1.047
3.432
0.697
0.572
0.127
0.058

Notes: all economic figures and relative frequencies of stories are expressed in percentage points.

Std. Dev.
Median
Min
Max
5.100
0.672
3.800
6.300
0.759
1.067
4.687
2.579
1.936
-2.209
4.114
1.229
1.579
1.070
6.166
3.604
0.381
0
3.138
0.638
0.402
0
3.824
0.478
0.102
0.106
0
1.887
0.063
0
0.539
0.040

Table 3. Partisan Bias in the Coverage of Economic Issues
unemployment
Specification
DP x EV x NE

EV

Change in EV

DP

DP x EV

DP x NE

NE x EV

ln(total number of articles)

Newspaper fixed effects
Date dummies
Newspaper-specific time trend
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. EV
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. DP

inflation

budget deficit

trade deficit

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

-0.149

-0.150

-0.150

0.022

0.024

0.022

-0.016

-0.014

-0.013

0.003

0.003

0.004

(2.38)**

(2.38)**

(2.35)**

(0.82)

(0.87)

(0.81)

(0.89)

(0.76)

(0.73)

(0.29)

(0.29)

(0.30)

0.165

0.084

-0.012

0.001

(11.14)***

(11.04)***

(6.19)***

(0.20)

0.094

-0.020

-0.002

-0.005

(6.11)***

(5.30)***

(1.07)

(1.87)*

1.090

0.353

0.080

0.141

(9.33)***

(9.99)***

(10.55)***

(12.08)***

-0.248

-0.073

0.029

-0.027

(8.92)***

(7.72)***

(7.46)***

(10.43)***

0.570

0.575

-0.130

-0.134

-0.030

-0.027

-0.027

-0.027

(2.15)**

(2.15)**

(1.55)

(1.60)

(0.91)

(0.80)

(0.48)

(0.48)

0.071

0.072

-0.009

-0.010

0.005

0.005

0.002

0.002

(1.99)**

(2.02)**

(0.50)

(0.55)

(1.04)

(0.89)

(0.32)

(0.35)

0.037

0.028

0.027

0.011

0.011

0.022

-0.020

-0.020

-0.019

0.004

0.004

0.003

(1.88)*

(1.40)

(1.38)

(0.79)

(0.68)

(1.30)

(1.11)

(1.11)

(0.90)

(2.05)**

(2.00)**

(1.64)

yes
no
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
no
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
no
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
no
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Observations
12124
12124
12124
12124
12124
12124
4017
4017
4017
4021
4021
4021
R-squared
0.56
0.63
0.67
0.66
0.72
0.75
0.39
0.61
0.66
0.66
0.70
0.74
DP is a dummy equal to 1 when the president is Democratic, EV stands for "Economic Variable", NE is the newspaper endorsement variable. Robust t statistics in parentheses. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 4. Unemployment News: Robustness Checks

Specification
DP x EV x NE (lagged)

lagged values of the unemployment rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
A
B
C
-0.160
(2.53)**

-0.164
(2.56)**

-0.149
(2.31)**

DP x unemployment (lagged)

1.090
(9.28)***
-0.258
(9.14)***

DP x unemployment
NE x unemployment (lagged)

0.072
(2.14)**

ln(total number of articles)

-0.150
(2.28)**

-0.137
(2.30)**

-0.139
(2.30)**

-0.138
(2.26)**

0.054
(1.90)*
0.529
(2.16)**
0.032
(1.95)*
0.051
(3.17)***
0.050
(3.21)***

0.030
(1.72)*
0.047
(2.59)**
0.049
(3.24)***

yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
12106
0.64

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
12106
0.67

0.111
(6.08)***

0.081
(4.90)***

0.092
(5.21)***
1.081
(9.36)***

0.088
(5.23)***
0.904
(8.92)***

-0.239
(8.73)***

-0.204
(8.36)***

0.610
(2.30)**
0.037
(1.85)*

0.623
(2.34)**
0.027
(1.36)

0.027
(1.35)

0.070
(1.95)*
0.585
(2.15)**
0.041
(2.20)**
0.061
(3.37)***
0.054
(3.24)***

yes
no
yes
no
no
yes
12116
0.56

yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
12116
0.63

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
12116
0.67

yes
no
yes
no
no
yes
12124
0.56

state unemployment rate
change in state unemp. rate

Newspaper fixed effects
Date dummies
Newspaper-specific time trend
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. EV
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. DP
Editorials included
Observations
R-squared

-0.150
(2.30)**

0.074
(2.19)**

NE x unemployment
DP x NE

(9)
C

0.090
(5.80)***

change in unemp. Rate
DP

excluding editorials
(8)
B

0.152
(10.80)***

unemployment rate
change in unemp. rate (lagged)

(7)
A

-0.142
(2.35)**

DP x EV x NE
unemployment rate (lagged)

controlling for state-level unemployment
(4)
(5)
(6)
A
B
C

0.071
(1.97)*
0.588
(2.14)**
0.032
(1.73)*
0.065
(3.39)***
0.053
(3.27)***

0.030
(1.58)
0.061
(2.85)***
0.054
(3.58)***

0.053
(1.88)*
0.523
(2.16)**
0.038
(2.37)**
0.047
(3.05)***
0.052
(3.34)***

yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
12124
0.64

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
12124
0.67

yes
no
yes
no
no
no
12106
0.58

DP is a dummy equal to 1 when the president is Democratic, EV stands for "Economic Variable", NE is the newspaper endorsement variable.Robust t statistics in
parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 5. Unemployment News: Newspapers belonging to a chain or with large circulation
Period
(1)
DP x EV x NE
EV
Change in EV
DP
DP x EV
DP x NE
NE x EV
ln(total number of articles)
state unemployment
change in state unemployment

-0.100
(2.01)**
0.194
(7.82)***
0.086
(4.00)***
1.039
(11.11)***
-0.176
(12.16)***
0.526
(1.68)
0.107
(1.67)
-0.154
(2.56)**
0.090
(5.10)***
0.049
(2.12)**

1988-2005
(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.105
(2.06)**

-0.106
(2.13)**

-0.061
(2.08)**
0.115
(7.17)***
0.057
(2.79)***
0.624
(11.50)***
-0.126
(14.03)***
0.278
(1.67)*
0.071
(2.55)**
-0.006
(0.11)
0.053
(3.52)***
0.074
(4.31)***

0.548
(1.71)*
0.109
(1.63)
-0.194
(3.17)***
0.088
(5.37)***
-0.001
(0.05)

-0.139
(2.77)***
0.082
(4.30)***
-0.012
(0.51)

1992-2005
(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.061
(2.06)**

-0.061
(2.01)**

-0.209
(2.93)***
0.098
(4.70)***
0.091
(5.04)***
1.012
(8.11)***
-0.224
(7.58)***
0.790
(2.60)**
0.078
(2.47)**
0.035
(1.13)
0.063
(3.05)***
0.061
(3.52)***

0.279
(1.65)
0.072
(2.52)**
-0.017
(0.29)
0.055
(3.60)***
0.052
(2.99)***

0.008
(0.16)
0.050
(2.42)**
0.039
(2.20)**

1996-2005
(8)

(9)

-0.208
(2.88)***

-0.208
(2.86)***

0.787
(2.56)**
0.079
(2.48)**
0.026
(0.84)
0.067
(3.11)***
0.058
(3.45)***

0.030
(0.93)
0.061
(2.46)**
0.059
(3.61)***

Newspaper fixed effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Date dummies
no
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
Newspaper-specific time trend
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. EV
no
no
yes
no
no
yes
no
no
yes
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. DP
no
no
yes
no
no
yes
no
no
yes
Editorials included
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
8167
8167
8167
11856
11856
11856
10129
10129
10129
R-squared
0.60
0.72
0.77
0.63
0.71
0.75
0.55
0.63
0.66
DP is a dummy equal to 1 when the president is Democratic, EV stands for "Economic Variable", NE is the newspaper endorsement variable. Robust t statistics in
parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 6: Unemployment News: Demand-driven coverage?

Specification
DP x EV x NR
DP x EV x NE
unemployment rate
change in unemp. rate
DP
DP x unemployment
NR x unemployment
DP x NR
NE x unemployment
DP x NE
state unemployment rate
change in state unemp. rate

Newspaper fixed effects
Date dummies
Newspaper-specific time trend
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. EV
Newspaper-specific slope w.r.t. DP
slope w.r.t. log of size
Editorials included
Observations
R-squared

(1)
A

reader partisanship
(2)
B

(3)
C

-0.648*
[1.78]
-

-0.663*
[1.82]
-

-0.644*
[1.73]
-

-0.02
[0.17]
0.096***
[5.40]
-0.036
[0.05]
0.098
[0.53]
0.242
[1.06]
2.141
[1.43]
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.243
[1.06]
2.193
[1.46]
-

-

-

-

-

-

0.066***
[3.54]
0.048***
[2.78]

0.070***
[3.56]
0.046***
[2.69]

yes
no
yes
no
no
yes
yes
12124
0.56

yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
12124
0.64

reader and endorsement partisanship
(4)
(5)
(6)
A
B
C

0.065***
[2.97]
0.049***
[3.10]

-0.511
[1.36]
-0.128*
[1.98]
0.018
[0.14]
0.094***
[5.31]
0.258
[0.32]
0.026
[0.13]
0.176
[0.75]
1.586
[1.01]
0.063*
[1.81]
0.521*
[1.88]
0.064***
[3.49]
0.051***
[3.00]

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
12124
0.67

yes
no
yes
no
no
yes
yes
12124
0.56

-

-0.526
[1.40]
-0.129*
[1.96]
-

-0.508
[1.32]
-0.129*
[1.96]
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.176
[0.75]
1.638
[1.04]
0.064*
[1.83]
0.523*
[1.87]
0.067***
[3.51]
0.050***
[2.96]

-

0.064***
[2.94]
0.051***
[3.28]

yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
12124
0.64

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
12124
0.67

-

DP is a dummy equal to 1 when the president is Democratic, EV stands for "Economic Variable", NR is the newspaper readership variable, while
NE is the newspaper endorsement one. Robust t statistics in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table A1: list of sampled newspapers with endorsement data
ID
AK
AJ
AS
AT
AGCB
AASB
BS
BD
BE
BI
BK
BL
BG
BNHB
BN
CR
CDMB
CIZB
CO
CSTB
CHTB
CK
CPDB
CS
CLDB
CL
OK
DM
DDNB
NJ
DP
RM
FP
NT
ET
EC
JG
FW
ST
FB
GPTB
GB
HRNB
HC
HDNB
HCBF
FTUB
KC
KYPB
KX
LVRB
JW
LH
LJSB

Newspaper
Akron Beacon Journal
Albuquerque Journal
Anchorage Daily News
Atlanta Journal And Constitution
Augusta Chronicle
Austin American Statesman
Baltimore Sun
Bangor Daily News
Bergen County Record
Birmingham News
Bismark Tribune
Bloomington Pantagraph
Boston Globe
Boston Herald
Buffalo News
Cedar Rapids-Iowa City Gazette
Charleston Daily Mail
Charleston Gazette
Charlotte Observer
Chicago Sun Times
Chicago Tribune
Cincinnati Post
Cleveland Plain Dealer
Columbia State
Columbus Dispatch
Columbus Ledger-Enquirer
Daily Oklahoman
Dallas Morning News
Dayton Daily News
Daytona Beach News-Journal
Denver Post
Denver Rocky Mountain News
Detroit Free Press
Duluth News-Tribune
Erie Times-News
Evansville Courier And Press
Fort Wayne Journal Gazette
Fort Wayne News-Sentinel
Fort Worth Star-Telegram
Fresno Bee
Gary Post-Tribune
Greensboro News And Record
Harrisburg Patriot-News
Hartford Courant
Hays Daily News
Houston Chronicle
Jacksonville Florida Times-Union
Kansas City Star
Kentucky Post
Knoxville News-Sentinel
Las Vegas Review-Journal
Lawrence Journal-World
Lexington Herald Leader
Lincoln Journal Star

State
OH
NM
AK
GA
GA
TX
MD
ME
NJ
AL
ND
IL
MA
MA
NY
IA
WV
WV
NC
IL
IL
OH
OH
SC
OH
GA
OK
TX
OH
FL
CO
CO
MI
MN
PA
IN
IN
IN
TX
CA
IN
NC
PA
CT
KS
TX
FL
MO
KY
TN
NV
KS
KY
NE

Chain
Knight Ridder

Endorsement score
1988? 1992?
-0.2596636
1
1
-0.2178417
0
0
Mcclatchy Company
0.4845000
1
1
Cox Newspapers
0.0399212
1
1
Morris Communications
-0.4167508
0
0
Cox Newspapers
0.0833165
0
1
Tribune Co
0.0977140
0
1
0.1580255
0
1
North Jersey
0.2171908
1
1
Advance Publications
-0.4621221
0
0
Lee Enterprises
-0.1061684
0
0
Lee Enterprises
-0.4447406
0
1
New York Times
0.2857174
1
1
-0.4891594
0
1
0.1022806
0
1
-0.2503612
0
1
Media News Group
-0.7527525
0
0
0.4303231
0
0
Knight Ridder
0.2801360
1
1
Sun Times Media Group
-0.0227328
1
1
Tribune Co
-0.2989278
1
1
E.W. Scripps
-0.4586532
0
1
Advance Publications
-0.1980308
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.0679328
1
1
-0.5325082
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.4488196
0
0
-0.5158233
1
1
Belo Corp
-0.3449326
1
1
Cox Newspapers
-0.2455849
0
1
0.5911839
0
0
Media News Group
-0.0303445
0
1
E.W. Scripps
-0.2593203
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.1534508
1
1
Knight Ridder
0.3287242
0
0
-0.4136883
0
0
0.2850918
0
1
0.2143500
0
1
Knight Ridder
-0.4156261
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.0393013
0
1
Mcclatchy Company
0.5033402
1
1
Sun Times Media Group
0.1367000
1
1
0.3326626
0
1
Advance Publications
-0.2998959
1
1
Tribune Co
0.1904112
0
1
0.1985943
0
0
Hearst Corp
-0.0987374
1
1
Morris Communications
-0.9632423
0
0
Knight Ridder
0.0383939
0
1
E.W. Scripps
0.2022318
0
1
E.W. Scripps
-0.3734314
0
1
Stephens Media Group
-0.5088014
0
0
-0.7068577
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.5206918
1
1
Lee Enterprises
-0.2499532
0
0

Notes: the last two columns specify whether data back to 1988 and to 1992 are available.

Table A1 (cont.): list of sampled newspapers with endorsement data
ID
LB
NWDB
LA
LAT
MT
UL
CA
MH
MWSB
MN
MBRB
MS
NHRB
TP
NYT
PBPB
JS
DN
PI
PG
OR
AC
RTDB
RO
SB
SAEC
SFCB
SF
SA
HT
IG
SE
JR
SL
SP
SPTB
TNTB
TD
TT
TB
ADSB
TLWB
VC
WP
WT
WE
WB
WO

Newspaper
Long Beach Press-Telegram
Long Island Newsday
Los Angeles Daily News
Los Angeles Times
Macon Telegraph
Manchester Union Leader
Memphis Commercial Appeal
Miami Herald
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
Minneapolis Star Tribune
Mobile Register
Modesto Bee
New Haven Register
New Orleans Times-Picayune
New York Times
Palm Beach Post
Peoria Journal Star
Philadelphia Daily News
Philadelphia Inquirer
Pittsburgh Post Gazette
Portland Oregonian
Press Of Atlantic City
Richmond Times-Dispatch
Roanoke Times
Sacramento Bee
San Antonio Express News
San Francisco Chronicle
Santa Fe New Mexican
Santa Rosa Press Democrat
Sarasota Herald-Tribune
Seattle Post-Intelligencer
Seattle Times
Springfield State Journal-Register
St. Louis Post Dispatch
St. Paul Pioneer Press
St. Petersburg Times
Tacoma News Tribune
Tallahassee Democrat
Tampa Tribune
Toledo Blade
Tucson Arizona Daily Star
Tulsa World
Vancouver Columbian
Washington Post
Washington Times
Wichita Eagle
Wilkes-Barre Times Leader
Worcester Telegram And Gazette

State
CA
NY
CA
CA
GA
NH
TN
FL
WI
MN
AL
CA
CT
LA
NY
FL
IL
PA
PA
PA
OR
NJ
VA
VA
CA
TX
CA
NM
CA
FL
WA
WA
IL
MO
MN
FL
WA
FL
FL
OH
AZ
OK
WA
DC
DC
KS
PA
MA

Chain
Media News Group
Tribune Co
Media News Group
Tribune Co
Knight Ridder

Endorsement score
1988? 1992?
-0.2664053
0
1
0.2436154
1
1
-0.5388390
1
1
0.2779051
1
1
0.3271415
0
0
-0.7585641
0
1
E.W. Scripps
0.1279533
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.2209475
1
1
0.0230852
0
1
0.2833712
1
1
Advance Publications
-0.6182148
0
1
Mcclatchy Company
0.0079176
0
1
Journal Register Co
0.0342288
1
1
Advance Publications
0.0230046
0
1
New York Times
0.4166383
1
1
Cox Newspapers
0.3089388
0
1
Copley Press
-0.2456197
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.4773682
1
1
Knight Ridder
0.1659037
1
1
Block Family
0.0521412
0
1
Advance Publications
0.0527399
1
1
-0.2503979
1
1
Media General
-0.7922730
1
1
Landmark Communication
0.3516304
0
1
Mcclatchy Company
0.6049401
1
1
Hearst Corp
-0.1073770
0
1
0.2157588
1
1
0.0804830
0
0
New York Times
0.3393954
0
0
New York Times
0.0381942
0
0
Hearst Corp
0.2872044
1
1
0.0878302
1
1
Copley Press
-0.3135503
1
1
Pulitzer Inc
0.3241484
1
1
Knight Ridder
-0.0365371
1
1
0.3125581
1
1
Mcclatchy Company
0.1453550
0
1
Knight Ridder
0.5688767
0
0
Media General
-0.0522953
0
1
Block Family
0.0791259
0
0
Pulitzer Inc
0.5186767
0
1
0.1801442
0
1
0.1153056
0
0
0.1321356
1
1
-1.1966380
0
1
Knight Ridder
-0.3828387
1
1
Knight Ridder
0.8862112
0
1
New York Times
-0.5122839
0
1

Notes: the last two columns specify whether data back to 1988 and to 1992 are available.

