NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION AND PRICING OF
AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL GOODS

Raaj Kumar Sah
Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 1338

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 19814

The research reported here is part of the NDER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1338
April 1984

Taxation and Pricing of Agricultural and Industrial Goods
ABSTRACTS

This paper presents an analysis of price reform and of optimal
pricing and taxation of agricultural and industrial goods in modern—

day LDCs. Our analysis is based on a general equilibrium paradigm
with a multitude of goods and income groups. It is consistent with
several alternative institutional structures within the agricultural
and the industrial sectors, as well as with alternative hypotheses concerning unemployment and migration of labor across the two sectors.

This approach differs substantially from the standard tax literature
with

regard to the structure of the economy and the set of admissible taxes.
The rules of price reform which we derive are quite simple to

implement, requiring only the knowledge of observable parameters

such as

price elasticities of demand and supply. The determination of optimal
prices (and taxes) requires, in

addition, the relative welfare weights

on individuals' incomes and on investment. We show
in

that it is desirable,

general, to levy import and export taxes. Among new results are those

presenting conditions under which all of the goods belonging to certain
categories (such as all purchased agricultural inputs or all agricultural
outputs

which are not consumed) should be either taxed or stibsidized.

Raaj Kumar Sah

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104

Joseph E. Stiglitz

Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

I. INTRODUcTION

In

most LDCs, governments play an active role in setting the food prices

received by farmers and the prices paid by city dwellers. They do this
through a variety of mechanisms, such as agricultural marketing boards, which
often have a monopoly on the purchase of certain goods from farmers and their
sale to consumers, price regulation authorities, which control the prices at
which private traders can sell, explicit food subsidies, sometimes accompanied

by rationing, and by export and import taxes and subsidies.' Their objectives
in attempting to alter the prices which would emerge in the absence of

government intervention are several. In the present paper we focus on the
following of their objectives:

o They seek to increase the income of peasants who are often among
the poorest in the economy.

o They seek to subsidize the poorer city dwellers. In most LDCs

direct

income subsidies are not feasible, and food subsidies may

be

thought to be an effective way of helping the poor.

o They seek to tax the agricultural sector to capture resources for
investment, and for public goods creation.2

o They seek to attain some level of self—sufficiency in specific

goods, to avoid excessive dependence on the international market.3
o They seek to use taxation and pricing to counteract the effects of
rigidities in the economy, such as the shortage and surplus in

labor and goods markets and the country's lack of access to a free
international trade and borrowing environment.4

—1--

Often, the stated objectives of governments seem at variance with the

policies which they adopt. Though they may claim that the food subsidies to
city dwellers
subsidize

the

are meant to help the urban poor, the government in

fact may not

grain consumed by the poor (millet, for example), but rather the

grain consumed by those relatively better off (rice, for example).

In other

cases, the government may fail to achieve its objectives due to corruption and

incompetence. Though the intended objective of marketing boards' bureaucrats
is to help producers and consumers, in some cases they iay actually harm both
groups by running excessively costly and inefficient operations, and by
collecting rents for themselves.

Moreover, in many cases, there appears to be some confusion in the

objectives of the government. It attempts to subsidize everyone, to increase
the prices received by farmers and to lower the prices paid by city dwellers,
without articulating who is paying for the subsidies, and indeed, without a
clear view of the full incidence of the complicated set of taxes and subsidies

which are levied. This confusion is further compounded in those countries in
which many different agencies set prices of different goads. Often these
agencies act independently of one another, under contradictory assumptions
concerning what the society's objectives are, and what the constraints on the
economy are.5

Different agricultural pricing policies have markedly different effects
on the welfare of farmers and city dwellers, and on the revenue available to

the government for investment. These effects can be assessed only within a
general equilibrium model, in which the demands and supplies of different
groups in the economy, and how these demands and supplies are altered by

—2—

changes in pricing policy, are taken into account, and in which the overall

constraints facing the economy —

its

balance of trade constraint, the

government's revenue constraint, etc. — are also taken explicitly into

account. We develop here a model within which the effects of pricing and
taxation policies can be evaluated, which enables us not only to identify
circumstances in which changes in a pricing policy can make all of the major
groups in the society better off, but also to characterize the qualitative
aspects of the optimal pricing policy.6

We begin our analysis with an exceedingly simple model. This model has
the advantage that it focusses our attention on the critical trade—off s

involved in pricing decisions. Moreover, as we shall see, it is surprisingly
easy to extend this model to deal with more complex situations. We present
many important extensions. The number of possible extensions which can be
explored, however, is enormous, and we have not attempted to be
comprehensive.

It is necessary, therefore, to bring to bear the detailed

knowledge of the particular country under study to arrive at the formulation
which is most appropriate.

II.. A SIMPLE MODEL

Consider an economy in which there are two commodities and two sectors:

food and related products, produced in the agricultural sector (Sector 1) and
a generalized industrial good, which can be used either for consumption or for

investment, produced in the industrial sector (Sector 2). Both goods are
freely traded; international price of the agricultural good in terms of the

industrial good is denoted by P.

turalctor Agricultural land is owned equally among peasants;
they decide on how much labor to supply, on the basis of the prices at which

they can sell their surplus. We denote this price (in terms of the industrial
good) by p. Clearly, the level of utility which they attain is a function of
this price; we write the utility level of a representative peasant by

V'(p).7 Some of the agricultural goods are consumed within the agricultural
sector; we shall be concerned with the surplus quantity Q

which each peasant

sells to the industrial sector or abroad. This quantity is a function of the
price the peasants receive. We denote the price elasticity of the surplus by

(1)

—

lnQ
____

Although economic theory puts no constraints on the sign of

(there

may be a backward bending supply schedule of the marketed output of peasants),
we focus here on the case where an increase in the price increases the

marketed surplus. There appears to be some empirical evidence in support of
this hypothesis8.

We assume that the government has very few policy instruments to control

peasants' behavior. In particular, the government can not directly control
the output, consumption and the surplus of peasants. This, we believe, is the
correct representation of most LDCs, since much

of the farming in these

economies is done In numerous small plots, and the ability of the government
to monitor the actions of any peasant seems sufficiently limited that only

indirect incentives are administratively feasible. This view is also
supported by the past experience of some of the socialist economies in which

—4—

the attempts to control agricultural quantities have not been particularly

successful. In any event, our present analysis does not deal with a
collectivist agriculture or with an agriculture based on government managed
parastatals.

Common experience also suggests that complex incentive schemes are

usually infeasible. For example, if the government attempts to implement nonlinear pricing, that is, schemes in which the price (per umit) paid to

peasants depends on the amount they sell, then peasants wcu1d have an

incentive to establish underground (unaccounted) markets. We therefore,
restrict ourselves to the simplest incentive structure, which is a piece rate
system entailing a common price to all peasants regardless of the quantities
they transact.

Industrial Sector: In contrast to the agricultural sector, we assume
that there exist enough policy instruments in the industrial sector so that
the distinction between direct and indirect control can be virtually

ignored. This is partly because the government is often a large, if not the
overwhelmingly large, industrial employer in developing eccmomies. In
addition, the governments can tax corporate profits and coratrol producers'

prices and quantities. Also, the factory system enables the employer to
monitor their workers relatively more easily.

For simplicity, we ignore the intra—sectoral income distribution at
present, and assume that the number of hours which industrial workers work is

fixed9; the government takes the wage, w, it pays workers as given; the
marketing board controls the price, q, that it charges for food in the

industrial sector. Thus, we write the welfare of an industrial worker as
2

V (q, w).

—5—

Given their income w and the price q, industrial workers decide on how

much food to consume. If x2 denotes this quantity, then x2 = x2(q,

w). We

denote the price elasticity of the demand (as a positive nuniber) of

let

xq

the urban consumption of food:

(2)

xq

=— aznx2
3Lnq

Investnt: We can calculate the amount available to the government for

4,rP

Phie 4c c4,,in1v rhA Aiffrcarrc

hrwc.i rh fn -,trn1 ruitnt,r -4

the industrial wage payments; plus the net revenue of the zrketing board:'°

(3)

I =

N(Y

— w) + (P —

p) N1Q + (q — P) N2x2

where N' is the number of peasants and N2 is the number of industrial

workers. Y is the output per industrial worker.

III.

PRICING POLICIES

Price Ref orR: There are three identifiable groups in our model, the
peasants, the industrial workers,
generations

through its

and the government (representing future

control of investment). For each value of p and

q, we

can calculate the feasible combinations of Vi, v2, and I (see Figure 1).
hanes can make all groups in society

We first show that: certainp
better off.

Note that an increase in rural food price makes the peasants better off,

but it does not affect the industrial workers. Also, investment increases

—6—

with an increase in p if11

(4)

r

< P1(1

+

l/Qp)

Thus, if the price of food in the agricultural sector is less than p ,

then an

increase in it is unequivocally desirable, since it will increase the surplus
available to the government f or investment, and it will also improve the

welfare of peasants, while leaving the situation of industrial workers
unchanged.

Similarly, a decrease in the urban food price makes the industrial

workers better off, and it does not affect the peasantse Also, it increases
investment if 12

(5)

q > P/(1 —

1/xq ),

and

> 1.

c

xq

—7—

I
V. — ________

I-

VI

Figure 1

imum value of
The utility possibilities schedule gives the
investment consistent with any level of utility of peasants and industrial
workers.

If the existing prices are at inefficient poirts such as Z, then a

change in prices can make every group in the society better off.

—8—

Thus, if (5) is satisfied then a decrease in the urban food price is
unequivocally desirable for the society.

The above rules of price reform, therefore, identify a lower limit of

what the rural food price should be, and an upper limit of what the urban food

price should be. A highly useful feature of these rules is that they can be
applied with very little information. Apart from the world price, the only
data required to use them are the demand and supply elasticities.

What is additionally attractive about these rules of price reform is that

their valdty s not restricted to the specific model considered above. The
only conditions required for the two rules of reform, (4) and (5), to hold are
that

(6)

—

>

0, andav2—

< 0,

respectively. Now, interpret V1 and V2 as representing the aggregate welfare
of the entire group of peasants and industrial workers, respectively. Then
(6) implies that the aggregate welfare of peasants increases if the price of
their output is increased, and that the welfare of industrial workers

decreases if the food price they face is increased. So long as these (rather
mild) conditions are satisfied, our rules of price reform will hold.
For instance, the rule for reform In the urban food price holds

regardless of the distribution of income among Industrial workers. Similarly,
the rule for reform in the rural food price holds no matter how agricultural
land is distributed among peasants, so long as not many peasants are

significant net buyers of food. Also, the same rules of reform apply (with
slight modifications) even when there is migration between the two sectors.

—9—

Optiial Pricing Policies: We showed above, how, In a variety of
circumstances, only the knowledge of the supply and demand elasticities is

sufficient for one to weed out inefficient pricing policies. But still, there
are numerous pricing policies which are efficient. A choice among these
policies necessarily entails trade—off s; between the interests of peasants,

industrial workers, and future generations (investment). In this section, we
show how one can attempt to think systematically about the nature of these
trade—off s. First, we express the aggregate social welfare as

(7)

H N1W(V1) + N2W(V2) + 61,

in which 6 is the social value of marginal investment.13 H gives the value of
social welfare as a function of the welfare of peasants and industrial

workers, and the level of investment. Conceptually, this allows us to draw
social indifference curves, i.e., those combinations of Vi-, V2, and I among

which the society is indifferent. The government, then, should choose that
point on the utility possibilities surface (Figure 1) which is tangent to the
social indifference curve.

This point of tangency, representing the optimal pricing scheme, can be
expressed as:

(8)

p=

"1

1 + (1 -

f)

L

,and

CQp

2

1-(1-F)—10—

where A1 is the private marginal utility of income to a worker in sector i,
and

= x1aw/av1 is the social (weight) marginal utility of income to a

worker in sector i.'4 We have thus obtained explicit expressions of a
remarkably simple form for the optimal prices in terms of the welfare
weights and the price elasticities.

Qualitative Results: Our formulae are not only simple, but

also

their

prescriptions are intuitively understandable. The optimum price in the
agricultural sector depends only on the social weight on the income of
peasants (relative to investment) and on the price elasticity of agricultural
surplus; similarly, the optimum price in the industrial sector depends only on
the social weight on the income of industrial workers and their price
elasticity of demand for agricultural goods.15

In the (normal) case where investment is socially valued more than
consumption, peasants receive less than the international price of food and

city dwellers pay more than the international price of food. Also, a higher
elasticity of agricultural surplus corresponds to a higher price paid to
peasants; a higher demand elasticity of food in the industrial sector
corresponds to a lower price charged to city dwellers (this is because when
government raises the price, it loses more intra—marginal tax revenue as a

result of the decreased demand). Further, the smaller the social weight on
peasant's income, the lower the price in the agricultural sector; the smaller
the social weight on city dwellers' income, the higher the price paid by them.

lplicit Tax

Rates:

The optimal pricing formulae derived above can be

usefully restated in terms

is

of the commodity taxes. Let t = (P

—

p)/p.

Then t

the tax rate on the output of peasants; it can also be interpreted as the

—11--

rate of subsidy on their consumption. Denote the food output and the
consumption of a peasant by X and x respectively. Then,

(10)

Q=X—x1

Further, define

(11) c =

LnX
aLnp

,

and

3Lnx

=

1

as the price elasticities of food output and consumption of a peasant.'6 Then
the surplus elasticity, can be expressed as
1

where

=

is

=
Qp

(1 + a)c + uc
Xp

xp

the ratio of peasants' consumption to their marketed

surplus. Using these definitions, the optimal tax rate is obtained from (8)
as

1

(12)

t =

— f)

1

c)cXp +

ac
xp

The tax rate in the present case has some features in common with the

traditional tax literature, but there also are some differences. According to
(12), the magnitude of the tax rate is inversely proportional to the price

elasticities of output and consumption. This dependence is heuristically the
same as the one which was posited in some of the earliest writings on
taxation, i.e., those by Frank Ramsey (1927) and by A.C. Pigou.'7

However, there is a basic difference between the present policy problem,
and the standard taxation problem in which production and consumption

decisions are made by corporations and consumers respectively. In the latter

-

—12—

case, the relative roles played by output and consumption elasticities depend
very much on the government's corporate tax policy; the output elasticity does
not appear in the tax formula, for example, if the corporate profit is
entirely taxed away.18
In the present policy problem, in contrast, it
the

is

nearly impossible for

government to be able to administratively distinguish between producers

and consumers within the agricultural sector;

simultaneously

since peasants are

producers as well as consumers. The key elasticity therefore

is the elasticity of marketed surplus. Even though this elasticity can be
restated in terms

of

output and consumption elasticities, as in (12), it is

the combined effect that matters.

IV. EXTENSIONS

The simplicity of the above model has enabled us to obtain results which

are intuitive. We now extend our analysis in many ways. Our approach here Is
to study one extension at a time; this facilitates clearer insights into the

considerations which are most relevant in the determinati of optimal prices.

A. Many

Incou Groups

The formulae derived earlier can be used in the case of many income

groups by simply interpreting B as the "average" social weight on the incomes
of individuals in a sector.

To see this, consider an agricultural sector in which there is a
continuum of land ownership ranging from large landlords to landless

workers.19 Denote an individual by the superscript h, whose marketed surplus

—13—

is Qh (which can be negative) and whose net labor supply (i.e., the labor
hours supplied by this person minus the labor hours used on his farm) is Lh.

Denote the rural wage per hour by w. Since this wage is determined in the
rural labor market, it depends on the price of agricultural surplus, p. We
define

(13)

c

wp

3Znw'
3Znp

as the elast1cty of rural wage with respect to p. Further, let Q denote the
average marketed surplus, i.e., Q

= Qh/l•
h

Then it is easily verified that (8) is still the optimal pricing rule,
with the modification that now

1hh +

(14)

1h

)/

Qh

where 81 is the social weight on the income of individual h. The interpretation of

as the average social weight on rural incomes is obvious.

Expression (14) defines a weighted average of the social weights on the income

of different individuals. The weight for an individual is his surplus plus
his gain (or loss) due to price induced change in the rural wage.20

Two points are worth noting here. First, the average social weight we
have derived above takes into account the general equilibrium effects of

prices on wage incomes. Similar social weights developed in the earlier tax
literature have typically ignored such effects.21 Second, our pricing formula
is largely independent of the specific form of economic organization within

the agricultural sector. Specifically, it does not depend on the nature of

—14—

the labor market (for example, on whether the labor market is competitive or

not). We further discuss the organization of the agricultural sector in a
later section.

The same approach applies to the industrial sector. With wage (income)
differences among city dwellers, (9) is the optimal pricing formula, with a
modification that

2

(15)

=E 2h
x 2h/Zx 2h
h

h

where 82h is the social weight on the income of the city dweller h, who

consumes 2h units of food. Once again, it is obvious from (15) that B2 is
the average of the social weights on the incomes of different city dwellers.22

B. Disaggregation of goods
The multitude of goods with which the agricultural sector deals can be

divided into some distinct categories. Among the goods produced in the
agricultural sector, for example, are those which are consumed by peasants and
also sold to outsiders (like food grains), those which are inputs to
agricultural production itself (like manure and irrigation wells), and those
which are produced solely for selling them to outsiders (like rubber and

fibers). Similarly, the agricultural sector buys some goods from outside for
consumption (like textiles, transistor radios and movies) and other goods for
their use as inputs in production (like fertilizers and tractors).23

All of these goods can be incorporated within our earlier model. What
one needs to do is to interpret Q as a vector, of which an element Q
represents

the net

supply of this (ith) good to the outsiders, Qj

—15—

is

positive

or negative, depending on whether peasants are net sellers or buyers of this

good. For those goods which are produced and utilized solely within the
agricultural sector, Q1 is zero. We assume that the government can influence
the prices of only those goods which cross the border between the two

sectors.24 Stated differently, the taxation of those goods for which Q j
zero is not feasible.25

Naturally, p, P and t are now vectors. From (3) and (7) one can obtain a
characterization of the optimal prices.26 For a unique interior optimum, the
optimal prices are solutions to the following set of equations.

3Q.

(16)

Z(P. —

where i =

p.)

1,...,

1

= (1 _L)Q•

denotes various goods, and the sum is taken over all goods

except the numeraire. The above expression can be alternatively stated as

(17)

z

U

t.

= [1 —

c

3

where

81
-s-—

— Z(P.

p.) •—]

3

=

3LnQ
3Lnp,

is the elasticity of the compensated net supply of good i,
3Q.

3

with respect to the price of good j;27 and a1 is the response of the net
supply of good j with respect to a (hypothetical) lump sum transfer of income
to a peasant.

Expression (17) generalizes the Ramsey tax rule to the context in which
individuals are simultaneously producers, consumers and traders.28

Heuristically, it states that the percentage change due to pricing in the
(compensated) net supply of each good with which the agricultural sector deals

should be the same; regardless of whether the good is a surplus consumption

—16—

good, a purchased farm input, a farm output to be sold as an industrial input,
or a good which serves several different purposes.

Now consider a somewhat hypothetical situation in which the cross price

effects on the uncompensated net supplies are negligible. Denoting the
3Ln Q.

uncompensated elasticities as
= 0 if i * j,

c

expression

=
ij

&n

, and

assuming that

p

(16) implies

ij

1
(18)

t1 = (1
cii

That is, the optimal pricing rule obtained in the sinipler case of one

aggregate agricultural good, (12), holds in the present case for each of the
goods traded by peasants.

The above expression provides some useful insights into the problem of

pricing. What (18) says is that if cross price effects are negligible, and if
the own price elasticity has the same sign within a category of goods, then

each member of this category should have the same sign of tax. That is, if
one good in the category is taxed, then all goods should be taxed; or, if one
good in the category is subsidized, then all goods should receive a subsidy.
Consider, now, the category of goods consisting of agricultural
production inputs which peasants buy from outside, like fertilizers and

tractors. In the standard case of a farm household facing a fixed rural wages
we know that

< 0 for all production inputs. In the present case, there

is an indirect effect of prices on the rural wage (or imputed wage) which in

turn might affect the quantity of input. For the standard sign to be
reversed, however, the indirect effect would have to be not only positive, but

also large enough so that it dominates the standard effect. Assume for a

—17—

moment that this is not so, i.e. ,

the direct own price effect prevails. The

expression (18) then implies that, In the normal case, all purchased

agricultural inputs should be priced higher than their international prices.
A similar argument applies to the category of goods which peasants
produce solely for selling them to outsiders (like rubber and fiber

products). In this case,

> 0

,

provided the indirect price effect

(through wage) does not reverse the direct response. Then, in the normal
case, the prices of goods in this category should be lower than their
international prices.

What is additionally interesting about the above results is that they do
not depend on what income distribution exists within the agricultural sector,
provided the induced price effects are not significant.

The above results are important not because we believe that the cross
price effects are negligible, or that the indirect effects of price changes
are either negligible, or are of a nature that the standard responses are

preserved. These results are important because we have isolated the reasons
why the sign of taxes might differ among goods belonging to specific

categories. By the same token, if these reasons do not exist then, for many
goods, we can prescribe what the sign of taxes should be.

Specifically, we often see in practice that the above prescriptions are

violated. For example, we find that a fertilizer is being subsidized, while a
pesticide is being taxed, or vice—versa. Or, that cotton is being subsidized
while jute is being taxed. It is obvious from our analysis that the
justification for such taxation must

effects

lie

in the presence of large cross price

or in the presence of such induced effects (through rural wage

changes) that the standard price responses are reversed. If it is found from

—18—

empirical analysis that such is not the case, then a violation of the above

prescriptions would suggest that the existing tax structure is not optimal and
that it can be improved upon.

This analysis also raises some doubts on an oft given advice that, on the
grounds of equity, some agricultural inputs (like tractors) should be taxed
since they will be used primarily by rich farmers, while other inputs (like
fertilizer) should be subsidized since they could be used by poor as well as

rich farmers. The above analysis suggests that such policies might not be

ustfied on the ground of equity alone; the primary justfcat1on for them
should come from the importance of cross price effects and of the effects of
prices on rural wage.29

C. Allocation of Public

lnvestient

An important part of policy making in the early phases of economic
development

is the decision on how investment (and public goods creation)

should be allocated between the two sectors. Though a full discussion of this
allocation problem will take us too far afield, a few comments might be
useful. First, recent development experiences have shown that the capital
allocation decisions need to be visualized in broader terms than the simple
choice between industrial plants versus tractors; as it was in much
earlier literature on economic

of

the

growth.3° One needs to consider public

investment in human capital formation, in raising land's productivity, in
technology development, and in fostering the adoption of newly developed
inputs and techniques.

Second, it

is apparent that many of the possible public investments in

the agricultural sector do not require a shipment of industrially produced

—19—

goods tothe agricultural sector, but in fact entail creating public goods
(such as irrigation and transportation networks) using inputs drawn primarily
from this sector itself.

Formally, the model with disaggregated goods presented earlier is easily
enlarged to incorporate the production and the allocation of investment

goods. What we need to specify additionally is the extent to which (and the
mechanism through which) the government collects fees from the potential

beneficiaries of public investments. As an example, we need to know what the
irrigation water charges are, and whether they depend on the quantity of water
used or whether they are flat fees depending on the proximity of users to the

water source. At a more general level, of course, the choice of fee schedules
for

the use of publicly created goods should in itself be determined

concurrently with the pricing and the investment allocation policy.

The nature of pricing rules would not however, undergo a substantial
revision

in the presence of allocation decisions, except that they would now

correspond to a situation in which public investments are optimally allocated
and also that the pricing rules will now include their effects on the revenue

collection from public fees. For example, in the basic model, if the
government allocates the capital good to the two sectors, then the expressions
(8) and (9) continue to represent the optimal pricing rules, provided there is
no public fee.3'

D. International Trade Environment
Some researchers, like Newbery (1972), have argued that the correct model

to describe the present—day LDCs is that of a small open economy. This might
be a rather extreme position, since the access of many

—20—

LDCs to specific trade

markets is often limited (a fact reflected in the routine bilateral and

multilateral quantity negotiations, like those between EEC and LDCs). Also,
the objective of self—sufficiency is prevalent in many economies, and this
objective is often reflected in restrictions which are imposed on the
quantities of certain imports.

A better approach, therefore, is to examine the issue of pricing within a
general framework in which the sensitivity of pricing decisions to the
characteristics of the international trade environment can be explicitly

assessed. This Is what we have attempted to do In Sah and Stgltz (1983b).
For brevity, however, we limit ourselves here to a discussion of certain
limited aspects of this more general approach.

Self—sufficiency Objective: Suppose that the government wishes to
achieve a certain degree of self—sufficiency in the agricultural good (a self—
sufficiency objective for industrial good can be treated in parallel

manner). One way to express this objective is as a constraint that the
quantity

its

of food imported can not exceed a certain pre—specified fraction of

urban consumption. Obviously, such a constraint influences pricing

decisions only when it is binding. But once it is binding, the two prices (p
and q) can not be varied independently of one another.

Further, the self—sufficiency objective may result in higher food prices

for both the peasants and the city—dwellers. This is because the government,
with self—sufficiency in mind, may use the price policy to increase the

surplus from peasants, and also to curtail urban food consumption. In this
case, then, peasants would be relatively better—off, and the city—dwellers
relatively worse—off, compared to a situation in which there are no self-sufficiency objectives.

—21—

Forei Sales Constraints:

Quantity

constraints on a country's exports

can be treated in a manner similar as above. We need to consider only those
cases in which the foreign sales constraints are binding. If the agricultural
good is being exported, then a constraint on its foreign sale might lead to a
lower (optimal) price to both the peasants and the city dwellers, since one of
the reasons to pay a higher price to peasants, and to charge a higher price

from city dwellers is to increase the export quantity of this good. This
reason does not exist any more when the foreign sales constraint is binding.

Non—Traded Goods: Many of the goods discussed earlier are non—traded
goods, such as infrastructure and inputs into human capital formation. In
addition, a large number of ordinary consumption and industrial goods produced
in LDCs have virtually no international markets, because of their low quality,

even though these goods are traded domestically.32 In fact, many of these

goods do not have a market even in the intra—LDC trade. For the purpose of
policy making, therefore, these goods must also be viewed as non—traded goods.
The treatment of a traded versus a non—traded good entails a difference

which is conceptually simple. The shadow price for a traded good is its
international price, whereas the shadow price of a non—traded good is

determined endogenously (and contemporaneously with the determination of
optimal prices) based on its social scarcity value. 33

Despite this difference, our earlIer discussion of the qualitative
properties of optimal taxation remains valid for non—traded goods as well.
For traded goods, we had defined taxes as the differences between the

international prices and the prices faced by consumers and producers. Taxes
for non—traded goods can be defined correspondingly with respect to the shadow

prices. This redefinition, however, does not change the expressions for the

—22—

optimal tax rates. Our discussion on taxation thus holds for non—traded goods
as well.34

K. Migration and Unemployment

Recent

development economics literature has focussed on the importance of

labor mobility across sectors. In particular, it has been pointed out that
migration from the agricultural to the industrial sector might increase
industrial unemployment indirectly, because only some of the migrants can find

industrial employment. This possibility has important consequences for public
policy. The following extension of the basic model incorporates some of these
consequences in the context of pricing.

Consider three population groups: peasants, industrial workers and
unemployed workers. One would expect that, for those peasants who are net
sellers of food, a lower rural food price will decrease the attractiveness of
living in the agricultural sector, compared to living in the industrial

sector. The same effect would arise if the urban food price is lower.
Further, if peasants are migrating to the industrial sector, for one reason or
another, then the level of unemployment in the sector will increase which, in
turn,

will

discourage further migration.

The modification required in the analysis of pricing policy, then, Is

that we need to calculate the consequences of the induced migration. First,
we need to redefine the elasticity of agricultural surplus to take into
account the fact that the rural population itself is sensitive to prices.
Second, an outward migration from the agricultural sector reduces the
population pressure (congestion) on agricultural land which, in turn,

increases the welfare of those living in this sector. Also, a change in the
congestion influences the government revenue from taxation by affecting the

—23—

quantity of the marketed surplus. Third, migration has direct welfare effect
as well, since workers move from one group to another which, in general, have
different levels of utility.

In a highly general model of migration which we have proposed

elsewhere,35 the formula for the optimal rural food price is obtained as36

,

1

(19)

where

1 + (1 —

f-)
BLiQ)
1

=

(20)

EQp

is the redefined price elasticity of agricultural surplus (taking into account
the effect of price on rural population), and

represents the welfare

effects of price—induced migration.37 Under plausible circumstances, it
appears that

exceeds

and that

is positive.38

Now compare the above expression for the optimal price, (19), to the

corresponding expression (8) when there is no migration. The effect of
migration in the normal case is to increase the numerator and decrease the

denominator. Heuristically, this Implies that the effect of migration is to
increase the price paid to peasants for their surplus. This uiakes some
intuitive sense since by paying a higher price to peasants, the government can
reduce the pressure of migration to cities and can, thus, curtail the
resulting urban unemployment which otherwise will cause loss of society's

welfare. This insight appears to be particularly relevant to some cities in
LDCs (for example, Bangkok, Cairo and Mexico city) in which the in—migration
from the rural sector has led to serious social degradation in urban areas.
In an Important special case of the above formulation, migration
continues to the point where the expected utility of the marginal migrant

—24—

(taking into account the probability of being unemployed) is equal in the two
sectors, and where the marginal productivity of a worker in the

rural

sector

is fixed. Then our pricing formula becomes39

(21)

N 6
where recall that A' is the private marginal utility of income to a rural
worker.

This has an interesting implication. In the early stages of development,
when the social weight on investment is expected to be quite large and when
the fraction of the population in the agricultural sector is large, then the

price paid to peasants should be less than the international price. But as
the economy develops, the price paid to peasants should increase, and it is
quite possible that it should even exceed the international price.40

F. Organization of The Industrial Sector

Public Control in Industrial Sector: Though we have assumed thus far
that the government can exercise direct control in the industrial sector, our
analysis remains essentially unchanged even if the industrial sector is

decentralized. Consider, for example, an industrial sector consisting of
public sector firms. If the government instructs its public sector managers
to maximize profits (based on whatever prices they face) then the optimum
described earlier can be implemented in a decentralized manner by setting
excise taxes at appropriate levels.

The same approach also holds, with slight modification, in an industrial
sector consisting of both private corporations as well as public sector

—25—

enterprises. In this case, the main additional effect one needs to consider
is the impact of pricing on the tax revenue from private corporations, and on
the allocation of post—tax profits of these corporations.

In the polar case

in which 100 per cent profit tax is imposed on private corporations, our
earlier formulae apply without any change.

Determination of Industrial Wage: Clearly, our earlier assumption that
industrial wage is fixed (in terms of industrial goods) was made solely for

simplicity. There are many hypotheses in the literature concerning industrial
wage determination. Some recent hypotheses, for instance, have postulated
relationship between industrial wages, industrial output and the level of

unemployment in the economy. According to these theories,the output of an
industrial firm (net of hiring and training costs) depends on the wage that it
pays to its workers, since this wage has effects on workers' productivity,
quality and turnover.41 Employers (public or private), therefore, take into
account these effects while determining the wages they pay, which in turn
determine the level of employment.
Elsewhere, we have developed a unified framework for industrial wage

determination which can not only be specialized to many of the new theories
(as

well as to the traditional approaches to industrial wage

determination),

but which also takes into account the interaction between the wage setting

mechanism and migration.42 For brevity, we do not present this general
approach
(i)

here and, instead, discuss a few highly special cases.
If the government can control the industrial wage, then (under our

assumption that labor supply in the industrial sector is Inelastic) a
reduction in the optimal wage is equivalent to a lump. sum tax. Thus,

it Is

not surprising that the wage should be set such that the marginal social
weight on the income of industrial workers equals the social weight on
—26—

investment, i.e.,

=

. Accordingly,

there should be no comnodity tax in

the industrial sector, i.e.

q = P.

(22)

The formula for the optimal price

in

the agricultural sector

remains

unchanged.
(ii) Suppose that the trade union demands are such that they impose a
constraint on the level of welfare which the government provides to its

members; that is, unions do not suffer from money illusion; they know that an

in the price of food represents a worsening of their welfare in the
same way that a reduction in their wage would. Then, Pareto optimality
increase

entails the government lowering (or raising) w to satisfy the union demand,
while maintaining (22) for pricing. The substitution of a lump

su tax for

equal utility discortionary tax generates increased revenue for the
government.

(iii) Alternatively, if the wage productivity hypothesis holds, that is
the wage rate affects workers productivity, then efficiency may entail paying
high wages in the industrial sector, and also real wages may be relatively
insensitive, for instance, to the unemployment rate. In the existing models
based on wage—productivity effects, relative prices are taken as fixed; but
here, we are concerned with the determination of relative prices. A natural

hypothesis then is that the productivity of a worker is a function of his wage
as well as the relative prices he faces. That is43
(23)

Y Y(q, w).

—27—

In this case, the government will take into account the fact that as it

increases q, productivity will decline; this will decrease the optimal price

in the industrial sector. The optimal price is given by

P
(24)

2

1 — (1 —

+ b)/Cxq

Where, b F/x2 K 0 captures the effect of price on output.44 Not
surprisingly, if we can control both industrial wages and prices, we again do
not want to impose a distortionary tax in the industrial sector, but we do

want to take into account the effect of an increase In inco

on the

productivity of industrial workers.

V. REMARKS AND DISCUSSION

Though we have analyzed many important extensions, they clearly do not
represent the entire range of circumstances one might encounter in different

countries. But, then, an analytical study of the present kind —
emphasis on identifying critical trade—off s —

is

with

its

probably not the best

approach to examine every possible detail. What we do in this section,
therefore, Is to take another look at the assumptions made in this study, and
to see how the qualitative features of the analysis might change if these

assumptions are modified. At the same time, we point out some of the
important questions we have not addressed in this paper.

Structure of the Economy: The major components of the economy in our
analysis are: the organization of the agricultural sector and the industrial
sector, the migration mechanism, and the international trade environment.45
As regards the agricultural sector, we began our analysis with a basic model

—28—

consisting of homogeneous land-owning peasants, which we
heterogeneous

then

generalized to

land ownership, and an endogenous determination of agricultural

wage.
The formula which we obtained earlier for the heterogeneous agricultural
sector [expressions (8) and (14)1 also applies to other forms of organization

within agriculture. For example, in a sharecropping agriculture, all we need
to

do is to interpret Qh as the net surplus of an individual after paying the

landlord's

share, or after receiving the share from the tenant. Further, if

the share contract is endogenously determined, then the individuals' surplus
elasticity will be based in part on the elasticities of eqmiuibrium shares
with respect to price.

Another aspect of sectoral organization which deserves our attention is

the internal composition of households. This aspect, though ignored in much
of the standard tax literature, is highly important since we know that the
households in any econoiny have heterogeneous demographic characteristics. Its
significance in LDCs should be obvious; not only do we observe that extended
households constitute an important institution, but also we find that often
there are systematic differences in the demographic characteristics of

households in different regions (rural and urban, for example), and in

different income groups. Its primary implication on pricing formulae, like

(8) and (14), is as follows. The social weights Bth would now be determined
not only by the income of the households and by the social aversion to
inequality, but also by the demographic composition of the households.

Moreover, the computation of households' response to prices would now be based
on a model of households which explicitly takes into account the intra—
household allocation.46

Rigidities in the Economy: The particular rigidity on which we have

—29—

focussed is the one in the labor market. Our approach posits that the wage
has an effect on the output (through labor productivity and other effects),
and that migration decisions are based on expected utilIty (which includes a

probability of remaining unemployed). The equilibrium market wage (that is,
the wage which employers would pay at their optimum) is, therefore, such that
there is unemployment.

An important consequence of this approach is that the market wage would
change if the tax policy changes (as we explained earlier, our use of the
assumption of fixed industrial wage in many parts of this paper is solely for

brevity in exposition). A related consequence is that the government would
not, in general, be able to eliminate unemployment through taxes and
subsidies.47

Two other points concerning rigidities are as follows.. First, an obvious
extension of rigidity in the labor market is to some other markets (of goods

and factors) which do not clear. This, of course, has been an issue of study
in the recent literature on temporary Keynesian equilibria,48 and it might
have significant implications in the context of taxation and pricing in LDCs.

Second, our present analysis has abstracted from the possibility that the
adjustments in the economy, particularly in the labor market, might be

lagged. In such a case, there are possible Intertemporal consequences of
taxation policies, and a myopic taxation policy (based on this period's

consequences alone) might be different from the one in which the dynamics of
adjustment is taken into account.49

Feasibility and Efficacy of Tax Instruments: Often there is a tendency
among policy analysts to borrow results from the standard tax literature and
prescribe them to LDC conditions, without examining the premises of the

former. Such an approach overlooks what we consider to be a fundamental

—30--

difference between LDCs and industrial economies, namely, which tax

instruments can the government use, and which instruments it can not use.
Furthermore, among the central issues which the recent tax literature50 has

attempted to understand are: (1) what are the constraints on the government's
ability to tax, (ii) how are these constraints related to the information and
transaction costs, and (iii) how are these constraints related to the design
of tax policy.

In the context of peasant agriculture, for example, it is virtually

impossible to tax labor input. This inability to tax can be viewed as an
information problem: though the
defined economic concept, .L

of labor income IS

a

perfectly well

smmustbe

which are quantitatively ascertainable by an outside

The importance of

this constraint can be seen in the following.

Our formulae seem to contradict the oft quoted result of Diamond and

Mirrlees (1971) that the producers' prices should be the same as the shadow

prices. Any

rural tax

or subsidy, that is any difference between p and P,

violates this result. How do we reconcile our results with theirs?

The answer is quite simple. The Diamond-Mirrlees model assumes that the
government can levy taxes on all factor inputs. In contrast, as we argued
above, a labour input tax

is

nearly impossible to implement in LDCs. As a

consequence, the Diamond—Mirrlees result does not hold in the present case; it
is incorrect, therefore, to borrow this result out of its context and use it
as

a basis for agricultural pricing.
There

are other differences as well between the policy problem examined

in this paper and the standard tax literature. First, as we pointed out
earlier, it is quite difficult to implement different producers' and
consumers' prices for food in the peasant sector (since peasants are both

—31—

consumers and producers), unlike in the standard tax model in which the
government can differentiate between the two sets of prices.
Second, all consumers face the same price in the standard tax model,

whereas we have analyzed in this paper an economy in which the city dwellers

face different prices from what peasants face. The case where the government
can not (or does not wish to) maintain a tax border between the agricultural

and the industrial sectors can be analyzed in a parallel nner; the detailed
results would obviously be different.5'

Third, all prof Its are taxed away in the standard tax model, itS
counterpart in the agricultural sector Implies that the government can impose

a 100 percent tax on land rent. For obvious reasons (e.g., government's
inability to distinguish returns from land and labor), such a tax is rarely
imposed.

52

The issue of land tax, in fact, provides a good example of the

constraints on tax instruments. This tax has been most highly recommended by
conventional theory since David Rlcardo.53 A major constraint on the use of
land tax, however, is as follows. If land tax is based on land area,
Irrespective of quality, then it is viewed as unfair. On the other hand,

basing

land tax on land quality is Inherently difficult, since the effect of

land quality from that of other inputs is not easily disentangled. It is not
surprising therefore that negligible use is made of the land tax in most of
today's LDCs and, moreover, its use has steadily declined over time (probably
because the use of coercion required to administer such a tax is less feasible
today than It was In earlier times).

More generally, what we have attempted to argue here is that for a tax
analysis to be

relevant,

it must be

based on only those instruments which are

feasible, which in turn depends on the information and transaction costs which

—32—

different instruments entail. In particular, it should not be surprising that
much of the taxation in LDCs is based on indirect instruments and, indeed, it
is these instruments which should form the core of analysis in developing

economies. Further, these economies often employ a variety of non—price
instruments (such as various kinds of rationing and queuing schemes) which
have yet not been investigated sufficiently in the public economics
literature.

Taxation

and the Use of Markets: A key characteristic of most tax

instruments is that the tax is actually imposed on the (formal) market
transactions (for example, on a consumer's purchase of a good from a trader,

or an employer's payment of wage to his.employee). What is often ignored in
the conventional tax analysis is that transactions also take place (to varying
degree) outside the formal market in which middlemen's services are employed
to a substantially lesser extent.

The formal market

is

costlier than the informal market since it entails

middlemen's Cost, but the former also economizes on large transactions.

Clearly then, the use of markets would shift from one to another depending on

the tax policy. Moreover, this shift would be different for different
individuals; this in turn, has efficiency and equity effects which have thus
far not been examined in the literature.

This issue is important in LDCs for at least two reasons. First, a large
proportion of transactions take place informally because formal markets are
often nonexistant in many areas (due perhaps to the small size of

transactions). Second, the widespread prevalence of corruption and tax
avoidance can be viewed as an additional division of the formal market into a

regular and an irregular (underground) market. The latter market, while
economizing on transactions and entailing middlemen's costs, avoids taxation,

—33—

often with the connivance of the tax bureaucracy. Presumably, however, it has
some disadvantages over the formal regular market, otherwise everyone would
switch to the irregular market and no tax revenue would be collected.

Clearly, then, a full analysis of taxation in LDCs needs to take into account
the shifts among these various markets.

Political Economy of Pricing and Taxation Often the most important
rationale which governments provide for their pricing policies is the
redistribution from rich to the poor... On the other hand, actual public

policies sometimes seem to do just the opposite. This apparent contradiction
raises some issues which need to be clarified.

Assume, for a moment, that redistribution is indeed a key government

objective. A basic question we then need to answer is: how much

redistribu-

tion is possible, given a set of policy instruments? Note that this is a
positive question rather than a normative one, and that it can be posed
quantitatively by devising several possible ways of measuring
redistribution.

Much of the tax literature has focussed on a normative question, namely,
what are the analytical properties of optimal redistributive taxes, given a

set of tax instruments. Surely, this is an important question and its answer,
as is well known by now, depends on the society's aversion to inequality and
on the nature of responses of individuals.
An

exclusive

concern with the latter question, though, can create an

incomplete picture. Suppose it turns out that very little redistribution can
be achieved, say, through pricing of goods (which happens to be the only

instrument a government can employ). Then, the discourse on tax policy is
modified In at least two ways. First, the redistributlve objective of
government loses its practical consequence (given the set of available

—34—

instruments), since very little redistribution can be achieved regardless of

what the stated objectives of the government are.55 By the same token, it
becomes clear that if the government indeed wants redistribution, then it must
enlarge the set of instruments.

The question of how much redistribution is possible has been examined by
Sah (1983) in the context of a simple model with heterogeneous individuals, in

which

the

only instruments available to the government are taxation (pricing)

of goods. The analysis shows that, under certain plausible conditions, the
redistribution that can be achieved is meager. The analysis clearly needs to
be extended to more general models such as the present one, in which not only

do consumer groups face different prices but also there are significant
rigidities in the economy.

Now, assume that redistribution is not the objective of taxation;
instead, taxation is used by the more powerful groups in the society for their

own

advantage.

It is obvious that the analytical apparatus developed in this

paper applies to this case as well. For example, if the city dwellers control
the political system and they maximize their own

welfare,

then the prices they

will set will correspond to the formulae we developed earlier, where the
social weight on income of peasants is set at zero.

Empirical studies have hitherto not provided much guidance on which one

of these two polar assumptions concerning the governments objective is more
correct or what particular combination of these two cases is most realistic.

More casual observation suggests nevertheless that the latter objective (in
which tax policies are employed by some groups against others) might be
playing an important role.

Some of the most important historical conflicts, for example, have been

associated

with one group of individuals attempting to use discriminatory

—35—

policies against other groups. Among the landmarks are: the conflicts
associated with corn laws in England, the discord between the North and the

South in the United States leading to the civil war, and the conflicts between
the advocates of peasants versus those of industrial workers in the pre—
collectivization USSR.

It is quite plausible, then, that the domination of one group by another
is an important factor determining present—day pricing policies (specially in

countries with significant regional specialization in crops). Therefore,
whether an analysis such as the present one would serve to improve the equity
and efficiency in an economy, or whether it will used by some groups of people
to discriminate against others, is a question of some concern to us.

FOOTNOTES

1.

Pricing and taxation of goods appear to be, by far, the most important

policy instruments employed by the governments in LDCs as well as In many
socialist economies. For some details on the magnitudes involved, see
Bale and Lutz (1979).

2.

There is a long tradition, cutting across ideological boundaries, of
viewing the agricultural sector as the desirable source of public

revenue. In the Marxist tradition, this approach was advocated by many
leaders of the October Revolution in what came to be known as the Soviet
Industrialization Debate". Our paper on price scissors (1984) clarifies
and corrects a number of positions advanced in this debate and it also
analyzes the issue of price scissors in the context of present day

LDCs. In the classical laissez faire tradition, on the other hand, the
agricultural

sector has been viewed as the ideal source of

ever since David Ricardo claimed that the land tax is the

public
best

revenue

form of

taxation.

3.

Economists are typically reluctant to deal with so—called 'non—economi&
objectives

such as self—sufficiency. The fact of the matter is that in

many countries

(for example, in

India and South Korea), a drive towards

self—sufficiency is an unambiguously
approach, therefore, is

while

4.

stated national policy. A useful

to include these objectives in policy analysis,

also pointing out the economic costs of pursuing such objectives.

Among other objectives are, for example, to stabilize prices faced by

—37—

consumers and producers [see Newbery and Stiglitz (1981)], and to

redistribute inco away from middlemen towards consumers and producers.

5.

Price intervention is extremely widespread in industrial economies too.

Son of the bitterest controversies among the EEC members, for example,
arise due to their disagreements on farm pricing policies. Many of the
objectives

of these governments are similar to those discussed earlier,

but some of them are different. The U.S. government, for example,
sometimes

6.

pays its farmers to reduce their output.

Despite the importance of these questions, they have not received much

attention

in the literature. Among the exceptions are Dixit (1969,

1971), Dixit and Stern (1974) and Newbery (1974). Also, some researchers
have analyzed agricultural pricing using approaches based on consumer

surplus; for example, Tolley, Thomas and Ming (1982). See Sah (1982b)
for a discussion of the limitations of this approach.

7.

We are abstracting from migration and capital flows. With migration, as

shall see later, the utility of the peasant is also a function of the
number of peasants in the agricultural sector. If there is capital flow,
then the utility is also a function of the interest rate at which they
we

can borrow and

lend.

for a brief discussion of this evidence.

8.

See Sah and Stlglitz (1984)

9.

This assumption can be easily relaxed by modelling endogenously
determined labor hours.
—38--

10. Here we assume that the quantities of the agricultural and industrial
goods traded with the rest of the world change in response to the

change

in domestic prices. The situation in which this is not the case can be
worked out according to the methodology developed in Sah and Stiglitz
(198 3a).

11. To see this, obtain the following from (3). =

Then.-

dp

N1Q[

—

> 0 If (4) holds.

12. From
dq

— N2X2[.(L..!2. c
q

xq

— 1].

Then,

dq

(

0 if (5) holds.

13. W is Increasing and concave in V. H is the Hamiltonlan giving the
instantaneous value of the time discounted additive social welfare.

14. The expressions (8) and (9) are the first order conditions of optimality

with respect to p and q. To obtain these we have made use of workers'
budget constraints and of the investment equation (3). Also, we have
used Roy's formula:

—AQ ,and
1

3V2

22

Clearly, one needs to verify that the second order conditions are
satisfied; they can not be taken for granted [see Atkinson and Stiglitz

(1980, p. 374)], An internal optimum might be particularly problematic
for q, since It requires (in the present model) B2/ > i —
need not be satisfied, for example, j

—39—

+ 0,

and

(

1.

which
In part,

this unrealistic possibility arises because (for simplicity) we have

not

as yet taken into account some important constraints, such as those due
to the wage—productivity relationships. We return to this issue later.

15. These and other conclusions presented in this paper hold at any point in
time. A separate issue is to trace the time path of prices and other
variables; this is beyond the scope of the present paper.

16. Recall, however, that the choice of peasants' labor hours is endogenous
in the present problem, and also that the value of their output is
influenced by a change in p. These elasticities, c

and
xp

Xp

therefore, are not the standard partial elasticities.

17. In Pigou's formulae, the magnitude of the tax rate is proportional to

+
Xp

--——

See, Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980, p. 467).

xp

18. See the reference cited in the last footnote.

19. Differences in the ownership of assets other than land can

incorporated

be

by building in the markets for these assets. Also, we

consider here a single type of agricultural labor. Its generalization to
a multitude of skill types is straightforward.

20. The sum of weights in the numerator adds up to the denominator since,

= 0.

from the rural labor market clearing condition,

Obviously,

h
= 0, in the special case in which everyone is identical.

—40—

21. See the weights proposed by Feldstein (1972), Diamond (1975) and Atkinson
and Stiglitz (1976). The difference arises because these papers assume
that the government can impose wage taxes, so the wages received by
individuals need not depend on commodity taxes.

22. Further, by contrasting (14) and (15), note that the wage elasticity term
does not appear in (15). This is simply because at present we are
assuming that industrial wages are fixed.

In more general models, such

as those discussed later in Section IVF, there would be wage elasticity
terms in the expressions analogous to (15).

23. At present we are abstracting from the differences between capital inputs
and intermediate inputs and between traded and non—traded goods. We
return to these issues later. Also, note that the same good sometimes
belongs to more than one category; for example, tractors are employed in
agricultural production as well as in personal transportation.

24. In practice, there are some ambiguities in the precise geographical
definition of such a border, since agricultural activities are sometimes
undertaken on the fringe areas of cities which fall under cities' tax
jurisdiction.

25. This somewhat overstate the constraints on the government. The
government can (and frequently does) attempt to impose taxes and

marketing controls on intrasectoral transactions. One of the
implications of such intervention is to encourage individuals to avoid
making use of formal markets, so that the taxes can thus be avoided.

—41—

This implication is discussed later in Section V.

26. In (3), Y would now denote the value of the entire set of industrial
outputs, measured at the international prices. Also,

the

numeraire good

here is any one of the pure consumption goods produced in the industrial

sector, of which the quantity consumed by a peasant is y'. The expansion
of x2 and q as vectors should be obvious.

27. The superscript U denotes that the quantity under consideration is a
compensated quantity. The Slutsky relationship in the present

context

is

Q1

p.

=

Qi
3p.

— Q•

____

j aM

28. It can be further extended to deal with the intra—sectoral income
distribution by following the approach discussed earlier.

29. Obviously, one also needs to take into account the functioning of credit
markets. In the presence of a rental market for agrictiltural machinery,
however, it is not obvious that the conclusions advanced here would be
necessarily changed.

30. In fact, ixj..ich of the growth economics literature focussed exclusively on

the industrial sector, implicitly ignoring the possibility of investing

in the agricultural sector. [Among the exceptions are: Dixit (1969),
Newbery (1972) and Stern (1972)]. The prevalent notion in these
approaches was that the potent'ial for investment in agriculture is small,

if not negligible, compared to that In industry. Such a view is

—42—

apparently not supported by the historical experience. Kuznets (1961),
among others, shows that the investment in agriculture was in fact larger
than that in industry in certain phases of the development of the
present—day industrial economies.

31. Some other consequences of pricing are also worth noting. For example,
if some

of

the investment goods in the agricultural sector are non—traded

goods produced within the agricultural sector (such as labor intensive
road construction), then the government would have to take into account
the effect of its pricing of agricultural inputs and outputs on the costs

of such investment goods. Similarly, if some of the Investment decisions
are made by peasants, and if the government's evaluation of the benefits

from these decisions differs from that of the peasants, then the

government would have to take into account the impact of its pricing
policies on these private investment decisions.

32. The importance of quality differences, though obvious to those who buy
and sell goods, has not received sufficient attention from economists,

particularly in the context of policy making. In the extreme case, there
are countries (like Nepal and Bangladesh) in which most of the

potentially tradeable consumer goods are of sufficiently low quality that
there is virtually no external trade in theni. If, in addition, it
happens that these countries face foreign sales constraints in other
tradeable goods (like primary

agricultural

commodities), then the actual

traded quantities would be nearly insensitive (at the margin) to pricing

policies. In determining optimal prices, therefore, such countries must
necessarily be treated almost like closed economies.

—43—

33. Specifically, those elements of the vector P which correspond to non—
traded goods, will be replaced by the vector r/c5, where elements of the

vector n are the Lagrange multipliers to the market clearing conditions
of different non—traded goods.

34. Further, those non—traded goods which are not taxed are treated in the
same manner as agricultural labor which, of course, is a non—traded, non—
taxed commodity.

35. In Sah and Stiglitz (1983a, 1983b), we develop not only a general model
of

migration but also a general model of industrial wage determination.

These models

can be specialized to various hypotheses concerning

migration (such as no migration, free migration with no unemployment, and
the Harris—Todaro migration hypothesis in which the expected utility of
the marginal migrant is equal in the two sectors), and to alternative
hypotheses concerning industrial wage determination (such as the
conventional hypothesis of marginal productivity, and those hypotheses

which entail wage effects on labor productivity, labor quality and labor
turnover).

36. In (19), the industrial wage is fixed in terms of industrial goods.
Also, the level of Industrial employment is fixed, since it is derived
from an equalization of the wage and the marginal product of labor.

These assumptions are being made here solely for brevity, as should be

obvious from the previous footnote. Further, for simplicity, we have

ignored

the consumption of unemployed workers.

—44—

37.

=

[w(v')

— W(VU) —

'PXaa1mp/6Q

c

where Vu is the utility of an unemployed worker, a is the agricultural

is

land per peasant, Xa =

respect to a, and m

the marginal output (per peasant) with

3ZnN

is the elasticity of rural population with

respect to the rural price. We assume V > V > V $

i.e.,

industrial

workers are better off than peasants, who in turn are better off than

those who are unemployed. We also assume agricultural land is not too

congested. Specifically, the last assumption means that aX is

small, and that CQ =

(which is the elasticity of agricultural

surplus per peasant with respect to the land per peasant) is smaller than

one. Now, note in the expression for

that the square bracket

represents the net welfare gain if one unemployed worker iigrates to the

agricultural sector. This net gain is positive due to the above
assumptions.

38. This follows from the previous footnote, and from

CQ =

CQp

+ (1 —

cQa)mp

in which it is assumed that the agricultural population increases if the

price of agricultural surplus is higher, i.e., m > 0.

This assumption

is automatically satisfied under the Harris—Todaro migration hypothesis
which we discuss in a moment.

39. This is the well known Harris—Todaro migration hypothesis. For

—45—

simplicity, we assume here that the social welfare function is
utilitarian, i.e.,

= A1

The main implication of the Rarris—Todaro

hypothesis then is that: H = NV1 + 51, instead of (7). The
corresponding result holds, therefore, in all those circumstances in
which the government is concerned with the rural welfare alone.

40.

Pricing in

the industrial sector in the presence of

endogenous migration

can be

analyzed in the same manner as above. Also, it is worthwhile

noting

here that the

hold

with

rules

of price reform derived earlier in

the paper

some modifications in the present case as well. For example,

the rule for reform in rural price, (4), holds in the present case

if

is replaced by
CQp

41. See Stiglitz (1976, 1982a).

42. See footnote 35.

43. This representation is consistent with a hypothesis that the productivity
depends on the level of worker's utility. It is also consistent with a
hypothesis that the productivity may be more closely related to food
consumption than to the consumption of other goods.

44. Expression (24) points out that the urban food price should not be
increased beyond a point (even if the government does not care about the
welfare of industrial workers), since the resulting decline in workers'

productivity will make it unattractive to do so. Also, the possibility
of a corner solution (in which the optimum urban food price is

—46—

excessively high) is remote when effects such as that of consumption on
productivity are taken into account (in contrast to the basic model in
which these effects were ignored; see footnote 14).

45. See footnote 35 on the extensions in the modelling of the industrial
sector and the migration mechanism. Further, in Sah and Stiglitz
(1983b), we analyze pricing under a more general international trade
environment than the one in this paper.

46. See Sah (1983b) for a methodology for analyzing intra—household
allocations.

47. This point has been missed in some of the earlier literature which has
concluded that there always exist government policies which would result
in an elimination of unemployment. This conclusIon, in turn, has
sometimes led to a belief that since the government can eliminate

unemployment, it would do so. Consequently, unemployment must
necessarily be a short run phenomenon which can be ignored in a long run

policy analysis. These views are clearly misleading if the endogenelty
of wages is taken into account.

48. See Solow and Stiglitz (1968) and Benassy (1975), for example.

49. For example, suppose that the employment in the present period can be
substantially reduced through tax instruments but this leads, in the
future periods, to a significant difference between the market wage and

that wage which would have cleared the market. Leaving the present

—47—

unemployment unaltered, on the other hand, leads to market wage clearing

the market in the future periods. Then there is a trade—off between the
social costs of present high unemployment versus that of distortions in
the future periods.

50. Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980) and Stiglitz (forthcoming).

51. This is the problem of price scissors. In this case, there is only one
relative price (of agricultural and industrial goods) in the economy.
For an analysis of price scissors in a closed economy, see Sah and

Stiglitz (1984). Its extension to an open economy is straightforward, as
can be seen in Sah and Stiglitz (1983a).

52.

In any event, the nature of tax problem remains essentially unchanged

even in a hypothetical situation in which land rents could be entirely
taxed away. For comments on this issue, see Sah and Stiglitz (1983b).

53. For a modern analysis of some of the classical views on the land tax, see
Feldstein (1977).

54. See Sah (1982a).

55.

In Figure 1, this would be the case if the economy is already on the

utility possibilities frontier, and if the projection of the frontier on

the (V1, V2) plane is 'small'. Further, the conclusions drawn in the
paper would also hold if a significant redistribution requires such
taxation (nearly infinite tax rate on luxuries, for example) that the
government would not adopt It.

—48—

REFERENCES

Atkinson,

A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1976, The Design

of

Tax Structure: Direct

versus Indirect Taxation, Journal of Public Economics 6, 55—75.

Atkinson, A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1980, Lectures on Public Economics, McGraw—
Hill, New York.

.
M

1

T...,
. aQ7G
J a d,

A

Effects:
359,

1. .

J_ I..J. J1L L.s..
U

L L. U £ L '.4 L

.LL14 i [J. L

An International Comparison, World Bank Staff Working Paper No,

The World Bank, Washington D.C.

Benassy, J.P.,
Review

1975, Neo—Keynesian Disequilibrium in a Monetary Economy,

of Economic Studies 32, 503—23.

Diamond, P.A. and J.A. Mirrlees, 1971, Optimal Taxation and Public Production
I: Production Efficiency and II: Tax Rules, American Economic Review
61, 8—27 and 261—278.

Diamond, P.A., 1975, A Many—person Ramsey Tax Rule, Journal of Public
Economics 4, 335—342.

Dixit, A.K., 1969, Marketable Surplus and Dual

Development, Journal of

Economic Theory 1, 203—219.

Dixit,

A.K., 1971, Short—run Equilibrium and Shadow Prices in a Dual Economy,

Oxford Economic Papers 23, 384—400.

—49—

Dixit, A.K., and N. Stern, 1974, Determinants of Shadow Prices in Open Dual
Economies, Oxford Econortic Papers 26, 42—53.

Feldstein, M.S., 1972, Distributional Equity and the Optimal Structure of
Public Prices, American Economic RevIew 62, 32—36.

Feldstein, M.S., 1977, The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New
Answer to an Old Question, Journal of Political Economy 85, 349—360.

Harris, J.H. and M.P. Todaro, 1970, Migration, Unemployment and Development:
A Two Sector Analysis, American Economic Review 60, 126—142.

Kuznets, S., 1961, Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations:

VI. Long—Term Trends in Capital Formation Proportions, Economic
Development and Cultural Change 9, 1—124.

Mirrlees, J.A., 1972, On Producer Taxation, Review of Economic Studies 39,
105—111.

Mirrlees, J.A., 1975, Optimal Commodity Taxation in a Two—Class Economy,
Journal of Public Economics 4, 27—33.

Newbery, D.M.G., 1972, Public Policy in the Dual Economy, Economic Journal 82,
567—590.

Newbery, D.M.G., 1974, The Robustness of Equilibrium Analysis in the Dual
Economy, Oxford Economic Papers 26, 32—41.

—50—

Newbery, D.M.G. and J,E, Stiglitz, 1981, The Theory of Commodity Price
Stabilization, Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Ramsey, F.?., 1927, A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation, Economic Journal
37, 47—61.

Sah, R.K., 1982a, Comparison of Coupons, Queues, Rations and Non—Intervention
in Managing Scarcities, CADE Research Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Sah, R.K, 1982b, A Welfare—Based Determination of Urban—Rural Prices, paper
presented at the World Bank seminar on Public Economics, June 1982, The
World Bank, Washington D.C.

Sah, R.K., 1983a, How Much Redistribution is Possible through Indirect Taxes,
Journal of Public Economics 20, 1983.

Sah, R.K., 1983b, Analysis of Intra—Household Consumption Allocations: A
Methodology and its Implementation, mimeo, Department of Economics,
University of Pennsylvania.

Sah, R.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1983a, The Social Cost of Labor and Project

Evaluation: A General Approach, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 1229, Cambridge.

Sah, R.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1983b, The Town, The Country, and the Rest of the

World: Economics of Public Marketing Boards in Developing Economies,

—51—

uthoeo, Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Sah, R.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1984, The Economics of Price Scissors, NBER
Working Paper NO. 1156, 1983, forthcoming in American Economic Review,
March 1984.

Solow, R.M. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1968, Output, Employment and Wages in the Short
Run, Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, 537—60.

Stern, N.H., 1972, Optimum Development in a Dual Economy, Review of Economic
Studies 39, 171—184.

Stiglitz, J.E., 1976, The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labor, and the
Distribution of Income in L.D.C.'s, Oxford Economic Papers 28, 185—207.

Stiglitz, J.E,, 1982a, Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and

Unemployment: The Efficiency Wage Model, in M. Gersovit et. al., eds.,
The Theory and Practice of Development, George Allen and Unwin, London.

Stiglitz, J.E., 1982b, Taxation and Agricultural Pricing Policies, Cost

Benefit Analysis, and The Foreign Exchange Constraint, paper prepared for
the World Bank, unprocessed.

Stiglitz, J.E., forthcoming, Information and Economic Analysis, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

—52—

Stiglitz, J.E. and P. Dasgupta, 1971, Differential Taxation, Public Goods, and
Economic Efficiency, Review of Economic Studies 38, 151—174.

Tolley, G.S., V. Thomas and C.M. Ming, 1982, Agriculture Price Policies and
the Developing Countries, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

—53—

