NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE TIMING OF DIVORCE
Gopi Shah Goda
John B. Shoven
Sita Nataraj Slavov
Working Paper 13382
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13382

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1-04
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions
or policy of SSA, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any agency of the Federal Government.
The authors would like to thank Justin Wong for superb research assistance.
© 2007 by Gopi Shah Goda, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Social Security and the Timing of Divorce
Gopi Shah Goda, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov
NBER Working Paper No. 13382
September 2007
JEL No. H55,J12
ABSTRACT
Social Security provides spousal benefits in retirement to secondary workers in married couples based
on the primary worker's earnings record. In addition, Social Security pays spousal benefits to divorced
secondary workers whose marriages lasted at least ten years. However, if a marriage failed in less
than ten years, no spousal benefits are paid. The spousal benefit is particularly valuable to secondary
workers in couples where there is a large disparity in earnings between the primary worker and the
secondary worker. We examine whether these couples, who have more to gain from extending their
marriage to ten years, are more likely to delay divorce to the tenth year relative to a control group.
We find that vulnerable couples are slightly more likely to delay divorce from year nine to year ten;
however, the effect is statistically insignificant and small in magnitude. While the "cliff"-vesting of
retirement benefits for divorced spouses raises equity concerns, it does not appear to distort incentives
for divorce.
Gopi Shah Goda
Robert Wood Johnson Scholars
in Health Policy Research Program
Harvard University
1730 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
gopi.shah.goda@gmail.com
John B. Shoven
NBER
30 Alta Road
Stanford, CA 94305-8715
and NBER
shoven@leland.stanford.edu

Sita Nataraj Slavov
Dept. of Economics
Occidental College
1600 Campus Road
Los Angeles, CA 90041
sslavov@oxy.edu

Social Security and the Timing of Divorce
Gopi Shah Goda, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov
1.

Introduction
The Social Security system contains many features designed to provide an adequate

retirement income for families, rather than just individual retired workers. The most
important of these features is the spousal benefit, under which secondary earners are
entitled to receive a monthly payment of 50 percent of their spouse’s monthly Social
Security benefit. Secondary earners may also elect to receive benefits based on their own
earnings records if they are higher than the spousal benefit; historically, however, the
spousal benefit provided a large source of benefits for non-working spouses in one-earner
couples. Of course, the existence of a spousal benefit raises the questions about what
happens in the event of divorce. Currently, an individual may not claim a spousal benefit
based on an ex-spouse’s earnings record if the marriage lasted less than 10 years. If the
marriage lasted 10 years or more, however, the divorced spouse is entitled to the full
spousal benefit in retirement.
The spousal benefit and the general rules for divorce were designed during the early
years of the program, during which family structure differed considerably from today. At
the inception of the system, such a design made sense. As discussed by Smith (2002), in
1940, almost three quarters of families had a working husband and non-working wife;
less than 10 percent were two-earner couples. In contrast, in 1998, only 15 percent were
one-earner couples, and close to 50 percent were two-earner couples. Moreover,
women’s labor force participation has increased from around 34 percent in 1950 to

1

almost 60 percent in 2005.1 As a result, more married women receive benefits based on
their own records, making the spousal benefit (and divorce rules) irrelevant for a larger
fraction of the population. The Social Security Administration reports that in 1970, 16
percent of benefit recipients were receiving spousal benefits; by 2005, this number had
fallen to around 7 percent. This shift in family structure has led to a criticism of the
spousal benefit on equity grounds, as one-earner couples receive a higher rate of return
from Social Security compared to two-earner couples. The existence of the spousal
benefit also has efficiency considerations from a labor supply point-of-view: secondary
earners face large distortions in their labor supply decisions because their Social Security
contributions only increase their benefits to the extent that they are larger than the spousal
benefit (Feldstein and Samwick (1992), Goda (2007)).
Divorce rates have also increased considerably over the last half a century. The
divorce rate has risen from about 2.6 divorces per year per 1,000 people in 1950, to 3.7
divorces per year per 1,000 people in 2004.2 In 1950, only about 2 percent of men and
women reported their marital status as divorced; by 2005, this number had risen to 11
percent for women and 9 percent for men. The increase in the divorce rate makes the
divorce rules more relevant for individuals who plan to claim the spousal benefit.3
Social Security’s rules for divorce have also been criticized on equity grounds. A
marriage lasting only 9 years leaves a non-working spouse with no benefit entitlement;
on the other hand, staying together for 10 years results in a large increase in potential
benefits. Thus, a shorter marriage may leave a divorced spouse with inadequate income

1

Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2007, Table 575
Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2007, Table 76.
3
U.S. Census Bureau, Marital Status of the Population 15 Years Old and Over, by Sex and Race: 1950 to
Present, Table MS-1.
2

2

in retirement. As reported by Smith (2002), in 1990, the median marriage length among
divorced couples was only 7.2 years, with 63 percent divorcing within 10 years.
Therefore, the 10-year requirement potentially affects a large number of individuals.
Favreault et al. (2006) provide a detailed analysis of the equity implications of the current
system; they also evaluate a variety of reforms including income splitting, under which a
couple’s total earnings credits are split equally at the time of divorce.
In this paper, we focus on the efficiency implications of Social Security’s divorce
rules. One might expect these rules to affect the timing of divorce. For a couple married
9 years, there is a strong incentive to wait until the 10th year to divorce. Moreover, a
divorced person may be reluctant to remarry if it means giving up the spousal benefit
from the first marriage. Of course, these incentives only apply to couples in which the
secondary earner intends to claim spousal benefits, rather than benefits based on her own
earnings record. Dickert-Conlin and Meghea’s (2004) results – which are based on
divorce rates aggregated by age of the wife – suggest that Social Security’s rules do not
appear to affect the timing of divorce and remarriage.
We revisit this question using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
Marital History File. This dataset allows us to do an individual-level analysis, in which
we control for characteristics, including the likelihood of claiming the spouse benefit. To
do this, we identify “vulnerable” individuals, who are likely to claim spousal benefits
instead of benefits based on their own records. Vulnerable individuals are likely to be
affected by Social Security’s divorce rules. Couples with a vulnerable spouse have an
incentive to delay divorce from year 9 to year 10 in order to preserve the vulnerable
spouse’s Social Security benefit. There are no similar incentives for delay in the timing

3

of divorce among couples in which both individuals intend to claim their own Social
Security benefit.
Our household-level analysis corroborates the findings of Dickert-Conlin and
Meghea. We find that vulnerable couples are slightly more likely than non-vulnerable
ones to delay divorce from year 9 to year 10. However, the difference is small and
statistically insignificant. We attribute this finding to several possible factors. For
example, the Social Security benefit computation is complex, and many individuals may
not be aware of the divorce rules. In addition, there is plenty of evidence to suggest that
individuals are myopic in planning for their retirements. Thus, it should not be surprising
if young couples do not consider the implications of delaying divorce for their future
Social Security benefits.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an overview of Social
Security’s rules regarding marriage and divorce, and a review of the previous literature.
Section III presents our methodology and results. Section IV concludes.

2. Background and Previous Literature
Social Security provides a spousal benefit equal to 50 percent of the primary earner’s
Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) to spouses of workers who have been married for at
least one year. The PIA is determined by applying a concave function to the Average
Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME) which is the monthly average of the highest 35 years
of the worker’s wage-indexed earnings during their lifetime. The concavity in the
formula provides low lifetime income earners with a higher replacement rate than high
lifetime income earners. The secondary earner’s benefit is the maximum of the spousal

4

benefit and the benefits determined by his or her own earnings record. Because of the
progressivity of the formula that converts the AIME to a PIA, it is not the case that
workers need to earn, on average, 50 percent of what the primary worker earns every year
in order to generate a benefit larger than the spousal benefit. The exact fraction depends
on the relative earnings amounts within the couple, but in many instances is closer to onethird. Figure 1 shows the necessary fraction of the primary worker’s earnings for
different values of the primary worker’s average indexed monthly earnings.
Figure 1
Percent of Primary Worker's AIME Needed to Earn More Than
Spousal Benefit
60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

Primary Worker's AIME (2005$)

According to the Social Security Administration, there were almost 31 million
workers receiving benefits based on their own earnings record in 2006. In addition to
this, around 2.5 million individuals received spousal benefits. Of those receiving spousal
benefits, more than 98 percent were female. However, women are increasingly likely to
receive benefits based on their own earnings record. In 1970, around 2.7 million women

5

received spousal benefits. By 2006, that had fallen to 2.4 million despite an increase in
the elderly female population.4
When a couple divorces, the secondary earner is entitled to collect the full Social
Security spousal benefit if the marriage lasted 10 or more years. However, if the
secondary earner remarries, the spousal benefit from the first marriage is no longer
available. (It is, therefore, possible for several individuals to receive spousal benefits for
the same primary worker.) The 10-year requirement is relatively recent. Prior to 1977, a
marriage was required to last for 20 years before an ex-spouse could claim the spousal
benefit. Increasing divorce rates in the 1960s and 1970s prompted the change in the law,
as policy makers were concerned that women who were divorced after less than 20 years
of marriage would be left in poverty.
Dickert-Conlin and Meghea (2006) carry out a differences-in-differences analysis that
focuses on the 1977 law change. They compare the divorce rates of 7-year marriages (the
control group) with those of 9- and 10-year marriages (the treatment groups) both before
and after 1977. One would expect the divorce rate in the 9-year marriage group to fall
relative to the control group after 1977, as postponing divorce by a year would result in
an entitlement to a spousal benefit. (In contrast, the 7-year marriage group would have to
postpone divorce by three years, which has a significantly higher cost.) Additionally, the
10-year marriage group should have displayed an increase in divorces relative to the
control group after 1977. The authors find some evidence of a decline in the divorce rate
for 9-year marriages; however, there appears to have been no impact on 10-year
marriages. Hence there is not much support for the claim that the change in Social
Security’s divorce rules affected the timing of divorce. A similar analysis suggests that
4

Social Security Administration, Social Security Beneficiary Statistics, December 20, 2006.

6

remarriage behavior was not affected either. In this case, the treatment group is women
whose marriages lasted for 10 years. This group of women became eligible for spousal
benefits in 1977, provided they did not remarry. The control group is women whose
marriages lasted for 9 years, and were therefore not eligible for spousal benefits. One
would expect the latter group to have a higher remarriage rate than the former after the
1977 law change; however, the data did not support this claim.
Of course, the predicted effect on behavior only apply to couples in which the
secondary earner intends to claim spousal benefits, rather than benefits based on her own
earnings record. The Dickert-Conlin and Meghea (2006) analysis makes no distinction
between these two groups. This provides a possible alternative explanation for their
findings. If many women are claiming benefits on their own record, then one might not
find an effect for women overall, as only a subset of women alter their behavior.
While the existing literature provides little evidence of distorted behavior, the divorce
rules certainly raise significant equity concerns. The current method of 10-year “cliff”vesting means that secondary workers with marriages that lasted 9 years and 11 months
will not receive any spousal benefits from Social Security from that marriage, while those
in marriages lasting 10 years would receive spousal benefits based on their ex-spouse’s
entire earnings history at retirement. Favreault and Steuerle (2006) point out that, while
the overall poverty rate among the elderly is low, poverty is significant problem among
elderly women. The policy also creates large disparities in taxes paid relative to benefits
received. For example, a man who marries multiple times for 10 years or longer can
obtain (for his exes) several spousal benefits from one earnings history.

7

As discussed by Thompson and Carasso (2002), many other countries use earnings
sharing to address such equity concerns. In Belgium and France, for example, divorced
spouses receive a benefit that is tied to the length of the marriage. Many other
industrialized countries split the couple’s total earnings credits at the time of divorce,
treating the divorced couple as two singles in computing benefits. The earnings-splitting
is either specified by law (e.g. in Canada, Germany, and Switzerland), or determined by
the divorce court (e.g., in Spain and the United Kingdom).
Favreault and Steuerle (2006) investigate the implications of several reforms that aim
to improve the equity, efficiency, and adequacy of Social Security’s treatment of the
family. They examine three versions of earnings-splitting proposals, and incremental
changes such as providing a minimum level of benefits and providing caregiver credits.
The simulated winners and losers under each proposal differ, but divorced women fare
better under earnings-splitting reforms.
Brien et al. (2001) study another aspect of the Social Security system: the treatment
of widows. When a widow reaches normal retirement age, she may claim a widow
benefit equal to 100 percent of her deceased husband’s PIA. Prior to 1979, a widow who
remarried lost her claim on the widow benefit, although she could claim a spousal benefit
based on the earnings of her new husband. The spousal benefit is, of course, less
generous than the widow benefit, as it amounts to only 50 percent of the primary earner’s
PIA. In 1979, the law was changed to allow widows aged 60 and above to claim the
widow benefit even if they remarried. However, widows under age 60 were still subject
to the old rules. The authors show that widows aged 60 and above had an increased
marriage rate in 1979, indicating that many individuals in this group had waited to

8

remarry until the law went into effect (it was passed in 1977). Moreover, they found that
after 1979, marriage rates declined among widows just under age 60, and increased
among widows over 60. This indicates that after 1979, widows just under age 60 started
waiting until age 60 to remarry in order to retain their widow benefit.
Our analysis also fits into the broader literature on how fiscal policy affects
individuals’ choice of family structure. A number of studies have shown that marriage
penalties created by the income tax and welfare programs have an impact on the timing
of marriage and divorce. Alm et al. (1999) provide a review of this literature.

3. Data and Methodology
Our data come from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) 1985-2003 Marital
History File. This dataset contains a marital history for each PSID respondent. Since
respondents are asked to provide information about previous marriages, the histories also
include marriages that began and ended prior to 1985. For our analysis, each observation
consists of one marriage for an individual in the survey. If an individual has multiple
marriages, it is possible for that person to appear in multiple observations. However,
because of the data collection procedures, not all marriages for all individuals appear in
the data. We generally treat each marriage as a separate observation. Clearly, multiple
marriages for the same individual might not be independent observations. To see if this
affects the results, we also do all of our estimates using only the first marriage that
appears in the sample for all individuals. Our qualitative results do not change.5 After
dropping observations with missing values, we end up with a sample of 16,361

5

These results are available from the authors upon request.

9

marriages. We merge this marital history data with the income data routinely collected
by the PSID.
According to our discussion in the previous section, an individual whose AIME is
less than a third of his or her spouse’s is better off claiming the spouse benefit. We
define an individual as defined “vulnerable” if his or her average is less than a third of the
primary worker’s income. Vulnerable individuals are most likely to rely on the spousal
benefit, rather than benefits based on their own records. Couples with a vulnerable
spouse are most likely to alter their behavior in response to Social Security’s divorce
rules. Of course, the calculation of the spousal benefit is based on the individuals’
AIMEs, which take into account their wages over their entire working life. During the
earlier years of a marriage, individuals cannot know with certainty their ultimate AIME.
At this point, a couple’s expected AIMEs will influence the divorce decision. Of course,
estimating an individual’s expected average income is tricky. For our base case, we
average income in all years prior to and during the marriage for which data are available.
This computation contains two implicit assumptions. First, the couple perfectly
anticipates their future income path during the marriage. Second, for marriages that end
in divorce, the individuals’ average incomes up until the divorce decision are a good
estimate of what their average incomes would have been had the marriage continued.
Note that we do not include years after the marriage ended. An individual may intend to
claim the spousal benefit while married, yet seek out a higher paying job if the marriage
ends. Such an individual should correctly be classified as vulnerable, as it is their
anticipated status during the marriage that is relevant for the divorce decision.

10

By this definition, there are 6,883 marriages in which one spouse is vulnerable. In
91.1 percent of these marriages, the vulnerable spouse is the wife. Clearly our definition
of vulnerable individuals does not perfectly capture those who intend to receive spousal
benefits. However, there should be a correlation between vulnerability as defined here
and the dependence on spousal benefits.
Vulnerable marriages are our treatment group for the analysis. The control group
consists of all the other marriages. We predict that the treatment group should be more
responsive to Social Security’s divorce rules than the control group. Consider the set of
all couples entering their 9th year of marriage who are contemplating divorce. Those in
the treatment group have larger costs associated with divorce before 10 years. Therefore,
we would expect a decline in the divorce rate of the treatment group, relative to the
control group, at 9 years of marriage. We would also expect an increase in the relative
divorce rate of the treatment group at 10 years of marriage.
Figure 2 depicts the conditional and unconditional probabilities of divorce by length
of marriage for the entire sample. The probability of divorce is simply the fraction of
marriages ending after t years. The conditional probability of divorce is the fraction of
couples divorcing after t years of marriage, conditional on being married at time t-1.
(The graph does not include the 316 marriages that either failed or left the sample before
the first year.) Only about 1 percent of marriages fail after one year. The divorce rate
increases until the 4th year of marriage, then levels off and falls.

11

Figure 2
Conditional and Unconditional Probability of Divorce for All Individuals
0.025

0.02

0.015
Prob. Of Divorce
Cond. Prob. Of Divorce

0.01

0.005

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15

Figure 3 shows the conditional divorce probability for the vulnerable group and the
entire sample. There appears to be a small dip in the probability of divorce in year 9,
followed by an increase in year 10. However, this appears for both the control and the
treatment groups. Moreover, for both groups, the effect appears to be small.
Figure 3
Conditional Probability of Divorce: Control Group, Treatment Group, Full Sample
0.03
0.025
0.02
Vuln
0.015

Not Vuln
Everyone

0.01
0.005
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

12

We perform a formal regression analysis to determine whether there is any
statistically significant impact of Social Security’s divorce rules. We begin with the set
of all marriages lasting 8 or more years. There are three possible outcomes for these 8year marriages:
1. Divorce in year 9,
2. Divorce in year 10, or
3. No divorce in either year 9 or year 10.
We estimate the following multinomial logit model:
pij =

exp(β j X i + α j Ti )

∑ exp(β
3

j

X i + α j Ti )

j =1

Here, pij is the probability that marriage i ends in outcome j , for the j = 1,2,3 specified

above. Ti is a dummy variable equal to 1 if marriage i is in the treatment group (has an
always-vulnerable spouse). X i is a vector of controls for the couple, including dummies
for the race of the household head, 6 whether each spouse was over the age of 22 at the
beginning of the marriage, and whether each spouse had finished high school and college
prior to the end of the marriage. The PSID’s racial classifications have expanded greatly
over time. In the initial years of the survey, the only categories coded were white,
African-American, and other race. Therefore, we consolidate the racial categories in
subsequent waves of the survey and include only indicators for African-American and
other race. The entire sample of 8-year marriages consists of 8,474 observations, of
which 3,877 have a vulnerable spouse. Including the independent variables reduces the
sample size to 8,076, as we are forced to drop observations with missing values.

6

Race is only available for the household head.

13

Table 1 presents the means and standard deviations for the independent variables
broken down by vulnerability status. The control groups have similar marriage lengths.
Both husbands and wives in the treatment group tend to get married at a younger age: 71
percent of men in the treatment group were over the age of 22 at marriage, compared to
78 percent in the control group. For the wives, 55 percent of the treatment group was
over 22 at the time of marriage, compared to 64 percent of the control group.

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Variable
Length of
Marriage
Husband
Over 22 at
Marriage
Wife Over
22 at
Marriage
Husband
Finished
College
Husband
Finished
High
School
Wife
Finished
College
Wife
Finished
High
School
Head
African
American
Head Other
Race

Full Sample
Mean
Std. Dev.
18.26
7.15

Vulnerable
Mean
Std. Dev.
18.81
7.33

Not Vulnerable
Mean
Std. Dev.
17.80
6.97

0.75

0.43

0.71

0.46

0.78

0.41

0.60

0.49

0.55

0.50

0.64

0.48

0.25

0.43

0.25

0.43

0.25

0.43

0.60

0.49

0.58

0.49

0.63

0.48

0.21

0.41

0.16

0.36

0.25

0.44

0.67

0.47

0.67

0.47

0.67

0.47

0.28

0.45

0.21

0.41

0.33

0.47

0.06

0.23

0.07

0.25

0.05

0.22

14

Wives in the control group are more likely to have finished college (but not high school).
Husbands in the control group are more likely to have finished high school (but not
college). Finally, the control group contains a greater percentage of African American
household heads.
Relative risk ratios for outcome 2 (divorce in year 10) relative to outcome 1 (divorce
in year 9) are presented in Table 2.7 The first column of Table 2 uses a vulnerability
definition that incorporates income throughout the length of the marriage. The
coefficient of interest is the relative risk ratio for the treatment dummy, which indicates
the treatment group’s risk of getting divorced in year 10 relative to 9 ( pi 2 / pi1 ), divided
by the same ratio for the control group. Our prediction is that this value should be greater
than 1 – that is, relative to the control group, the treatment group’s probability of divorce
falls in year 9 and increases in year 10. The point estimate of the relative risk ratio is
1.12, suggesting that the treatment group is slightly more likely than the control group to
delay divorce from year 9 to year 10. However, this coefficient is statistically
insignificant. In general, the other independent variables don’t appear to be statistically
significant either.
As discussed above, our definition of vulnerability assumes that couples perfectly
anticipate their future income path if the marriage continues. As a robustness check, we
redo our regression analysis under the alternative that couples do not anticipate any future
changes in their income. That is, we classify people as vulnerable if their average income
until the 8th year of marriage is less than a third of their spouse’s. The implicit
assumption here is that individuals expect their future average income to be similar to
7

Relative risk ratios for the never divorced outcome relative to outcome 1 are omitted, but are available
from the authors upon request.

15

their average income in the 8th year of marriage. The sample size for this case is only
7,517, as we must drop marriages in which both spouse’s average earnings are zero,
which are more likely to occur when we only compute average earnings until the 8th year
of marriage. Regression results for this case are given in the second column of Table 2.
They are qualitatively similar to the base case. The treatment group’s relative probability
of divorce does fall in year 9 and rise in year 10. However, this difference is statistically
insignificant.
The only independent variable that is statistically significant in both regressions is the
dummy variable for the wife’s age at the time of marriage. The relative risk ratio is less
than 1, indicating that a woman who is younger when she marries is relatively more
likely to delay divorce until year 10. This is roughly consistent with the hypothesis that
vulnerable couples delay divorce: a woman who married at a young age is more likely to
be vulnerable (in a way that is not captured by our vulnerability measure) and therefore
more likely to anticipate receiving the spouse benefit. However, given the insignificance
of our direct measure of vulnerability, we hesitate to interpret this isolated finding as
evidence that Social Security’s divorce rules affect behavior.

16

Table 2: Regression Results

Dependent
variable
Treatment Group
Head AfricanAmerican
Head Other Race
Husband Over 22
at Marriage
Wife Over 22 at
Marriage
Husband Finished
High School
Husband Finished
College
Wife Finished
High School
Wife Finished
College

Base Case

1.12
(0.14)
1.16
(0.15)
1.71
(0.57)
1.11
(0.20)
0.69*
(0.11)
0.75
(0.14)
0.85
(0.20)
1.10
(0.24)
1.44
(0.38)

Average Income
Through Year 8 Only
1.10
(0.14)
1.15
(0.15)
1.61
(0.54)
1.12
(0.20)
0.68*
(0.11)
0.76
(0.14)
0.88
(0.20)
1.05
(0.22)
1.34
(0.35)

* Significantly different from 1 at the 5 percent level. (Standard errors in
parentheses.)

4. Conclusion

Social Security’s current rules regarding divorce allow secondary workers in
marriages that lasted at least ten years to receive spousal benefits based on the primary
worker’s earnings history. However, secondary workers whose marriages lasted less than
ten years do not receive this benefit. As a large number of marriages that fail do so
before ten years, the rules create equity concerns. This “cliff”-vesting means that
secondary workers in marriages that fail before ten years undergo a significant loss in
terms of future retirement benefits, especially if their earnings were significantly lower
than their spouses. In our sample of marriages that lasted at least eight years and using a
definition of vulnerable that requires the secondary earner’s average earnings to be at

17

least one third of his or her spouse’s average earnings, 46 percent of couples have a
vulnerable spouse. This represents a significant percentage of all marriages.
We attempt to detect a behavioral response by spouses that are more vulnerable to a
divorce before the tenth year of marriage relative to a control group. The control group
consists of couples where the secondary earner would likely earn more than the spousal
benefit. Because the secondary worker receives the maximum of the benefit calculated
from his or her own earnings record and the spousal benefit, the spousal benefit is
thought to be of little value to the secondary workers in the control group. While the
presence of the spousal benefit still provides secondary workers in this category some
insurance, it is relatively far less important to secondary workers in the control group
relative to the vulnerable couples.
Our regression results show little evidence for a behavioral response among
vulnerable couples relative to the control group. While the relative risk ratios in the
multinomial regression indicate that vulnerable couples are slightly more likely to delay
divorce in their ninth year of marriage to the tenth year, the effect is not statistically
significant and is small in magnitude. Therefore, we conclude that the divorce rules in
Social Security do not have strong efficiency implications with regards to divorce
incentives even for couples where the secondary spouse is more vulnerable to the
potential loss in retirement benefits. There are several possible explanations for why
individuals may not respond to the incentives to delay divorce until the tenth year of
marriage: individuals may not be fully aware of the divorce rules in Social Security; they
may be myopic regarding the extra retirement benefits they are losing from earlier
divorce; they may value the earlier dissolution of their marriage more highly than the

18

added retirement benefits far into the future; they may have better information about their
future earnings potential than is available in our data; or they may expect to remarry and
receive spousal benefits from their future spouse’s earnings record. Further research
could shed some light on which of these explanations accounts for the insignificant
behavioral response to divorce rules in Social Security.

19

References:
Alm, James, Stacy Dickert-Conlin, and Leslie A. Whittington, “Policy Watch: The
Marriage Penalty,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 3.
(Summer, 1999), pp. 193-204.
Brien, Michael J., Stacy Dickert-Conlin, and David A. Weaver, “Widows Waiting to
Wed? Remarriage and Economic Incentives in Social Security Widow Benefits,”
SSA Office of Research Evaluation and Statistics WP 89, January 2001.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and Cristian Meghea, “The Effect of Social Security on Divorce
and Remarriage Behavior,” CRR WP 2004-09, April 2004.
Favreault, Melissa and Eugene Steurle, “Social Security Spouse and Survivor Benefits
for the Modern Family, paper prepared for the annual Retirement Research
Consortium conference, August 10-11, 2006.
Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick, “Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax
Rates,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1-22, March 1992.
Goda, Gopi Shah, “Implicit Social Security Tax Rates over the Life Cycle,” unpublished
mimeo, April 2007.
Smith, Karen E., "The Status of the Retired Population, Now and in the Future," in Social
Security and the Family, Melissa M. Favreault, Frank J. Sammartino, and C.
Eugene Steurle, eds., Washington: Urban Institute Press, 2002, pp. 47-88.
Thompson, Lawrence H. and Adam Carasso, "Social Security and the Treatment of
Families: How Does the United States Compare with Other Developed
Countries?" in Social Security and the Family, Melissa M. Favreault, Frank J.
Sammartino, and C. Eugene Steurle, eds., Washington: Urban Institute Press,
2002, pp. 123-176.

20

