NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CURRENT ACCOUNT ADJUSTMENT:
SOME NEW THEORY AND EVIDENCE
Jiandong Ju
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 13388
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13388

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We thank Rudolfs Bems, Marcel Fratzscher, Caroline Freund, Mick Deveraux, Gordon Hanson, Jean
Imbs, Olivier Jeanne, Aart Kraay, Nuno Limao, Jonathan Ostry, David Parsley, Ken Rogoff, Eric van
Wincoop and seminar participants at Northwestern University, University of Lausanne, Graduate Institute
for International Studies in Geneva, the IMF, and the European Central Bank for helpful discussions
and suggestions, and Chang Hong, Erik von Uexkull, and Xuebing Yang for very capable research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jiandong Ju and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Current Account Adjustment: Some New Theory and Evidence
Jiandong Ju and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 13388
September 2007
JEL No. E00,F3,F4
ABSTRACT
This paper aims to provide a theory of current account adjustment that generalizes the textbook version
of the intertemporal approach to current account and places domestic labor market institutions at the
center stage. In general, in response to a shock, an economy adjusts through a combination of a change
in the composition of goods trade (i.e., intra-temporal trade channel) and a change in the current account
(i.e., intertemporal trade channel). The more rigid the labor market, the slower the speed of adjustment
of the current account towards its long-run equilibrium. Three pieces of evidence are provided that
are consistent with the theory.
Jiandong Ju
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
and University of Oklahoma
jju@imf.org
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
sw2446@columbia.edu

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 An Overlapping-Generations, Multi-Sector Model
2.1 Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 The Interest Rate under Trade and Financial Autarky
2.2.1 Change in Capital Stock Kt . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 Change in Time Preference β . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.3 Change in Productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 A Frictionless Open-Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Multiple Equilibria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Adding Costs to Goods Trade and Capital Flows . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

7
9
12
12
13
13
13
15
16

3 A Model with Labor Market Rigidity
3.1 Current Account Adjustment in a Small Country . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Current Account Adjustment in a Large Country . . . . . . . . . . .

19
20
26

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

4 Some Empirical Evidence
29
4.1 Labor Market Rigidity and Trade Structure Flexibility . . . . . . . . 31
4.2 Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Convergence Speed . . 34
4.2.1 Estimating the Speed of Convergence for Current Account . . 34
4.2.2 Relating the Adjustment Speed of Current Account to Labor
Market Rigidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.3 Current Account Adjustment Speeds Estimated from a Non-linear
TAR Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3 Volatility of Current Account-to-Total Trade Ratio . . . . . . . . . . 39
5 Conclusion

41

6 Appendix

45

1

1

Introduction

One of the major advances in open-economy macroeconomics in the last thirty
years is the intertemporal approach to current account, developed in seminal work
by Sachs (1981, 1982) and Svesson and Razin (1983), codified in Obstfeld and
Rogoﬀ (1996), and now taught to every graduate student in international economics.
Relative to the Mundell-Fleming model, the intertemporal approach has a micro-foundation
and can be connected to Friedman’s permanent income hypothesis. In spite of its
appeal at a conceptual level and some partial empirical support, actual current
accounts for many countries appear too smooth (i.e., do not seem to move as much as
the theory predicts) (see, for example, Roubini, 1988; Sheﬀrin and Woo, 1990; Otto,
1992; Ghosh, 1995; Ghosh and Ostry, 1995; Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 1996; and Hussein
and de Melo, 1999). The empirical failure of the classic intertemporal approach is
sometimes interpreted as a consequence of capital controls. The diﬃculty with this
interpretation is that the empirical failure occurs also with countries that arguably
have a very high degree of capital mobility (e.g., the United Kingdom, see Sheﬀrin
and Woo, 1990, and Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ, 1996). In this paper, we propose a theory
of current account adjustment that nests the textbook version as a special case.
Countries with certain institutional features (to be made clear later) would naturally
have relatively smooth current accounts. We also provide some tests that shed light
on the theory’s predictions.
We argue that the setup of a single tradable-sector in a typical paper on the
intertemporal approach is not an innocuous simplification. In particular, in an
alternative setup with two tradable sectors to be presented in this paper, any
shock that changes a country’s capital stock - which can come from an exogenous
increase in the domestic capital stock, an increase in the discount factor, or an
increase in productivity - could be accommodated by a change in the composition
of output and intra-temporal trade with no need for a current account adjustment

2

(or intertemporal trade). The intuition behind this apparently major departure from
the classic exposition of the intertemporal approach can be understood by appealing
to the classic theory of (intra-temporal) trade. In the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson
model with two sectors and two factors, factor prices are equalized across countries
as long as the goods market is integrated. Even with financial autarky (i.e., no
intertemporal trade but with free contemporaneous trade in goods), a shock to the
capital stock can be completely accommodated by a change in the composition of
output and goods trade. Instead of exporting capital directly (i.e., adjusting the
current account), a country can export capital indirectly by exporting more of the
capital-intensive product and at the same time importing more of the labor-intensive
product (i.e., adjusting the composition of the intra-temporal trade). In this case,
going from financial autarky to free international capital mobility need not generate
any capital movement. In other words, the intertemporal trade that would have
taken place is completely substituted by a change in the composition of goods trade.1
Of course, current account does fluctuate in the data; so one cannot stop here.
Can we recover the textbook predictions about a current account response to a shock
in our model with multiple tradable goods? The answer is yes if we assume that labor
is sector-specific. Intuitively, if labor is not mobile across sectors, then domestic
output composition cannot change fully in response to a shock to a country’s capital
stock. So the adjustment must go through the current account. In this case, the
current account response would resemble that described in the textbook by Obstfeld
and Rogoﬀ (1996). In general, if an economy’s labor market is partially flexible, its
response to a shock would be a combination of a change in the current account (i.e.,
the intertemporal trade channel) and a change in the composition of output and
goods trade (i.e., the intra-temporal trade channel). The relative importance of the
current account channel depends inversely on the degree of domestic labor market
1

The point on potential substitution between international trade and capital mobility is
pioneered by Mundell (1957), and discussed by Jones and Neary (1984), Markusen (1983), Markusen
and Svensson (1985), Wong (1986), and Neary (1995), among many others.

3

flexibility.
We note that it is not straightforward to study capital flows (capital account
adjustments) in a Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson framework: without costs of trade
in goods or capital, there are infinite combinations of capital flow and goods trade
composition that constitute equilibria. So the exact amount of capital flows is
indeterminate. With costs of trade in goods and/or capital, one tends to obtain one
of two corner solutions: the adjustment to a shock is either entirely through a change
in the goods trade and nothing through capital flows, or only through capital flows
with no change in the composition of goods trade. In this paper, we introduce labor
market rigidity in addition to costs of trade and capital flows. The costs of trade and
capital flows deliver a unique solution, and labor market rigidity eﬀectively generates
decreasing returns to scale at the sector level and moves the equilibrium away from
the two corners toward an interior solution. This interior solution potentially helps
to explain both the “missing trade” puzzle (i.e. the factor content of goods trade
is too small relative to the prediction of the Heckscher-Ohlin model, see Trefler,
1995) in the trade literature, and the “too smooth current account” puzzle in the
open-economy macroeconomics literature.
The model presented in this paper diﬀers in an important way from the more
standard generalization of adding a non-tradable sector to the bare-bones intertemporal
approach to current account. In models with non-tradable and tradable sectors,
frictions in the domestic labor market impede resource reallocation between the
non-tradable and tradable sectors. Since, with a single tradable good, one cannot
decouple goods trade from current account changes, the more rigid the domestic
labor market, the less the current account responds to a shock. This is shown
through calibrations by Fernandez de Cordoba and Kehoe (2000) and others. In
contrast, since our model allows for a separation between a change in the mix of the
goods trade and a change in the current account, it delivers an opposite prediction.
A change in the current account and a change in the composition of two tradable

4

sectors are substitutes. Therefore, an increase in domestic labor market rigidity that
reduces resource reallocation between the two tradable sectors, must increase, rather
than reduce, the size of the current account response. Assuming that the distribution
of the underlying shocks is the same for all economies, a testable implication of our
model is that the variance of the current account is positively associated with the
degree of domestic labor market rigidity across countries. We report some empirical
evidence that suggests that our channel dominates in the data.
The theory presented in this paper is related to an empirical literature in open-economy
macroeconomics that estimates the speed of adjustment of the current account
towards the long-run equilibrium (Milesi-Ferretti and Razin, 1998; Freund, 2000;
Freund and Warnock, 2005; and Clarida, Goretti, and Taylor, 2005). This line of
research typically finds that the current account has a tendency to regress back
to its long-run equilibrium, with a speed of adjustment that is heterogenous across
countries. The reason behind the mean reversion property and especially the cross-country
heterogeneity in the adjustment speed is usually unexplained in the existing studies.
Our theory provides a micro-foundation to understand these patterns. In the very
short run, every economy can be thought of as being represented by a specific-factor
model in which labor does not move between sectors. A shock manifests itself in
a change in the economy’s current account. In the long run, the economy can be
represented by a Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson setup in which all factors are perfectly
mobile. The same shock is absorbed by a change in the composition of goods
production and trade with no change in the current account. The transition from
the short run to the long run generates the mean reversion in current account. The
time it takes for an economy to move from the very short run to the long run can
be assumed to be proportional to its labor market rigidity. If the degree of labor
market flexibility is diﬀerent across countries, so is the convergence speed of current
account.
The empirical part of the paper provides three types of results.

5

First, we

report evidence that an economy’s frequency in the adjustment of the goods trade
composition is linked to its labor market rigidity. This is a necessary but not
suﬃcient condition for our story. Second, we examine a time-series implication of
our theory: current account is mean-reverting, and the adjustment (to its long run
equilibrium) is slower in a country with a more rigid labor market. We implement
our empirical test in two steps: (a) estimating a speed of current account adjustment
country by country; and (b) relating the adjustment speed to labor market rigidity.
The result is supportive of our prediction. Third, we report evidence that a country’s
current account (relative to total trade) is more variable if its labor market is more
rigid. We interpret it as suggesting that economies with a more rigid labor market
have a larger current account response to the same set of underlying shocks.
The large country case represents an interesting twist. Since one country’s
current account surplus must be the rest-of-the-world’s current account deficit, for
a large country, its current account adjustment depends not only on its own labor
market institutions, but also on those of the other countries. We show theoretically
that, even if a large country has a completely flexible labor market (but the rest
of the world does not), part of its response to a shock has to take place through
a change in its current account (which is diﬀerent from the case of a small open
economy).
This paper is related to the literature on dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin models
pioneered by Oniki and Uzawa (1965), Bardhan (1965), Stiglitz (1970), and Deardorﬀ
and Hanson (1978). Other contributions in recent years include Chen (1992), Baxter
(1992), Nishimura and Shimomura (2002), Bond, Trask and Wang (2003), and
Bajona and Kehoe (2006). Most closely related to our paper is one by Ventura
(1997), which studies trade and growth with a model of one final good, two intermediate
goods, and labor-augmenting technology. While this literature tends to focus on the
question of income convergence across countries, current account adjustment is not
typically studied (and a balanced trade is often assumed ). Our paper is also related

6

to specific factor models in the trade literature. Jones (1971), Mayer (1974), Mussa
(1974), and Neary (1978 and 1995) are some of classic papers. The tradition in the
trade literature is to assume that capital is sector specific but labor is fully mobile.
We choose to focus on rigidity in labor market. Collective bargaining and laws
that make it diﬃcult for firms to fire workers could impede labor mobility across
sectors. More generally, both labor and capital may be specific in the very short
run and become more flexible over time. In our context, frictions in the capital
market impede both the access to the international capital market (which reduces
the reliance on current account adjustment) and the reallocation of capital between
tradable sectors within the economy (which increases the reliance on current account
adjustment). Therefore, with these two opposing eﬀects, the linkage between the
capital market imperfection and the pattern of current account adjustment is not
clear cut. We therefore find it useful to emphasize labor market rigidity.
We organize the rest of the paper in the following way. Section 2 presents
an overlapping-generations version of a multi-sector, two-factor, and flexible labor
market model. Section 3 introduces labor market rigidity to the model. The labor
market institution is parameterized in such a way that the specific-factor model
and the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model are special cases of the formulation.
The last part of this section discusses how the large-country case may diﬀer from
the small-country case. Section 4 presents some empirical work examining the
relationship between domestic labor market institution and patterns of current
account adjustment. Finally, Section 5 concludes and points to directions for future
research.

2

An Overlapping-Generations, Multi-Sector Model

We use an overlapping-generations model to illustrate the idea. After setting up
the model, we first discuss how the domestic interest rate under both trade and

7

financial autarky would respond to various shocks. The point is to demonstrate that
the model behaves in the same way as the textbook version of the intertemporal
approach; nothing unusual goes on here. However, when we allow for free trade
in goods but retain financial autarky, the model deviates substantially from the
textbook predictions. In particular, shocks to the economy are absorbed through
changes in the composition of output and goods trade with no change in the domestic
interest rate. In this case, moving from financial autarky to financial openness would
not generate any current account response to any of these shocks.
We start with a closed-economy case. Each individual is assumed to live for
two periods, young and old. Lt individuals are born in period t. There is no
population growth; thus Lt = Lt−1 = L. Each individual supplies one unit of labor
when she is young, and zero when she is old, and divides the labor income when
young between her first period consumption and saving. In the second period, the
individual consumes the saving (principle plus interest).
Let Cty and Cto be the consumption in period t of young and old individuals.
The utility of an individual born at t, Ut , is defined as
o
Ut = u(Cty ) + βu(Ct+1
), 0 < β < 1

(1)

where β is time-preference factor.
Let wt be the wage rate per unit of labor at period t, and rt+1 the interest rate
from period t to period t + 1. The endowment at period t is labor Lt , and capital
stock Kt which equals the total saving from the previous period. Lt and Kt are used
to produce two intermediate goods X1t and X2t , which in turn are used to produce
a composite final good Yt . The final good is then used for both consumption and
investment. We assume that intermediate good 1, X1t , is labor intensive, while
X2t is capital intensive. The final good is taken as the numeraire whose price is
normalized to 1.

8

The intertemporal budget constraint is
Cty +

o
Ct+1
= wt
1 + rt+1

(2)

The consumer maximizes utility (1) subject to the budget constraint (2). Substituting
(2) into (1), the first order condition is:
o )
βu0 (Ct+1
1
=
1 + rt+1
u0 (Cty )

(3)

which is the standard intertemporal Euler equation. (2) and (3) together solve for
o
Cty and Ct+1
as functions of (wt , rt+1 , β). An individual’s saving is s(wt , rt+1 , β) =

wt − Cty (wt , rt+1 , β). Thus, total saving in period t is given by
St (wt , rt+1 , β, Lt ) = [wt − Cty (wt , rt+1 , β)] Lt

(4)

In equilibrium St equals Kt+1 , the capital stock in period t + 1. Cty (wt , rt+1 , β)
decreases as rt+1 increases. Thus St (wt , rt+1 , β, Lt ) is an increasing function of rt+1 .

2.1

Production

The production setting assumed in this paper is close in spirit to that in Ventura
(1997). While international capital flows (or intertemporal trade) are prohibited
by assumption in his model, we not only allow for intertemporal trade but make
it a central focus of the discussion. The market is perfectly competitive. The
production function for the final good is Yt = G(X1t , X2t ). The production function
for intermediate good i(= 1, 2) is Xit = fi (At Lit , Kit ) where At measures labor
productivity, which is exogenous and identical in both sectors.2

Hit = At Lit

can be understood as eﬀective labor. All production functions are assumed to be
homogeneous of degree one. We assume no depreciation of capital for simplicity.
2

One could introduce the productivity parameter in a diﬀerent way, e.g., making it Hicks-neutral
in the final good, Yt = At G(X1t , X2t ). None of the major results are aﬀected.

9

The unit cost function for Xit is

φi (

wt
, rt ) = min{wt Lit + rt Kit | fi (At Lit , Kit ) ≥ 1}
At
µ ¶
wt
= min{
Hit + rt Kt | fi (Hit , Kit ) ≥ 1}
At

(5)

We denote qt = wt /At as the wage rate for one unit of eﬀective labor thereafter.
Free entry ensures zero profit for the intermediate goods producers. We assume
that the country’s endowment is always within the diversification cone so that both
intermediate goods are produced. In period t + 1 we have:

p1,t+1 = φ1 (qt+1 , rt+1 ) and p2,t+1 = φ2 (qt+1 , rt+1 )

(6)

where pi is the price of intermediate good i. Note that labor and capital are both
used to produce intermediate goods. The full employment conditions for labor and
capital are, respectively,

where aiLt+1 =

a1Lt+1 X1,t+1 + a2Lt+1 X2,t+1 = Lt+1

(7)

a1Kt+1 X1,t+1 + a2Kt+1 X2,t+1 = Kt+1

(8)

∂φi (qt+1 ,rt+1 )
At+1 ∂qt+1

and aiKt+1 =

∂φi (qt+1 ,rt+1 )
∂rt+1

are labor and capital usages

per unit of production at t + 1, respectively.
The profit maximization for final good producers requires that
p1,t+1 = G01 (X1,t+1 , X2,t+1 ) and p2,t+1 = G02 (X1,t+1 , X2,t+1 )

(9)

which implies

G(X1,t+1 , X2,t+1 ) = p1,t+1 X1,t+1 + p2,t+1 X2,t+1
= wt+1 Lt+1 + rt+1 Kt+1

10

(10)
(11)

Equation (10) is due to homogeneous of degree one of f (.) and implies zero profit
for the final good producers. Equation (11) is due to zero profit for the intermediate
goods producers and implies that supply equals demand in the final good market.
Equations (6)- (9) are a system of Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson (HOS) framework.
For a given vector of product prices (p1,t+1 , p2,t+1 ), factor prices (qt+1 , rt+1 ) are
determined by (6). Given factor prices, endowment vector (Lt+1 , Kt+1 ) then determines
the output vector (X1,t+1 , X2,t+1 ) through equations (7) and (8). Finally, product
prices (p1,t+1 , p2,t+1 ) and sector output are also linked by the market clearing condition
(9) for the products. All the key propositions of the HOS model are valid here. In
particular, Samuelson’s factor price equalization theorem holds: If the product prices
(p1,t+1 , p2,t+1 ) are the same across countries, the eﬀective wage rate, qt+1 , and the
interest rate, rt+1 , must also be equal across countries.
If Kt+1 increases, the Rybczynski theorem implies that the capital intensive
output X2,t+1 increases, while the labor intensive output X1,t+1 decreases. Thus the
market price of X2,t+1 , p2,t+1 , declines, while p1,t+1 increases. Using the Stolper-Samuelson
theorem, the return to capital, rt+1 , declines, while the eﬀective wage rate qt+1
increases. Thus, r(Lt+1 , Kt+1 ) as a solution to the above system is a decreasing
function of Kt+1 . The inverse function of this,
Kt+1 = I(Lt+1 , rt+1 ) = r−1 (Lt+1 , rt+1 )

(12)

defines the investment function. Since the wage rate wt+1 = At+1 qt+1 , an improvement
in the (labor-augmenting) productivity increases the wage rate proportionally. However,
the interest rate rt+1 , and the investment function r−1 (Lt+1 , rt+1 ) are not aﬀected
by a change in the technology At+1 .

11

2.2

The Interest Rate under Trade and Financial Autarky

The equilibrium interest rate in period t + 1, rt+1 , is determined by the saving
function (4) (the supply of capital) and the investment function (12) (the demand
for capital). This can be represented graphically by a Metzler diagram in Figure 1A
that has saving and investment on the horizontal axis and the interest rate on the
vertical axis. The upward-sloping SS curve represents the saving function and the
downward-sloping II curve represents the investment function. The equilibrium
investment Kt+1 and the interest rate rt+1 are determined by the intersection
between the SS and II curves. We consider four cases of comparative statics under
autarky (with no goods trade or international capital flows), namely, increases in:
(a) the capital stock in period t, (b) the time preference, (c) the productivity shifter
in period t and (d) the productivity shifter in period t+1, respectively. The objective
is to show that our model under both trade and financial autarky behaves in the
same way as the textbook model with one tradable sector. There is nothing unusual
so far. This is to be contrasted later with the case of financial openness when our
model departs from the textbook model substantially.
2.2.1

Change in Capital Stock Kt

Consider an exogenous increase in the capital stock in period t (possibly due to an
infusion of international aid). We apply the standard HOS analysis to equilibrium
conditions (6) - (9). The increase in Kt results in a reduction in the interest rate rt
and an increase in the eﬀective wage rate qt . Thus, wage rate in period t, wt = At qt ,
increases.
Note that individual saving s(wt , rt+1 , β) = wt −Cty (wt , rt+1 , β) =

o (w ,r
Ct+1
t t+1 ,β)
.
1+rt+1

As wage income wt increases, s(wt , rt+1 , β) increases. Therefore, in Figure 1a, the
saving curve SS shifts out, while the investment curve II remains unchanged. The
equilibrium moves from E to C and rt+1 declines.

12

2.2.2

Change in Time Preference β

An increase in β in period t means that individuals have become more patient
and would like to consume less in period t but more in the next period. Thus,
s(wt , rt+1 , β) =

Ct+1 (wt ,rt+1 ,β)
1+rt+1

increases and the saving curve SS shifts out. Since

the demand for capital or the investment curve II in t + 1 is not aﬀected, rt+1 falls.
2.2.3

Change in Productivity

Consider first an increase in At . In response, wt = At qt must increase proportionally.
Thus, the saving curve SS in period t + 1 shifts out, while the investment curve II
in period t + 1 is not aﬀected. As a result, rt+1 declines.
Consider next an increase in At+1 . In our setup, this has no eﬀect on the wage
income in period t, and therefore no eﬀect on the saving curve SS. As we discussed
before, in this labor-augmenting setup, an increase in At+1 has no eﬀect on the
investment curve II either. Thus, rt+1 does not change.

2.3

A Frictionless Open-Economy

Let us now consider the open-economy case in which the world consists of two
countries, home and foreign, and allow for both intratemporal and intertemporal
trade. Intratemporal trade takes place when a country exports the good of its
comparative advantage and imports the good of its comparative disadvantage, whereas
intertemporal trade takes place when a country lends capital (or runs a current
account surplus) to another country in one period and collects the capital back with
interest (or runs a current account deficit) in a future period.
Note that in the textbook exposition of the intertemporal approach, when there
is only one tradable sector, only intertemporal trade is feasible (i.e, no intratemporal
trade). For comparison, we first discuss how our model would work if intratemporal
trade in the intermediate goods is artificially banned. Assume that the two countries
are identical to begin with, and then the home country is hit by a shock that increases
13

Kt , β, At or At+1 , respectively. All foreign variables are denoted by a “*”. The
current account balance is illustrated in Figure 1. As we discussed in the last section,
an increase in either Kt , β, or At would shift the saving curve in period t + 1 out
from SS to S 0 S 0 , while the investment curve II remains unchanged. The post-shock
A0 , is at point C and less than that of abroad at
home autarky interest rate, rt+1
A∗ . Thus, if only intertemporal trade is allowed, the world interest rate r is
E ∗ , rt+1
A0 but below r A∗ . Home would run a current account surplus in period t,
above rt+1
t+1

and foreign would run a deficit. These results resemble exactly those in Obstfeld
and Rogoﬀ (1996). An improvement in the future technology At+1 is only slightly
diﬀerent. In the textbook treatment, this shifts out both the saving curve SS and
the investment curve II so the net eﬀect on the interest rate is ambiguous. In
our model, an increase in At+1 has no eﬀect on either the saving curve SS or the
investment curve II, and therefore no eﬀect on the interest rate.
Suppose we now allow for free trade in intermediate and final goods, but ban
intertemporal trade. We will see that our model’s results can be dramatically
diﬀerent from those in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996). The intratemporal trade in
the intermediate and final good equalizes the product prices across countries in
every period. That is, pit = p∗it . As equation (6) and the counterpart in foreign
country indicate, factor prices (qt , rt ) are determined by the prices of intermediate
goods (p1t , p2t ) so we must have
qt = qt∗ and rt = rt∗

(13)

in every period t. Consider now opening up the economy for international capital
flows. With equal interest rates in both countries, there is no incentive for intertemporal
trade.
This is basically Samuelson’s factor price equalization theorem. The underlying
reason for the diﬀerence between our setup and that in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996)

14

is that an extra channel for adjustment to shocks - through intratemporal trade in
the intermediate goods - has been opened up. In particular, in response to a shock
that increases the home country’s capital stock, the home country can increase
the production and export of the capital intensive intermediate good (i.e., exporting
capital indirectly through intratemporal trade), instead of exporting capital directly
(i.e., through a current account adjustment).
This idea can be illustrated by the Metzler diagram shown in Figure 1. From
the previous section, a shock that augments the home country’s capital stock would
shift out the home saving curve from SS to S 0 S 0 . Let I e I e and I e∗ I e∗ be the
investment curves at home and abroad under free intratemporal trade, respectively.
As Home produces more capital intensive good now than under autarky, and Foreign
produces less, the home investment curve I e I e in Figure 1A shifts out, but the foreign
investment curve I e∗ I e∗ in Figure 1B shifts in. The intratemporal trade moves the
domestic equilibrium from C to G, and the foreign equilibrium from E ∗ to G∗ . The
interest rates after the intratemporal trade are equalized in the two countries.
The following proposition summarizes our discussion:
Proposition 1 In a frictionless world, intratemporal trade in the intermediate goods
equalizes interest rates across countries in every period. As a result, there is no
incentive for intertemporal trade.

2.4

Multiple Equilibria

Going from trade/financial autarky to an open economy, zero intertemporal trade
(or zero capital flow) is a possible equilibrium but not the only one. To see this,
we use a graphical representation of an integrated world economy from Dixit and
Norman (1980) and Helpman and Krugman (1985). In Figure 2, O and O∗ represent
the origins for home and foreign countries, respectively. Vectors OX1 and OX2
represent the world employment of capital and labor in intermediate Sectors 1
and 2 in the equilibrium of the integrated world economy. Intratemporal trade
15

equalizes product and factor prices across two countries. Let E be the distribution
of factor endowments without capital flows. That is, E = (Lt+1 , Kt+1 ) from origin O
¡
¢
∗
and L∗t+1 , Kt+1
from origin O∗ . The full employment conditions in home country,
(7) and (8), determine the domestic employment of labor and capital in Sectors

1 and 2, OA and OB, respectively. O∗ A∗ and O∗ B ∗ are their foreign-country
counterparts. Note that any distribution inside the parallelogram OX1 O∗ X2 is a
possible equilibrium if both labor and capital are mobile internationally. If labor is
not internationally mobile (which we will assume throughout the paper), all points
on line T T ∗ are equilibria. For example, point E 0 , is one of the feasible equilibria,
where home lends EE 0 amount of capital to foreign, and produces OA0 and OB 0 .
Multiple equilibria implies indeterminacy. To achieve a unique equilibrium, we
consider first costs of goods trade together with costs of capital flows. This by
itself would result in a complete specialization in either intratemporal trade or
intertemporal trade. We regard this as unsatisfactory as it is not consistent with
the data. Our preferred solution is to relax the assumption of perfect labor mobility
within a country in addition to consider costs of trade and capital flows. We will
discuss this case in Section 3.

2.5

Adding Costs to Goods Trade and Capital Flows

In an influential paper by Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000), trade costs are used to explain
the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle, as well as five other major puzzles in international
finance. It is argued that “trade costs can create a wedge between the eﬀective real
interest rates faced by borrowers and lenders,” and “it is precisely such incipient
real-interest-rate eﬀects that keep observed current-account imbalances within a
modest range.” (Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 2000, pp. 341) In this section, we introduce
costs of trade into our multiple-sector model and study the eﬀect of trade costs on
current account. As we will see, our results are very diﬀerent from those of Obstfeld
and Rogoﬀ (2000).

16

Consider the case in which a shock increases the domestic capital stock at t + 1
∗ . Home is
in a world with two otherwise identical countries. That is, Kt+1 > Kt+1

capital abundant, importing the labor-intensive intermediate good 1 and exporting
the capital-intensive intermediate good 2. We assume an iceberg transportation cost
τ : for every unit of home (foreign) good shipped abroad, only a fraction 1−τ arrives.
Then the no-arbitrage condition implies that

p1t+1 =

p∗1t+1
and p2t+1 = (1 − τ ) p∗2t+1
1−τ

(14)

For simplicity, we assume a Cobb-Douglas production function for both intermediate
αi 1−αi
goods so that φi (qt+1 , rt+1 ) = qt+1
rt+1 where α1 > α2 . Rewrite the zero profit

conditions for home and foreign countries
α1 1−α1
α2 1−α2
p1t+1 = qt+1
rt+1 and p2t+1 = qt+1
rt+1
∗α1 ∗1−α1
rt+1 and
(1 − τ ) p1t+1 = qt+1

(15)

p2t+1
∗α2 ∗1−α2
= qt+1
rt+1
(1 − τ )

which gives
α1 +α2
rt+1
α1 −α2
=
(1
−
τ
)
∗
rt+1

(16)

We also assume an iceberg cost of capital flow, ρ. Hence, capital flows from home
to foreign countries if
rt+1
< (1 − ρ)
∗
rt+1

(17)

Combining (16) and (17), we conclude that there would be no capital flows (intertemporal
trade) if the trade cost is small relative to the cost of capital flows, in the sense that
α1 −α2

τ < 1 − (1 − ρ) α1 +α2

(18)

In this case, any cross-country interest rate diﬀerential would be driven down suﬃciently
by trade in intermediate goods so that no international capital flows (or intertemporal

17

trade) would take place.
α1 −α2

On the other hand, if τ > 1 − (1 − ρ) α1 +α2 , there would be capital flows (from
home to foreign country). Note that as long as there exists intratemporal trade, (16)
∗ . In this case, capital would cross the national
always holds and rt+1 < (1 − ρ) rt+1

border until the capital/labor ratios in the two countries become identical so that
intratemporal trade is eliminated. This is essentially Mundell’s (1957) argument that
intertemporal trade (capital flows) and intratemporal trade are complete substitutes.
The notion of trade costs includes transport cost, tariﬀs and non-tariﬀ barriers.
Costs of capital flows include costs associated with exchange controls, foreign countries’
taxes on international investment, and premia for currency and political risks in
international financial investment.

Given the strong home bias on observes in

international financial investment, it is entirely possible that the cost of international
capital flows is enormous for many countries. The following proposition summarizes
our discussion.
Proposition 2 Introducing costs of trade and costs of capital flow produces a unique
equilibrium but at one of the two corners. If the trade cost is small relative to the
α1 −α2

cost of capital flows in the sense that τ < 1 − (1 − ρ) α1 +α2 , then the economy’s
adjustment to shocks takes place entirely through intratemporal trade in intermediate
goods (i.e., no current account response). On the other hand, if the trade cost is
large relative to the cost of capital flows, then the adjustment to shocks takes place
entirely through intertemporal trade (or a current account response).
By construction (with only one tradable sector), Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000)
rule out the substitution between intratemporal trade and capital flows. In their
model, a higher transportation cost raises incipient real interest diﬀerentials and
therefore increases the cost of borrowing/lending (i.e., current account adjustment),
which reduces the current account imbalance. In contrast, in our model, there
would be no incentive for international capital flows if the trade costs were zero,
18

since the intratemporal trade in goods would have indirectly realized exports (or
imports) of capital. Higher costs of trade would reduce intra-temporal trade and
raise intertemporal trade. Thus, our model produces an opposite result from that
in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ with regard to the eﬀect of trade costs on the size of
current account. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000) report a negative empirical correlation
between current account surplus and real domestic interest rate and interpret that
as supportive evidence for their theory. However, the negative correlation is also
consistent with our model except that the direction of causality is reversed.

3

A Model with Labor Market Rigidity

We now turn to a model that allows for labor market rigidity. In the framework
described in Section 2.5, it is assumed that capital and labor can be costlessly
and instantaneously reallocated between sectors within a country. We now relax
this assumption. In particular, we introduce some labor market frictions and show
that international capital flows and goods trade are no longer complete substitutes.
Generally speaking, in response to a shock, an economy’s adjustment involves a
combination of intratemporal trade (i.e., changes in the composition of goods trade)
and intertemporal trade (i.e., borrowing or lending on the international capital
market).
The timing of the model is as follows. The economy is in a steady state in period
t. At the beginning of period t + 1, young individuals at t + 1 have made career
choices in terms of which sector to work in. Lit+1 is hired in sector i at time t + 1,
and the capital stock is Kt+1 . Then a shock (e.g., a change in Kt , β, or At ) hits
the economy. To simplify the analysis, we assume that the cost of goods trade is
small relative to the cost of capital flows (in the sense that inequality (18) holds)
so that no capital moves across countries in period t. Goods trade is assumed to be
balanced initially. Since trade in intermediate goods suﬃciently narrows the interest

19

rate diﬀerential between the countries, initially zero capital flow in equilibrium does
not imply that the capital/labor ratios are identical in two countries. The home
country - to be hit by a shock - is assumed to be capital abundant both before and
after the shock. If home is a small country, it is shown that capital will flow from
home to foreign countries in period t although the home country exports the capital
intensive good at the same time. At the end of this section, we will relax the small
country assumption and discuss the large country case.

3.1

Current Account Adjustment in a Small Country

Let home be a small country which takes world prices (p1t , p2t ) as given. When labor
is perfectly mobile across sectors, our model would coincide with the HOS setup
0
0
discussed in Section 2.5. Domestic factor prices (qi,t+1
, ri,t+1
) would be determined

by (15) both before and after a shock. If labor is assumed to be attached to the
sectors, on the other hand, this becomes a specific-factor model. A shock that
increases the capital stock would reduce the financial-autarky level of domestic
interest rate, but would raise the wage rate.

Moreover, the wage rate in the

0
capital-intensive sector 2, w2,t+1
, would be higher than that in the labor intensive
0
sector 1, w1,t+1
. Output in both sectors would increase. In the textbook exposition of

classic trade theories, the specific-factor model is viewed as a short-run equilibrium,
and the flexible-labor-market HOS model represents the long run equilibrium. In
the transition from the short run to the long run, labor (and capital) move from the
labor-intensive sector to the capital-intensive sector. Once reaching the long run,
0
0
factor prices go back to (qi,t+1
, ri,t+1
), and the capital-intensive output increases, but

the labor intensive output decreases, in accordance with the Rybczynski theorem.
Between these two polar cases, there are various levels of partial labor market
rigidity. To parameterize the degree of labor market flexibility, we assume that when
a unit of labor moves from one sector to another, it would earn only λ fraction of
the wage in the new sector. 1 − λ fraction of the wage income is lost (due to moving
20

costs). A higher λ represents a more flexible labor market. At the one extreme,
λ = 1 represents the HOS model (in which labor market is completely flexible);
at the other extreme, λ = 0 represents the specific-factor model (in which there is
no labor mobility). The post-shock wage ratio in the specific-factor model,
defines the upper bound for the wage diﬀerential. Therefore, even for λ ≤

0
w1,t+1
,
0
w2,t+1

0
w1,t+1
,
0
w2,t+1

an

individual intending to move from the labor-intensive sector 1 to the capital-intensive
sector 2 would see a decline in her wage income. As a result, no labor relocation
0
0
takes place, and wage rates would stay at (w1,t+1
, w2,t+1
). So the entire range of

0≤λ≤

0
w1,t+1
0
w2,t+1

eﬀectively corresponds to a specific-factor model. If λ >

0
w1,t+1
,
0
w2,t+1

labor

in sector 1 would find it worthwhile to move to sector 2 until w1,t+1 = λw2,t+1 . The
relationship between the degree of labor market flexibility and the post-shock wage
rates in the two sectors can be summarized by the following expression:

w1,t+1 = {
Since, when 0 ≤ λ ≤

0
w1,t+1
,
0
w2,t+1

λw2,t+1 ,

0
w1,t+1
0
w2,t+1

<λ≤1

0
, 0≤λ≤
w1,t+1

0
w1,t+1
0
w2,t+1

a (moderate) change in the labor market flexibility

has no eﬀect on the economy, we will focus on scenarios in which

0
w1,t+1
0
w2,t+1

<λ≤1

thereafter.
Let fi (At+1 Li,t+1 , Ki,t+1 ) be the production function for intermediate good i.
We drop the subscript t + 1 in the rest of this subsection for simplicity. Note that
qi = Awi , so w1 = λw2 if and only if q1 = λq2 . The equilibrium conditions become:
∂f1 (H1 , K1 )
∂K1
∂f1 (H1 , K1 )
p1
∂H1
p1

∂f2 (H2 , K2 )
∂K2
∂f2 (H2 , K2 )
= λp2
∂H2
= p2

H1 + H2 = AL, and K1 + K2 = K 0

(19)
(20)
(21)

Equation (19) states that the marginal products of capital in two sectors are equal,
while equation (20) is the condition that w1 = λw2 .
21

As discussed by Neary (1978), physical and value factor intensities,

Ki
Li

and

rKi
wi Li ,

may diﬀer when w1 6= w2 , which could generate paradoxical results in comparative
statics. To simplify the analysis and avoid these paradoxes, we will assume a
Cobb-Douglas production function. Let
f1 (H1 , K1 ) = H1α1 K11−α1 and f2 (H2 , K2 ) = H2α2 K21−α2

(22)

where α1 > α2 . Therefore, sector 1 is more labor intensive than sector 2 in both
physical and value senses.
We are now ready to discuss the open-economy case. Let the home country be
capital abundant after the shock so that the country imports (the labor-intensive)
good 1 and exports (the capital-intensive) good 2. Intra-temporal trade in the
intermediate goods implies that p1 =

p∗1
1−τ

and p2 = (1 − τ ) p∗2 . The iceberg cost

of capital flows is still denoted by ρ. However, the financial-autarky level of the
interest rate diﬀerential is no longer governed by equation (16). Since labor market
rigidity results in decreasing returns to scale at the sector level, intertemporal and
intratemporal trade coexists in the equilibrium.
We assume that condition (18) holds in equilibrium before the shock.

By

assumption, as the domestic interest rate, r0 , is greater than (1 − ρ) r∗ but less
than r∗ / (1 − ρ), there are no capital flows crossing national borders before the
shock. Consider a shock that increases the domestic capital stock from K to K 0 .
We first examine two polar cases of labor market flexibility, and then discuss the
more general case of an intermediate level of labor market flexibility.
If λ = 1 (perfectly flexible labor market), with trade openness but financial
autarky, factor prices are determined by the zero profit conditions given by (15) and
the domestic interest rate stays at r0 after the shock. Going from financial autarky
to financial openness, there is no incentive for capital to flow out (or in). In other
words, all the adjustment to the shock goes through the channel of intratemporal

22

trade: the country exports more of the capital-intensive good without any direct
capital outflow.
If λ ≤

0
w1t+1
0
w2t+1

(highly rigid labor market), with trade openness but financial

autarky, labor is sector specific and there are decreasing returns to scale at the sector
level. The domestic interest rate falls after the shock. If the shock is suﬃciently
large, the post-shock domestic interest rate, r0 , dips below (1 − ρ) r∗ , leading to a
capital outflow. It can be easily verified that, without the cost of capital flows, the
entire shock to the capital stock, ∆K = K 0 − K, would flow out and would restore
the interest rate to the long run level r0 . Moderately positive costs of capital flows
would modify this slightly. Thus, the movement of the current account in this case
resembles that of the textbook version of the intertemporal approach.
For intermediate levels of labor market flexibility,

w10
w20

< λ < 1, the financial-autarky

equilibrium is described by equations (19), (20), and (21). For notational convenience,
each variable is denoted by a superscript λ and the equilibrium is labelled as the
λ-economy. A set of comparative statics, to be used later for our main results, are
summarized in the following lemma. A formal proof is relegated to the appendix.
Lemma 1 Suppose that sector 1 is labor intensive in the λ-economy. Then we have
∂H1λ
∂λ

< 0,

∂K1λ
∂λ

< 0,

∂rλ
∂λ

> 0, and

∂rλ
∂K

< 0.

When the labor market is partially rigid, some labor moves from sector 1 to
sector 2 in response to a shock, with an associated adjustment of capital between
the two sectors as well. The amounts of labor used in two sectors, H1λ < H1 and
H2λ > H2 , are determined by the wage rate equation (20). The interest rate is now
between the two polar cases, r0 < rλ < r0 . The more flexible the labor market, the
closer the interest rate to r0 . If the shock is suﬃciently large, the financial-autarky
level of interest rate becomes rλ < (1 − ρ) r∗ , resulting in a capital outflow under
financial openness. As capital flows out, rλ increases, while the wage rate diﬀerential
w2λ − w1λ shrinks so that w1λ /w2λ > λ. This implies that labor in sector 1 does not
23

flow to sector 2 while capital flowing out. Therefore, the λ-economy is eﬀectively the
¡
¢
specific-labor model in which the labor usage in each sector is fixed at H1λ , H2λ ,

respectively. As we again have decreasing returns to scale, capital will flow out until

the domestic interest rate reaches (1 − ρ) r∗ . Since rλ > r0 under financial autarky,
only a part of ∆K = K 0 − K flows out under financial openness. In other words,
a change in the current account is only a part of the adjustment in response to the
shock; the remaining adjustment must go through a change in the composition of
goods trade.

w10
w20

More formally, let B = K 0 − K 00 denote the amount of capital outflow. When
< λ < 1, the interest rate is determined by the labor market flexibility parameter

λ, and the capital stock employed in the home country K 00 . That is, rλ = rλ (λ, K 00 ) =
r(λ, K 0 − B). Thus, the amount of capital outflow is determined by
rλ (λ, K 0 − B) = (1 − ρ) r∗

(23)

Diﬀerentiating equation (23), we obtain the result that the size of the current account
response to a given shock is inversely related to labor market flexibility:
dB
=
dλ

∂rλ (.)
∂λ
∂rλ (.)
∂K

<0

(24)

We summarize our results by the following proposition.
Proposition 3 Consider a small-open economy with labor market flexibility indexed
by λ. When a shock increases the capital stock (by a suﬃcient size to overcome the
cost of capital flows) in the country, it experiences an outflow of capital (i.e., runs
a current account surplus). The more flexible the labor market (i.e., the bigger is
λ), the smaller the current account response.
A graphical illustration in Figure 3 may help us to understand the above analysis.
The length of the horizontal axis is equal to the total supply of capital. The
24

vertical axis measures the interest rate. The value marginal product of capital
curves in sectors 1 and 2, labeled as V1 and V2 , respectively, are plotted relative
to origins O1 and O2 . The equilibrium position before a shock is shown by E 0
where V10 = p1 ∂f1 (H10 , K1 )/∂K1 and V20 = p2 ∂f2 (H20 , K − K1 )/∂K2 intersect. A
shock that increases the capital stock from K to K 0 , shifts origin O2 to the right
to O20 by ∆K = K 0 − K. Correspondingly, V20 , is shifted to the right by ∆K to
0

V2 = p2 ∂f2 (H20 , K 0 − K1 )/∂K2 . In the specific-factor model in which labor is not
mobile (λ ≤

0
w1t+1
),
0
w2t+1

the new equilibrium E 0 is determined by the intersection between

0

V10 and V2 . The interest rate decreases from r to r0 , while capital employed in sector
1, K1 , increases from K10 to K11 . At the constant product prices, the wage rate in
each sector must increase, with a greater proportion in the capital intensive sector.
In the long-run (which can be thought of as λ = 1), factor prices are restored to
the long-run equilibrium level, (q 0 , r0 ). Using Rybczynski theorem, the output of
the labor intensive sector must fall. That is, both V1 and V2 shift to the left and
intersect at the long-run equilibrium E L , which is to the left of point E 0 .
When

w10
w20

< λ < 1, the equilibrium of the λ-economy, E λ , is between the
0

specific-factor equilibrium E 0 and the long run equilibrium E L . V2 shifts left to
λ

λ

V2 = p2 ∂f2 (H2λ , K 0 − K1 )/∂K2 and V10 shifts left to V1 = p1 ∂f1 (H1λ , K1 )/∂K1 in
Figure 3 since H1λ < H10 but H2λ = AL − H1λ > H20 . As labor market becomes less
λ

rigid, more factors move from sector 1 to sector 2 consequently, and both V2 and
λ

V1 will shift to the left further. The interest rate rλ increases as λ increases so that
r0 < rλ < r0 .
We assume that the shock (∆K = K 0 − K) is suﬃciently large so that rλ <
(1 − ρ) r∗ . Therefore, domestic capital will flow out, which shifts both origin O20 and
L

V2 to the left in Figure 3. As capital flows out, the home interest rate increases,
while wage rate diﬀerential shrinks. This implies that labor in each sector sticks to
Hiλ as capital flows. In equilibrium the capital employed by home country is reduced
λ

to K 00 and V2 shifts to the left to V200 = p2 ∂f2 (H2λ , K 00 − K1 )/∂K2 which intersects
25

λ

V1 at E 00 ; the interest rate is equal to (1 − ρ) r∗ .
By similar reasoning, a country runs a current account deficit in response to
a shock that temporarily reduces the country’s capital stock. Moreover, the size
of the current account deficit is inversely related to the degree of domestic labor
market flexibility. As the labor market approaches perfect flexibility (λ → 1), the
current account response to a shock approaches zero (since all adjustment takes
place instantaneously through a change in the composition of goods trade). This
discussion, however, assumes that the country is a price-taker in the world market.
We consider next the case of a large country.

3.2

Current Account Adjustment in a Large Country

As the capital stock increases from K to K 0 at home, the relative supply of the labor
intensive good to the capital intensive good, X1 /X2 , declines. As a result, the world
relative price of good 1, p1 /p2 , increases. Therefore, in the foreign country, sector 1
expands relative to sector 2 and the wage rate in sector 1, w1∗ , is higher than that
in sector 2, w2∗ . The counterparts of equilibrium conditions (19), (20), and (21) in
the foreign country without capital flows are:

∂f1 (H1∗ , K1∗ )
∂K1∗
∂f1 (H1∗ , K1∗ )
λ∗ p1 (1 − τ )
∂H1∗
p1 (1 − τ )

=
=

p2 ∂f2 (H2∗ , K2∗ )
1−τ
∂K2∗
p2 ∂f2 (H2∗ , K2∗ )
1−τ
∂H2∗

H1∗ + H2∗ = A∗ L∗ , and K1∗ + K2∗ = K ∗

(25)
(26)
(27)

Labor market rigidity in the foreign country, λ∗ , diﬀers from that at home. Moreover,
cross-sector factor adjustments in the two countries go in opposite directions. Sector
2 expands at home due to the increase in the capital stock, but sector 1 expands in
the foreign country due to an increase in the world market relative price of good 1.
Equation (26) represents w2∗ = λ∗ w1∗ and is the reverse of the equation (20). The
26

world market clearing conditions for the intermediate goods are:

X1 (p1 , p2 ) + X1∗ (p1 , p2 ) = f1 (H1 , K1 ) + f1 (H1∗ , K1∗ )

(28)

X2 (p1 , p2 ) + X2∗ (p1 , p2 ) = f2 (H2 , K2 ) + f2 (H2∗ , K2∗ )

(29)

where Xi (p1 , p2 ) is the derived demand for intermediate good i in the home country,
which is the inverse function of equation (9), and Xi∗ (p1 , p2 ) is its counterpart in
the foreign country.
First consider intratemporal equilibrium without capital flows. Ten endogenous
variables, H1 , K1 , H2 , K2 , H1∗ , K1∗ , H2∗ , K2∗ , p1 , and p2 are determined by ten
equations (19), (20), (21), (25), (26), (27), (28), (29). By comparing the domestic
interest rate r, which is determined by K1 /H1 , with the foreign interest rate r∗ ,
which is determined by K1∗ /H1∗ , we can determine the direction of capital flow.
Now let K f be the amount of capital flow (intertemporal trade) between the
countries. The equilibrium intratemporal and intertemporal trade is then determined
by the ten equations described above, replacing domestic and foreign capital stocks,
K 0 and K ∗ , by K 0 − K f and K ∗ + K f , respectively, and adding a world capital
market clearing condition:

p1

∂f1 (H1 , K1 )
∂f1 (H1∗ , K1∗ )
= (1 − ρ) p1 (1 − τ )
∂K1
∂K1∗

(30)

A closed form solution is not possible without some further simplifying assumptions.
The comparison between r and r∗ , which depends on the levels of labor market
rigidity both at home and abroad, is complicated, too. Fortunately, for one interesting
special case we are able to determine the adjustment pattern to a shock. Specifically,
if the domestic labor market is perfectly mobile (λ = 1), but the foreign labor market
is rigid (λ∗ < 1), we are able to compare the financial autarky levels of domestic
and foreign interest rates and the qualitative results of Proposition 3 remains.
27

Using Stolper-Samuelson theorem, the increase in p1 /p2 reduces the interest rate
at home when labor is perfectly mobile. In the foreign country, the increase in p1 /p2
reallocates factors from the capital intensive sector to the labor intensive sector. As
one unit of labor moves from sector 2 to sector 1, more capital would be released in
sector 2 than can be absorbed in sector 1 if capital intensities in both sectors were
to remain constant. Therefore, as a consequence of the labor adjustment, capital
intensities must rise in both sectors. The rigid labor market in the foreign country,
however, prevents a required labor adjustment and therefore an increase in capital
intensities (a decrease in the interest rate) to the full scale. Therefore, without any
cross-country capital movement, the foreign interest rate would be higher than the
domestic interest rate. If the shock is suﬃciently large, the interest rate diﬀerential
between two countries would exceed the cost of capital flows. With capital mobility,
the home country runs a current account surplus in period t.
Intuitively, for a country to avoid using the current account to adjust to a shock,
it has to do all the adjustment through a change in the composition of goods trade
(exporting more the capital-intensive good and importing more the labor-intensive
good). For a large country (e.g., the United States) to be able to do that, the rest of
the world would have to do the reverse (adjusting its output mix and composition of
goods trade in the opposite direction). Any lack of labor market flexibility in the rest
of the world would prevent it from adjusting the output mix and the composition of
goods trade fully. As a consequence, the large country with a perfectly flexible labor
market would have to adjust to a shock at least partly through its current account
if the labor market in the rest of the world is not perfectly flexible. We state the
result as follows and relegate a formal proof to the Appendix.
Proposition 4 Consider a two-country world (i.e., both countries are large) in
which the labor market is perfectly flexible at home (λ = 1) but somewhat rigid in
the foreign country(λ∗ < 1). When a shock increases the capital stock in the home
country, the home country runs a current account surplus in period t.
28

This proposition suggests that the relationship between labor market flexibility
and current account adjustment for a large country is qualitatively diﬀerent from
a small country. For a small country, the more flexible the domestic labor market,
the smaller the current account response to a shock. But this feature may not hold
for a large country.

4

Some Empirical Evidence

In this section, we investigate three questions empirically for small open economies.
First, does the flexibility of a country’s labor market correspond to the frequency
of adjustment in the composition of its goods trade? Second, does labor market
rigidity slow down the speed of convergence of an economy’s current account to
its long-run equilibrium? Third, is a rigid labor market associated with a greater
variance of the current account relative to total trade in goods and services?
These three questions are inter-related. In our theory, flexibility of domestic
labor market aﬀects an economy’s ability to change the composition of goods trade
rather than its current account to accommodate a shock.

Hence, a necessary

condition for our story to work is that flexibility in a country’s labor market should
be reflected in the flexibility of its trade structure. We note, however, this is not a
suﬃcient condition for our story as other theories could also be consistent with this
pattern.3
The second question examines an implication of our theory for the dynamics of
the current account. While our model does not explicitly study the transition from
the short run to the long run, we impute an interpretation about the transition
from two comparative statics results in the model. In the very short run, a given
economy may be represented by a specific-factor model. According to our theory,
the adjustment to a shock takes place entirely through a change in the current
account. In the long run, the economy can be represented by a Hescher-Ohlin setup
3

See, for example, Cunat and Melitz (2007).

29

with a flexible labor market. According to our theory, the eﬀect of the shock is
absorbed entirely by a change in the composition of goods trade, and the current
account returns to long-run equilibrium level.4 Following the theory by Kraay and
Ventura (2000), we will not impose the restriction that the current account in the
steady state is zero and let it be country specific instead. This reasoning generates
the predictions that current account is mean-reverting and that current account
adjustment is slower if domestic labor market is less flexible. For the active empirical
literature that estimates the mean reversion property of the current account (and
finds cross country diﬀerences in the speed of current account convergence), our
theory can be thought of as a micro-foundation.
The third question we examine is an implication of our theory for the cross-country
pattern in the variance of current account (net trade) relative to total trade (exports
plus imports). Any economy is subject to various shocks all the time, most of which
are not measured and recorded systematically. In the absence of an exhaustive
catalogue of all the relevant shocks, we assume that the distribution of the shocks is
the same for all economies over a long enough time period. Under this assumption,
our theory implies that the more rigid the labor market, the more likely the eﬀects
of these shocks show up in the movement in the net trade (current account) rather
than the movement in the total trade. In other words, a lower flexibility in the
labor market may be associated with a greater variance of current account relative
to total trade.
It is tempting to think that any impediment to a reallocation of capital and labor
between sectors within an economy would slow down the current account adjustment
or increase the variance of the current account relative to the total trade. In other
words, our theory may be as much about how capital market rigidities could aﬀect
To make it formal, we assume that e−λT denotes the fraction of the wage income that is lost
when a unit of labor moves from one sector to another within a time period T. In the short run
(T = 0), the entire wage income would be lost, so no work would wish to move. In the long run
(T = ∞), no wage income is lost, so the model becomes the HOS setup. The current paper does
not consider an endogenously determined T , which is left for future research.
4

30

the pattern of current account adjustment. This, however, may not be the case.
Consider credit market constraints (an inability to borrow funds quickly from banks
or capital market) faced by small and medium-sized firms. Suppose a favorable
shock hits an economy that would make it profitable for firms in a particular sector
to expand. The inability for these firms to borrow funds quickly due to credit market
constraints prevents a quick adjustment in the composition of goods trade. This
may lead one to think that the economy would have to turn to the current account
to do the adjustment. However, current account adjustment is about borrowing
and lending vis a vis the international capital market. If small/medium-sized firms
cannot borrow funds quickly at home due to the credit market constraints, it is
equally likely that they cannot borrow funds quickly from the international capital
market. In this example, imperfections in the credit market impede both the access
to the international capital market (i.e., the use of current account to accommodate
a shock) and the reallocation of capital between sectors within the economy (i.e.,
the use of intra-temporal trade to adjust to the shock). Therefore, the linkage
between credit market constraints and the pattern of current account adjustment is
ambiguous.

4.1

Labor Market Rigidity and Trade Structure Flexibility

We first examine whether domestic labor market rigidity aﬀects the churning of trade
structure (i.e., the average change in the composition of exports and imports over
time). Recent empirical trade studies suggest that working with highly disaggregated
sectoral data is important as most of the adjustment in capital-labor ratio likely
takes place within a finely defined sector rather than across sectors. For example,
Schott (2004) documented that China and France (as examples of developing and
developed countries) often appear to export the same set of products to the U.S.
(according the US customs’ classification of products). However, as their products
appear to have diﬀerent unit values, they are likely to be of diﬀerent varieties. Since

31

China and France have very diﬀerent capital-to-labor ratios, this suggests that much
of the diﬀerence in factor content is reflected in diﬀerent specialization between
China and France within a common sector rather than across diﬀerent sectors. The
implication for us is that we need to work with the most disaggregated data possible.
Absent a satisfactory way to compute the churning of capital/labor ratio in exports
and imports, we compute the degree of churning for exports and imports (for any
reason) country by country, using most disaggregated data available on exports and
imports from the United Nations’ Comtrade database at the HS 6 digit level.5
To be precise, Let sX (j, h, t) = the share of product h in country j’s exports in
year t, and sM (j, h, t) = the share of product h in country j’s imports in year t.
Then the Trade Structure Churning Index for country j, or Churning(j) for short,
is defined by

Churning(j) =

T
1 XX
[|sX (j, h, t) − sX (j, h, t − 2)| + |sM (j, h, t) − sM (j, h, t − 2)|]
T t=1
h

where t = 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004, and T = 5. The churning index is
bounded between zero (no change in trade structure) and 2 (maximum possible
change). The value of the trade structure churning index is reported in Column
3 of Table 1. Since agriculture, dairy farming, and fishery activities (agriculture
for short) are generally diﬃcult to switch in and out of, we have also computed a
churning index excluding these activities and reported it in Column 4 of Table 1.
The index for labor market rigidities comes from the World Bank Investment
Climate Assessment (ICA) based on an enterprise survey conducted by the World
Bank in 2003.6 Specifically, it is the proportion of managers/survey respondents
5

It would have been useful to also examine churning of the output structure across countries.
Unfortunately, the most disaggregated data set on sectoral output, the UNIDO database, has less
than 100 sectors. This level of disaggregation is far below that of the trade data we are using here
(which has over 5000 sectors at HS 6-digit).
6
http://iresearch.worldbank.org/InvestmentClimate. The data were used in the World Banks’
World Development Report 2005 .

32

in a country who report labor regulation as a major business constraint (out of 18
categories listed on the questionnaire, including quality of infrastructure, macroeconomic
instability, tax rate, tax administration, corruption, and crime. Each respondent
can report multiple categories as major constraints.) This measure of labor market
rigidity is preferable to simply coding the labor market regulations on the book,
since the strength of enforcement varies widely across countries. A strong law that
is not well enforced is not as binding for firms as a weaker regulation that is strictly
enforced. Since survey responses presumably take enforcement into account, the
ICA index can be regarded as a de facto measure of labor market rigidity. In any
case, the labor market rigidity index is presented in Column 5 of Table 1.
A scatter plot of the trade structure churning index (for all sectors) against the
labor market rigidity index is reported in Figure 4. A negative association between
the two is evident: countries with a more rigid labor market are more likely to
have a low churning of their trade structures. With a t-statistics of -1.75, the slope
coeﬃcient is statistically diﬀerent from zero at the 10% level. Brazil is an apparent
outlier on the lower right part of the graph. If one removes Brazil, the new slope
coeﬃcient is still negative; but with a t-statistics of -1.60, it is only diﬀerent from
zero at the 15% level. If we remove agriculture, dairy, and fishery activities from
the computation of the trade churning index, the new scatter plot is presented in
Figure 5. The negative slope coeﬃcient is more significant (at the 1% level with a
t-statistic at -2.11) than Figure 4. After removing Brazil, the slope coeﬃcient is still
negative and significant at the 10% level (with a t-statistic at -1.94). To summarize,
the data suggest that domestic labor market rigidity aﬀects the speed of turnover
of an economy’s trade structure.
This result is after all not surprising: one would think that impediments to labor
reallocation should necessarily slow down the adjustment in the trade structure. In
that sense, Figures 4 and 5 can also be read as a confirmation that the measure of
labor market rigidity captures useful information about the actual operation of the

33

labor markets in these economies.

4.2

Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Convergence Speed

We now turn to the second piece of empirical evidence. One may consider the index
of labor market rigidity as representing the length of the time it takes for a given
economy to make the transition from the short run to the long run. Our theory
then predicts that the speed of convergence of the current account (scaled by GDP)
to the long run equilibrium increases with the flexibility of domestic labor market.
Before we present our empirical results, we first make a note of the existing
empirical literature in open-economy macroeconomics that examines the mean reversion
property or estimates the speed of convergence of the current account towards
long-run equilibrium (Milesi Ferretti-Razin, 1988; Freund, 2000; Freund and Warnock,
2005; and Clarida, Goretti, and Taylor, 2005). These estimations are often done for
a single or a small number of developed countries and tend to be done without a
theoretical microfoundation. Our theory can be regarded as a possible microfoundation
for such estimations.
Our own empirical work follows a two-step procedure. In step one, for every
country in the sample, we estimate a speed of convergence of current account to GDP
ratio towards the steady state. This estimation utilizes the time series information
country by country. In step two, we relate the speed of convergence to a country’s
degree of labor market rigidity. This steps is done for a cross section of countries.
We explain the two steps in turn.
4.2.1

Estimating the Speed of Convergence for Current Account

Let x(j, t) be the ratio of country j’s ratio of current account to GDP in time t,
or, x(j, t) = ca(j, t)/gdp(j, t). Using ∆ to denote first diﬀerence of a variable, we
estimate

34

∆x(j, t) = α(j) + β(j)x(j, t − 1) + e(j, t)

(31)

for the period 1980-2005. Under the null hypothesis that the current account as a
share of GDP does not converge, β(j) = 0. Under the alternative hypothesis that
the ratio of current account to GDP converges to a long-run steady state, β(j) is
negative (and smaller than one in absolute value). The greater is β(j) in absolute
value, the faster is the speed of convergence. Note that this specification does not
impose the constraint that the long-run value of the current account-to-GDP ratio
should be zero. The country-specific long-run value in this specification is given by
−α(j)/β(j). The idea that diﬀerent countries may have diﬀerent long-run values is
consistent with Kraay and Venture (2000).
Our theory suggests that large economies’ current accounts could behave systematically
diﬀerently from smaller ones as foreign labor market flexibility also aﬀects them.
In the empirical tests, we exclude large economies, defined as those whose GDP
accounts for more than 5% of world GDP. Consequently, the United States, Japan
and Germany are excluded from the sample.
The estimation is done at both quarterly and annual frequencies. Data on current
account and GDP come from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics database.
Potential serial correlations in the error term is mopped up by higher orders of
the lags of the dependent variable (We will later consider a non-linear specification
that allows for faster convergence when the current account is suﬃciently far away
from its long-run equilibrium level). We now turn to the second step of our empirical
design, namely, relating the estimated speed of current account convergence to labor
market rigidity.

35

4.2.2

Relating the Adjustment Speed of Current Account to Labor
Market Rigidity

Let R(j) be an index of country j’s rigidity of labor market, or a measure of the
diﬃculty in firing or hiring workers. We relate a country’s speed of current account
adjustment to its labor market rigidity as follows:

β(j) = c + γR(j) + u(j)

(32)

Under the null hypothesis that current account adjustment is not related to labor
market rigidity, γ = 0. Under the alternative hypothesis that a more rigid labor
market leads to a slower adjustment in current account, γ > 0 (recall that β(j)s are
non-positive).
We now turn to the basic results from estimating Equation (32). As a first step,
we estimate the speed of current account convergence country by country using
quarterly data on the ratio of current account-to-GDP. There are 30 countries for
which we simultaneously have quarterly CA data and a measure of labor market
rigidity. These regression results are not reported to save space. As a second step,
we implement the simplest possible bi-variate linear regression exploring any linkage
between a country’s speed of current account convergence and its labor market
rigidity. The result is reported in Column 1 of Table 2. The slope coeﬃcient
is 1.06 and statistically significant. This is consistent with the notion that the
current account convergence is systematically slower in countries with more rigid
labor markets.
The convergence speed for current account could be aﬀected by factors other than
labor market rigidity. Unfortunately, the literature does not provide much guidance
on this, and most empirical estimation on current account convergence uses only
univariate time series. Since a key benefit of a flexible exchange rate regime is
supposed to provide a country with a better insulation from external shocks, one

36

might think that exchange rate regime matters for the speed of adjustment. It is
well recognized that a country’s self-declared (de jure) exchange rate regime does
not often describe its actual behavior well (Frankel and Wei, 1994). We therefore
add a de facto exchange rate regime classification a la Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2004).
Specifically, a country in a given time period is classified into one of six regimes: a
peg to a foreign currency, a crawling peg, a managed float, a float, free falling, and
dual exchange rates. Since our regression is a cross-section, we assign an exchange
rate regime classification to a country if it spends a majority of the time in that
regime during the sample period. The regression result is reported in Column 2 of
Table 2. It turns out that the exchange rate regime designations are not statistically
significant. The coeﬃcient on labor market rigidity is basically unchanged (with a
point estimate of 1.17 and still being statistically significant).
In addition, one might think that the level of economic development (or the
quality of public institutions) can aﬀect the speed of adjustment. So we also include
per capita GDP (in logarithm) as a control variable. The result is reported in
Column 3. It turns out the level of development does not play a significant role in
the current account adjustment either.
We have tried other variations: merging various flexible exchange rate regimes
into one, using an alternative measure of de facto exchange rate classification a la
Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003). These results are reported in the last four
columns of Table 2. In all these cases, the coeﬃcient on labor market rigidity remains
positive and statistically significant at the 10% level. This suggests that the pattern
that a more rigid labor is associated with a slower current account adjustment is
robust.
The results so far use quarterly data. However, because annual data on current
account/GDP ratio have fewer missing observations than quarterly data, we can
work with a larger set of countries. Table 3 reports a set of regressions that relate
the current account adjustment parameters estimated using annual data with labor

37

market rigidity. The same pattern emerges: a more rigid labor market is associated
with a systematically slower speed of current account adjustment. Now, however,
the coeﬃcient on per capita GDP is significant as well: the current account adjusts
faster in poorer countries on average. The coeﬃcients on the exchange rate regime
classifiers are still insignificant, though the negative sign on various flexible regime
dummies is consistent with the notion that current account adjusts faster in countries
with a flexible exchange rate regime. To check if this result is driven by any outlier,
Figure 6 plots the estimates of β(j) (speed of current account convergence) against
R(j) (labor market rigidity). The figure suggests a robustly positive relationship
that is unlikely to be driven by one or two outliers.
4.2.3

Current Account Adjustment Speeds Estimated from a Non-linear
TAR Model

As Freund and Warnock (2005) and Clarida, Goretti, and Taylor (2005) suggest,
the speed of current account adjustment is likely to be non-linear, with faster
adjustment for larger initial deviations from the long-run equilibrium. To take
this into account, we now estimate the speed of current account adjustment by a
threshold autoregressive (or TAR) model.
The TAR model allows the CA/GDP ratio to follow a unit-root process (i.e.,
no convergence) if its value stays within a certain range but reverts to its long-run
equilibrium when the CA/GDP ratio exceeds some threshold values. To be more
specific, the CA/GDP ratio in the TAR model is assumed to come from the following
data generating process,

∆x(j, t) = α1 (j) + β(j)x(j, t − 1) + e(j, t) if |x(j, t − 1)| > φ(j)
= α2 (j) + e(j, t)

otherwise

38

(33)

where α1 (j), α2 (j), β(j), and φ(j) are parameters to be estimated (for every
country j in the sample). In practice, the estimation is done in sequence. The
value of φ(j) is determined by a grid search. As O’Connell and Wei (2002) note, if
transaction costs or other factors create a zone of non-converging current account,
the TAR model provides a more powerful way to detect global stationarity than the
linear AR specification — even if the true behavior of CA/GDP does not conform to
the TAR specification.
Estimation of these models can be done via maximum likelihood or sequential
conditional least squares. Franses and van Dijk (2000) demonstrate the equivalence
of the two methods. Procedurally, we estimate the pooled model using the fixed
eﬀects panel estimator by performing a grid search over possible values of φ. Starting
with an initial value of φ at 0.003, the search adds 0.003 in each successive round
until φ reaches the 75th fractile of the distribution of x(j, t − 1).
After we obtain estimates of β(j) from a TAR model country by country, we
again connect them with the countries’ level of labor market rigidity. The results
are presented in Tables 4-5 (when the convergence speeds for CA/GDP are estimated
with quarterly and annual data, respectively). The coeﬃcients on the measure of
labor market rigidity are positive in all specifications and statistically significant at
the 10% level in 13 out of 14 cases. This again confirms the notion that more labor
market rigidity is associated with slower convergence for CA/GDP to its long-run
equilibrium. In Table 5, there is some evidence that the convergence is faster for
countries with a flexible exchange rate regime, or lower level of income.

4.3

Volatility of Current Account-to-Total Trade Ratio

Rather than looking at the speed of convergence, another way to gauge a country’s
reliance on current account to adjust to shocks is to look at the standard deviation
of the country’s CA/total trade ratio. Under the assumption that the distribution
of the underlying shocks is the same across countries, our theory predicts that an

39

economy’s current account becomes more volatile if its domestic labor market is
more rigid.7 In this subsection, we compute this standard deviation, country by
country, using the time series over the period 1980-2005. We then regress it on the
measure of labor market rigidity, plus control variables. To be precise, let std(j) =
standard deviation of CA/total trade for country j, R(j) be its labor market rigidity,
and Z(j) be a vector of other controls, then the specification is:

std(j) = c + γR(j) + ηZ(j) + u(j)

(34)

The proposition that a country with a more rigid labor market tends to rely more
on its current account (relative to total trade) to adjust to shocks is interpreted as
implying γ > 0. Since both real and nominal shocks could aﬀect CA/total trade
directly, we include the standard deviation of log CPI and standard deviation of log
GDP (scaled by the mean of log GDP) as control variables. In addition, we allow
exchange rate regimes to have a direct eﬀect on the variability of the CA/total trade
ratio.
The regression results are presented in the first four columns of Table 6. The
estimates for γ are consistently positive and statistically significant at the 10 percent
level. The estimates are consistent with the interpretation that labor market rigidity
aﬀects a country’s relative reliance on its current account to do the adjustment to
shocks. The variability of log CPI is also positively related to the variability of
current account (unsurprisingly). A floating exchange rate regime also tends to
be associated with more current account variability. Perhaps, surprisingly, GDP
variability is not positively associated with current account variability.
A scatter plot of std(j) against R(j) in Figure 7 suggests that Brazil and
Nicaragua may be outliers. We exclude these two countries and re-do the regressions.
The results are presented in the last four columns of Table 6. With this modification
7

Bluedorn (2005) examines, for a set of small island economies in the Caribbean, current account
responses to hurricanes. As we do not have measures of labor market rigidity for most of these
economies, we do not adopt the idea here.

40

of the sample, the variability of the current account/GDP ratio is now positively
associated with the variability of log GDP (but no longer with log CPI). Most
important for us, the positive and statistically significant association between the
variability of the CA/GDP ratio and labor market rigidity appears to be robust to
excluding possible outliers.
Taking together the various pieces of evidence, the data strongly suggest that a
country’s current account adjustment is closely linked to its labor market flexibility
in a way that is consistent with the model in this paper.

5

Conclusion

This paper proposes a theory of current account adjustment that places domestic
labor market institutions front and center. In particular, an economy’s adjustment
to a shock generally involves a combination of an intratemporal channel (a change
in the composition of goods trade) and an intertemporal channel (a change in net
capital flows). When labor is sector specific (which can be regarded as the very short
run), all adjustment for a small open economy takes place through capital flows (and
the model behaves like the textbook version of an intertemporal approach). When
labor is completely mobile within an economy, any shock can be accommodated
by a change in the output and trade composition with no change in the current
account. A relatively more rigid labor regulation slows down the transition from
the short run to the long run, and therefore slows down the speed of convergence
for the CA/GDP ratio.
Three pieces of empirical evidence are presented. First, a rigid labor market
makes an economy less nimble and more likely to experience a low churning of its
trade structure. Second, a higher rigidity of the labor market reduces the speed of
convergence of the current account. And third, a country with a rigid labor market
is likely to exhibit a higher variance of current account to total trade. These patterns

41

are consistent with the theory’s predictions.
This paper represents a first attempt to explore how domestic labor market
institutions can aﬀect the substitution between intra-temporal trade adjustment and
current account adjustment. Many topics in the standard intertemporal approach to
current account, such as the role of fiscal policy, non-tradable sector, and asymmetric
information, have not been explored in this paper. It would naturally be interesting
to rethink each of these topics in our theoretic framework and to re-examine the
data if appropriate. We leave these for future research.

References
[1] Bardhan, P. K. (1965), “Equilibrium Growth in the International Economy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 79: 455—464.
[2] Bajona, Claustre and Timothy J. Kehoe (2006), “Demographics in Dynamic
Heckscher-Ohlin Models: Overlapping Generations versus Infinitely Lived
Consumers,” NBER Working Paper 12566.
[3] Baxter, Marianne (1992), “Fiscal Policy, Specialization, and Trade in the
Two-Sector Model: The Return of Ricardo?” Journal of Political Economy
100: 713—744.
[4] Bluedorn, John (2005), “Hurricanes: Intertemporal Trade and Capital Shocks,”
Nuﬃeld College Economics Paper 2005-W22.
[5] Bond, Eric W., Kathleen Trask and Ping Wang (2003), “Factor Accumulation
and Trade: Dynamic Comparative Advantage with Endogenous Physical
and Human Capital,” International Economic Review 44: 1041—1060.
[6] Cunat, Alejandro and Marc J. Melitz (2007), “Volatility, Labor Market
Flexibility, and the Pattern of Comparative Advantage,” CEPR Working
Paper 6297.
[7] Chen, Zhiqi (1992), “Long-Run Equilibria in a Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin
Model,” Canadian Journal of Economics 25: 923—943.
[8] Clarida, Richard, Manuela Goretti, and Mark P. Taylor (2007), “Are There
Thresholds of Current Account Adjustment in the G7?” In G7 Current
Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard
Clarida, The University of Chicago Press, Chapter 5.
[9] Deardorﬀ, Alan and James A. Hanson (1978), “Accumulation and a Long Run
Heckscher-Ohlin Theorem,” Economic Inquiry 16: 288—292.
[10] Fernandez de Cordoba, G. and Timothy J. Kehoe (2000), “Capital Flows
and Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations Following Spain’s Entry into the

42

European Community,” Journal of International Economics, 51 (2000),
49-78.
[11] Franses, Philip Hans, and Dick van Dijk (2000), Nonlinear Time Series Models
in Empirical Finance, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
[12] Frankel, Jeﬀrey, and Shang-Jin Wei (1994), “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc?
Exchange Rate Policies of the East Asian Economies,” in Macroeconomic
Linkages: Savings, Exchange Rates, and Capital Flows, edited by Takatoshi
Ito and Anne O. Krueger, University of Chicago Press, pp 295-329.
[13] Freund, Caroline (2000), “Current Account Adjustment in Industrialized
Countries,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International
Finance Discussion Paper 692.
[14] Freund, Caroline and Francis Warnock (2005), “Current Account Deficits in
Industrial Countries: The Bigger They Are, the Harder They Fall?” In
G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by
Richard Clarida, The University of Chicago Press.
[15] Ghosh, Atish R. (1995), “International Capital Mobility amongst the Major
Industrialised Countries: Too Little or Too Much?” The Economic Journal,
105(428): 107-128.
[16] Ghosh, Atish R. and Jonathan D. Ostry (1995), “The Current Account in
Developing Countries: a Perspective from the Consumption Smoothing
Approach,” World Bank Economic Review 9(2): 305-333.
[17] Ghosh, Atish R. and Jonathan D. Ostry (1997), “Macroeconomic Uncertainty,
Precautionary Saving, and the Current Account,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 40(1): 121-139.
[18] Hussein, Khaled A. and de Mello, Luiz Jr. (1999), “International Capital
Mobility in Developing Countries: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
International Money and Finance 18: 367-381.
[19] Jones, Ronald W and J. Peter Neary (1984), “The Positive Theory of
International Trade,” in Handbook of International Economics, V1, edited
by R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[20] Johnson, David. (1986), "Consumption, Permanent income, and Financial
Wealth in Canada: Empirical Evidence on the Intertemporal Approach to
the Current Account," Canadian Journal of Economics 19(2): 189-206.
[21] Kraay, Aart, and Jaume Ventura (2000), “Current Accounts in Debtor
and Creditor Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp
1137-66.
[22] Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2003), "To Float or to Fix:
Evidence on the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth," American
Economic Review, Vol. 93 (4), pp. 1173-1193, 2003.

43

[23] Markusen, James R. (1983), “Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as
Complements,” Journal of International Economics, 19: 341-56.
[24] Markusen, James.R. and L.E.O. Svensson (1985), “Trade in Goods and Factors
with International Diﬀerence in Technology,” International Economic
Review, 26: 175-92.
[25] Mayer, Wolfgang (1974), “Short-run and Long-run Equilibrium for a Small
Open Economy,” Journal of Political Economy 82: 955-67.
[26] Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin (1998), “Current Account
Reversals and Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities,” NBER working
paper 6620.
[27] Mundell, Robert A. (1957), “International Trade and Factor Mobility,”
American Economic Review 47, 321-325.
[28] Mussa, Michael (1974), “Tariﬀs and the Distribution of Income: the Importance
of Factor Specificity, Substituttability, and Intensity in the Short and Long
Run,” Journal of Political Economy 82: 1191-204.
[29] Neary, J. Peter (1978), “Short-run Capital Specificity and the Pure Theory of
International Trade,” Economic Journal 88: 488-510.
[30] Neary, J. Peter (1995), “Factor Mobility and International Trade,” Canadian
Journal of Economics 28: S4-S23.
[31] Nishimura, K. and K. Shimomura (2002), “Trade and Indeterminacy in a
Dynamic General Equilibrium Model,” Journal of Economic Theory 105:
244—260.
[32] O’Connell, Paul (1998), “Market Frictions and Real Exchange Rates”, Journal
of International Money and Finance, 17(1), pages 71-95.
[33] O’Connell Paul, and Shang-Jin Wei (2002), “The Bigger They Are, The Harder
They Fall: How Price Diﬀerences Across U.S. Cities Are Arbitraged”,
Journal of International Economics, 56(1), pages 21-53.
[34] Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1996), Foundations of International
Macroeconomics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[35] Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles
in International Macroeconomics: Is there a Common Cause?” in Ben
Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 339-390.
[36] Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor (1997), “Non-linear Aspects of
Goods-Market Arbitrage and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Point
Revisited,” Journal of Japanese and International Economics, 11, pages
441-479.
[37] Oniki, H. and H. Uzawa (1965), “Patterns of Trade and Investment in a
Dynamics Model of International Trade,” Review of Economic Studies 32:
15—38.

44

[38] Otto, Glenn (1992), “Testing a Present-Value Model of the Current Account:
Evidence from US and Canadian Time Series," Journal of International
Money and Finance 11(5): 414-430.
[39] Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (2004), “A Re-interpretation of
Exchange Rate Regimes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[40] Roubini, Nouriel (1988), “Current Account and Budget Deficits in an
Intertemporal Model of Consumption and Taxation Smoothing: A Solution
to the ‘Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle’ ?” NBER Working Paper 2773.
[41] Sachs, Jeﬀrey (1981), “The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment
in the 1970s,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 201-268.
[42] Sachs, Jeﬀrey (1982), “The Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment
Process,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 84: 147-159.
[43] Sarno, Lucio and Mark Taylor (2004), “Non-Linear Dynamics in Deviations
from the Law of One Price: A Broad-Based Empirical Study”, Journal of
International Money and Finance, 23(1), pages 1-25.
[44] Schott, Peter (2004), "Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization
in International Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2):647-678,
May.
[45] Sheﬀrin, Steven M and Wing Thye Woo (1990), “Present Value Tests of an
Intertemporal Model of the Current Account,” Journal of International
Economics, 29(3-4): 237-253.
[46] Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1970), “Factor Price Equalization in a Dynamic Economy,”
Journal of Political Economy 78: 456—488.
[47] Svensson, Lars E. O. and Assaf Razin (1983), “The Terms of Trade and
the Current Account: the Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Eﬀect,” Journal of
Political Economy 91: 97-125.
[48] Trefler, Daniel (1995), “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other HOV
Mysteries ,” American Economic Review 85: 1029-1046.
[49] Ventura, Jaume (1997), “Growth and Interdependence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112: 57—84.
[50] Wong, Kar-yiu (1986), “Are International Trade and Factor Mobility
Substitutes?” Journal of International Economics, 21: 25-44.

6

Appendix

In this appendix we prove Lemma 1 and Proposition 4.
Proof of Lemma 1:
Substituting (21) into (19) and (20) and diﬀerentiating these two equations with
respect to λ, we obtain:

45

∙
¸
∂ 2 f1 (.)
∂ 2 f2 (.) ∂H1
p1
+ p2
∂H1 ∂K1
∂H2 ∂K2 ∂λ
∙
¸
2
∂ f1 (.)
∂ 2 f2 (.) ∂H1
+ λp2
p1
∂λ
∂H12
∂H22

∙
¸
∂ 2 f1 (.)
∂ 2 f2 (.) ∂K1
= − p1
(35)
+
p
2
∂λ
∂K12
∂K22
∙
¸
∂f2 (.)
∂ 2 f1 (.)
∂ 2 f2 (.) ∂K1
= p2
− p1
+ λp2
∂L2
∂H1 ∂K1
∂H2 ∂K2 ∂λ
(36)

The homogeneity of degree 1 implies
Hi

∂ 2 fi (.)
∂ 2 fi (.)
+ Ki
∂Hi ∂Ki
∂Ki2

= 0

(37)

Hi

∂ 2 fi (.)
∂ 2 fi (.)
+
K
i
∂Hi ∂Ki
∂Hi2

= 0

(38)

1
Substituting (37) and (38) into (35) and (36) and solving for ∂K
∂λ , we then have
#
"
Φ
∂f2 (.)
∂K1
(39)
= p2
∂λ p1 ∂ 2 f1 (.) + p2 ∂ 2 f2 (.)
∂H2

∂H1 ∂K1

∂H2 ∂K2

where
Φ = −p21 ∆1 − λp22 ∆2 + ∆3
and
∆i =

∂ 2 fi (.) ∂ 2 fi (.)
−
∂Hi2 ∂Ki2

µ

∂ 2 fi (.)
∂Hi ∂Ki

¶2

> 0 for i = 1, 2

since fi (.) is concave, and
¸∙
¸
∙
H2 K1
∂ 2 f1 (.) ∂ 2 f2 (.) K2 H1
∆3 = p1 p2
−1
−λ
∂H1 ∂K1 ∂H2 ∂K2 H2 K1
K2 H1

K2
H2

Using (22) to solve for factor demands, we have
¶
µ
Ki
1 − αi ³ wi ´
=
(40)
Hi
αi
r
³ ´ ³ ´
K1
K2
w1
1
> K
and
H1
H1 / H2 < w2 = λ since α1 > α2 and w1 = λw2 . Thus, ∆3 < 0,

1
which implies that Φ < 0. Using (39), we have ∂K
∂λ < 0, and then (35) implies that
∂H1
∂λ < 0.
∂r
. Rewrite equations (19) and (20) as
We now turn to the sign of ∂λ

∂f1 (1, K1 /H1 )
∂K1
∂f1 (1, K1 /H1 )
p1
∂H1
p1

∂f2 (1, K2 /H2 )
∂K2
∂f2 (1, K2 /H2 )
= λp2
∂H2
= p2

46

(41)
(42)

Diﬀerentiating these two equations with respect to λ and using (37) and (38), we
obtain:
∙
¸
p1 ∂ 2 f1 (.) λK2 K1 ∂ (K1 /H1 )
∂f2 (.)
= p2
−
H2
H1
∂λ
∂H2
∂K12
1 /H1 )
1 /H1 )
∂r
which implies that ∂(K∂λ
< 0. Note that r = p1 ∂f1 (1,K
. So ∂λ
> 0.
∂K1
∂r
Finally we prove ∂K < 0. Suppose that labor does not move across two sectors
when capital starts to flow out. Diﬀerentiating (19) with respect to K, we have:
¶
µ
p2 ∂ 2 f2 (.)
p1 ∂ 2 f1 (.) p2 ∂ 2 f2 (.) ∂K1
=
+
∂K
∂K12
∂K22
∂K22
1
which implies that ∂K
∂K > 0. As K declines, K1 decreases and so that K1 /H1
decreases since H1 does not change when capital starts to flow out. Thus, r =
1 /H1 )
p1 ∂f1 (1,K
increases.
∂K1
Now diﬀerentiating zero profit conditions p1 = (w1 /A)α1 r1−α1 and p2 = (w2 /A)α2 r1−α2 ,
we obtain:
µ
¶
α1 − α2 dr
d (w1 /w2 )
=
w1 /w2
α1 α2
r

So w1 /w2 increases as r increases. Thus w1 /w2 > λ when capital flows out, which
implies that labor in sector 1 will not flow to sector 2. That is, as capital flows out,
∂r
< 0.
labor does not move across sectors and r increases, which proves ∂K
Proof of Proposition 4:
Rewrite equations (25) and (26) as
∂f1 (1, K1∗ /H1∗ )
∂K1∗
∂f1 (1, K1∗ /H1∗ )
λ∗ p1 (1 − τ )
∂H1∗
p1 (1 − τ )

=
=

p2 ∂f2 (1, K2∗ /H2∗ )
1−τ
∂K2∗
p2 ∂f2 (1, K2∗ /H2∗ )
1−τ
∂H2∗

(43)
(44)

∂f (1,K ∗ /H ∗ )

1 /H1 )
Comparing r = p1 ∂f1 (1,K
with r∗ = p1 1 ∂K1∗ 1 is equivalent to comparing
∂K1
1
K1 /H1 with K1∗ /H1∗ . Let λ = 1 in (41) and (42). Solving for Ki /Hi , we have
K1 /H1 = k1 (p1 , p2 , 1). We start from the case that τ = 0. Using (43) and (44), we
solve for Ki∗ /Hi∗ and have K1∗ /H1∗ = k1 (p1 , p2 , λ∗ ). Note that the function forms of
K1 /H1 and K1∗ /H1∗ are the same when λ = 1. So we have:

K1 /H1 − K1∗ /H1∗ = k1 (p1 , p2 , 1) − k1 (p1 , p2 , λ∗ )
e
∂k1 (p1 , p2 , λ)
(1 − λ∗ )
=
∂λ

(45)

h
e < 1. To determine ∂k1 (p1 ,p2 ,λ)
where λ∗ < λ
, we create an artificial small foreign
∂λ
e
economy which takes world prices as given and has a labor market with rigidity λ.
Equilibrium conditions in the artificial economy are the same as (43) and (44) but

47

e Diﬀerentiating equilibrium conditions in the artificial economy
replacing λ∗ by λ.
e
with respect to λ, we obtain:
"
#
e ∗ K ∗ ∂ (K ∗ /H ∗ )
p1 ∂ 2 f1 (.) λK
∂f1 (.)
1
1
1
− 2∗
(46)
= p1
∗
∗2
e
H1
H2
∂H1∗
∂K1
∂λ

³ ∗´ ³ ∗´
e ∗ in the artificial economy, we have K2∗ / K1∗ >
Using (40) and noting that w2∗ = λw
1
H2
H1
∗ /H ∗
∗
h
∂
K
( 1 1)
w2
∂k1 (p1 ,p2 ,λ)
e
=
> 0. Applying this result to (45), we have
h
w1∗ = λ. Therefore,
∂λ
∂λ
∗
∗
∗
K1 /H1 > K1 /H1 . Thus, r < r at τ = 0. Now let λ∗ be constant, but τ varies.
Using similar argument, we can further show that r∗ |τ >0 > r∗ |τ =0 > r. As τ is
relatively large, the capital flows from the home country to the foreign country at
period t, and the larger the value of λ∗ , the smaller the amount of capital flow.

48

r

I

Ie

S'

re
rA'

rA*

G
S

S'

S*

Ie*

E

rA

I*

r*

S

C

I

E*

Ie
S*
S, I

Figure 1A

G*

Figure 1B

A*

T*

A'*
B*

X2
E

B

B'*
E'

B'

X1
A

T

A'
L

L+L*

Figure 2

49

I*

S*, I*

O*

K+K*

O

Ie*

V20

V10

V2′′

V1λ

V2λ
0

r
(1 − ρ )r *

E0

EL

E ′′

λ

r
0
r ' V2

O1

V2′′

V2′

Eλ

V2λ
K 1′′ K 10

E′
V2′

V1λ

K1λ

K11
Figure 3

50

CA
Surplus

V10
O2

K ′′

O2′

2
HND

AZEKGZ
GEO
ALB
MLI MDA UGA

1.5

SEN
MDG
ZMB

EST
NIC GUY
BGR
KEN
UKR
LTUBGD
LVA
PHL EGY
ECU
SVK HUN
IDN
BLR
LKA
ROM GTM
SLV
HRV
IRL
IND
ARM
DZA
GRCTUR
THA
KOR
KHM
MYS
CHN
CZE
POL
KAZSVN
PRT
ESP

1

.5

ZAF

BRA

SYR

PAK

0

20

40

Labor Rigidity

Churning Index

60

Fitted values

Figure 4: Trade Structure Churning vs Labor Market Rigidity, All Sectors
The slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.009 (0.005), t = -1.75
Excluding Brazil, the slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.010 (0.006), t = -1.60

1.2
ZMB

MLI
ALB
KGZ
EST

1

GEO
AZE

LVA

BGD

PHL

HND
MDG

HUN
GUY
SVKBGR
LTU
UKR IRL ROM
IDN
LKA
MDA
KHM
EGY
HRV
THA MYS
BLR
UGA
TUR
KOR NIC CZE
CHN
ARM
SLV
SEN
POL
SVN
IND
KEN
GRC
ECU GTM
PRT

.8
.6

KAZ

.4

ZAF

DZA
ESP

BRA

PAK

SYR

.2
0

20

Labor Rigidity

Churning Index

40
Fitted values

Figure 5: Trade Churning vs Labor Market Rigidity, Excluding Agriculture
The slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.0056 (0.0026), t = -2.11
Excluding Brazil, the slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.0065 (0.0034), t = -1.94

51

Convergence speed of CA/GDP vs. Labor Mkt Rigidity
ESP

0

IND
IRL
DEU
THA MYS
IDN
UGA PAK
ROM
PRT
UKR
LVA NICHUN
CHN
KOR
PHL
ARM
LTU
EGY
GRC
MDG
BGD
BGR
SEN
KEN LKA
MDA
EST HND
POL
KGZKHM CZE
ZMB
ECU
AZE
GTM
SLV
TURDZA
KAZSVN
MLI

-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8
-1

SYR

BRA

ZAF

HRVBLR

20

0

Fitted values

Labro Market Rigidity

40

60

Convergence speed of CA/GDP Annually

Figure 6: Convergence Speed of CA/GDP vs Labor Market Rigidity
(based on Column 1 of Table 3; Convergence speed estimated with annual data)
The slope coefficient (standard error) = 1.012 (0.350), t = 2.90

Std Dev of (CA/Total-trade) vs Labor Mkt Rigidity
NIC

150

100

BRA

UGA
ALB

ROM

KGZ
ARM

BGD PAK
PRTCHN
THA
TUR MDG
ZMB
KOR
PHL
IND
HRV
POL
KEN
MLIUKRHUNESPHND
LKA
GRC
SVK
MOL
BGR
IRL
SEN
SLV
DEU
GTM
BLRLTUEST
SVN
CZE

50

ZAF

0
0

20
40
Labro Market Rigidity
Fitted values

60

Std. Dev. of CA/Total Trade

Figure 7: Standard Deviation of (CA/Total Trade) vs Labor Market Rigidity
The slope coefficient (standard error) = 13.71 (6.51), t = 2.11

52

Table 1: Labor Market Rigidity and Trade Structure Churning Index

Country Code
1
ALB
ARM
AZE
BGD
BGR
BLR
BRA
CHN
CZE
DZA
ECU
EGY
ESP
EST
GEO
GRC
GTM
GUY
HND
HRV
HUN
IDN
IND
IRL
KAZ
KEN
KGZ
KHM
KOR
LKA
LTU
LVA
MDA
MDG
MLI
MYS
NIC
PAK
PHL
POL
PRT

Country Name
2
Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan, Rep. of
Bangladesh
Bulgaria
Belarus
Brazil
China
Czech Republic
Algeria
Ecuador
Egypt
Spain
Estonia
Georgia
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Croatia
Hungary
Indonesia
India
Ireland
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kyrgyz Republic
Cambodia
Korea
Sri Lanka
Lithuania
Latvia
Moldova
Madagascar
Mali
Malaysia
Nicaragua
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Portugal

Trade Structure
Churning
All sector
3

Trade Structure
Churning Excluding
Agriculture
4

Labor Market
Rigidity
5

1.57
0.84
1.86
1.18
1.24
0.96
0.79
0.76
0.76
0.82
1.02
1.13
0.53
1.33
1.73
0.82
0.92
1.31
1.88
0.91
0.97
0.98
0.85
0.88
0.71
1.24
1.86
0.79
0.80
0.95
1.15
1.12
1.49
1.69
1.48
0.79
1.29
0.40
1.09
0.75
0.63

1.10
0.61
0.85
0.95
0.81
0.68
0.54
0.64
0.65
0.44
0.52
0.69
0.39
1.04
0.96
0.54
0.53
0.82
0.92
0.69
0.83
0.73
0.57
0.78
0.44
0.55
1.09
0.71
0.66
0.72
0.80
0.88
0.71
0.90
1.12
0.68
0.64
0.30
0.92
0.58
0.52

4.90
2.35
1.40
10.80
7.80
6.35
56.90
20.70
9.55
12.90
14.10
28.10
11.80
11.50
5.80
7.70
16.70
10.60
14.20
4.20
8.80
25.90
16.70
9.60
1.65
22.50
3.50
5.90
4.10
25.60
8.70
3.80
6.70
14.80
3.90
14.50
6.90
15.00
24.70
21.55
18.10

53

ROM
SEN
SLV
SVK
SVN
SYR
THA
TUR
UGA
UKR
VNM
ZAF
ZMB

Romania
Senegal
El Salvador
Slovakia
Slovenia
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
Vietnam
South Africa
Zambia

0.94
1.75
0.93
1.00
0.70
0.61
0.81
0.84
1.50
1.23
No data
0.81
1.58

0.76
0.58
0.60
0.80
0.57
0.30
0.69
0.67
0.67
0.76
No data
0.65
1.16

12.25
16.30
3.90
6.00
3.60
33.80
11.40
10.45
10.80
6.15
10.90
32.90
16.90

Sources:

1. Trade Structure Churning Indexes are computed by the authors using most disaggregated
data available on exports and imports from the United Nations’ Comtrade database at the HS
6 digit level. Let sX(j, k, t) = share of product k in country’s exports in year t, and sM(j, k, t) =
share of product k in country j’s imports in year t. Then the Trade Structure Churning Index
for country j, or Churning(j) for short, is defined by
Churning (j) = 1/T ∑t ∑k [ |sX(j, k, t) - sX(j, k, t-2)| + |sM(j, k, t) - sM(j, k, t-2)| ]
Where t = 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004, and T=5. The churning index is bounded
between zero (no change in trade structure) and 2 (maximum possible change).
Column 3 is computed using data for all HS sectors. Column 4 is computed excluding HS
Chapters 1-29 (i.e., excluding agriculture, dairy, fishery and related sectors).
2. Labor Market Rigidity (Column 5) refers to the fraction of managers who report labor
regulations as either a major business constraint or a severe business constraint in a World
Bank Investment Climate Assessment survey conducted in 2002. This should be regarded as
a de facto measure of labor market rigidity.

54

Table 2: Labor Market Rigidity and Convergence Speed of CA/GDP
(with Convergence Speed Estimated with Quarterly Data, Controlling for Seasonality)
b1Q
b1Q
b1Q
b1Q
b1Q b1Q
Labor market rigidity
1.063
1.174
1.16
1.214
1.192
1.108
(0.536)*

(0.615)*

(0.621)*

Exchange rate: crawling peg

-0.173

-0.217

-0.173

-0.219

(0.20)

(0.21)

(0.19)

(0.20)

Exchange rate: managed float

-0.206

-0.212

(0.25)

(0.25)

-0.24

-0.229

(0.19)

(0.19)

Exchange rate: float

-0.257

Exchange rate: dual market

-0.239

(0.21)

(0.21)

-0.182

-0.177

(0.41)

(0.41)

Exchange rate: managed float, float, free falling
or dual market
Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: intermediate
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]

0.109

-0.184

-0.153

(0.14)

(0.15)

0.004

0.041

(0.18)

(0.20)

0.112

(0.14)

Observations
R-squared

1.077

(0.562)* (0.566)* (0.575)* (0.585)*

(dropped) (dropped)

Exchange rate: free falling

Constant

b1Q

0.071

(0.13)
-0.408

-0.441

(0.13)

-0.57

-0.405

-0.437

-0.491

-0.54

(0.090)*

(0.179)*

(0.185)*

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

0.12

0.18

0.2

0.17

0.2

0.2

0.21

(0.171)* (0.177)* (0.111)* (0.144)*

Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%
The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for an AR process with lags that characterizes the speed of
convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5,
their last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2002)

55

Table 3: Labor Market Rigidity and Convergence Speed of CA/GDP
(with Convergence Speed Estimated with Annual Data)
b1A
b1A
b1A
b1A
Labor market rigidity
1.012
1.228
1.258
1.133
(0.350)*

Exchange rate: crawling peg
Exchange rate: managed float
Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: free falling
Exchange rate: dual market

(0.407)*

(0.396)*

(0.381)*

b1A
1.151

0.969

1.031

(0.383)*

(0.367)*

-0.028

-0.003

(0.08)

(0.08)

0.063

0.024

0.056

0.015

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.11)

-0.048

-0.036

-0.061

-0.037

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.12)

(0.12)
(dropped)

-0.115

-0.096

(0.12)

(0.12)

-0.235

-0.245

(0.29)

(0.28)

Exchange rate: managed float, float,
free falling or dual market
Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: intermediate
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]
Constant

b1A

(0.371)*

(0.11)

(dropped)

b1A

0.043

0.07

(0.12)

(0.11)

0.155

0.162

0.184

(0.086)*

(0.086)*

(0.081)*

-0.689

-0.7

-0.747

-0.692

-0.745

-0.678

-0.76

(0.059)*

(0.092)*

(0.093)*

(0.096)*

(0.097)*

(0.070)*

(0.076)*

49

47

47

47

47

47

47

0.15

0.21

0.27

0.18

0.25

0.16

0.25

Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%

The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for an AR process with lags that characterizes the speed of
convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5,
their last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2002)

56

Table 4: Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Convergence
(with CA/GDP convergence speed estimated from a TAR model, quarterly data)
b1Q
b1Q
b1Q
b1Q
b1Q
Labor market rigidity
0.93
1.008
0.987
1.038
1.004
(0.464)*

(0.527)*

(0.518)*

(0.485)*

(0.474)*

Exchange rate: crawling peg

-0.183

-0.248

-0.183

-0.251

(0.17)

(0.17)

(0.16)

(0.17)

Exchange rate: managed float

-0.126

-0.136

-0.212

-0.195

(0.16)

(0.16)

Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: free falling
Exchange rate: dual market

(0.21)

(0.21)

(dropped)

(dropped)

-0.248

-0.221

(0.18)

(0.18)

-0.198

-0.191

(0.35)

(0.34)

Exchange rate: managed float, float,
free falling or dual market
Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: intermediate
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]

0.16

b1Q

1.04

0.989

(0.512)*

(0.514)*

-0.109

-0.057

(0.12)

(0.13)

-0.074

-0.012

(0.16)

(0.17)

0.169

(0.12)

Constant

b1Q

0.117

(0.11)

(0.11)

-0.6

-0.439

-0.487

-0.441

-0.491

-0.548

-0.629

(0.077)*

(0.153)*

(0.155)*

(0.148)*

(0.148)*

(0.099)*

(0.126)*

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

0.13

0.2

0.26

0.18

0.25

0.15

0.19

Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%

The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for a symmetric treshold AR process that characterizes the speed
of convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5,
their last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2002)

57

Table 5: Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Convergence:
(with CA/GDP convergence speed estimated with a TAR model, annual data)
b1A
b1A
b1A
b1A
b1A
Labor market rigidity
0.96
0.99
1.049
1.162
1.204
(0.505)*

Exchange rate: crawling peg

(0.565)*

(0.548)*

(0.554)*

(0.534)*

0.063

0.032

0.041

-0.004

(0.18)

(0.17)

-0.134

-0.078

(0.17)

(0.16)

(0.16)

(0.16)

Exchange rate: managed float

0.013

0.05

(0.18)

(0.18)

Exchange rate: float

-0.698

-0.628

(0.354)*

(0.345)*

-0.246

-0.189

(0.18)

(0.18)

-0.162

-0.16

(0.38)

(0.37)

Exchange rate: free falling
Exchange rate: dual market
Exchange rate: managed float, float,
free falling or dual market
Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: intermediate
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]

0.283

Observations
R-squared

b1A

0.937

1.052

(0.590)

(0.556)*

-0.068

-0.048

(0.12)

(0.12)

0.033

0.053

(0.18)

(0.17)

0.328

(0.161)*

Constant

b1A

0.365

(0.170)*

(0.157)*

-0.794

-0.758

-0.865

-0.77

-0.892

-0.776

-0.915

(0.085)*

(0.139)*

(0.148)*

(0.146)*

(0.154)*

(0.105)*

(0.116)*

42

39

39

39

39

39

39

0.08

0.29

0.35

0.14

0.22

0.1

0.22

Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%
The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for a symmetric treshold AR process that characterizes the speed
of convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5,
their last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2002)

58

Table 6: Labor Rigidity and Standard Deviation of (CA/Total Trade)
Labor market rigidity

all obs

all obs

all obs

all obs

13.712

15.745

12.176

12.509

14.518

15.151

12.93

13.39

(6.511)*

(7.403)*

(6.565)*

(6.795)*

(6.215)*

(7.170)*

(6.421)*

(6.312)*

6.433

7.068

8.015

7.478

(9.83)

(10.01)

(9.29)

(9.51)

Exchange rate: crawling peg
Exchange rate: managed float
Exchange rate: float
Exchange rate: free falling
Exchange rate: dual market

excl. BRA & NIC excl. BRA & NIC excl. BRA & NIC excl. BRA & NIC

6.111

6.691

(10.98)

(10.48)

31.874

28.188

(17.144)*

(16.090)*

14.226

5.148

(16.35)

(15.92)

-0.282

2.106

(23.12)

(21.66)

Exchange rate: managed float, float,
free falling or dual market
Exchange rate: float

14.701

8.405

(10.10)

(10.16)
1.746

Exchange rate: intermediate

-0.668

(7.56)

(6.92)

1.653

13.815

(11.54)

sd(lnCPI)
sd(lnGDP) / mean(lnGDP)
Constant
Observations
R-squared

9.551

9.944

9.475

9.665

(11.48)
-4.038

-3.484

-3.271

-6.571

(1.943)*

(2.083)*

(1.934)*

(2.097)*

(5.18)

(5.68)

(5.50)

(5.69)

-125.662

-181.012

-168.784

-125.979

218.668

222.032

178.874

289.532

(84.62)

(134.70)

(91.116)*

(91.36)

(143.98)

(201.53)

(169.61)

(158.596)*

44.657

38.278

37.781

43.566

40.204

32.043

35.26

38.064

(6.065)*

(8.855)*

(8.623)*

(6.792)*

(6.377)*

(8.898)*

(8.464)*

(6.901)*

42

41

41

41

40

39

39

39

0.46

0.53

0.5

0.47

0.19

0.26

0.2

0.22

Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%
The dependent variable is the country-specific standard deviation of Current Account / trade for the period from 1980 to 2005 (or all years for which
data is available within this period)
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 6-7 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 3 and 7, their last three
classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 4 and 8 are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
sd(lnCPI) is the standard deviation of the natural log of the Consumer Price Index and sd(lnGDP)/mean(lnGDP) is the standard deviation of the
natural log of GDP divided by the mean of the natural log of GDP for each country over the period from 1980 to 2005.

59

Table 7: List of countries in regressions
quarterly

annual

currency regime
RR (2004)
LS (2002)

Labor rigidity

Albania

TAR

float

float

4.9

Algeria

AR

peg

fixed

12.9

AR

crawling peg

fixed

2.35

AR

crawling peg

fixed

1.4

AR, TAR

crawling peg

float

10.8

Armenia

AR, TAR

Azerbaijan, Rep. of
Bangladesh
Belarus

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

free falling

float

6.35

Brazil

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

dual market

float

56.9

Bulgaria

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

free falling

intermediate

7.8

AR, TAR

free falling

float

5.9
20.7

Cambodia
China

AR, TAR

peg

fixed

Croatia

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

crawling peg

float

4.2

Czech Republic

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

managed float

fixed

9.55

Ecuador

AR, TAR

Egypt
El Salvador
Estonia

AR, TAR

Georgia

AR, TAR

Greece
Guatemala

AR, TAR

Guyana
Honduras
Hungary

AR, TAR

India

AR, TAR

crawling peg

fixed

14.1

AR, TAR

managed float

fixed

28.1

AR, TAR

managed float

fixed

AR, TAR

3.9
11.5
5.8

AR, TAR

crawling peg

intermediate

7.7

AR, TAR

crawling peg

float

16.7

TAR

crawling peg

fixed

10.6

AR, TAR

crawling peg

intermediate

14.2

AR, TAR

crawling peg

fixed

8.8

AR

crawling peg

intermediate

16.7
25.9

Indonesia

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

crawling peg

float

Ireland

AR, TAR

AR

managed float

float

9.6

Kazakhstan

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

peg

intermediate

1.65
22.5

Kenya

AR, TAR

managed float

float

Korea

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

managed float

float

4.1

Kyrgyz Republic

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

managed float

fixed

3.5

Latvia

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

peg

fixed

3.8

Lithuania

AR, TAR

AR

peg

fixed

8.7

AR, TAR

managed float

fixed

14.8

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

free falling

fixed

14.5

AR, TAR

crawling peg

intermediate

3.9

AR

crawling peg

fixed

6.7

Nicaragua

AR, TAR

free falling

float

6.9

Pakistan

AR, TAR

free falling

float

15

AR, TAR

crawling peg

fixed

24.7
21.55

Madagascar
Malaysia
Mali
Moldova

Philippines

AR, TAR

Poland

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

free falling

float

Portugal

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

free falling

fixed

18.1

Romania

AR, TAR

AR

peg

float

12.25

AR

managed float

fixed

16.3

free falling

float

6

AR, TAR

managed float

float

3.6

Senegal
Slovakia

AR, TAR

Slovenia

AR, TAR

South Africa

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

crawling peg

fixed

32.9

Spain

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

peg

fixed

11.8

AR, TAR

peg

fixed

25.6

AR

managed float

float

33.8

Sri Lanka
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

peg

fixed

11.4

Turkey

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

crawling peg

intermediate

10.45

AR

crawling peg

fixed

10.8

AR, TAR

AR, TAR

managed float

float

6.15

Uganda
Ukraine
Vietnam

TAR

10.9

Zambia
AR, TAR
free falling
float
16.9
AR and TAR indicate data availability for the regressions based on autoregressive process (AR) and threshold autoregressive process (TAR) Current Account
convergence coefficients.
Currency regime reports the classification a country receives in Reinhart-Rogoff (RR 2004) and Yeyati-Sturzenegger (YS 2002) during most of the years between
1980 and 2005 for which their data is available. If two different classifications have been maintained for the same number of years, the more recent one is chosen.
Labor rigidity reports the share of managers ranking labor regulations as a major business constraint in a World Bank Enterprise Survey.

60

Table 8: Description of exchange rate regime classifications in Reinahrt and Rogoff (2004):
No separate legal tender
Pre announced peg or currency board arrangement
peg (excluded)
Pre announced horizontal band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
De facto peg
Pre announced crawling peg
Pre announced crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
crawling peg
De factor crawling peg
De facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
Pre announced crawling band that is wider than or equal to +/-2%
De facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-5%
managed float
Moving band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%
Managed floating
float Freely floating
free falling Freely falling
dual market Dual market in which parallel market data is missing.
Reference: Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2004): The modern history of exchange rate arrangements: A
reinterpretation. NBER Working Paper 8963. http://www.nber.org/papers/w8963

Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002):
floating
intermediate
fixed (excluded)
Reference: Levy-Yeyati, E. and Frederico Sturzenegger (2002): A de facto classification of exchange rate
regimes. http://200.32.4.58/~ely/AppendixAER.pdf

61

