                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TASK SPECIALIZATION, COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGES, AND THE EFFECTS
                       OF IMMIGRATION ON WAGES

                                            Giovanni Peri
                                            Chad Sparber

                                        Working Paper 13389
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13389


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




We thank Christina Gathman, Gordon Hanson, Andrea Ichino, Anamaria Felicia Ionescu, Peter Lindert,
Francesca Mazzolari, Seth Sanders, Nicole Simpson, Geoffrey Woglom, and participants at the NBER
Summer Institute on International Trade and Investment 2007, the Annual Economic Demography
Workshop 2007, the Workshop in Macroeconomic Research at Liberal Arts Colleges, the CEGE Conference
at UC Davis, and seminars at University of Bologna, University at Buffalo, Emory University and
UC Irvine for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Giovanni Peri and Chad Sparber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Task Specialization, Comparative Advantages, and the Effects of Immigration on Wages
Giovanni Peri and Chad Sparber
NBER Working Paper No. 13389
September 2007
JEL No. F22,J31,J61,R13

                                               ABSTRACT

Many workers with low levels of educational attainment immigrated to the United States in recent
decades. Large inflows of less-educated immigrants would reduce wages paid to comparably-educated
native-born workers if the two groups compete for similar jobs. In a simple model exploiting comparative
advantage, however, we show that if less-educated foreign and native-born workers specialize in performing
complementary tasks, immigration will cause natives to reallocate their task supply, thereby reducing
downward wage pressure. Using individual data on the task intensity of occupations across US states
from 1960-2000, we then demonstrate that foreign-born workers specialize in occupations that require
manual tasks such as cleaning, cooking, and building. Immigration causes natives -- who have a better
understanding of local networks, rules, customs, and language -- to pursue jobs requiring interactive
tasks such as coordinating, organizing, and communicating. Simulations show that this increased specialization
mitigated negative wage consequences of immigration for less-educated native-born workers, especially
in states with large immigration flows.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Chad Sparber
Department of Economics,
Colgate University,
13 Oak Drive,
Hamilton, NY, 13346.
csparber@mail.colgate.edu
1     Introduction

Immigration has significantly aﬀected the US labor supply during the last few decades, particularly among
workers with limited formal schooling. Economists continue to debate the wage eﬀects of these large inflows on
native-born workers. If workers’ skills are diﬀerentiated mainly by their level of educational attainment, and
workers of diﬀerent education levels are imperfectly substitutable, then a large flow of immigrants with limited
schooling should increase wages paid to highly-educated natives and reduce wages paid to less-educated ones.
This intuitive approach receives support in Borjas (2003, 2006) and Borjas and Katz (2005). They use US
national data to argue that immigration reduced real wages paid to native-born workers without a high school
degree by four to five percent between 1980 and 2000. In contrast, area studies by Card (2001, 2007), Card and
Lewis (2007), and Lewis (2005) employ city and state level data and find almost no eﬀect of immigration on the
wages of less-educated native workers. Ottaviano and Peri (2006) note that the eﬀects of immigration crucially
depend upon the degree of substitution between native and foreign-born workers within each education group.
That is, native and foreign-born workers of comparable educational attainment might possess unique skills that
lead them to specialize in diﬀerent occupations, which would mitigate wage losses from immigration.1
    We advance this debate by providing a theory to explain why native and foreign-born workers with little
formal education may be imperfect substitutes in production. We then measure the tasks these individuals
perform in their occupations so that we can estimate the eﬀect of immigration on wages. We argue that
immigrants are likely to have imperfect language skills, incomplete knowledge of productive networks, and only
scant awareness of social norms and the intricacies of productive interactions. However, they have manual
and physical skills similar to those of native-born workers. Therefore, they have a comparative advantage
in occupations requiring manual labor-intensive tasks, while less-educated native-born workers will have an
advantage in jobs demanding interactive and language-intensive tasks. Immigration encourages specialization
so that foreign-born workers create little adverse wage consequences for less-educated natives.
    We begin in Section 2 by developing a simple model of comparative advantage and incomplete specialization
of workers. Workers’ skill endowments imply that immigration reduces the compensation paid to manual tasks
and increases the compensation paid to interactive ones. The complementary nature of the two skills and
the reallocation of native workers toward interactive tasks favor wages paid to native workers. The eﬀects
compensate (in part or entirely) for the depressing eﬀect of immigration on the wage paid to manual tasks.
    Next, Section 3 describes data for the 50 US states (plus the District of Columbia) from 1960 to 2000 that we
use to test our model. To measure the intensity of manual and interactive tasks supplied by workers, we use a
  1 Manacorda et. al. (2006) find similar imperfect substitutability between native and immigrant workers for the UK. Other

important contributions to the literature on immigration and wages include Altonji and Card (1991), Borjas (1994), (1995), (1999),
Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997), Butcher and Card (1991), Card (1990), Friedberg and Hunt (1995), Friedberg (2001), and
National Research Council (1997).




                                                                2
dataset assembled by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) that merges data on job task requirements based upon
the US Department of Labor’s Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) with Census occupation classifications.
We adopt two of their variables; one captures the manual labor content of each job (called “eye-hand-foot
coordination” skills), and the other accounts for an occupation’s interactive content (called “direction-control-
planning”). Using IPUMS microdata from the Census (Ruggles et. al. (2005)), we then construct the supply
of each task for native and foreign-born workers by state, as well as the change in tasks supplied over time.
   The empirical analysis in Section 4 strongly supports three key implications of our theory. In states with large
inflows of less-educated immigrants: i) less-educated native-born workers shifted their supply toward interactive
tasks at a faster rate than in states with low immigration; ii) the total supply of manual relative to interactive
skills increased at a faster rate than in states with low immigration; and iii) the wage paid to manual relative
to interactive tasks decreased more than in states with low immigration. Less-educated natives have responded
to immigration by leaving manual task-intensive occupations for interaction-intensive ones. These results are
upheld by two stage least squares regressions that instrument for the variation of less-educated immigrants
across states using two diﬀerent sets of exogenous variables, both of which exploit the increased level of Mexican
immigration as an exogenous supply shift. The first instrument follows a strategy similar to Card (2001), Card
and Di Nardo (2000), and Cortes (2006) by using the imputed share of Mexican workers (based upon 1960 state
demographics and subsequent national growth rates) as a proxy for the share of less-educated immigrants in a
state. The second set of instruments interacts decade indicator variables with the distance of a state’s center of
gravity to the Mexico-US border, its square, and a border dummy.
   Critics of past area studies have argued that the methodology fails to identify wage losses because the eﬀects
of immigration are diﬀused nation-wide through internal migration. However, Section 4.2.3 demonstrates that
increased immigration among less-educated workers in a state neither reduces the relative wage of less-educated
native-born workers nor induces their out-migration.2 Our paper provides a new potential explanation for this
phenomenon — rather than flee their home states for new locales, natives respond to immigration by specializing
in jobs that are intensive in interactive production tasks. This stabilizes native-born wages, and removes their
incentive to migrate.
   Given the positive wage eﬀect of specializing in interactive skill-intensive occupations, native-born realloca-
tion of productive task supply has protected their real wages and mitigated losses due to immigration. In Section
5, we use the parameters of our model and our empirical results to calculate the eﬀect of immigration on average
wages paid to native-born workers with a high school degree or less. Task complementarities and increasing
specialization among native-born workers imply that the wage impact of immigration on less-educated natives,
while usually negative, is quite small. These findings agree with those of Card (2001), Card and Lewis (2007),
  2 See   Card (2001), Lewis (2003), and Peri (2007) for further defense of area studies.




                                                                  3
and Ottaviano and Peri (2006) and enrich the structural framework to analyze the eﬀect of immigration used
in Borjas (2003), Borjas and Katz (2005), Ottaviano and Peri (2006), and Peri (2007).



2     Theoretical Model

We advocate a simple general equilibrium model of comparative advantages in task performance, rather than
final goods production, to illustrate the eﬀects of immigration on specialization and wages.3 We develop the
model here, and provide more detailed derivations of the equations in the Appendix. We will test the model’s
implications in Section 4, and use its structure and empirically-estimated elasticities to evaluate the eﬀects of
immigration on wages paid to less-educated native-born workers in Section 5.


2.1     Production

Consider an economy that combines two intermediates, YH and YL , in a CES production function to produce
the final consumption good, Y , according to Equation (1).

                                                h   σ−1           σ−1 i σ−1
                                                                         σ

                                             Y = βYL σ + (1 − β)YH σ                                                           (1)

    The parameter σ ∈ (0, ∞) measures the elasticity of substitution between the two intermediate goods, while
β and (1 − β) capture the relative productivity of YL and YH in the production of Y . We choose Y to be the
numeraire, and assume it is assembled by perfectly competitive firms that minimize costs and earn no profits.
This ensures that the prices of YL and YH (denoted PL and PH ) are equal to their marginal products.
    The intermediate goods are produced by workers of diﬀerent education levels. Low education workers
(with total labor supply equal to L) produce YL , and high education workers (H) produce YH . While CES
production functions combining the services of high and low education labor are widely used in economics,4 we
add to the framework by assuming that less-educated workers must perform both “manual” and “interactive”
tasks to produce YL . Manual tasks include functions such as building, moving, and operating equipment, while
interactive tasks involve coordinating, directing, and organizing people. Let less-educated workers supply M
manual-task inputs and I interactive-task inputs. These tasks combine to produce YL according to the CES
function in Equation (2), where β L ∈ (0, 1) captures the relative productivity of manual skills and θL ∈ (0, ∞)
measures the elasticity of substitution between M and I.
   3 Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) develop an interesting new theory of oﬀ-shoring that builds upon a process of international

task division. Their model has features and implications similar to the one developed in this paper.
   4 See the literature on cross-country income diﬀerences (Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 2001; Caselli and Coleman, 2006), technological

change (Acemoglu,1998; 2002), and labor economics (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Card and Lemieux, 2001).




                                                                4
                                              ∙      θL −1               θL −1
                                                                               ¸ θ θL−1
                                                                                  L
                                          YL = β L M  θL
                                                           + (1 − β L )I  θL
                                                                                                                                  (2)

    Highly-educated workers similarly perform two tasks to produce YH . Like less-educated workers, highly-
educated workers supply interactive skills. Rather than perform manual functions, however, highly-educated
workers supply analytical (or quantitative) skills. To simplify the analysis and focus on the role of less-educated
workers in production (and on the impact of immigrants on those workers), we assume that interactive and
analytical skills are perfectly substitutable in the production of YH . Thus, YH is produced according to a linear
technology equal to the total supply of highly-educated workers. That is, YH = H.5
    Competitive labor markets and producers of YL and YH yield the relative task demand function in Equation
(3), where wM and wI denote the compensation paid to the provider of one unit of manual and interactive task,
respectively.

                                                       µ            ¶θ L µ        ¶−θL
                                                M            βL              wM
                                                  =                                                                               (3)
                                                I          1 − βL            wI


2.2     Relative Supply of Tasks with Heterogeneous Workers

Each highly-educated worker is identical from a productive point of view and supplies one unit of task input
to produce one unit of good YH . The wage of each highly-educated worker equals the marginal productivity of
YH in (1) so that WH = PH . In contrast, less-educated workers are heterogeneous and diﬀer from each other
in their relative task productivity. In particular, each agent j is characterized by a specific level of eﬀectiveness
in performing the two tasks. Let mj and ij represent the eﬀectiveness of worker j in performing manual and
interactive tasks, respectively. The one unit of labor supplied by less-educated worker j can be fully used to
provide mj units of manual tasks or ij units of interactive tasks. Workers with higher eﬀectiveness in a particular
task will spend relatively more of their labor endowment performing it, but we assume that decreasing returns
imply that an agent will not choose to fully specialize.
    Let lj be the share of personal labor endowment (share of time) worker j spends performing manual tasks
so that 1 − lj is the time spent performing interactive tasks. Worker j’s supply of manual task units is indicated
              δ                                                                          δ
by μj = (lj ) mj , while its supply of interactive task units is ιj = (1 − lj ) ij . The parameter δ ∈ (0, 1) captures
the decreasing returns from performing a single task. Each worker takes the wages paid to tasks as given and
chooses an allocation of labor between manual and interactive tasks to maximize her labor income given in
Equation (4).
   5 A previous version of this paper permitted imperfect substitutability between interactive and analytical tasks. For this version,

however, we intend to focus empirically on the eﬀect of less-educated immigrants. Since the richer model of YH has no implications
for less-educated workers, we leave it and the empirical analysis of task specialization and complementarities among highly- educated
workers to a diﬀerent paper.




                                                                    5
                                              WL,j = (lj )δ mj wM + (1 − lj )δ ij wI .                                                (4)

    By maximizing wages with respect to lj , we can identify the equilibrium relative supply of manual versus
interactive task-units for worker j (Equation (5)), which depends positively on relative task compensation and
the worker’s eﬃciency in performing manual relative to interactive tasks, (mj /ij ).6

                                                             µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                         δ  µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                        1
                                                      μj         wM             mj
                                                         =                                                                            (5)
                                                      ιj         wI             ij
                                                                                                P
  Aggregate task supply simply equals the summation over all less-educated workers. That is, M = j μj =
           P
Lμ and I = j ιj = Lι, where μ and ι represent the average unit-supply of manual and interactive tasks.
Aggregate relative task supply (Equation (6)) is then a function of relative wages and the average relative
eﬀectiveness of workers (defined in Equation (7)), where ϑj = (ιj /I) is worker j 0 s share in the total supply of
interactive tasks.

                                            P                µ    ¶ δ
                                                               wM 1−δ ³ m ´ 1−δ
                                                                             1
                                        M    j μj   P μj
                                          = P      = ϑj    =                                                                          (6)
                                        I     j ιj  j   ιj     wI       i
                                                            " Ã µ    ¶ 1 !#1−δ
                                               ³m´           P    mj 1−δ
                                                          =    ϑj                                                                     (7)
                                                  i          j    ij

    In equilibrium, relative task provision (Equation (8)) is a positive function of both the relative productivity
of the tasks in the production of YL and the average relative eﬀectiveness of workers. An increase in β L raises M
                                                                                                                 I
                              ¡m¢
demand, while an increase in i raises supply. Relative compensation (Equation (9)) is also a positive function
                                      ¡ ¢
of β L , but it depends negatively on mi ; a population that is more eﬀective in manual task performance (on
average) would supply more of those tasks, thereby decreasing their relative price.

                                                      µ            ¶ (1−δ)θ
                                                                        δθ L
                                                                                  ³ m ´ (1−δ)θ
                                                                                           θL
                                           M∗               βL             L +δ                L +δ
                                              =                                                                                       (8)
                                           I∗             1 − βL                     i

                                           ∗
                                                   µ             ¶ (1−δ)θ
                                                                    (1−δ)θL
                                                                               ³ m ´− (1−δ)θ
                                                                                          1
                                          wM             βL               L +δ               L +δ
                                              =                                                                                       (9)
                                          wI∗          1 − βL                    i

    All workers receive the same relative compensation in equilibrium. Equation (10) identifies an individual
worker’s relative supply of tasks, which is positively related to its eﬀectiveness in performing them. In con-
trast, the average worker’s relative eﬀectiveness will negatively aﬀect an individual’s supply. This is because a
    6 In practice (and in anticipation of our empirical strategy), workers are likely to select diﬀerent allocations of their time between

manual and interactive tasks according to their occupation choice. Thus, we assume each unique allocation represents a diﬀerent
occupation. A worker will choose an occupation with the time allocation (l, 1−l) that maximizes its wage income, which depends on
its relative eﬃciency (mj /ij ) of task performance. For given relative wages, there is a one-to-one correspondence between relative
eﬃciency and occupation choice, as well as between relative eﬃciency and the relative supply of tasks (Equation (5)). Hence, the
choice of occupation reveals the comparative advantage of a worker.



                                                                       6
population with higher manual abilities would supply more units of manual tasks and depress its relative wage,
thereby inducing the individual to shift supply from manual toward interactive tasks.

                                      µ            ¶ (1−δ)θ
                                                        δθL
                                                                 ³ m ´− [(1−δ)θ   δ            µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                                           1
                               μj           βL            L +δ                    L +δ](1−δ)       mj
                                  =                                                                             (10)
                               ιj         1 − βL                   i                               ij

   The left panel of Figure 1 illustrates the wage and provision of tasks for an economy. Bold lines represent (in
logarithmic scale) aggregate relative task supply and demand. Point E0 identifies the equilibrium corresponding
to Equations (8) and (9). Dotted lines to the left and right of the aggregate supply curve represent relative
individual task supply for workers j1 (with low manual eﬀectiveness) and j2 (high manual eﬀectiveness). The
equilibrium supply for each type of worker is identified by the point where its individual supply curve crosses
the level of equilibrium compensation (at points 1 and 2, respectively). Intuitively, an increase in β L would shift
aggregate demand to the right, increase the equilibrium relative compensation for manual tasks, and increase
                                                                    ¡ ¢
the relative supply of manual tasks for each worker. An increase in mi   would shift aggregate supply to the
left, decrease the relative compensation for manual tasks, and reduce the relative supply of manual tasks for
each worker of a given relative eﬀectiveness.


2.3      Two Types of Workers: Eﬀects of Immigration on Relative Task Supply and
         Returns to Tasks

The model in Section 2.2 analyzes average wages and task provision for a single group of heterogenous workers.
In this section, we expand the model to incorporate a second heterogenous group that diﬀers from the first only
                                                 ¡ ¢
in its average manual to interactive eﬀectiveness m
                                                  i . Suppose the initial group of less-educated “domestic” (or
                                                            ³    ´
native-born) workers has size LD and average eﬀectiveness m   iD . Now allow immigration so that a new group
                                                               D

                                                                                   ³     ´
of less-educated “foreign-born” (or immigrant) workers of size LF and eﬀectiveness miFF enters the labor force.
While there is no clear reason for immigrants to be less productive in performing manual tasks such as building
a wall, picking fruits, or cutting jewelry, they are certainly not as proficient as natives in communicating with
other native-born workers, organizing people, serving customers, managing relationships, or other interactive
tasks that require mastery of the language and knowledge of personal customs and networks. Therefore, we
        ³    ´    ³    ´
assume m   F
          iF   >    mD
                    iD . In other words, foreign-born workers have, on average, comparative advantages in

performing manual tasks, while native workers have comparative advantages in performing interactive tasks.7
This assumption allows us to analyze how immigration aﬀects wages and task provision.
   Equation (3) continues to describe relative aggregate demand. Equation (11) represents the relative supply
of tasks in the economy obtained by summing the skills provided by each group.
  7 We   make no assumptions regarding whether one group has an absolute advantage in both tasks.




                                                                   7
                                              M   MF + MD     MF            MD
                                                =          =f    + (1 − f )                                                                            (11)
                                              I    IF + ID    IF            ID

   The term 0 < f = IF /(IF + ID ) < 1 is the share of interactive tasks supplied by foreign-born workers. It
is a simple monotonically increasing transformation of the share of foreign-born among less-educated workers,
s = LF /(LF + LD ). Hence, the aggregate relative supply of tasks in the economy is a weighted average of
each group’s supply, and the weights are closely related to the share of each group in employment. The relative
                                                                               ³     ´      ³     ´
supply for foreign and native-born workers is given by Equation (6), with miFF and miDD substituting for
¡m¢
  i , respectively. Equation (12) describes the equilibrium relative compensation of tasks when the average
                                                                       "                                    #(1−δ)
                                                                          ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                                  1
                                                                                                ³     ´ 1−δ
                                                                                                         1

manual versus interactive task eﬀectiveness of the population equals f m     F
                                                                            iF        + (1 − f ) miDD              .

                                                                  ⎡                                                 ⎤− (1−δ)θ
                                                                                                                         (1−δ)

                    ∗
                                 µ            ¶ (1−δ)θ
                                                 (1−δ)θL              µ       ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                 1
                                                                                                   µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                                               1               +δ
                                                                                                                               L
                   wM                  βL              +δ L
                                                                  ⎣f mF                                mD           ⎦
                             =                                                        + (1 − f )                                                       (12)
                   wI∗               1 − βL                          iF                                iD

   By substituting this wage equilibrium into aggregate relative supply (6) for domestic workers, we find their
                                                                                                                           ∗              ∗
                                                                                                                         MD             MF
equilibrium relative provision of tasks (Equation (13)). The weighted average of                                          ∗
                                                                                                                         ID    and       ∗
                                                                                                                                        IF    (according to
Equation (11)) identifies the equilibrium aggregate relative provision of tasks in Equation (14).

                                                      ⎡                                                    ⎤− (1−δ)θ
                                                                                                                  δ

               ∗
                     µ                ¶ (1−δ)θ
                                           δθL                µ       ¶ 1−δ
                                                                         1
                                                                                          µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                        L +δ   µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                                                                           1
             MD            βL                  L +δ
                                                      ⎣f mF                              mD                ⎦                       mD
              ∗ =
             ID          1 − βL                          iF
                                                                              + (1 − f )
                                                                                         iD                                        iD
                                                                                                                                                       (13)


                                                                  ⎡                                                 ⎤ (1−δ)θ
                                                                                                                       (1−δ)θL

                         ∗
                                 µ            ¶ (1−δ)θ
                                                   δθ L               µ       ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                 1
                                                                                                   µ        ¶ 1−δ
                                                                                                               1             +δL
                    M                  βL                 L +δ
                                                                  ⎣f mF                                mD           ⎦
                       =                                                              + (1 − f )                                                       (14)
                    I∗               1 − βL                          iF                                iD

   The right panel of Figure 1 illustrates the equilibrium in an economy with native and foreign-born labor.
Due to comparative advantages in manual tasks, immigrants’ supply is to the right of domestic workers’ supply.
The overall relative supply (represented by the thickest line in the panel) is a weighted average of the two —
the distance of the average supply curves from those of immigrants and domestic workers is proportional to
f and 1 − f , respectively. An increase in the share of foreign-born employment (which would raise f ) would
shift the overall relative supply closer to that of foreign-born workers. Point E1 represents the equilibrium
with immigrants. Immigration reduces compensation paid to manual relative to interactive tasks, while also
increasing the relative provision of the skills. However, the average manual versus interactive task supply of
native workers (point D) is smaller than in the case without immigration. Finally, the manual versus interactive
task supply of immigrants (point F ) is larger than for native workers.
   The equilibrium results summarized in Equations (12), (13), and (14) provide the basis for comparing
economies diﬀering from each other in the presence of foreign-born workers. As f increases from 0 (only


                                                                              8
domestic workers) to positive values, our model has specific comparative static implications for the relative
task supply of natives, overall relative task supply, and relative task compensation. We summarize the main
implications in three propositions that will motivate our empirical analysis. We begin with a Lemma, to be
empirically validated, that states our comparative advantage assumption.
                                                                                                       ³        ´       ³        ´
                                                                                                           mF               mD
      Lemma: The comparative advantage of foreign-born workers in performing manual tasks,                 iF       >       iD    ,
implies that they supply relatively more manual versus interactive tasks than domestic workers provide. That
      MF       MD
is,   IF   >   ID .

    Proof: Consider individual supply (10) for the average immigrant and domestic worker. The two expressions
                     ³        ´ (1−δ)θ
                                   θL δ
                                            ¡ m ¢− [(1−δ)θ δ+δ](1−δ)
                         βL            L +δ
will share the term 1−β                       i
                                                          L
                                                                     , but the comparative advantage assumption implies
                            L
³    ´ 1−δ
        1    ³    ´ 1−δ
                     1
  mF
  iF       > m  D
               iD       . Therefore, μιFF > μιDD . Multiplying the numerator and the denominator of the first ratio
                                                                                             MF       MD
by LF , and the numerator and the denominator of the second ratio by LD we obtain            IF   >   ID .   QED.
      The relative eﬀectiveness of workers is not observable empirically, but occupation choices reveal their intensity
of task supply. Thus, we can compare the relative task supply of natives and immigrants to test whether the
main assumption of our model is correct. The assumption also facilitates the following three propositions.
      Proposition 1: A higher foreign-born share (s) of less-educated workers in an economy induces lower
                                                                                                      M∗
aggregate supply of manual relative to interactive tasks among less-educated native workers, I ∗D .
                                                                               "               D                  #
                                                    ³    ´ ³     ´                ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                       ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                                                               1
                                                      mF     mD                     mF                   mD
   Proof: Consider Equation (13). The assumption iF > iD implies that f iF                   + (1 − f ) iD
                                                                                                                   ιF ιD
is monotonically increasing in f . The share f , in turn, depends positively on s (specifically, ∂f /∂s =    (sιF +(1−s)ιD )2         >
0) so that the expression in square brackets above is increasing in s. Since this expression is raised to a negative
       ³              ´
               δ                                                                                  M∗
power − (1−δ)θ   L +δ   and is the only portion of (13) that depends upon s, it implies that I ∗D is a negative
                                                                                                       D

function of s. QED.
      Proposition 2: A higher foreign-born share (s) of less-educated workers in an economy induces a larger
                                                                                            ∗
supply of manual relative to interactive tasks among less-educated workers
                                                                      "      overall, M I∗ .               #
                                                                        ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                                 1
                                                                                              ³      ´ 1−δ
                                                                                                        1
                                                                          mF                      mD
   Proof : Consider equation (14). It contains the same expression f iF            + (1 − f ) iD             as above,
                                                                            ³             ´     ∗
                                                                                (1−δ)θL
which is monotonically increasing in s. As it is raised to a positive power (1−δ)θ   L +δ
                                                                                           , M
                                                                                             I ∗ depends positively

on s. QED.
      Proposition 3: A higher foreign-born share (s) of less-educated workers in an economy induces lower
                                                                 w∗
compensation paid to manual relative to interactive tasks , wM∗ .
                                                      "          I                      #
                                                        ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                1
                                                                             ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                                     1
                                                          mF                   mD
   Proof: Consider equation (12). It also contains f iF            + (1 − f ) iD           raised to a negative power
³              ´                                  ∗
     (1−δ)                                       wM
 − (1−δ)θ L +δ   . Hence, the overall expression w ∗ depends negatively on s. QED.
                                                  I
                                                                                     ³     ´
   Notice also that an increase in the average relative task ability of immigrants m     F
                                                                                        iF    would have very similar
eﬀects to those of an increase in f. Specifically, from conditions (12), (13) and (14) one can easily show that an


                                                            9
              ³        ´                                                                      ³ ∗ ´
                  mF                                                                            w
increase in      would decrease the compensation paid to manual relative to interactive tasks wM∗ , decrease
                  iF
                                                                                         ³ ∗´ I
                                                                                           M
the supply of manual relative to interactive tasks among less-educated native workers I ∗D , and increase
                                                                                       ³ ∗D´
the supply of manual relative to interactive tasks among less-educated workers overall M  I ∗ . Section 3 will
                       ³    ´
demonstrate that f and miFF have been rising together over time and exhibit a mild positive correlation across
states so that they are likely to reinforce each-other.
   In our empirical analysis, we first check the validity of the inequality expressed in the Lemma. Then we test
the qualitative predictions of the three propositions using data for US states from 1960-2000.


2.4    Eﬀect of Immigration on Real Wages

The model above has clear qualitative predictions for how immigration aﬀects the relative supply and compen-
sation of tasks. We can use the model to simulate immigration’s eﬀect on the average wage of highly-educated
workers, less-educated workers, less-educated native-born workers, and workers employed in specific occupations
(i.e., for individual j) once we have estimated the parameters and measured how M , I, and H have responded
to immigration.
   Competitive markets ensure that inputs will earn wages equal to their marginal products. On average, both
highly-educated and less-educated workers earn the unit price of the intermediate good they produce. The
logarithmic diﬀerential of their marginal products provides the measures of immigration’s eﬀect on these groups
                                                    ¡     ¢
expressed in Equations (15) and (16), where κH = WYH H is the income share paid to highly-educated workers
and 1 − κH is the share paid to less-educated workers.

                                                               µ                           ¶
                              ∆W H   ∆PH    1 ∆H   1                  ∆H             ∆YL
                                   =     =−      +                 κH    + (1 − κH )                       (15)
                               WH     PH    σ H    σ                  H               YL

                                                               µ                      ¶
                              ∆W L   ∆PL    1 ∆YL   1              ∆H             ∆YL
                                   =     =−       +             κH    + (1 − κH )                          (16)
                               WL    PL     σ YL    σ               H             YL

   Equation (15) provides a direct measure of immigration’s eﬀect on highly-educated labor. More interestingly,
however, we can decompose the eﬀect on wages paid to less-educated workers into its manual and interactive
                                                     ³     ´     ³     ´
components. Equations (17) and (18) obtain values for ∆w
                                                       wM
                                                         M
                                                             and   ∆wI
                                                                    wI   from logarithmic diﬀerentials of their
marginal products. Equation (19) then represents wages paid to less-educated workers as the average manual
and interactive wage eﬀects weighted by their respective supplies, where κM = (wM M/W L L) is the manual
task share of wages paid to less-educated workers and (1 − κM ) equals the share compensating interactive tasks.

                                     µ                      ¶ µ       ¶
                           ∆wM   1       ∆H             ∆YL      1   1 ∆YL    1 ∆M
                               =      κH    + (1 − κH )      +     −       −                               (17)
                           wM    σ        H             YL      θL σ    YL   θL M




                                                          10
                                     µ                      ¶ µ       ¶
                         ∆wI   1         ∆H             ∆YL      1   1 ∆YL    1 ∆I
                             =        κH    + (1 − κH )      +     −       −                                                (18)
                          wI   σ          H             YL      θL σ    YL   θL I


                           ∆W L   ∆wM wM    ∆wI wI        ∆wM             ∆wI
                                =        μ+        ι = κM     + (1 − κM )                                                   (19)
                            WL    wM WL      wI WL         wM              wI

   Calculations of the eﬀect of immigration on the average native-born less-educated worker then requires two
additional steps. First we weight the change in compensation by the average task supply of natives (μD and ιD )
                                                                           ∆wI                      ∆wM
rather than by μ and ι. This implies a higher relative weight on            wI   and lower one on   wM    since native workers
supply relatively more interactive tasks. Second, the reallocation of native-born task provision generates wage
eﬀects equal to (∆μ) wM + (∆ι) wI .8 Altogether, Equation (20) expresses the net eﬀects of immigration on
average wages paid to less-educated native-born workers.


                         ∆W D   ∆wM wM       ∆wI wI              wM          wI
                              =         μD +         ιD + (∆μD )    + (∆ιD )                                                (20)
                          WD     wM W D       wI W D             WD          WD

   To obtain the eﬀect of immigration on the wage paid to occupation j, we weight the percentage wage
changes by the supply of each task in that occupation (Equation (21)). There is no second order eﬀect because
the expression analyzes the outcome for workers in a specific occupation, so the supply of tasks is fixed.


                                            ∆W j   ∆wM wM     ∆wI wI
                                                 =        μ +        ιj                                                     (21)
                                             Wj    wM W j j   wI W j

   We will use the expressions (15), (16), (20) and (21) in Section 5 to evaluate the impact of immigration
between 1990 and 2000 on average wages paid to highly-educated workers, less-educated workers, less-educated
native workers, and specific occupational groups at the national level and for selected US states. Note that
                                                                    ∆YL
expressions (17) and (18) contain the unmeasurable term             YL .   Since YL is produced under perfect competition
using services of less-educated workers only, however, the total income generated in this sector will be distributed
to less-educated workers. This allows us to relate changes in the production of YL to small changes of inputs M
and I as in Equation (22); the percentage change in YL is equal to the sum of the percentage changes of inputs
M and I weighted by the income share of each factor.


                                  ∆YL   wM ∆M + wI ∆I      ∆M             ∆I
                                      =               = κM    + (1 − κM )                                                   (22)
                                   YL       PL YL           M             I
  8 While in the theoretical model the change in task supply generates only a second order eﬀect, in the empirical analysis it is

important to control for diﬀerences in wM and wI that may be due to a host of causes not necessarily captured by this model.




                                                               11
3        Data Description and Preliminary Evidence

This section describes how we construct measures of task supply to test the main implications of the model. The
IPUMS dataset by Ruggles et. al. (2005) provides individual-level data on personal characteristics, employment,
wages, immigration status, and occupation choice. As consistent with the literature, we identify immigrants as
those who are born outside of the United States and were not citizens at birth. To focus on the period of rising
immigration, we consider census years from 1960 to 2000. We include only non-military wage-earning employees
who were eighteen years of age or older and had worked at least one week prior to the census year.
     Since the immigrant share of employment varies greatly across US states, we adopt states as the econometric
unit of analysis.9 One critique of this approach is that US states are open economies, so the eﬀects of immigration
in one state could spill into others through the migration of natives. We demonstrate in Section 4.2.3, however,
that natives do not respond to immigration by moving.10 Instead, our analysis provides a new explanation for
the observed small wage and employment response: Native-born workers protect themselves from competition
with immigrants (and partly benefit from their inflow) by specializing in interactive task-intensive occupations.
State-level regressions, therefore, remain informative.


3.1      Task Variables

We begin by measuring the task intensity of each occupation so that we can obtain aggregate task supply
measures for natives and immigrants by education level and state. To do so, we use data collected and organized
by Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) (hereinafter ALM) who analyze how the diﬀusion of computers altered
the task supply of workers from routine to non-routine tasks.11 We merge the ALM data with individual-level
Census and CPS data, and then aggregate figures to obtain the data used in regressions. We briefly describe
the merging procedure and the characteristics of the task variables here.12
     Between 1939 and 1991, the US Department of Labor periodically evaluated the tasks required for more
than 12,000 occupations. The published results are available in five editions of the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles (DOT). ALM aggregate the data from each of the two most recent versions (1977 and 1991) by gender
and three-digit Census Occupation Codes (COC) for five occupational skills.13 We restrict our focus to the two
variables that best capture the interactive and manual tasks described in our model.
     We measure the interactive skill content of an occupation by the level of Direction, Control, and Planning
    9 Alsosee Card (2001, 2007), Lewis (2005), Card and Lewis (2007), Cortes (2006), and Kugler and Yuksel (2006).
 10 Card   (2001, 2007) and Peri (2007) provide concurring evidence.
  11 We are extremely grateful to David Autor for providing the data, which has also been used recently by Bacolod and Blum

(2006) to analyze skill premia and the gender wage gap and by Bacolod et al. (2006) to analyze the eﬀect of urban agglomerations
on the premium of specific skills.
  12 For more details on the construction of the variables, we refer to the Appendix of Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003).
  13 Diﬀerentiation by gender within each census occupation occurs because “the gender distribution of DOT occupations diﬀers

substantially within COC occupation cells.”




                                                              12
(DCP ) activities that it requires. DCP takes ordinal values ranging from zero to ten and maintains high values
in occupations requiring non-routine managerial and interpersonal skills. ALM define DCP as “Adaptability to
accepting responsibility for the direction, control, or planning of people and activities.” The highest DCP values
occur for managerial occupations, while the lowest are found among traditional blue-collar laborers. Conversely,
Eye-Hand-Foot coordination (EHF ) measures the occupational demand for non-routine manual skills. ALM
describe EHF as the “Ability to move the hand and foot coordinately with each other and in accordance with
visual stimuli.” Ordinal values also range from zero to ten, but are highest in occupations that demand physical
precision including dancers, athletes, and firefighters. The lowest occur primarily in white-collar jobs, including
a number of natural science and teaching professions.14
   The somewhat arbitrary scale of measurement for the task variables encourages ALM to convert the values
into percentiles. We follow a similar approach. First, we use the ALM crosswalk to match task variable values
with individual demographic information from the Census in 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990. Unfortunately, changes
in the Census occupation classification scheme prevent us from developing a crosswalk for the 2000 Census. As
an alternative, we match the ALM variables to individual-level CPS data from 1998, 1999, and 2000. We assume
that the sample obtained merging those years is collectively representative of the US workforce in 2000.15 Next,
we re-scale the task variables by assigning percentile values according to the 1960 distribution of workers. This
standardization of values between 0 and 1 facilitates a more intuitive interpretation of their changes over time.16
                                                                    MD         MF
   Occupational percentile values facilitate construction of        ID   and   IF   ratios to match our theoretical model to
the empirics. MF and MD represent the average (weighted by the Census weight of the individuals) EHF values
for foreign and native-born workers, respectively, for the given unit of observation (usually states). Similarly,
IF and ID are weighted averages of DCP for foreign and native-born workers.


3.2     Aggregate Trends and Stylized Evidence

By construction, the median percentile values of each task variable equals 0.50 in 1960. Evolution in the
occupational composition of the US workforce between 1960 and 2000 has caused median values to exhibit
trends over the period. Table 1 displays the skill values (and occupations) associated with the median worker.
The reported values and trends are similar to those presented in Figure 1 of ALM. In particular, there has been
a large decline in the supply of manual tasks as the median EHF value fell by almost 35% (from 0.50 to 0.33) of
its initial value. The US has also experienced a large increase in the supply of interactive tasks, as the median
  14 Note that since both DCP and EHF refer to non-routine tasks (as defined in ALM), their supply was not directly displaced by

the adoption of computer technology — a prominent phenomenon during the period considered. Computer adoption or technological
change can still confound the relative supply of tasks, however, so we control for it in our empirical analysis.
  15 Each of these Census and CPS datasets is available from IPUMS. We choose to use information from several CPS years to

increase the sample size. We avoid 2001 data to ensure that the events of September 11 will not aﬀect results.
  16 We standardize values using both the 1977 and 1991 DOT datasets. For most regression specifications, we assign percentile

values based upon the 1977 DOT to individuals from 1960 to 1980, and values from the 1991 DOT to workers in 1990 and 2000.




                                                              13
DCP value increased by more than 24% (from 0.50 to 0.62). These trends may be due to technological change,
changes in educational attainment, and/or changes in the industrial composition of the economy.
   We are primarily interested in less-educated workers (i.e., those with at most a high school degree) and the
diﬀerences in tasks supplied by US and foreign-born workers. Figure 2 reports the aggregate relative supply
of manual versus interactive tasks for less-educated native, foreign-born, and recent immigrant workers in each
decade between 1960 and 2000.17 Three features of Figure 2 are relevant. First, in accordance with the Lemma
of Section 2.3, foreign-born workers with a high school degree or less always provided, on average, more manual
relative to interactive tasks when compared to native workers with similar education. This diﬀerence is even
more apparent when we only consider recent immigrants. New immigrants supply a disproportionate amount
of manual tasks and, over time, become more similar to natives in their task supply. Second, the gap between
the relative supply among native and immigrant workers has increased significantly over time. This is due to
two phenomena — the increase in the share of recent immigrants among foreign-born and the increased relative
supply of manual tasks by recent immigrants. In 2000, immigrant supply of manual versus interactive skills
was 30% higher than for natives. Third, less-educated native workers have significantly decreased their relative
supply. While technology may have contributed to this phenomenon, immigrants exhibited the opposite trend.
Considering that the share of immigrants among less-educated workers grew substantially during the forty years
analyzed, and that immigrants relative specialization in manual tasks increased, the aggregate trend is consistent
with Proposition 1. Native-born workers progressively left manual occupations and adopted interactive ones as
immigrants increasingly satisfied the demand for manual skills.
   Table 2 provides examples of occupational shifts responsible for changes in the task performance of less-
educated native-born workers by listing selected occupations, their task intensity, and the percentage of foreign-
born employees in each job in 2000. We highlight pairs of occupations in which each job is within the same
industrial sector and has similar education requirements, but also requires quite diﬀerent tasks. For example,
agricultural laborers and farm coordinators are both in agriculture and require little formal education. However,
the first uses mostly manual skills (such as cultivating, picking, sorting) and the second uses mostly interactive
skills (such as supervising, organizing, planning, keeping contacts). This is confirmed by the relative manual
to interactive task value of 2.5 for the first occupation and 0.43 for the second. Both occupations were filled
by US-born workers in 1960. By 2000, however, most agricultural laborers (63%) were foreign-born, while farm
coordinators were still almost exclusively US-natives (96%). As immigrants took manual jobs, native workers
in agriculture could specialize in occupations requiring coordination and managerial tasks. Thus, even within
the same sector and for similar education requirements, we see evidence of specialization.
   Figure 3 provides stylized evidence on the systematic association between immigration and native workers’
 17 Recent  immigrants are foreign-born workers who have been in the US less than 10 years. The 1960 Census does not report the
variable “years in the U.S.” for foreign-born individuals.



                                                              14
behavior across states. It plots the foreign-born share of less-educated workers and the level of manual versus
interactive tasks supplied by less-educated native workers for each state in 2000. While this does not control
for any state-specific factor, the negative correlation is clear. In states with a higher share of immigrants
among less-educated workers, native workers perform significantly more interactive relative to manual tasks.
The empirical analysis of the next section tests whether part of this remarkable diﬀerence in specialization of
native workers across states is due to immigration, and how this might aﬀect wages paid to native-born workers.



4     Empirical Results

In this section we test the Lemma and three Propositions of Section 2.3 for less-educated workers (generally
those with a high school degree or fewer years of schooling). First, Section 4.1 verifies that foreign-born workers
provide, on average, a higher relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks than native workers do. Section
4.2 then tests the correlation between the foreign born share of workers and the relative supply of tasks by native
workers across states (Proposition 1). Instrumental variable regressions show that immigrant inflows cause
natives to specialize. Section 4.3 tests the eﬀect of immigration on the aggregate supply of relative tasks across
states (Proposition 2). Section 4.4 performs robustness checks by controlling for exogenous demand factors, and
Section 4.5 quantifies the eﬀects of immigration on the relative compensation of manual and interactive tasks
(Proposition 3).


4.1    Immigrants’ Relative Supply of Tasks

The aggregate data shown in Figure 2 confirm that the relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks by
foreign-born workers in the US was larger than the relative supply among native workers in each census year
since 1960. This tendency also characterizes the overwhelming majority of US states. Table 3 reports the
                                                                     MF        MD
percentage of US state-year observations satisfying the inequality   IF    >   ID .   Note that for the 28 observations
in which foreign-born workers were less than 1% of less-educated employment, the small sample size (often 10 to
                                                                     MF
20 individuals) would lead to massive error in the construction of   IF   . Therefore, we exclude these observations
from our inequality checks.
                                               MF       MD
    The first column of Table 3 reports that   IF   >   ID   for 80% of the state-year observations in which more
than 1% of less-educated employment was foreign-born. In column 2 we consider only the 108 observations with
at least 5% of immigrants among the less-educated workers; the inequality holds in 88% of the cases. Column
3 demonstrates that all states with at least 10% of immigrants among the less-educated satisfy the inequality.
Columns 4, 5, and 6 check the inequality for the same groups as columns 1, 2, and 3, but consider only recent
immigrants in the construction of relative task supply. The percentage of states satisfying the inequality is,



                                                        15
respectively, 87%, 96% and 100%. On average, an individual state’s immigrants work in occupations requiring
relatively more manual tasks than natives do. This relationship is stronger for recent immigrants and in states
with large immigrant populations.
                                       MF             MD
   Figure 4 plots the values of        IF      and    ID   for observations with more than 10% of immigrants among less-
educated workers. Figure 5 shows the same variables when we only include recent immigrants in the calculation
                                                                                 MF        MD
of MF and IF . All points lie above the 45◦ -line since each satisfies           IF   >    ID .   Moreover, we see that in some
                             MF
cases the relative supply    IF   for foreign-born workers is as much as 50% larger than the corresponding supply
of natives. In the case of recent immigrants, the diﬀerences can be as large as 100%.


4.2     Immigration and the Response of Natives

The regressions in this section examine the relationship between less-educated immigrants and task supply of
similarly educated native workers across states (s) and time (t). We begin with the test of Proposition 1 in
Equation (23)

                                       µ        ¶
                                           MD
                                  ln                  = αs + τ t + γ (Share f oreign L)st + εst                                  (23)
                                           ID    st
                                                                                                                  ³        ´
                                                                                                                      MD
   The relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks by less-educated native workers equals                      ID        , and
                                                                                                                           st
(Share f oreign L)st represents the foreign-born share of less-educated workers.18 We control for year (τ t ) and
state (αs ) fixed eﬀects, and εst represents a non correlated zero-mean disturbance. If γ is negative and significant,
then native-born workers respond to immigration by specializing in occupations less intense in manual versus
interactive tasks, and Proposition 1 holds.
   Empirically, we can go beyond the simple test of Proposition 1 and determine whether immigration has
a stronger relationship with the average native-born supply of manual (μD ) or interactive (ιD ) tasks.19 In
                                                                   ³    ´
particular, we separately regress Equations (24) and (25). Since ln M D
                                                                     ID   = ln (μD )st − ln (ιD )st , it must be
                                                                                          st
also true that γ = γ M − γ I .




                              ln (μD )st        = αM    M
                                                   s + τt + γ
                                                              M
                                                                (Share f oreign L)st + εM
                                                                                        st                                       (24)

                               ln (ιD )st       = αIs + τ It + γ I (Share f oreign L)st + εIst                                   (25)


   Relationships uncovered by regressions of (23) could reflect demand characteristics (such as sector com-
position or technology) specific to state-year observations. Though we control more formally for sector and
  18 The foreign-born share was called s in Section 2. Here we use the more explicit Share f oreign L to avoid confusion with the

subscript s indicating states.
  19 Recall that μ = MD and ι = ID .
                  D     L       D     L
                       D                   D




                                                                   16
technological variables at the state level in Section 4.4, here we note that immigration should have a similar
relationship with the relative task supply of foreign-born workers as it does with natives if results arise due to
                                                                                                MD          MF 20
technological shocks. The specification in (26) tests this possibility by replacing             ID   with   IF .


                                      µ        ¶
                                          MF
                                 ln                 = αF     F    F                        F
                                                       s + τ t + γ (Share f oreign L)st + εst                                  (26)
                                          IF   st

     Table 4 presents the least squares estimates of γ, γ M , γ I , and γ F in the first through fourth rows, respectively,
for diﬀerent samples and variable definitions. Columns 1 through 3 use EHF and DCP variables obtained from
the 1991 DOT. The first specification includes all less-educated workers to construct the aggregate state-year
variables and weights each observation by its employment. Column 2, in contrast, includes only male workers.
Column 3 returns to the full sample of workers, but does not weight the observations in the least square estimates.
Columns 4 through 6 follow the same methodologies as columns 1-3, but use the 1977 DOT definitions. Finally,
columns 7 to 9 use the 1977 DOT definitions for the 1960, 1970, and 1980 observations, and the 1991 DOT for
1990 and 2000.21
     Three important results emerge. First, the estimates of γ uphold Proposition 1. The coeﬃcients are negative,
between -0.18 and -0.29, and always significantly diﬀerent from 0. Most of the weighted least squares estimates
(our preferred method since it accounts for the large variation in labor market size across states) are around
-0.20 and are stable across specifications. Thus, a one percentage-point increase in the foreign-born share of
less-educated workers is associated with a 0.2% decline in the relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks
among natives. Second, this decrease is primarily achieved through a rise in the supply of interactive tasks,
rather than a fall in natives’ manual task supply. A large inflow of immigrants performing manual tasks is
associated with increased demand for complementary interactive tasks provided by natives. Third, there is no
systematic association between the foreign-born share and their relative supply of tasks. In the few instances
where the estimate of γ F is significant, it is also positive. Thus, state-specific demand factors are unlikely to
generate the negative correlation captured by γ, as they would have similar eﬀect on task intensity of immigrants.


4.2.1      Instrumental Variable Estimation

To argue that our estimates of γ represent the response of native supply to immigration (i.e. that the direction
of causation goes from immigration to a change in native skill supply), we need to ensure that the cross-state
variation of less-educated immigrants is driven by supply shifts. A particularly relevant concern is whether un-
                                                                                                                  
 20 Note  that the theoretical model implies that increases in f for a given relative ability of immigrants, m   F
                                                                                                                iF
                                                                                                                    , would generate
                                                                                             
                                                                                          mF
γF   < 0. However, an exogenous increase in f coupled with an exogenous increase in i            (the scenario supported by the data
                                                                                          F
presented in Section 4.1) would have no clear implications for γ F , though γ would still be negative.
  21 This last merged definition captures the changes in task supply due to changes in employment across occupations as well as

the change in task supply within occupations. Hence it is our preferred definition in our analysis.




                                                                 17
observed technology and demand factors, which may diﬀer across states due to variation in sector composition,
have simultaneously increased the productivity (demand) of interactive tasks and attracted immigrants.22 To
establish causality, we use two sets of instruments that build upon the fact that Mexican immigration, docu-
mented and undocumented, has represented a large share of the increase in less-educated immigrants to the
US beginning in the 1970s and becoming more prominent in the 1980s and 1990s. This inflow, independent of
state-specific demand shocks, can be exploited as an exogenous supply shift as long as we can diﬀerentiate flows
across states. Thus, our two sets of instruments are the imputed share of Mexican immigrants in a state and
the state’s proximity to the Mexico-US border.
    Beginning with Card (2001), several studies23 of immigration’s eﬀect on state or city economies have used
instrumental variables that exploit two facts. First, new immigrants — especially those with lower education —
tend to move to the same areas in which previous immigrants from their country live.24 Second, the countries
of origin among foreign-born workers have changed drastically between 1960 and 2000. The US has experienced
a large increase of immigrants from Mexico and Latin America, a moderate increase of immigrants from China
and Asia, and a drastic decrease of immigrants from Europe. Together, these facts provide a way to use location
preferences as factors aﬀecting the supply of foreign-born workers across states and time that are uncorrelated
with state-specific demand (productivity).
    We impute the share of Mexican workers in total employment within a state and use this measure as an
instrument for the share of immigrants among less-educated workers. To do so, we first record the actual
share of Mexicans in the employment of state s in 1960 (sh M EXs,1960 ), and then assume that the growth
rate of the Mexican share of employment between 1960 and year t was equal across states. Thus, Equation
(27) imputes shares in year t, where (1 + g M EX)1960−t is the growth factor of Mexican-born employment
nationwide between 1960 and year t, and (1 + g U S)s,1960−t is the growth factor of US-born workers in state s
between 1960 and year t. The identification power of the instrument is based on the fact that some states (such
as California and Texas) had a larger share of Mexican immigrants in 1960 relative to others. These states will
also have larger imputed shares of Mexicans in 1970 through 2000 and, due to the educational composition of
this group, will have a larger immigrant share among less-educated workers.


                                                                      (1 + g M EX)1960−t
                                   sh\
                                     M EX s,t = sh M EXs,1960                                                                (27)
                                                                       (1 + g U S)s,1960−t

    Our second instrument also exploits the exogenous increase in Mexican immigration and measures the dis-
tance of a state from the US-Mexico border. First, we use the coordinates of the center of gravity for the popu-
  22 Note, however, that such an explanation conflicts with our finding that states attracting a larger share of immigrants do not

attract immigrants who supply more interactive skills.
  23 Also see Cortes (2006), Lewis (2003), Ottaviano and Peri (2006), Peri (2007), and Saiz (2003).
  24 This is due to information networks between immigrants and their country of origin, as well as to the immigration policy of

the US. A documented less-educated immigrant is most likely to come to the US to join a family member.



                                                               18
lation of each US state (calculated by the US Bureau of Census for year 2000 and available at www.census.gov).
Then, using the formula for geodesic distance, we calculate the distance of each state center to the closest section
of the US-Mexican Border in thousands of Kilometers.25 Since we already control for state fixed eﬀects in the
regressions, we interact the distance variable with 4 year dummies (from 1970 to 2000). This captures the fact
that distance from the border had a larger eﬀect in predicting the inflow of less-educated workers in decades
with larger Mexican immigration. The resulting set of instruments then includes the distance from the border
and the distance squared, both interacted with decade dummies. We also use a US-Mexico border dummy in-
teracted with decade dummies to capture the fact that border states had larger inflows of Mexican immigration
due to undocumented border crossings. Since illegal immigrants are less mobile across states, border states have
experienced a particularly large exogenous supply-driven increase of less-educated immigrant workers.
    The rows of Table 5 report the respective two stage least squares estimates of γ, γ M , γ I , and γ F . We use the
merged DOT definition to construct the task supply variables and, in turn, use the imputed share of Mexicans,
the distance from the border, and the border dummy as instruments.26 Columns 1-3 use the imputed share
of Mexicans as instruments. Column 1 weights the observations by employment, column 2 includes only male
workers in constructing the task supply variables, and column 3 performs unweighted OLS. Columns 4-6 use
the distance from the border and its square interacted with the decade dummies as instruments, and columns
7-9 use the border dummy interacted with decade dummies.
    The last row of Table 5 reports the F-test of joint significance of the instruments in explaining the endoge-
nous variable Share f oreign Lst . Notice the remarkable explanatory power of the imputed share of Mexican
workers (F-statistics larger than 20) and geographic instruments (border distance and border dummy) in the
employment-weighted equations. When we do not weight observations by employment, the power of the border
dummy decreases significantly. This is due to the relevance of California and Texas, border states and large
recipients of Mexican immigrants and among the largest states, that are weighted heavily in WLS regressions.
    The 2SLS estimates confirm the OLS results of Table 4. The estimates of γ are always negative and
significant. They now range between -0.15 and -0.50 with WLS estimates clustering around -0.2. In the majority
of the cases, natives respond to increases in the share of foreign-born workers by significantly raising interactive
task supply. The supply of manual tasks experiences an insignificant decrease. Finally, the correlation between
immigration and foreign-born relative task supply is never significantly diﬀerent from 0.
  25 We divide the US-Mexico border in 12 sections and calcualte the distance of each center of gravity with each section and then

choose the shortest distance for each state.
  26 We also performed separate regressions exclusively using the DOT 1977 definition and the DOT 1991 definition. Each generated

very similar estimates.




                                                               19
4.2.2      Robustness Checks and Response of Specific Groups of Native Workers

Table 6 tests the robustness of the 2SLS estimates and performs a test of exogeneity of the instruments. In
particular, using the same specification as in column 1 of Table 5, the first four columns of Table 6 demonstrate
how the estimates of γ, γ M , and γ I vary from least square estimates, to 2SLS using only imputed Mexicans
as instrument (column 2), to using the geographic variables (distance and border interacted with decades),
to using all of the instruments together (column 4). Specifications 5 to 8 replicate 1 to 4 but redefine less-
educated workers as those with no high school diploma. The last three rows of the table report the F-test of
joint significance of the instruments and the Hausman test of over-identifying restrictions that can be performed
when we use more instruments than endogenous variables (columns 3, 4, 7, and 8).27 The value reported in
the second to last row is the Chi-squared test statistic under the null hypothesis that none of the instruments
appear in the second stage regression. The degrees of freedom are given by the diﬀerence between the number
of instruments and endogenous variables (this equals 7 in columns 3 and 7, and 8 in columns 4 and 8). The last
row reports the probability of obtaining the observed value of the test statistic or higher under the null. We
cannot reject the null at any level of significance, so the assumption of instrument exogeneity stands.
   More importantly, the point-estimates of γ using the 2SLS method with all instruments are quite precise,
not far from the OLS estimates, and significantly negative. Regardless of the definition of less-educated workers,
we obtain 2SLS estimates using all instruments that are close to -0.2 (-0.22 and -0.23 respectively). The esti-
mates with geographic instruments and those using all instruments together confirm that increased immigration
produces a significant increase in interactive task supply and a less significant (often insignificant) decrease of
manual task supply by natives. Reassured by the test of exogeneity and by the stability of the IV estimates, we
will mostly use the geographic instruments and all instruments together in the rest of the paper.
   Distributional and policy concerns often push the analysis of immigration toward its eﬀect on specific de-
mographic groups. It is important to understand how specific native-born age-education groups respond to
immigration. Groups who specialize in interactive task-intensive occupations are better equipped to mitigate
wage losses. Thus, analysis of specific groups will identify those who are at a greater risk of experiencing wage
losses.
   Table 7 reports estimates of γ from regression (23) for specific sub-groups of less-educated natives using
2SLS method and all the instruments together. The first three columns separate workers into three education
groups (those with 0 to 4, 5 to 9, and 9 to 12 years of schooling) and two age groups (25 to 45 and 46 to 65
years old). The supply-response of natives to immigrants is large and significant for people with 9 to 12 years of
education in each age sub-group. This education cohort comprised 95% of US-born workers with a high school
degree or less in 2000. The intermediate group of native workers with 5 to 8 years of education also responded
 27 See   Woolridge (2002).




                                                        20
by shifting supply to more interactive-intensive occupations. While γ for workers of all ages is close to 0.2, it
is not very significant. However, γ is significant for younger workers. The group of least educated workers (0
to 4 years) does not seem to respond to immigration, however they only represent 0.5% of native workers with
at most a high school diploma. Altogether, analysis of narrowly defined education and age groups reveals that
most groups of native workers respond to immigration by changing their task supply.
   Similarly, women have an estimated γ (reported in the last column) very similar to the value estimated
for all workers (-0.22). The estimate is larger in absolute value for older (-0.46) than younger (-0.12) workers.
Columns 4 reports the task supply response of less-educated native-born black workers. Previous research has
emphasized a disproportionate eﬀect of immigration on labor market outcomes of black Americans (e.g. Borjas
et. al. (2006)). Interestingly, while black Americans seem to have reduced their relative supply of manual
tasks in response to immigration (γ = −0.16), the estimate is not significant (standard error of 0.29). By
disaggregating the eﬀects over age groups, we see that young black workers particularly did not respond to
immigration by supplying interactive tasks. Certainly, this result would imply a higher risk of competition of
immigration on wages paid to black Americans.


4.2.3      Native Employment Response

The native task supply response to immigration is identified using data on working individuals in each state-
year. An alternative response mechanism could be that natives lose or quit their jobs, or possibly leave their
state of employment entirely. In the long run, we expect competitive labor markets will cause wages to adjust
to full employment. Several studies of this displacement eﬀect at the state or city level fail to find evidence
for its existence.28 Nonetheless, we must analyze the less-educated native-born employment and working age
population (L)st response for completeness. Consider the regression specification in (28).


                                    ln (L)st = αL     L                              L
                                                s + τ t + η (Share f oreign Lst ) + εst                        (28)

   Table 8 reports the estimates of η using both employment (columns 1 to 4) and the working age population
(columns 5 to 9) to measure the dependent variable (L)st . In the first row of Table 8 we consider all less-educated
individuals. In the second and third row we consider the eﬀect of immigration by age-group. As workers with
similar education and age characteristics are more likely to compete for similar jobs, the impact of immigrants
by demographic group can be larger than the overall eﬀect. Columns 1, 2, 5 and 6 display WLS results (with
employment weighted observations), while 3, 4, 7 and 8 use 2SLS using all instrumental variables together.
Finally we alternatively use workers with no high school degree (columns 1, 3, 5 and 7) and workers with at
most an high school degree (Columns 2, 4, 6 and 8) to define less-educated workers. The reported standard
 28 See   Card (2001, 2007), Card and Lewis (2007), Ottaviano and Peri (2007) and Peri (2007).



                                                               21
errors are heteroskedasticity robust and are clustered by state. Regardless of the definition of less-educated
workers, the method of estimation, or the age group considered, we find no significant eﬀect of immigration on
the employment and population of native workers. The estimates of η are not very precise (generally smaller
than 0.4 in absolute value), often positive, and never significantly less than zero. Overall, these estimates confirm
the results already found in the literature — there is no systematic displacement of native workers through job
losses or out of state migration due to immigration. Instead, previous sections showed that immigration causes
native workers to systematically reallocate their task supply toward interactive skills.


4.3    Immigration and Total Task Supply

The regression specification in (29) provides a test of Proposition 2, which states that the total relative supply
of manual versus interactive tasks is larger in economies with a larger share of immigrants. That is, the higher
relative task supply among immigrants more than compensates for the reduced supply among natives.

                                µ       ¶
                                    M
                           ln                = αTs OT + τ Tt OT + γ T OT (Share f oreign Lst ) + εTstOT          (29)
                                    I   st
               ¡M ¢
   We obtain     I   st
                          by aggregating the supply of manual and interactive tasks from all less-educated workers
in state s and year t. Proposition 2 implies that γ T OT > 0. However, we can also test how immigration aﬀects
the average amount of manual (μ) and interactive (ι) tasks supplied in equilibrium by running two separate
regressions, similar to (29), with ln (μ)st and ln (ι)st as dependent variables. Analogous to the specifications in
(24) and (25), we call these coeﬃcients γ M
                                          T OT
                                               and γ IT OT .
   The first three rows of Table 9 show the parameter estimates of γ T OT , γ M
                                                                              T OT
                                                                                   , and γ IT OT . The last three rows
show the F-test of significance for the instruments in the first stage and the test of over-identifying restrictions.
Results for workers with a high school degree or less are in columns 1 to 4; columns 5 to 9 are for high school
dropouts. Each 2SLS regression exhibits positive and significant estimates of γ T OT , confirming the prediction
of Proposition 2. For workers with high school degree or less, γ T OT is estimated around 0.3. This arises due
to a large increase in the average supply of manual tasks due to to immigration (γ M
                                                                                   T OT
                                                                                        = 0.21) and a small
decline in interactive task supply (γ IT OT = −0.08). Hence, states with large inflows of less-educated immigrants
experience significant increases in manual relative to interactive task supply as predicted by theory.


4.4     Controlling for Task Demand and Technological Change

Our period of analysis is associated with large changes in production technologies, particularly in the diﬀusion
of information technologies and computer adoption. Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) demonstrate that this
change had a large eﬀect in shifting demand from routine tasks to non-routine tasks. Similarly, the increasing



                                                                  22
importance of advanced services, the demise of manufacturing, and other sector-shifts might have contributed
substantially to diﬀerences across states in the demand for manual and interactive tasks. In this section we
explicitly introduce controls for a state’s technology level and sector composition that may have confounded the
correlation between immigration and task intensity in our prior analysis.
   We begin by including the share of workers (with at most a high school degree) who use a computer at
work to control for the diﬀusion of information technology (IT) across states. This data is available in the CPS
Merged Outgoing Rotation Group Surveys in 1984, 1997 and 2001. We match the 1984 computer data to the
1980 Census data, the 1997 computer-use data to the 1990 Census, and the 2001 computer-use data to the 2000
CPS data. We impute a share of 0 for all states in 1970 and 1960 since the PC was first introduced in 1981.
   The estimates reported in columns 1 and 4 of Table 10 are obtained with 2SLS using all instruments and
weighting observations by their corresponding employment. First, the eﬀect of immigration on the relative task
supply of natives (-0.3) remains negative and significant (column 1), while the eﬀect on aggregate relative task
supply (0.21) is still positive and significant (column 4). Second, computer technology reduces relative task
supply as predicted, since computers decreased the relative productivity of manual versus interactive tasks. The
IT variable, interpretable as a decrease in the parameter β L in the theoretical model, has the same eﬀect on
equilibrium task supply among natives and immigrants.
   Our second control accounts more explicitly for the industrial composition of each state in 1960 and its
eﬀect on task demand. We create state-specific indices of manual versus interactive task demand driven by
                                    ¡ ¢T ech
each state’s industrial composition, M
                                     I       , by assuming that the occupational composition of industries and
industry-specific employment shocks are uniform across states. First, we calculate EHFit and DCPit values
                                                                                                     ¡ ¢
among all workers for each industry i in year t from national data and record the corresponding ratio M
                                                                                                      I i,t .

Next, we calculate industry-level national employment growth since 1960, gi,t . By assuming that industries grew
at their national growth rates regardless of the state in which they are located, we can predict the employment
                                                               \ i,s,t . Finally, we calculate a state’s level
share of industries within each state in each census year, EmpShare
                          ¡ ¢T ech                                          ¡ ¢
of relative task demand, M  I      , as the average value of its industries’ M
                                                                             I it , weighted by their predicted

employment shares.


                                 \ i,s,t =                   EmpSharei,s,1960 · (1 + gi,t )
                               EmpShare                                                                      (30)
                                                        P
                                                        Ind
                                                              EmpSharei,s,1960 · (1 + gi,t )
                                                        i=1

                                  µ       ¶T ech                                 µ       ¶
                                      M                P
                                                       Ind                           M
                                                   =             \i,s,1960 ·
                                                             EmpShare                                        (31)
                                      I    s,t         i=1                           I   i,t

                                                ¡ ¢T ech
   Specifications 2 and 4 of Table 10 include ln M
                                                 I s,t   as a control for sector-driven changes in task intensity.
                                 ¡ M ¢T ech
Columns 3 and 6 include both ln I s,t and the computer use variable. When included by itself, the variable


                                                                 23
has very significant explanatory power but does not change the coeﬃcient on the share of less-educated foreign-
born workers. When included with the IT control, immigration’s eﬀect on the relative task supply of natives
becomes much larger in magnitude (-0.42), while the overall eﬀect (0.08) is reduced in size and significance.
Regressions also indicate that immigration increases native-born interactive task supply, and reduces native-
born manual task supply. In the aggregate, states with large immigrant shares have larger manual task supply,
but interactive tasks remain unaﬀected.


4.5     Immigration and the Relative Compensation of Tasks

Proposition 3 suggests that by increasing the relative supply of manual tasks in a state, immigrants decrease
the wage paid to manual tasks relative to interactive ones. In this section, we proceed to estimate the eﬀect
of immigration on the relative wages paid to tasks. The task demand function in Equation (3) for state s
during year t implies that Equation (32) describes the relationship between the relative supply of manual versus
                                                                                                 wM
interactive tasks among less-educated workers ( M
                                                I ) and the relative wage paid for these skills ( wI ).


                                           µ        ¶            µ             ¶                   µ        ¶
                                               wM                       βL               1              M
                                      ln                  = ln                        −    ln                                 (32)
                                               wI    st               1 − βL       st   θL              I   st

    We allow relative productivity (β L ) to vary systematically across states (due to diﬀerences in industrial
composition) and over time (due to technological change). We also permit a random, zero-mean, idiosyncratic
component in relative productivity. Exogenous shifts in the overall relative supply of manual versus interactive
                                                                1
tasks across states can identify the coeﬃcient                 θL ,   where θL represents the elasticity of substitution between
the tasks. Hence we estimate Equation (33) using two stage least squares. Exogenous shifts in the share of
                                                                                                                  1
foreign-born workers will aﬀect the aggregate relative supply of skills. Hence, we can estimate                  θL   by employing
                                                                      M
the share of foreign-born workers as instrument for                   I .


                                            µ        ¶                                 µ       ¶
                                                wM                              1          M
                                       ln                    = αs + τ t −         ln                    + εst                 (33)
                                                wI      st                     θL          I       st

                             M
    While we calculated      I   in the previous sections by state, aggregation of the individual supply of manual
                                                                                                                              wM
(EHF ) and interactive (DCP ) tasks for the labor force prohibits direct observation of the relative wage                     wI   .
However, the IPUMS data contains individual-level information on wages and other characteristics that we can
merge with an individual’s supply of EHF and DCP . Measurement of wM and wI for each state and year
requires two steps for each year in our sample. First, we select only workers with at most a high school degree
and regress, by year, the natural logarithm of individual real weekly wages29 on indicator variables for the
  29 Real weekly wages are calculated by dividing the yearly salary income by the number of weeks worked in the year. The

nominal figures are converted into real figures using the CPI-U deflator published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and available
at www.bls.gov/cpi.




                                                                        24
number of years of education (12 indicators from 0 to 12), years of experience (40 indicators from 1 to 40),
a gender dummy, and a race dummy (white versus non-white).30 The residuals of these regressions represent
individual wages after controlling for personal characteristics, which we label ln(wage clean)ist for individual i
residing in state s in census year t.
   In the second step, we transform the wages into levels and regress them on the individual measures of EHF
and DCP using weighted least squares. We allow the coeﬃcients on these skill variables to vary across the 51
states so that they capture the price of manual and interactive tasks in each state. Therefore, by separately
estimating the second stage regression in Equation (34) for each year, we can identify the state and year-specific
wages received for supplying manual (wML )st and interactive (wIL )st tasks.


                                 wage cleanist = (wM )st ∗ EHFist + (wI )st DCPist + εist                           (34)

                                                                                             1
                                     d
   Next, we substitute the estimates w         cI st into Equation (33) to estimate
                                      M st and w                                            θL .   Table 11 reports the
results for diﬀerent DOT definitions (1991, 1977, and merged) as in Table 4. Columns 1, 4, and 7 report the
estimates of θ1L when we exploit the result of Proposition 2 and directly use Share f oreign Lst as an instrument
      ³    ´
for ln M L
        IL     . The instrument is relatively powerful (F-statistic of 14), and we obtain estimates statistically
                st
significant at the 10 or 5% level between 1.3 and 1.45.
                                                                                                               ³        ´
                                                                                                                   ML
   To address the concerns that also Share f oreign Lst could be endogenous, we also instrument ln                 IL
                                                                                                                        st
with our geographic instruments in columns 2, 5, and 8. The specifications in 3, 6, and 9 use the geographic
IVs and the imputed share of Mexicans. Unfortunately, the instruments are quite weak (F-statistics near 4)
                       ¡ ¢
when used to predict ln M
                        I st , so the standard errors increase and the significance of the estimates decreases.
                                         1
However, the point estimates of         θL   remain consistently around one.
   The 2SLS estimates using Share f oreign Lst as an instrument imply that the share of foreign-born workers
reduces the relative compensation paid to manual tasks, thus confirming Proposition 3. This arises due to the
                                           ¡ ¢
positive impact of Share f oreign Lst on ln M                                                  1
                                             I st and the negative and significant value of − θL . The range

of point estimates in Table 11 suggest the elasticity of substitution (θL ) ranges between 0.7 and 1.1. Even
assuming the largest estimate (1.1), manual and interactive tasks have a high degree of complementarity. These
figures are comparable to commonly estimated values for the elasticity of substitution between less and more
educated workers (σ) available in the literature, which fall between 1.5 and 2.31
 30 We    also weight each individual by its Census sample weight.
 31 See   Katz and Murphy (1992) or Angrist (1995).




                                                                 25
5        Simulated Eﬀects of Immigration on Real Wages

Our empirical analysis suggests that to understand the wage implications of immigration, simulations must
account for the adjustment in native-born task supply. We do so by combining the formulas derived in Section 2
with the estimated response of μD and ιD to immigration from Section 4.2 and the elasticity (θL ) from Section
4.5. First, we use Equations (15), (17) and (18) and the changes in H, M , and I due to immigration between
1990 and 2000 to evaluate the eﬀects of immigration on compensation paid to highly-educated workers, manual
tasks, and interactive tasks. Then we combine those results with Equation (20) to find the overall eﬀect of
immigration on average wages paid to less-educated native workers.
   The simulated eﬀect of immigrants on average wages paid to less-educated native workers diﬀers from
                                                               ³      ´
the eﬀect on average overall wages of less-educated workers ∆W   WL
                                                                    L
                                                                        for two reasons. First, the change in
                                        ³     ´
                                          ∆wI
compensation paid to interactive tasks wI is weighted more heavily, and the change in compensation paid
                ³     ´
to manual tasks ∆wwM
                    M
                         less heavily, for natives. Since immigrants supply more manual tasks, we know that
∆M           ∆I                    ∆wM                                                     ∆wI
M        >    I .   This implies   wM    (which is usually negative) is smaller than       wI    (which is positive for some
states). Hence, the large wage loss from manual tasks is weighted less in occupations chosen by natives. This
attenuation grows larger if natives increasingly specialize in interactive tasks, and is much stronger in high
immigration states.
                                                          wM          wI
    Second, the empirical results suggest the term (∆μD ) W  + (∆ιD ) W  in Equation (20) also positively
                                                                        D              D

contributes to the average wage of natives. On one hand, immigration increases ∆ιD and reduces ∆μD . Unit
                              ³     ´
                                wM
compensation for manual tasks W       was 10 to 20 percent smaller than unit compensation for interactive tasks
³    ´                            D

  wI
  W
       in 1990 and 2000.32 Moreover, this diﬀerential was larger in high immigration states so that immigration
     D

shifted workers to occupations whose tasks were better compensated. On the other hand, the estimates from
Tables 4 and 6 imply that the positive impact of immigration on ∆ιD was generally larger than the negative
impact on ∆μD . Hence, higher demand for complementary services also had a positive eﬀect on average wages,
shifting natives to jobs with higher interactive content.
    Table 12 reports the simulated eﬀects of immigration from 1990-2000 at the national level and for states
with unusually high levels of immigration. The first two columns report the increase in employment due to
immigration as percentage of 1990 employment. Columns 1 and 2 consider workers with some college education
¡ ∆H ¢                                          ¡ ¢
   H   and those with high school degree or less ∆L
                                                 L , respectively. Notice that for each reported state (except

New York) the percentage inflow of less-educated immigrants was larger than the inflow of more-educated ones.
For Arizona, Massachusetts, and Texas the inflow of less-educated was almost four times that of more-educated
workers.
 32 The estimates of wg       fI were obtained in Section 4.5 and are used in this section to calculate the shares of M and I in
                       M and w
wages paid to less educated workers, as well as the ratios wI and wM .
                                                         WD        WD




                                                              26
                                                                                     ¡ ∆M ¢               ¡ ∆I ¢
   Columns 3 and 4 show the percentage change in the equilibrium supply of manual       M and interactive    I

tasks due to immigration. These figures are calculated by multiplying the average task-supply of immigrants
by the inflow of less-educated immigrants, and then dividing by the total task supply in 1990. In each state
considered, the percentage supply of manual tasks increased more than the supply of interactive tasks did. This
confirms that immigrants specialized in manual-intensive occupations.
    The following three columns (5, 6, and 7) apply the formulas (15), (17), and (18) to report the percentage
                                                  ³      ´                                        ³      ´
changes in wages paid to highly-educated workers ∆W  WH
                                                       H
                                                           and  the compensation  paid  to manual   ∆wM
                                                                                                     wM    and
            ³      ´
interactive ∆wwI
                 I
                     tasks. We assume a value of σ = 1.75 that is in the middle of the range usually estimated
in the literature (1.5 to 2). We also set θL = 1, a value implying that skills are more substitutable than most
of our estimates find.
   Column 5 reports the percentage wage change of highly-educated American workers due to immigration.
Since the inflow of highly-educated immigrants was small relative to the inflow of less-educated ones, the wage
eﬀect on people with high education is usually positive (a gain of 1.3% at the national level).
   The change in wages paid to manual versus interactive tasks (columns 6 and 7) is clearly more important for
understanding the eﬀects of immigration on less-educated workers. In Nevada, the compensation of manual tasks
performed by less-educated workers decreased by 5.2%, while the compensation of interactive tasks performed
by the same group increased by 0.5%. In Arizona, compensation for manual tasks decreased by almost 14%,
while compensation for interactive tasks only decreased 4.6%.
   Column 8 reports the resulting eﬀect on the change in average wages paid to less-educated labor before
                                                ³      ´
accounting for any shift in domestic task supply ∆W
                                                  W
                                                     L
                                                         . That is, these figures are useful for identifying
                                                        L

the counter-factual wage eﬀects for less-educated native workers that are identified by models with perfect
substitutability between native and foreign-born workers. Column 9, by comparison, reports the actual simulated
eﬀects of immigration on less-educated natives that account for the reallocation of tasks following immigration
³      ´
  ∆W D
   W
        . To calculate these figures, we use the formula in (20). We then compute the values of ∆ιD and
    D

∆μD by multiplying the change in the foreign-born share of each state between 1990 and 2000 by the average
response of interactive and manual task supply to immigration from columns 1-4 of Table 6 (respectively +0.13
and -0.06). The resulting values are elasticities that, when multiplied by their initial values, equal ∆ιD and
∆μD .
   Comparison of columns 8 and 9 highlights the most important feature of Table 12. Together they provide the
diﬀerence in wage eﬀects estimated using a simple model of homogeneous labor versus our model of comparative
advantage. At the national level, specialization reduces the wage loss of less-educated native workers by about
one percentage point (from -2.4% to -1.5%). In states with large immigration such as California or Arizona, task
reallocation reduces the wage loss by more than three percentage points. Specialization completely eliminates



                                                       27
the wage losses in California. Except for Arizona (whose less-educated workers experience a 5.6% wage loss),
no state witnessed wage losses exceeding 2.1%. By specializing in interactive skill-intense occupations, less-
educated natives reduce wage losses by two to three percentage points in many high immigration states, and
one percentage point overall.
    Finally the last two columns demonstrate how state-level averages still conceal a large degree of variation
in wage eﬀects across occupations. Column 10 shows the wage eﬀect of immigration on a postal clerk with
high school education or less. This is a job with relatively high interactive task intensity and low manual task
intensity. In contrast, column 11 shows the eﬀect of immigration on wages of hand packers, an occupation with
relatively high manual task requirements. Occupational choice makes a huge diﬀerence in determining the wage
losses in states with high immigration. In Texas, a hand packer would have suﬀered a 5% wage loss due to
immigration, while a postal clerk would have suﬀered only half that eﬀect. In Florida, the postal clerk would
have actually gained 0.5% of her real wage, but the hand packer would have lost 0.8% of hers. At the national
level, postal clerks only experienced a 1.2% wage decline, while hand packers lost 3.4%. In sum, less-educated
natives protected themselves from most of the negative wage eﬀects of immigration first because they have
typically chosen jobs more similar to postal clerks than hand packers, and second because immigration pushed
them to seek such occupations at higher rates.



6     Conclusions

The eﬀects of immigration on wages paid to native-born workers with low levels of educational attainment
depend upon two critical factors. The first is whether immigrants take jobs similar to those of native workers or
instead take diﬀering jobs due to inherent comparative advantages between native and foreign-born employees
in performing particular productive tasks. The second is whether US-born workers respond to immigration and
adjust their occupation choices to shield themselves from competition with immigrant labor.
    This paper provides a simple and new theoretical framework and empirical evidence to analyze these issues.
We argue that production combines diﬀerent labor skills. Immigrants with little educational attainment have
a comparative advantage in manual and physical tasks, while natives of similar levels of education have a
comparative advantage in interactive and language-intensive tasks. Native and foreign-born workers specialize
accordingly. When immigration generates large increases in manual task supply, the relative compensation paid
to interactive tasks rises, thereby rewarding natives who progressively move to interactive-intensive jobs.
    Our empirical analysis modified a dataset developed by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) that measures the
task-content of occupations in the United States between 1960 and 2000. We find strong evidence supporting
three implications of our theoretical model:
    i) On average, less-educated immigrants supplied more manual relative to interactive tasks than natives

                                                       28
supplied.
   ii) In states with large immigration among the less-educated labor force, native workers shifted to occupations
intensive in interactive tasks, thereby reducing native workers’ relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks.
   iii) In states with large immigration among the less-educated labor force, there is a larger relative supply
of manual versus interactive tasks than in states with low levels of immigration. This implies that immigrants
more than compensate for the change in skill supply among natives, and it ensures that manual task-intensive
occupations earn lower wages.
   Since native-born workers respond to inflows of immigrant labor by specializing in occupations demanding
interactive tasks, the relative supply of interactive tasks by the average US-born worker has increased signif-
icantly in the recent decades. As a consequence, the wage loss of less-educated native workers in states with
large immigration was much smaller than predicted by models in which the labor supplied by less-educated
natives and immigrants is perfectly substitutable. In particular, we estimate that immigration of less-educated
workers only reduced average real wages paid to less-educated US-born workers by 1.5% between 1990 and 2000.
Without task specialization, that loss would have equaled 2.5%.




                                                        29
References

Acemoglu, Daron (1998) “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change and Wage
Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (4), pp. 1055-1090.

Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Directed Technical Change.” Review of Economic Studies, 69 (4), pp. 781-810.

Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2001) “Productivity Diﬀerences” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116
(2) pp. 563-606.

Altonji, Joseph J. and David Card (1991) “The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of
Less-Skilled Natives” in John M. Abowd and Richard Freeman eds., Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market,
Chicago, the University of Chicago Press.

Angrist, Joshua (1995) “The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.” American
Economic Review 85 (1995), pp. 1065-1087.

Autor David H., Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change:
an Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), pp. 1279-1333.

Bacolod, Marigee and Bernardo S. Blum (2006) “Two sides of the Same Coin: U.S. Residual Inequality and the
Gender Gap.” Manuscript, UC Irvine, March 2006.

Bacolod, Marigee, Bernardo S. Blum and William C. Strange (2006) “Skills in the City.” Manuscript, University
of Toronto, November 2006.

Borjas, George J. (1994) “The Economics of Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature, 32 (4), pp. 1667-
1717.

Borjas, George J. (1995) “The Economic Benefits from Immigration.” Journal of Economics Perspectives, 9 (2),
pp. 3-22.

Borjas, George J. (1999) “Heaven’s Door.” Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford.

Borjas, George J. (2003) “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immi-
gration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), 1335-1374.

Borjas, George J. (2006) “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration” Journal of
Human Resources, 41 (2), pp. 221-258.

Borjas, George J., Richard Freeman, and Larry Katz (1997) “How Much do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect
Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997 (1), pp. 1-90.


                                                     30
Borjas, George J. and Larry Katz (2005) “The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States.”
NBER Working paper #11281, April 2005.

Borjas, George J., Jeﬀrey Grogger, and Gordon Hanson (2006) “Immigration and African-American Employment
Opportunities: The Response of Wages, Employment and Incarceration to Labour Supply Shocks.” NBER
Working Paper, #12518.

Butcher, Katrin C. and David Card (1991) “Immigration and Wages: Evidence from the 1980s.” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 81 (2), 292-296.

Card, David (1990) “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor
Relation Review, 43, pp. 245-257.

Card, David (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19 (1), pp. 22-64.

Card, David (2007) ”How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities” CReAM Discussion Paper N. 11/07, London UK.

Card, David and John Di Nardo (2000) “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?” NBER Working
Paper #7578.

Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (2001) “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to College for
Younger Men? A Cohort Based Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (2), pp. 705-746.

Card, David and Ethan Lewis (2007) “The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations
and Impacts” in Mexican Immigration to the United States, George J. Borjas editor, The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, London, 2007.

Caselli F. and W. J. Coleman, (2006) ”The World Technology Frontier.”, American Economic Review, 96 (3).
pp. 499-522.

Cortes, Patricia (2006) “The Eﬀect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI data.”
Manuscript, University of Chicago, March 2006.

Friedberg, Rachel and Jennifer Hunt (1995) “The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country Wages, Employment
and Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9 (2), pp. 23-44.

Friedberg, Rachel (2001) “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 116(4), pp. 1373-1408.

Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006) “Trading tasks: A Simple Theory of Oﬀ-shoring.” NBER
Working Paper #12721, December 2006.

                                                    31
Katz, Larry and Kevin Murphy (1992) “Change in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1), 35-78.

Kugler Adriana and Mutlu Yuksel (2006) “The Impact of Less Skilled Immigration on U.S. Natives: Evidence
from Hurricane Mitch.” Manuscript, University of Houston, January 2006.

Lewis, Ethan (2005) “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadel-
phia Working Paper #05-08.

Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth (2006) “The Impact of Immigration on the Struc-
ture of Male Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain.” Manuscript, London School of Economics, August
2006.

National Research Council (1997) “The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal Eﬀects of Immi-
gration.” National Academy Press, Washington D.C.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri (2006) “Rethinking the Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages” NBER
Working Paper #12497.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri (2007) ”The Eﬀect of Immigration on U.S. Wages and Rents”
manuscript U.C. Davis, August 2007.

Peri, Giovanni (2007) “Immigrants’ Complementarities and Native Wages: Evidence from California” NBER
Working Paper # 12956, March 2007, Cambridge, MA.

Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2005). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:            Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor], 2004.
http://www.ipums.org.

Saiz, Albert (2003) “Immigration and Housing Rents in American Cities.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Working Paper No. 03-12.

Woolridge J.L. (2002) “Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.” MIT Press, Boston, MA.




                                                     32
A      Appendix - Derivation of Equations from Section 2

A.1     Equations from Section 2.1

Competitive labor markets and producers of YL and YH generate equilibrium conditions for relative input prices
and task compensation. By equating the marginal productivity of intermediate goods to their prices, we find
the relationship between the relative price of intermediate goods and their relative demand in Equation (35).
Equating the productivity of each task to its compensation produces Equation (3).

                                                                   µ             ¶− σ1
                                              PH   (1 − β)              H
                                                 =                                                                (35)
                                              PL      β                 YL


A.2     Equations from Section 2.2

Maximization of WL,j with respect to lj in Equation (4) generates the optimal relative allocation of labor for
worker j in Equation (36). By rearranging the definitions of unit-task supply and substituting them into this
expression, we can identify an individual’s equilibrium relative supply of task units in Equation (5).

                                                          µ                  ¶ δ−1
                                                                                1
                                                 lj            ij wI
                                                      =                                                           (36)
                                               1 − lj         mj wM


A.3     Equations from Section 2.3

The equilibrium relative compensation of tasks (12) is obtained by substituting (6) for domestic and foreign work-
ers into (11), and then equating it with the demand curve (3). Intuitively, this is the wage obtained when the av-
                                                                           "                                   #(1−δ)
                                                                              ³     ´ 1−δ
                                                                                       1
                                                                                                    ³    ´ 1−δ
                                                                                                            1

erage manual versus interactive task eﬀectiveness of the population equals f miFF         + (1 − f ) m D
                                                                                                      iD              .


A.4     Equations from Section 2.4

To isolate the eﬀect of immigration on wages, first substitute (2) into the production function (1) and take the
derivative with respect to the inputs M , I, and H to obtain their marginal products.

                                                                                 
                                                                        1    1
                                                          1            θL   −σ            − θ1
                                         wM = (β L β) Y σ YL                          M         L                 (37)
                                                                                     
                                                                             1    1
                                                               1            θL   −σ           − θ1
                                        wI = (1 − β L )βY YL   σ                          I      L                (38)

                                                                                       1
                                                                                 1    −σ
                                           WH = PH = (1 − β)Y σ YH                                                (39)

    Highly-educated workers earn the unit price of the intermediate good they produce. The logarithmic diﬀer-
ential of (39) directly measures immigration’s eﬀect on highly-educated workers as expressed in (15).


                                                          33
   Wages paid to less-educated workers are divided into their manual and interactive components. The first
order eﬀect of immigration is equal to the percentage change in the intermediate good price PL . Values for
³     ´      ³     ´
  ∆wM          ∆wI
   wM   and    wI    can be obtained from logarithmic diﬀerentials of (37) and (38).
   Note that (19) represents the average manual and interactive wage eﬀects weighted by their respective
supplies. Thus, we can express the first order wage eﬀect for less-educated workers by substituting Equations
                         ∆wM             ∆wI
(17) and (18) for         wM      and     wI    and simplifying to obtain Equation (16).33 Calculations of the eﬀect of
immigration on the average native-born less-educated worker (20) and of a worker in occupation j (21) are then
described in the main text.
                         ∆YL
   Derivation of          YL    requires several steps. First, since YL is produced under perfect competition using
services of less-educated workers, we know that the total income generated in sector YL will be distributed to
less-educated workers as in Equation (40).


                                                     PL YL = W L L = wM M + wI I                                                                (40)

   This allows us to relate changes in the production of YL to small changes of inputs M and I as in Equation
(22). The formal proof hinges only on constant returns to scale to M and I in (2). First, re-write Equation
(22) by dividing by PL YL . Then take the total diﬀerential with respect to M and I to find Equation (41).


                                        dYL   d( wPM M
                                                   L YL
                                                        +     wI I
                                                              PL YL )               d( wPM
                                                                                         L
                                                                                             M
                                                                                             YL   +    wI I
                                                                                                       PL YL )
                                            =                           dM +                                     dI                             (41)
                                         YL           dM                                         dI
                                                              wM       dYL            wI         dYL
   From the definition of wages we know that                  PL   =   dM     and     PL   =      dI .   Distributing the diﬀerentiation with
respect to M and I we can re-write (41) as in (42).


                                "                        #      "                        #
     dYL   wM M dM    wI I dI     d( dY
                                     dM ) M
                                       L
                                              d( dY
                                                  dI ) I
                                                    L
                                                                  d( dY
                                                                     dM ) M
                                                                       L
                                                                              d( dY
                                                                                  dI ) I
                                                                                    L

         =         +          +             +              dM +             +              dI                                                   (42)
      YL   PL YL M   PL YL I       dM YL       dM YL                 dI YL       dI YL

                                                                                                         dYL M            dYL I
   Due to constant returns to scale of M and I in YL , the expression                                    dM YL        +    dI YL   equals one (Euler
Condition). Constant returns also imply that the second derivatives (with respect to M or I), multiplied by
              M           I
the shares    YL   and   YL ,   sum to 0. Hence the two terms in brackets equal 0 so that (41) reduces to (43).


                                                     dYL   wM M dM    wI I dI
                                                         =         +                                                                            (43)
                                                      YL   PL YL M   PL YL I
                                        wM M        wM M                     wI I       wI I
   Finally, we label the term           PL YL   =   WL L
                                                           as κM , and      PL YL   =   WL L
                                                                                                  as (1 − κM ). We then use ∆, rather than
d, to indicate a small (rather than an infinitesimal) change to obtain equation (22).

                                                                                             1      1
                                                                                                   −σ
 33 This                                                                                                                     ∆YL         ∆H
           can be checked by taking the total logarithmic diﬀerential of PL = βY             σ    YL     with respect to      YL
                                                                                                                                   and    H
                                                                                                                                            .


                                                                       34
Tables and Figures




                  Table 1: Median Supply of Interactive and Manual Tasks, All Workers, 1960-2000

                                        1960              1970               1980            1990             2000
                                        Male
                                                                                             Male             Male
                                     Hucksters,         Female              Female
                     Occupation                                                           Guards and       Janitors and
                                    Peddlers, and      Waitresses         Bank Tellers
                                                                                         Private Police      Cleaners
                                      Salesmen
                         DCP
                     (Interactive       0.50              0.53               0.59            0.61             0.62
                      Measure)
                                                                             Female         Male             Male
                                       Male           Male Job and         Secondary     Food Service     Food Service
                     Occupation
                                    Shoemakers         Die Setters           School      and Lodging      and Lodging
                                                                            Teachers      Managers         Managers
                        EHF
                      (Manual           0.50              0.49               0.35            0.33             0.33
                      Measure)




               Note: The variables DCP and EHF are based on the scores assigned to each occupation by the Dictionary of
               Occupational Titles (DOT) in 1977 for 1960, 1970, and 1980, and the scores assigned by the DOT in 1991 for
               1990 and 2000. They are converted into percentile scores using the 1960 distribution so that median values
               equal 0.5 in 1960 by construction.




                                                                     35
                                               Table 2:
                          Relative Manual and Interactive Task Requirements
and the Percentage of Foreign-Born Workers in Selected Occupations, 2000, High School Diploma or Less

         Occupation                  % of     Relative Manual          Relative                           Manual/
                                 Foreign-Born      Tasks:         Interactive Tasks:                     Interactive
                                   Workers,   EHF/(DCP+EHF) DCP/(DCP+EHF)
                                     2000
                                              Agricultural Sector
      Agricultural Laborer           63%            0.72                 0.28                                  2.5
       Farm Coordinator               4%            0.30                 0.70                                 0.43
                                              Construction Sector
       Construction Helper           66%            0.97                 0.03                                  43
          Construction                8%            0.31                 0.69                                 0.44
           Supervisor
                                                       Postal Services
         Mail Handling-                48%                 0.94                      0.06                     17.5
        Machine Operator
          Mail Clerk/                  7%                    0.14                    0.86                     0.17
           Deliverer
                                                      Food Preparation
       Miscellaneous Food              33%                 0.56                      0.44                     1.63
          Preparation
        Supervisor Food                14%                   0.36                    0.64                     0.58
          Preparation
                                                  Transportation Services
           Taxi Driver                 40%               0.98                        0.02                     49.5
        Supervisor, Motor              10%               0.31                        0.67                     0.45
        Vehicle Operators
 Note: Occupations are defined by the Census. Data for the year 2000 are obtained averaging the CPS samples for 1998, 1999 and
 2000 as described in the text. The indices EHF and DCP are those obtained using the 1991 DOT definitions.




                                                             36
                                                        Table 3
 Share of State-Year Observations in which Manual/Interactive Task Supply for Immigrants is Larger than for Native-Born
                                                       Workers


             Sample:               State-Year       State-Year        State-Year                     State-Year       State-Year        State-Year
                                  Observations     Observations      Observations                   Observations     Observations      Observations
                                  with Share of    with Share of     with Share of                 with Share of     with Share of     with Share of
                                  Less-Educated    Less-Educated Less-Educated                     Less-Educated Less-Educated         Less-Educated
                                   Immigrants       Immigrants        Immigrants                    Immigrants        Immigrants        Immigrants
                                      >1%              >5%               >10%                           >1%              >5%               >10%
                                    Relative Task Supply Calculated for all Less-                  Relative Task Supply Calculated for Less-Educated
                                                Educated Immigrants                                 New Immigrants (Less than 10 Years in the US)
Percentage of State-Year               80%              88%              100%                           87%              96%               100%
Observations for which
(MF/IF) > (MD/ID)
Total Number of State-                   227                  108                    55                   227                  108                    55
Year Observations


Note For the few state-year observations in which the foreign-born share of less-educated employment was smaller than 1%, the calculation of relative task
supply is noisy and unreliable because it is based on a very small sample. The relative supply of tasks for native, foreign-born, and recent immigrants equals
EHF/DCP. The indices EHF and DCP are obtained using the 1977 DOT definition for 1960, 1970 and 1980 and the 1991 DOT definition for 1990 and 2000.




                                                                             37
                                                                   Table 4
                         Impact of Foreign-Born Workers on the Supply of Tasks of US Natives, Least Squares Estimates
                                                  Workers with a High School Degree or Less

                           Explanatory Variable: Foreign-Born Share of Workers with a High School Degree or Less
               DOT Definition:                 1991 DOT                         1977 DOT                         Merged DOT
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)
         Dependent                    Basic     Males       Non-        Basic    Males        Non-       Basic    Males       Non-
           Variable     Parameter                Only     Weighted                Only     Weighted                 Only   Weighted
     Domestic Workers         γ     -0.18** -0.18**       -0.26**     -0.19** -0.19**       -0.27**    -0.21** -0.21**      -0.29**
     Ln(MD/ID)                       (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.09)      (0.04)    (0.07)      (0.09)     (0.05)     (0.07)    (0.09)
                              Μ
     Domestic Workers        γ        -0.01      0.00       -0.01       0.00      0.01        0.02       -0.02     -0.01      -0.03
     Ln( μ D )                       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.07)      (0.03)    (0.03)      (0.07)     (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.07)
     Domestic Workers        γI      0.17**     0.18**     0.26**      0.19**    0.20**      0.29**     0.18**    0.20**     0.27**
     Ln( ι D )                       (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.05)    (0.06)      (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.06)    (0.06)
                               F
     Foreign Workers         γ         0.21      0.09      0.69**       0.20      0.06       0.78**       0.19      0.05     0.69**
     Ln(MF/IF)                       (0.18)     (0.17)     (0.33)      (0.18)    (0.19)      (0.35)     (0.17)     (0.07)    (0.33)
     Number of Observations            255        255        255         255       255         255        255       255        255


Note: Each cell contains estimates from separate regressions. The dependent variable in each is indicated in the first column. The explanatory variable is the foreign-born
share of less-educated workers. The units of observation in each regression are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total
of 255 observations. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The method of estimation is least squares. In specifications (1), (2), (4), (5), (7) and (8) we weight
observations by employment, and the standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state. In specifications (3), (6) and (9) we perform unweighted OLS with
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. In Specifications (1)-(3) the task supply is obtained using the 1977 DOT, in specifications (4)-(6) we use the 1991 DOT
definitions, while in (6)-(9) we use the 1977 DOT definition for 1960, 1970 and 1980 and the 1991 DOT definition for 1990 and 2000.
** indicates significance at the 5% level



                                                                                        38
                                                                     Table 5
                              Impact of Foreign-Born Workers on the Supply of Tasks of US Natives, 2SLS Estimates
                                                    Workers with a High School Degree or Less

                              Explanatory Variable: Foreign-Born Share of Workers with a High School Degree or Less
                   Instruments              Imputed Share of Mexican        Distance from the Border and     US-Mexico Border Dummy
                                                   Immigrants                      Distance Squared            Interacted with Decades
                                                                                Interacted with Decades
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)           (8)        (9)
          Dependent                      Basic       Males       Non-         Basic     Males       Non-    Basic        Males       Non-
            Variable       Parameter                  Only    Weighted                   Only    Weighted                 Only    Weighted
      Domestic Workers           γ      -0.15**     -0.18**     -0.24*      -0.27** -0.26** -0.50**       -0.22**       -0.21**    -0.41**
      Ln(MD/ID)                          (0.05)      (0.08)     (0.14)       (0.09)     (0.12)     (0.20)  (0.06)        (0.09)     (0.17)
                                 Μ
      Domestic Workers          γ         -0.06       -0.07      -0.09       -0.15*      -0.18     -0.38*  -0.11*         -0.09    -0.24**
      Ln( μ D )                          (0.05)      (0.06)     (0.10)       (0.08)     (0.12)     (0.14)  (0.06)        (0.07)     (0.12)
      Domestic Workers          γI      0.09**       0.11**    0.14**       0.12**       0.07       0.12  0.11**        0.12**     0.17**
      Ln( ι D )                          (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.07)       (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.09)  (0.03)        (0.04)     (0.06)
      Foreign Workers           γF        0.08        -0.14       0.44        -0.07      0.08       0.13    0.09          -0.08      0.38
      Ln(MF/IF)                          (0.23)      (0.23)     (0.34)       (0.28)     (0.25)     (0.48)  (0.21)        (0.20)     (0.28)
                                                                    First Stage
      F-Test of the Instruments          20.95        28.5       22.80       14.53       12.2       4.91    19.9         13.36       7.68
      (p-value)                         (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000) (0.000)       (0.001) (0.000)       (0.000)    (0.000)
      Number of Observations               255         255        255          255        255       255      255           255       255

Note: Each cell contains estimates from separate regressions. The dependent variable in each is indicated in the first column. The explanatory variable is the foreign-born
share of less-educated workers. The units of observation in each regression are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total
of 255 observations. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The method of estimation is two stage least squares. Specifications (1)-(3) instrument using the
imputed share of Mexican described in the main text. Specifications (2)-(4) instrument using the distance between the center of gravity of the state and the Mexico-US
border, interacted with four decade dummies. Specifications (7)-(9) use a dummy equal to one for states on the US-Mexico border, interacted with four decade dummies.
We use the 1977 DOT definition for 1960, 1970 and 1980 and the 1991 DOT definition for 1990 and 2000. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered by state, are
reported in parenthesis.
** indicates significance at the 5% level


                                                                                      39
                                                                     Table 6
                             Impact of Foreign-Born Workers on the Supply of Tasks of US Natives, Multiple Instruments

                                             Explanatory Variable: Foreign-Born Share of Less-Educated Workers
                                              Workers with a High School Degree or Less              Workers with No High School Diploma
                                              (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
                                              LS             2SLS             2SLS               2SLS             LS              2SLS             2SLS             2SLS
                                                           Imputed         Geographic              All                          Imputed         Geographic            All
     Dependent                                             Mexican         Instruments        Instruments                       Mexican         Instruments      Instruments
       Variable   Parameter                               Instrument                                                           Instrument
 Domestic Workers      γ                   -0.21**         -0.15**          -0.22**        -0.22**             -0.27**          -0.17**          -0.24**          -0.23**
 Ln(MD/ID)                                  (0.05)          (0.05)           (0.06)         (0.06)              (0.05)           (0.05)           (0.07)           (0.07)
 Domestic Workers     γΜ                     -0.02           -0.06            -0.08          -0.10              -0.07*          -0.10**          -0.10**          -0.10**
 Ln( μ D )                                  (0.03)          (0.05)           (0.06)         (0.06)              (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)
 Domestic Workers     γI                   0.18**           0.09**           0.12**         0.11**             0.20**            0.07*           0.14**            0.14**
 Ln( ι D )                                  (0.05)          (0.03)           (0.03)         (0.03)              (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.05)           (0.04)
                                                                                 First Stage
 Joint F-Test of the Instruments             NA            20.07**          20.50**        20.95**               NA             16.09**          27.57**          29.69**
 (p-value)                                                 (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)                                               (0.000)          (0.000)
 Test of Over-Identifying                    NA              NA                3.82           8.92               NA               NA               2.55             7.65
 Restrictions
 (Specification in First Row)
 Probability (χ2 > test)                     NA              NA               81%               35%              NA               NA               92%              47%
 under the Null of Exogeneity of
 Instruments
 Observations                                255             255               255               255             255              255              255               255

Note: Each cell contains estimates from separate regressions. The dependent variable in each is indicated in the first column. The explanatory variable is the foreign-born
share of less-educated workers. The units of observation in each regression are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total
of 255 observations. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The method of estimation is two stage least squares. Each observation is weighted by employment,
and the standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state. The last two rows report the Hausman test of overidentifying restrictions that can be performed
when we use more instruments that endogenous variables. We report the test statistic and the p-value, namely the probability that χ2 is larger than the observed statistic under
the null hypothesis of the exogeneity of the instruments.
** indicates significance at the 5% level



                                                                                         40
                                                             Table 7
                      Impact of Foreign-Born Workers on the Supply of Tasks of Detailed Demographic Groups

                      Explanatory Variable: Foreign-Born Share of Workers within a Particular Demographic Group

                      Dependent variable: Ln(MD/ID) for Domestic Workers within a Particular Demographic Group

                                               Individuals         Individuals with         Individuals            African                Women
                                             with 0-4 Years          5-8 Years of            with 9-12           Americans                With a
                                              of Schooling            Schooling               Years of             With a               High School
                                                                                             Schooling           High School           Degree or Less
                                                                                                                Degree or Less
     All Ages                                     -0.03                   -0.16               -0.38**               -0.16                   -0.22**
                                                  (0.31)                 (0.10)                (0.08)               (0.29)                   (0.10)
     Age: 25-45                                   -0.28                  -0.22*               -0.29**               -0.03                    -0.12
                                                  (0.34)                 (0.10)                (0.14)               (0.43)                   (0.11)
     Age: 46-65                                   0.087                   -0.04                -0.85*               -0.20                   -0.46**
                                                  (0.64)                 (0.39)                (0.23)               (0.39)                   (0.23)
     Number of Observations                        255                     255                  255                  255                      255

Note: Each cell contains the estimate of the parameter γ from a separate regression that only includes natives and immigrants belonging to the specified demographic
group. The units of observation in each regression are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total of 255 observations.
All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The method of estimation is two stage least squares using all instruments. Each observation is weighted by
employment, and the standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state.
** indicates significance at the 5% level




                                                                                41
                                                             Table 8
                   Effects of the Foreign-Born Share of Employment on Native-Born Employment and Population.
                                               Less-Educated Workers by Age Group

Dependent Variable:                                  Ln(EmploymentD)                                                   Ln(PopulationD)
                                             LS                              2SLS                              LS                            2SLS
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)             (8)
                                  HS or            HS              HS or              HS             HS or             HS           HS or            HS
                                   Less          Dropouts           Less            Dropouts          Less          Dropouts         Less          Dropouts
All Ages                           -0.12           0.20             0.25              0.45            0.20           0.49**          0.55            0.53
                                  (0.37)          (0.24)           (0.70)            (0.42)          (0.33)          (0.19)         (0.64)          (0.31)
Age: 25-45                         -0.35          -0.08             0.23              0.10           -0.07             0.08          0.48            0.25
                                  (0.27)          (0.28)           (0.69)            (0.42)          (0.24)          (0.24)         (0.60)          (0.32)
Age: 46-65                         -0.42          -0.37            -0.36              0.03           -0.34            -0.19         -0.07            0.22
                                  (0.59)          (0.38)           (0.69)            (0.67)          (0.46)          (0.28)         (0.64)          (0.52)
Observations                        255            255              255               255             255              255           255             255

Note: Each cell contains estimates from separate regressions. The explanatory variable is the foreign-born share of workers in the group. The dependent variable is
either the logarithm of native employment (columns 1-4) or the logarithm of native population (columns 5-8) in the group. The units of observation in each regression
are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total of 255 observations. The method of estimation is either Least Squares
(columns 1, 2, 5 and 6) or 2SLS (columns 2, 4, 6 and 8) using all the instruments. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. Each observation is weighted by
employment, and the standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state.




                                                                               42
                                                                         Table 9
                                                Impact of Foreign-Born Workers on the Total Supply of Tasks
                                               Explanatory Variable: Foreign-Born Share of Less-Educated Workers
                                                Workers with High School Degree or Less                Workers with No High School Diploma
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
                                             OLS            IV           IV             IV        OLS            IV            IV           IV
                                                        Imputed     Geographic          All                   Imputed     Geographic       All
       Dependent                                       Mexican      Instruments Instruments                   Mexican     Instruments Instruments
        Variable           Parameter                  Instrument                                             Instrument
     All Workers              γΤΟΤ          0.28**       0.38**        0.29**         0.29**      0.04         0.13**       0.09**       0.09**
     Ln(M/I)                                (0.08)        (0.08)       (0.09)         (0.10)     (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)
     All Workers              γΜΤΟΤ         0.28**       0.26**        0.21**         0.21**     0.13**        0.10**       0.10**       0.10**
     Ln( μ )                                (0.03)        (0.06)       (0.07)         (0.07)     (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
     All Workers               γITOT         0.00       -0.12**       -0.08**         -0.08*      0.08          -0.03         0.01         0.01
     Ln( ι )                                (0.07)        (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)
                                                                            First Stage
     Joint F-Test of the                      NA          20.95       20.50**        20.07**       NA         16.09**       27.57**     29.69**
     Instruments                                         (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)                                (0.000)      (0.000)
     (p-value)
     Test of Over-Identifying                 NA              NA               3.82             8.92              NA               NA               2.55             7.65
     Restrictions
     (Specification in First Row)
     Probability (χ2 > test)                  NA              NA               81%              35%               NA               NA              92%               47%
     under the Null of Exogeneity
     of Instruments
     Observations                             255             255              255              255              255               255              255              255

Note: Each cell contains estimates from separate regressions. The dependent variable in each is indicated in the first column. The explanatory variable is the foreign-born
share of less-educated workers. The units of observation in each regression are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total
of 255 observations. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The method of estimation is two stage least squares. Each observation is weighted by employment,
and the standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state. The last two rows report the Hausman test of overidentifying restrictions that can be performed
when we use more instruments that endogenous variables. We report the test statistic and the p-value, namely the probability that χ2 is larger than the observed statistic under
the null hypothesis of the exogeneity of the instruments.



                                                                                        43
** indicates significance at the 5% level
                                                                Table 10
           Impact of Foreign-Born Workers on the Supply of Tasks of US Natives, Controlling for Technology and Demand Factors

                                            Dependent Variable: Relative Task Supply, Ln(Manual/Interactive)
                                         Dependent Variable: Task Supply of Domestic         Dependent Variable: Task Supply of All Workers,
                                                     Workers, Ln(MD/ID)                                           Ln(M/I)
                                             (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
                                             IV                IV                IV               IV                 IV               IV
            Explanatory Variables     All Instruments All Instruments All Instruments All Instruments All Instruments All Instruments
         Foreign-Born Share of Less-      -0.30**           -0.29**           -0.42**           0.21**            0.20**             0.08
         Educated Employment               (0.06)            (0.07)            (0.07)           (0.08)             (0.10)           (0.10)
         Percentage of Workers Using      -0.35**                             -0.51**          -0.31**                            -0.46**
         a Computer                        (0.10)                              (0.09)           (0.10)                              (0.09)
         Sector-Driven                                      0.54**             0.68**                             0.60**           0.72**
         Manual/Interactive Task                             (0.11)            (0.10)                              (0.11)           (0.10)
         Intensity
                                           Decomposition of the Effect on Manual and            Decomposition of the Effect on Manual and
                                                       Interactive Tasks                                     Interactive Tasks
         Effect of Foreign-Born Share    -0.16**             -0.12**            -0.19**           0.14*              0.18**          0.10*
         on Ln( μ )                       (0.06)              (0.06)             (0.07)           (0.08)              (0.07)         (0.06)
         Effect of Foreign-Born Share     0.14**              0.17**             0.22**           -0.06                -0.01          0.02
         on Ln( ι )                       (0.04)              (0.03)             (0.04)           (0.05)              (0.04)         (0.06)
         Number of Observations            255                  255                255             255                  255            255

         Note: The top three rows report estimates of the impact of the foreign-born share, percentage of computer users, and industry-driven change in relative task intensity
         on the relative task supply of natives (columns 1 to 3) and overall relative task supply (columns 4 to 6). The bottom two rows report the effect of immigration on the
         supply of manual and interactive tasks when we control for the computer use and sector-driven variables. The units of observation in each regression are U.S. states
         in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total of 255 observations. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The
         method of estimation is two stage least squares. Each observation is weighted by employment, and the standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by
         state.
         ** indicates significance at the 5% level




                                                                                        44
                                                                    Table 11
                                   Estimates of the Relative Wage Elasticity of Manual versus Interactive Tasks


                                    Dependent Variable: Wage Paid to Manual Tasks / Wage Paid to Interactive Tasks
                                     1991 DOT                                1977 DOT                                                        Merged DOT
 Instruments:        Foreign-       Geographic        All       Foreign- Geographic           All        Foreign-                            Geographic              All
                       Born                                       Born                                      Born
                      Share                                      Share                                     Share
                      1.45*            1.04          0.95        1.33**        0.98          0.90          1.30*                                  0.95              0.95
     1/θL
                      (0.85)          (0.90)        (0.90)       (0.73)       (0.92)        (0.90)         (0.74)                                (0.79)            (0.85)
   Implied
 Elasticity of          0.69             0.96              1.05             0.75             1.02               1.11             0.77             1.05              1.05
 Substitution
F-test of Joint
Significance of
                        16.2             4.03              4.05             16.2             4.03               4.05             16.2             4.03              4.05
      the
 Instruments
 Observations           255              255                255              255              255               255              255              255                255


   Note: The explanatory variable is the negative of the logarithm of the relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks among all workers. In specifications (1), (4)
   and (7) we use the foreign-born share of less-educated workers as an instrument for the relative supply of manual versus interactive tasks in the state. In specification
   (2), (5) and (8), the instrument is the portion of the foreign-born share explained by the geographic variables (border distance and border dummies). In specifications
   (3), (6) and (9), the instrument is the portion of the foreign-born share explained by the geographic variables plus the imputed share of Mexicans. The units of
   observation in each regression are U.S. states in a census year (decennial panel of 50 states plus DC from 1960-2000) for a total of 255 observations. All regressions
   include state and year fixed effects. The method of estimation is two stage least squares. Each observation is weighted by employment, and the standard errors are
   heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state. In Specifications (1)-(3) the task supply is obtained using the 1977 DOT, in specifications (4)-(6) we use the 1991
   DOT definitions, while in (6)-(9) we use the 1977 DOT definition for 1960, 1970 and 1980 and the 1991 DOT definition for 1990 and 2000.
   ** indicates significance at the 5%
   * indicates significance at the 10% level




                                                                                   45
                                                                Table 12
                                    Simulated effects of Immigration on Wages between 1990 and 2000


                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)          (10)              (11)
                    ΔH/H       ΔL/L       ΔM/M         ΔI/I       ΔWH/        ΔwM/        ΔwI/       ΔWL/        ΔWD/         Postal            Hand
                                                                   WH          wM          wI         WL          WD          Clerk            Packer
State                                                                                                                      μ/(μ+ι)=0.2       μ/(μ+ι)=0.8
Arizona             5.7%      24.2%       32.6%       23.3%       3.6%       -13.8%      -4.6%       -9.0%       -5.6%        -6.4%            -12.0%
California          7.0%      13.9%       16.9%       12.1%        1.1%       -5.5%      -0.7%       -3.1%        0.0%        -1.7%             -4.6%
Colorado            5.3%      11.2%       14.6%       10.6%       1.0%        -5.2%      -1.2%       -3.1%       -1.7%        -2.0%             -4.4%
DC                  1.2%       3.6%        4.5%        3.2%        0.3%       -1.9%      -0.7%       -1.1%        0.2%        -0.9%             -1.7%
Florida            10.6%      10.0%       11.8%        9.7%        0.0%       -1.2%       0.9%        0.0%        1.6%         0.5%             -0.8%
Illinois            2.3%      4.4%         4.9%        3.7%       0.4%        -1.3%      -0.1%       -0.8%        0.3%        -0.4%             -1.1%
Massachusetts       1.6%       7.4%        8.9%        7.1%       1.1%        -3.5%      -1.7%       -2.5%       -0.9%        -2.0%             -3.1%
Nevada             13.8%      18.6%       23.4%       17.7%        1.5%       -5.2%       0.5%       -2.4%        0.1%        -0.7%             -4.0%
New Jersey          3.7%       4.4%        5.3%        3.6%       0.1%        -1.2%       0.5%       -0.3%        1.6%         0.2%             -0.9%
New York            5.6%       4.4%        5.5%        3.7%       -0.2%       -0.6%       1.3%        0.4%        2.7%         0.9%             -0.2%
Oregon              6.4%      12.4%       16.7%       12.7%       1.6%        -5.0%      -1.0%       -3.4%       -2.0%        -1.8%             -4.2%
Texas               4.2%      13.1%       15.6%       11.7%        1.7%       -5.7%      -1.8%       -3.7%       -2.1%        -2.5%             -4.9%
United States      4.0%       6.0%        10.2%       6.5%        1.3%        -4.2%      -0.4%       -2.4%       -1.5%        -1.2%             -3.4%
Note: The variables and parameters used in the simulations reported above are described in the text. In particular, we assumed σ=1.75 and θL=1. The twelve
states chosen are those with higher foreign-born employment shares or with high levels of immigration between 1990 and 2000. The parameters used to estimate
the change in task-supply of native workers in response to immigration are the average estimates from columns (1)-(4) in Table 6.




                                                                            46
                                                                 Figure 1
                                           Relative Manual/Interactive Task Supply and Demand

                       Native-Born Workers of                                              Native and Foreign-Born Workers of
                        Heterogeneous Ability                                                      Heterogeneous Ability .


                            Relative Supply of
      ln(wM/wI)             Worker j1                                          ln(wM/wI)                      Relative Supply,
                                                                                                              Native-Born
                                             Aggregate Relative
                                             Supply                                                                       Aggregate Relative
                                                                                                                          Supply
                                                     Relative Supply of
                                E0                   Worker j2
                  1                          2
Equilibrium                                                                                                                          Relative Supply,
ln(wM/wI)                                                                                                     E1                     Foreign-Born
                                                                                                  D                          F
                                                                      Equilibrium
                                                                      ln(wM/wI),
                                                                      With Immigrants

                                                     Aggregate
                                                     Relative                                                                      Aggregate
                                                     Demand                                                                        Relative
                                                                                                                                   Demand


                                                                                       Increase in f

                                                                  ln(M/I)                                                                  ln(M/I)
              Equilibrium   Equilibrium    Equilibrium                                        Equilibrium   Equilibrium      Equilibrium
              ln(μ/ι)j1     ln(M/I)        ln(μ/ι)j2                                          ln(MD/ID)     ln(M/I)          ln(MF/IF)




                                                                          47
                                                              Figure 2
                                        Relative Supply of Manual/Interactive Tasks in the US
                      Native, Foreign-Born, and Recent Immigrants with a High School Degree or Less, 1960-2000


                                                     Relative Manual/Interactive Task Supply
                     1.5
                     1.4
                     1.3
                     1.2
                     1.1
                     1




                           1960                      1970                      1980                         1990                       2000
                                                                            Census Year

                                                           U S Natives                                  Foreign-Born
                                                           R ecent Immigrants
                            Re cen t Imm igran ts a re t hose in the U S fo r less th an 10 yea rs



Note: The relative supply of tasks for native, foreign-born, and recent immigrants reported above are obtained by aggregating the values of EHF and DCP over
individuals of the relevant group, weighted by their Census weight, and calculating their ratio. The construction of the indices EHF and DCP is described in the
main text. The indices used in the figures are those obtained using the 1977 DOT definition of task intensity for 1960, 1970 and 1980, and the 1991 DOT
definitions for year 1990 and 2000.


                                                                                                                                                               48
                                                          Figure 3
         Share of Foreign-Born Workers and the Relative Supply of Manual/Interactive Tasks by Native-Born Workers,
                                        High School Degree or Less, US States, 2000

                                                                   Kentucky




                                          .2
                                                                  Mississippi
                                                                  Indiana
                                                                  Alabama
                                                                  Tennessee
                                                                   South  Carolina
                                                                       Arkansas
                                                                West Virginia
                        Manual/Interactive Supply US-Born
                                                                    Maine
                                                                           North Carolina
                                                     .1
                                                                                     Idaho
                                                                          Michigan
                                                                    Missouri
                                                                         Georgia
                                                                     Wisconsin
                                                                        Iowa
                                                                       Wyoming                     Connecticut
                                                                   Ohio
                                                                Montana
                                                                      Pennsylvania
                                                                             Minnesota
                                                                  Vermont
                                                                    LouisianaDelaware
                                                                                Virginia
                                                                               Nebraska                  Massachusetts
                                                                         New Hampshire
                                                                 South Dakota                   Illinois     Texas
                                                                              KansasMaryland Oregon
                                         0




                                                                 North Dakota                                   Florida
                                                                       Oklahoma Utah  New Mexico
                                                                                                     District of Columbia
                                                                                                                      New York
                                                                                         Colorado
                                                                                Alaska Washington          New Jersey                        California
                          -.1




                                                                                              Rhode Island          Hawaii

                                                                                                                             Coefficient: -0.6
                                                                                                                Nevada
                                                                                                                   Arizona   Standard error: 0.1
                                          -.2




                                                            0                  .1               .2             .3                 .4               .5
                                                                                              Share of Foreign-Born


Note: The vertical axis reports the relative skill supply (MD/ID) of native workers in 2000. The construction of the indices EHF and DCP is described in the main
text. The horizontal axis reports the foreign-born share of workers with a high school diploma or less in 2000.




                                                                                                                                                              49
                                                                            Figure 4
                                                          Relative Supply of Manual/Interactive Tasks
                                            Foreign-Born versus Natives with a High School Degree or Less, 1960-2000




                                      2
                                      1.5
                       Foreign Born
                                      1




                                                 450 line
                                      .5




                                                                   .8               1                     1.2                  1.4
                                                                                 US Born

Note: The vertical axis reports the relative skill supply (MF/IF) of immigrants. The horizontal axis reports the relative skill supply (MD/ID) of natives. Points
represent US states in Census years. Only observations in which the share of immigrant workers with a high school degree or less was at least 10% are
included.




                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                         Figure 5
                                                      Relative Supply of Manual/Interactive Tasks
                                       Recent Immigrants versus Natives with a High School Degree or Less, 1960-2000




                            2.5
                            2
                   Recent Immigrants
                          1.5
                            1




                                           450 line
                            .5




                                                               .8                1                      1.2                   1.4
                                                                              US Born

Note: The vertical axis reports the relative skill supply (MF/IF) of immigrants who have been in the US for ten years or less. The horizontal axis reports the
relative skill supply (MD/ID) of natives. Points represent US states in Census years. Only observations in which the share of immigrant workers with a high
school degree or less was at least 10% are included.




                                                                                                                                                             51
