                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CONSOLIDATION OF BANKS IN JAPAN:
                             CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES

                                         Kaoru Hosono
                                          Koji Sakai
                                         Kotaro Tsuru

                                      Working Paper 13399
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w13399


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2007




We appreciate valuable comments from Andy Rose, Taka Ito, Hiro Ito, Barry Williams, and other
participants at NBER EASE 18th Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Kaoru Hosono, Koji Sakai, and Kotaro Tsuru. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Consolidation of Banks in Japan: Causes and Consequences
Kaoru Hosono, Koji Sakai, and Kotaro Tsuru
NBER Working Paper No. 13399
September 2007
JEL No. G21,G34

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the motives and consequences of the consolidation of banks in Japan during the period
of fiscal year 1990-2004 using a comprehensive dataset. Our analysis suggests that the government's
too-big-to-fail policy played an important role in the mergers and acquisitions (M&As), though its
attempt does not seem to have been successful. The efficiency-improving motive also seems to have
driven the M&As conducted by major banks and regional banks in the post-crisis period, while the
market-power motive seems to have driven the M&As conducted by regional banks and corporative
(shinkin) banks. We obtain no evidence that supports managerial motives for empire building.

Kaoru Hosono                                     Kotaro Tsuru
Gakushuin University                             Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry
Faculty of Economics                             1-3-1, Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku
Mejiro 1-5-1, Toshima-ku                         Tokyo, 100-8901, JAPAN
Tokyo 171-8588 JAPAN                             tsuru-kotaro@rieti.go.jp
kaoru.hosono@gakushuin.ac.jp

Koji Sakai
Research Fellow of the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science
2-1 Naka, Kunitachi
Tokyo 186-8601
Japan
ed042002@srv.cc.hit-u.ac.jp
            Consolidation of Banks in Japan: Causes and Consequences




1. Introduction

      Mergers and acquisitions (M&As) among financial institutions have been

accelerating over the last two decades across the world. These waves of mergers and

acquisitions in the banking industries raise important questions of whether mergers

enhance the efficiency of surviving banks and contribute to the stabilization of the

banking sector or just increase their market power in setting prices. A large number of

studies attempt to resolve these questions by examining profitability, cost efficiency and

market performance of merger survivors. However, most of the existing studies examine

the consolidation among the U.S. or European financial institutions and little is known

about the causes and consequences of financial consolidation outside the U.S. or Europe.

      This paper investigates the causes and consequences of the consolidation among

Japanese banks. In Japan, a variety of banks have been consolidated since the 1990s

when most banks suffered from a huge amount of non-performing loans.

The number of city banks, which operate nation-widely and internationally, remained at

13 during the 1980s but decreased almost by half to 7 in 2005. While the number of

first-tier regional banks, which operate in one or a few prefectures, virtually did not

change over the last two decades (63 in 1980 and 64 in 2005), the number of second-tier

regional banks, which are smaller than first-tier regional banks and operate mainly

within a prefecture, decreased from 71 in 1980 to 48 in 2005. The number of cooperative




                                            2
(shinkin) banks, which are deposit-taking cooperatives operating within a prefecture and

specializing in small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) loans, also dropped from 462

in 1980 to 301 in 20051.

       Using a rich dataset of bank M&As in Japan, this paper comprehensively analyzes

the causes and consequences of bank mergers in the following ways. First, we analyze

motives of bank mergers as well as their consequences. Using ex-ante bank

characteristics, we investigate what type of a bank was more likely to be a target or an

acquirer. Looking at the post-merger performance of a consolidated bank, we examine

the effects of mergers on the cost efficiency, profitability and healthiness. Though many

preceding studies focus on profitability and cost efficiency, it would be important to

examine whether bank consolidation improved bank healthiness or not, if regulatory

authorities promote bank consolidation to stabilize the banking system. We measure

long-run post-merger performance based on accounting ratios rather than stock market

returns. Though market returns are relatively free from measurement errors associated

with accounting ratios, analyzing them would severely reduce the sample size, given that

many regional banks and all shinkin banks are not publicly traded. In addition,

accounting ratios enable us to analyze important components of performance (e.g., cost

efficiency or market power)2. Finally, our observations are comprehensive. We use data


1
  City banks and regional banks are both corporations licensed under Bank Law, while shinkin banks
are cooperatives of small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) licensed under Shinkin Bank Law.
Regional banks are classified into first-tier and second-tier regional banks according to the
associations they belong to. There are usually one relatively large first-tier regional bank and some
relatively small second-tier regional banks in one prefecture.
2
  We could analyze the impact of merger announcement on abnormal returns for the mergers of listed
major banks (e.g., Okada, 2005). However, it would still be difficult to analyze the long-run


                                                 3
of major banks (i.e., city banks, trust banks, and long-term credit banks, which operate

nation-widely and internationally) and regional banks (i.e., first-tier regional banks and

second-tier regional banks) over the period of fiscal year 1990-2004, and data of shinkin

banks over the period of fiscal year 1990-2002. Our sample universe accounts for more

than 80% share of deposits in all the depository institutions in Japan3. During the period

of fiscal year 1990-2004, there were 10 mergers by major banks, 9 mergers by regional

banks, and 97 mergers and 2 transfers of business among shinkin banks4, besides the

mergers and transfer of business from failed banks.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the existing

literature on bank mergers. Section 3 discusses the hypotheses on the motivations of

bank mergers. Section 4 analyzes the M&A waves in Japan using aggregate data at the

prefectural level. Section 5 describes our bank-level dataset. Section 6 analyzes the

motivation of bank mergers using pre-merger bank characteristics data. Section 7

presents the post-merger performance concerning profitability, market power, cost

efficiency, healthiness, and portfolio. Section 8 concludes.




performance of stock returns even for the mergers of listed major banks, because most of the
consolidated major banking firms newly established holding companies that owned the share of other
financial institutions (e.g., nonbanks, securities companies, and credit card companies). For the
pitfalls of using short-run responses of stock market prices to merger announcement when mergers
are a relatively new phenomenon, see Delong and Deyoung (2007).
3
  As of March 2001, for example, the share of deposits at city banks, first-tier regional banks,
second-tier regional banks, and shinkin banks are 29.2%, 25.5%, 8.2%, and 15.1%, respectively. Data
source is Bank of Japan web site: www.boj.or.jp.
4
  No merger was conducted across different types of banks during the sample period, and there was
one sale of business of a failed bank across bank types: the business of the failed city bank, Hokkaido
Takushoku Bank, was sold to a regional bank, Hokuyo Bank and a trust bank, Chuo Trust Bank in
1997.


                                                   4
2. Literature review

      In the U.S., a large number of commercial and savings banks were taken over by

other depository institutions during the 1980s and especially after restrictions on

intrastate and interstate banking were removed by the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking

and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. Recently, financial conglomerates have emerged

through a series of M&As after restrictions on securities and insurance businesses by

banks were lifted by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Service Modernization Act. In

Europe, the emergence of the European Union in 1999 spurred consolidation of the

financial services industry. In the crisis-hit Asian countries, foreign capital entry into the

banking industry and government recapitalization promoted bank consolidation. These

merger waves generated a vast literature on bank M&As, especially for U.S. and

European banks.

      Berger, Demsetz and Strahan (1999) review existing research concerning the

causes and consequences of the consolidation of the financial services industry. They

point out that the evidence is consistent with increases in market power especially in the

case of consolidation within the same market (in-market M&As); improvements in profit

efficiency, and diversification of risks, but little or no cost efficiency improvement on

average; and potential costs to the financial system from increases in systemic risk or

expansion of the financial safety net.

      Okada (2005) studied 10 mega-mergers among city banks during 1989-2000 and

found that no improvement in X-inefficiency was observed but increases in cumulative




                                              5
excess stock returns and decreases in perceived default probability were found. Her

results suggest that the motivation of mega-mergers was not to improve efficiency but to

take advantage of the government’s too-big-to-fail policy. Yamori, Harimaya and Kondo

(2005) studied financial holding companies of regional banks and found that profit

efficiency tended to increase when the market share in the region increased. Hosono,

Sakai and Tsuru (2006) analyzed the motives and consequences of credit corporative

(shinkin) banks during the period of 1984-20025. Their major findings are as follows.

First, less profitable and cost efficient banks were more likely to be an acquirer and a

target. Second, acquiring banks improved cost efficiency but still deteriorated their

capital-to-asset ratio after consolidation. Finally, the consolidation of shinkin banks

tended to improve profitability when the difference in the ex-ante profitability between

acquiring banks and target banks were large. This paper extends Hosono et al., (2006) to

cover most Japanese banks, including city banks, first-tier regional banks, second-tier

regional banks, and shinkin banks. Compared with the preceding studies on the

consolidation of Japanese banks, this paper comprehensively analyzes the causes and

consequences of bank mergers, as we mention in the Introduction.




3. Hypotheses on the motives of bank consolidation

        This section reviews four major hypotheses on the motives of bank consolidation.




A. Improving efficiency
5
    See also Yamori and Harimaya (2005) for the study of the mergers of shinkin banks.


                                                   6
      As Berger et al., (1999) points out, the primary motive for consolidation would be

maximizing the value of shares owned by existing shareholders. Banks can maximize

value either by increasing their efficiency or by increasing their market power in setting

prices. Cost efficiency will be improved if an efficient bank spreads its superior

managerial skills to an inefficient bank by acquiring the latter. Profitability will be

enhanced by superior risk management.

      The efficiency improvement hypothesis suggests that an efficient bank tends to

acquire or purchase the business of an inefficient bank.




B. Strengthening market power

      Market power can be strengthened if two or more banks operating in the same

market are consolidated and consequently the market becomes more concentrated.

Existing evidences from the U.S. bank M&As suggest that in-market M&As, i.e., M&As

of banks operating in the same market, may increase market power in setting prices.

      According to this hypothesis, banks operating in the same region are more likely

to be consolidated. Actually, most of the M&As among regional banks were conducted

by banks operating in the same prefecture. Although all of the M&As among corporative

(shinkin) banks were also conducted by banks operating in the same prefecture, this fact

does not necessarily imply the market power motive but may simply reflect the

regulatory restriction under which shinkin banks are allowed to operate only in a region

that is usually defined within a prefecture.




                                               7
C. Taking advantage of a too-big-to-fail policy

      The government policy directly or indirectly affects banks’ M&A decisions. In

particular, if regulatory authorities are expected to pursue a too-big-to-fail policy, weak

banks have a strong incentive to be consolidated with each other, because bank managers

may want to keep their positions. Bank shareholders can also gain from the value of

deposit insurance by surviving through mergers.

      The government can promote bank consolidations among weak banks in some

ways. First, the government can “arrange” consolidations, persuading (or sometimes

forcing) relatively healthy banks to acquire unhealthy banks. Second, the government

can give weak banks incentives to be consolidated with each other by establishing a

scheme for recapitalizing consolidated banks.

      In Japan, the government’s “arrangements” were sometimes used before the 1980s

when the financial markets were heavily regulated, and even in the first half of the 1990s,

as is known as the “convoy system” (see the next section for details). The

“market-based” consolidation through public money injection has become an alternative

tool since 1998 when the banking crisis culminated and the government first

recapitalized banks. When Japanese authorities recapitalized banks first in 1998, they did

so towards major banks and two largest regional banks. This fact may have fostered

banks’ anticipation for bailouts as long as they were large. Not only a large bank that

operates nation-widely, regional banks and corporative banks (shinkin) banks that are




                                            8
relatively large in a prefecture may have anticipated bailouts, because the Japanese

regulatory authorities have often worried about the stability of regional financial systems,

though the notion of a regional systemic risk had not been stipulated until the Deposit

Insurance Act was revised in 2001 (Article 102)6 7.

       If the government’s anticipated too-big-to-fail policy and local market stabilization

policy affect the decision of M&As, unhealthy banks or banks recapitalized by the

government tend to be consolidated with each other.




D. Managerial Empire Building

       When corporate governance structures are weak, managers may be willing to

acquire other banks for the purpose of empire-building. They may gain personal

financial and non-financial gains from consolidated institutions. Managerial hubris

may also drive bank mergers (Bliss and Rosen, 2001).

       Weak governance structures allow managers to spend on activities with scope for

generating managerial private benefits, such as advertisement or entertainment

expenditures (Yafeh and Yosha, 2003). Therefore, we may expect that banks that spend

more on advertisement or entertainment tend to acquire other banks. In addition, if

managerial empire building motive drives M&As, then a consolidated bank cannot

realize efficiency gains, and is not willing to downsize or restructure the business.
6
  For example, when the largest regional bank in Tochigi Prefecture, Ashikaga Bank, was failing, the
government temporarily nationalized it to avoid a regional systemic risk.
7
  Though the government has not recapitalized shinkin banks so far, this does not necessarily mean
that the government does not care about the stability of the local financial market. It has not been
necessary for the government to recapitalize shinkin banks because the central financial institution of
shinkin banks, called Central Shinkin Bank, recapitalized member shinkin banks when necessary.


                                                   9
Managers of consolidated banks may increase advertise expenditures for their private

benefits.




4. Bank Merger Wave in Japan

4.1 Overview

      A very small number of mergers occurred in the banking industry until the 1980s

after the World War II in Japan. The number of city banks, which operate nation-widely

and internationally, had been 13 until 19908. Mergers among regional banks, which

operate mainly within a prefecture, also had been rare until the 1990s. Only one mutual

bank (former second-tier regional bank) was acquired in the 1970s and two mutual banks

were acquired in the 1980s.9 Mergers among credit corporative banks (shinkin) did not

occur frequently, either. A small number of mergers until the 1980s reflected the

government’s so-called “convoy system” policy10. Under this policy, the regulatory

authorities tried to stabilize the banking system by restricting competition among banks

and bailing out failing banks. The government restricted banks’ opening new branches

and prohibited banks from engaging in securities business to control competition. When

a weak bank fell into financial distress, the government requested a healthy bank to

rescue the weak bank by injecting capital and sending directors. Healthy banks

responded to the government’s request because they could obtain the branch networks of
8
   Mitsui Bank acquired Taiyo Kobe in 1990.
9
   Hirosaki Sogo Bank was acquired by Seiwa Bank in 1976. Takachiho Sogo Bank was acquired by
Nishinippon Sogo bank in 1984. Heiwa Sogo Bank was acquired by Sumitomo Bank in 1986.
10
   For the details of the convoy system, see Hoshi and Kashyap (2001). For a typical example,
Ministry of Finance asked Sumitomo Bank to acquire the failing Heiwa Sogo Bank and Sumitomo
responded to it so as to obtain the branch network of Heiwa Sogo.


                                              10
the failing banks. Until the 1980s, M&As in the banking industry occurred only when

the government requested healthy banks to acquire failing banks.

        As the financial liberalization was made progress in the 1980s, the regulatory

authorities found it more and more difficult to maintain the convoy system; healthy

banks had little incentive or capability to rescue failing banks. In the early 1990s, stock

prices and land prices fell sharply, which hit hard banks’ asset quality. Risk-based capital

requirements based on the Basel capital standards, introduced in fiscal year 1992,

spurred consolidation of weak banks. Two mergers among city banks 11 and three

mergers among regional banks occurred in the first half of the 1990s (Table 1). Mergers

among shinkin banks also occurred more frequently in the 1990s than before. Despite the

introduction of the Basel capital standards, which were supposed to be rule-based

regulations, financial regulations and supervisions by Ministry of Finance were still

affected by political pressure until a banking crisis occurred in 199712.

       A banking crisis occurred in 1997, when three large financial institutions,

including a city bank named Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, failed. In 1998, two long-term

credit banks named the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan and the Nippon Credit Bank

failed. In response to the severe banking crisis, the Japanese regulatory authorities

introduced prompt corrective actions in 1998, applied stringent accounting standards in

implementing the Basel capital standards, and recapitalized banks to promote their
11
   Taiyo Kobe Bank was acquired by Mitsui Bank in 1990 and Saitama Bank was acquired by
Kyowa Bank in 1991.
12
   The government’s resolutions of the failed “Jusen,” nonblank finance companies specialized in
housing and real estate loans, were severely criticized by the public that the government rescued
agricultural cooperatives that had invested in Jusen and had a strong political influence (See Hoshi
and Kashyap, 2001).


                                                  11
restructuring. Financial Supervision Agency (FSA) was built and took over financial

supervisions from Ministry of Finance in 1998. FSA refrained from “arranging” mergers,

not intervening in bank mergers to rescue weak banks.

       Major banks tried to survive through mergers, resulting in the merger wave in the

early 2000s. Financial Rehabilitation Plan, released by Takenaka, Minister of Financial

Services Agency, in October 2002, forced major banks to apply strict accounting

standards and to reduce their non-performing loan share to a half, urging weak banks to

be consolidated.

       Seven mergers among major banks occurred from FY 2000 to FY 2002. Mega

banks are now reorganized into three groups (Mizuho, Mitsui-Sumitomo, and

Mitsubishi-UFJ). The government also promoted consolidation of regional banks and

shinkin banks. New legislation has enabled the government to recapitalize a consolidated

bank since 200213. Six mergers among regional banks occurred from FY 2000 to FY

2004. Merges among shinkin banks also accelerated in the early 2000s (Table 1).




4.2   Empirical analysis

      We first investigate the reasons for the recent merger wave using the M&A ratios,

i.e., the numbers of M&As divided by the total number of banks existing in the previous

year, sorted by prefectures and bank types. The hypotheses concerning the motives of

13
   Special Measures Law for the Promotion of Financial Institutions Reorganization was enacted in
October, 2002. Under this law, the government recapitalized Kanto Tsukuba Bank in September 2003.
Financial Function Reinforcement Law was enacted in April 2004 to enable the government to
preemptively capitalize healthy regional and shinkin banks. Under this law, Kiyo Holdings and Howa
Bank were recapitalized in 2006.


                                               12
bank mergers discussed in Section 3 have some implications concerning the time when

and the space where M&A waves occur.

       First, if M&As are driven by the motivation for improving efficiency, then merger

waves result from shocks to an industry’s economic, technological or regulatory

environment (e.g., Mitchell and Mulherin, 1996). These shocks lead to industry

reorganization. Analyzing the U.S. industrial merger waves in the 1980s and the 1990s,

Harford (2005) found that operational performances measured by ROA, sales growth

and others, were high prior to merger waves. He also found that higher market valuations

relaxed financing constraints and made it easier to implement efficiency-driven M&As.14

Following Harford (2005), we use the average ROA for each bank type to capture the

economic shocks to the industry’s operating environment, and the stock price index for

the banking industry to capture the degree of financial constraints.

     Second, if M&As are driven by the motivation for strengthening market power,

banks operating in a less concentrated and more competitive market are more willing to

merge each other. Given that banks often compete within a region 15 , we use the

Herfindahl index for the deposits of regional banks and shinkin banks calculated for each

prefecture.

     Third, if M&As are driven by the motivation for taking advantage of a


14
   Shleifer and Vishny (2003) argue that stock market overvaluation promotes corporate managers to
acquire relatively undervalued firms. This “behavioral” hypothesis also suggests that higher share
prices cause merger waves. However, most of bank mergers in Japan have not been carried out
through tender offers (take-over-bids) paying with stocks. So, we do not discuss the possibility of the
behavioral hypothesis in details in this paper. For the empirical evidences of the “neoclassical” and
“behavioral” hypothesis applied to Japanese non-financial firms, see Arikawa and Miyajima (2007).
15
   For the empirical evidences in Japan, see, e.g., Kano and Tsutsui (2003)


                                                  13
too-big-to-fail policy or a local market stabilization policy, then merger waves occur

when the overall bank health is deteriorated. To capture the bank healthiness, we use the

average capital-to-asset ratio for each bank type. The change in the stock price index for

the banking industry also serves as a proxy for bank healthiness. Unlike the

efficiency-motive hypothesis, the hypothesis concerning a too-big-to-fail policy suggests

that a lower stock price triggers a bank merger. A low ROA may also lead to a merger

under the too-big-to-fail-policy hypothesis, because a low ROA deteriorates bank health.

       Finally, if M&As are driven by the managerial motives for private benefits, then

M&As are more likely to occur when and where the average expenditures for managerial

private benefits such as advertisement expenditures or entertainment expenditures are

high. While major banks and regional banks disclose advertisement expenditures, shinkin

banks do not disclose the components of operational costs such as advertisement

expenditures. Therefore, we cannot test the managerial motives hypothesis using the

prefecture-level data here.

        To control for regional shocks that affect banks’ operating environment, financial

constraints for M&As, and bank healthiness, we add the growth rate of prefectural GDP

to the explanatory variables16. We also include a time dummy that takes the value of

unity in and after fiscal year 1998 and zero before fiscal year 1997 to capture the

regulatory changes stated in the previous section. The estimation period is from fiscal

year 1990 to fiscal year 2004.

      We estimate the following equation.
16
     Major banks had head offices in Tokyo, Nagoya, Sapporo or Osaka.


                                                 14
 M & A Ratioi , j ,t = β1 Averagege Performancei , j ,t −1
                    + β 3 Herfindahl Indexi ,t −1 + β 4GDPGrowthi ,t −1 + β 5 PostCrisisDummyt
                    + β 6 PostCrisisDummyt * Average Performancei , j ,t −1 + ε i , j ,t

(1)

, where indexes i, j, t, are a prefecture, a bank type, and a fiscal year, respectively.

Average Performance is either the average ROA, the average capital-to-asset ratio

calculated for each prefecture, or the change in the stock price index for the banking

industry. We do not enter those three variables at a time, because they are highly

correlated. Herfindahl Index is calculated based on the shares of deposits of regional and

shinkin banks in a prefecture. GDP growth is the growth rate of the GDP of the

prefecture where the head office locates. Because GDP growth is highly correlated with

stock price index, we do not enter them at the same time. We allow for the change in the

coefficients of the bank performance variables after the crisis using the interaction term

of the post-crisis dummy and the performance variables.

      Table 2 reports the pooled-OLS regression estimates of Equation (1). Though we

also estimate the model with a fixed or random prefectural effect, we report the

pooled-OLS model based on the specification tests. First, when the average ROA is

included as a performance measure (column 1), the coefficients on ROA and its

interaction term with the post-crisis dummy are both negative, though neither is

significant. This is not consistent with the efficiency-driven hypothesis. Next, looking at

the case where the average capital-to-asset ratio is used (column 2), we see that the

coefficients on the capital-to-asset ratio and its interaction term with the post-crisis




                                                  15
dummy are both negative, though only the interaction term is significant. Finally, using

the stock price index yields the result (column 3) that its coefficient is negative and

significant, while its interaction term is positive but not significant. These results suggest

that M&As tended to occur when the overall bank health was deteriorated, consistent

with the too-big-to-fail or stabilization policy hypothesis. The coefficients on the

Herfindahl index are negative and significant, regardless of the bank performance

measures, suggesting that M&As tended to occur where the market was less

concentrated, which is consistent with the market-power hypothesis. The coefficients on

the GDP growth are significantly negative, which is again consistent with the

too-big-to-fail or the financial stabilization policy hypothesis. Finally, the post-crisis

dummy is positive and significant, suggesting that the regulatory changes triggered bank

consolidations.

      We will examine the relevance of the four hypotheses concerning the motives of

M&As more closely using bank-level data in the following sections.




5. Bank-Level Data

      The data source of financial statements of major banks and regional banks is

Nikkei Financial Quest and that of shinkin banks is Financial Statements of Shinkin

Banks in Japan, edited by Financial Book Consultants, Ltd. (Kinyu tosho konsarutanto

sha). We identify an acquirer if the bank is legally surviving and a target if the bank has

legally disappeared. We focus on the mergers and acquisitions of surviving banks by




                                             16
excluding from our dataset the transfers of business from a failed bank, because the latter

is likely to be conducted for different motives and to have different consequences17. Our

dataset covers the period of fiscal year 1990 to 2004 (i.e., from March 1991 to March

2005) for major and regional banks and fiscal year 1990 to 2002 (i.e., from march 1991

to March 2003) for shinkin banks. For the details of the variables we use, see Appendix

1.

       In Japan, financial holding companies were allowed to be built since 1998 when

the Antimonopoly Act was revised. Some consolidated banks, especially major banks

and large regional banks, took that opportunity to form a financial holding company that

held insurance companies and nonbank financial companies as well since 2000. In the

case of holding companies, we use the financial statements of the subsidiary banking

companies. We do not use the stock prices of the financial holding companies because

they reflect the performance of the other subsidiary companies as well. By using the

financial statement of the subsidiary banking companies, we focus on the effects of

mergers on the banking company. If there is a synergy effect from the security

companies to the banking company within the same holding company, it is reflected by

the financial statement of the banking company.

       In the following analyses, we divide the sample banks into major banks (city

banks, long-term credit banks18, and trust banks), regional banks (first-tier regional

17
   The transfer of business from a failed bank is identified if the deposit insurance made financial
assistance (not recapitalization) to the bank that acquired or purchased the business of another bank.
18
   Long-term credit banks are those banks that were established for the purpose of long-term
corporate finance and permitted to issue long-term bonds exclusively under Long-term Credit Bank
Law. Though three long-term credit banks were established after WWII, two of them (i.e., Long-Term


                                                 17
banks and second-tier regional banks), and shinkin banks for the following reasons. First,

a shinkin bank is a cooperative depository institution specialized to small- and medium-

sized enterprise (SME) finance. Therefore, the motives and consequences of M&As

might be different from corporations like major banks and regional banks. Second, while

major banks operate nation-widely, regional banks and shinkin banks operate mainly

within a prefecture. Most of the M&As among regional banks and shinkin banks were

conducted by those banks that operated within the same prefecture (in-market merger)19.

The effects of mergers on market power might be different between major banks and

regional or shinkin banks. Third, regulatory authorities’ attitudes towards the

non-performing loan problems were different between major banks, on one hand, and

regional and shinkin banks, on the other hand, in the late 1990s and the early 2000s. The

government aimed at quickly reducing the non-performing loans of major banks, while

the government, afraid from the adverse effect of the write-off of non-performing loans

on SME finance, did not force regional and shinkin banks to reduce non-performing

loans quickly. Because the number of mergers by major banks and regional banks are

small (10 and 9, respectively), separating them may yield relatively weak statistical

results. However, we choose not to pool the major banks and regional banks because of

the above reasons.

      Table 3 shows the descriptive sample statistics of the bank and market



Credit Bank of Japan and the Nippon Credit Bank) failed in 1998, and one (i.e., Industrial Bank of
Japan) was merged with city banks (Fuji Bank and Daiichi-Kangyo Bank) and reorganized in 2002.
19
   Among the M&As by regional banks or shinkin banks , only four (two M&As by regional and two
M&As by shinkin banks) were conducted across prefectural borders.


                                               18
characteristics that we use in the following analyses. We compare the bank

characteristics variables among the acquirers, targets, and the average of each bank type:

major banks, regional banks, and shinkin banks. The variables of the acquirers and the

targets are as of one-year before the mergers. Though we do not control for

macroeconomic shocks across different years in Table 3,20 it provides some useful

information concerning the ex-ante characteristics of acquires and targets. First, targets

and acquirers are less capitalized than the average of each bank type, and the differences

in the risk-based capital ratios are significant in the case of the mergers of regional banks

and shinkin banks. Second, the acquirer tends to be larger and the target tends to be

smaller than the bank-type average, with the exception of the major banks’ targets,

though the differences in the logarithm of total assets are significant only in the case of

shinkin banks. Finally, in the case of the M&As of shinkin banks, the targets’ ROA are

significantly lower than the average.

       Figure 1 compares some characteristics of acquirers and targets as compared with

the average of each bank type. We follow the following three-step process to draw Figure

1. First, observing the financial statements of the acquirer and the target for the five

years preceding the merger, we combine these statements to create pro forma financial

ratios for a hypothetical combined bank. To calculate hypothetical pre-merger financial

ratios, we calculate the weighted average of the acquirer and the target, where the total



20
   The differences in the interest rates on deposits and loans, in particular, seem to reflect the fact that
a large number of M&As occurred in the latter half of the 1990s, when Bank of Japan conducted an
extremely-low-interest-rate policy.


                                                    19
assets of the acquirer and the target are used as a weight21. Second, we calculate the

post-merger bank’s financial ratios for the actual combined bank using its financial

statements for five years after the merger. Third, we normalize both the pre-merger and

post-merger financial ratios of the acquirer and the combined bank, respectively, by

subtracting off the same-year, bank-type average.

       Those banks whose data is available at the merger year and a pre-merger year are

included in the sample here. Similarly, those banks whose data is available at the merger

year and a post-merger year are included in the sample here. In Figure 1, simple averages

of bank characteristics are depicted. Because we cannot compare accounting variables as

of the year of M&As with the pre-merger or post-merger periods, we just connect a line

for one year before M&As and one year after M&As. We look at the financial ratios that

represent bank efficiency, market power, healthiness, and portfolio.

       Figure 1A depicts the pre-merger and post-merger financial ratios of major banks,

suggesting some interesting facts. First, target banks were less cost-efficient than the

average and consolidated banks’ ROA recovered slowly from an immediate deterioration

after mergers. Second, consolidated banks increased the share of SME loans at least for

the first three years after mergers. Third, the loan interest rate did not show a clear

increasing tendency. Fourth, poorly capitalized banks tended to be an acquirer or a target,

and that a consolidated bank suffered from decreasing capital ratios and increasing



21
   If three and more banks merged, the series of the targets are a weighted sum of the targets and the
series of the hypothetical combined bank are a weighted sum of the targets and acquirers. In both
series, we use total assets as weights.


                                                  20
non-performing loans at least for three to four years after mergers22. Finally, both

acquirers and targets spent less on advertisement expenses before mergers and

consolidated banks continued to spend less on them after mergers than the average.

       Figure 1B depicts the pre-merger and post-merger bank characteristics of regional

banks. Like major banks, target banks were inefficient and poorly capitalized and that

profitability and efficiency once deteriorated and then slowly recovered after

consolidation. The recovery of bank health, measured by capital ratios or

non-performing loans, after consolidation was also slow. Unlike major banks,

consolidated banks decreased the share of loans to SMEs after mergers. Consolidated

banks also decreased the advertisement expenses after mergers from a relatively high

level before mergers.

       Figure 1C shows the pre-merger and post-merger bank characteristics of shinkin

banks. Like major banks and regional banks, target banks were inefficient and unhealthy.

The recovery of profitability, cost efficiency, or healthiness could not be seen clearly

after M&As. Acquirers and targets tended to focus on traditional loan business before

M&As and a consolidated bank tended to focus more on loan business, unlike major

banks. A consolidated bank raised the loan interest rate after M&As.

       In the following sections, we statistically examine how the pre-merger bank

characteristics affected the M&A decision and how M&As changed bank performance.

22
   Non-performing loans (NPLs) defined by Bank Law are the sum of loans to failed borrowers,
delinquent loans, loans delinquent for more than three months, and loans with the terms alleviated, all
classified by each loan. NPLs defined by Financial Rehabilitation Law are all the claimable assets
other than the normal ones whose debtors have no financial problems, classified by debtors’ financial
conditions. Banks are required to disclose both types of NPLs.


                                                  21
6. Ex-ante Characteristics and the Decision of Consolidation

     If efficiency improvement motives drive consolidation, relatively profitable and

efficient banks would tend to acquire relatively unprofitable and inefficient banks in

order to spread superior expertise and management skills over the target bank. On the

other hand, if the government’s too-big-to-fail policy or its motives of stabilizing the

nation-wide or local banking system drive consolidation, relatively unhealthy banks tend

to be consolidated with each other. The government may also promote consolidations

through recapitalization. If managerial private incentive for empire-building is a major

motive for mergers, banks that spend more on private benefits like advertisement

expenditures are more likely to acquire other banks.

      To analyze the motives for consolidation, we estimate the multinomial logit

model:

                                   exp( β ' X t −1, j )
                       Pt , j =   3
                                                                for j = 1, 2,3         (2)
                                  ∑ exp( β ' X
                                  j =1
                                                  t −1, j   )


     , where Pt , j is the probability of the bank’s choosing the variable j at time t ,

with j being an acquirer, a target, or neither. The dependent variable vector X t −1, j

consists of bank profitability, efficiency, healthiness, governmental recapitalization,

managerial private benefits, and size as well as other control variables including market

concentration and macroeconomic variables. We choose the ROA and the cost ratio for

the efficiency variables, and the capital-to-asset ratio and the non-performing loans as a




                                                       22
proportion of total loans as bank health measures. Non-performing loans is available

only after 1998. We also use the yearly change in the stock prices as bank health

measures in the case of major banks, though the stock price data of individual bank is

available only up to 2001, because since then major banks established holding

companies whose subsidiaries include security companies and non-banks as well. The

governmental recapitalization is captured by a dummy variable that takes the value of

one if the bank has been recapitalized that year or before and zero otherwise. As a

measure of private benefits, we use the advertisement expenses as a proportion of total

cost. For the size variables, we use the logarithm of total assets and the growth rate of

total assets. As a degree of market concentration, we use the Herfindahl index for

regional banks and shinkin banks. Though major banks had head offices in Tokyo, Osaka,

Nagoya or Sapporo and had some operational advantages over the areas where the head

offices were located, they had branches and operated nation-widely. This is why we do

not use the prefectural Herfindahl index in the case of major banks. We control for the

experience of M&As using a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the bank has

experienced a M&A before and zero otherwise. A bank that has experienced a M&A

before may not want to carry out another M&A if it takes a long time to consolidate

information systems and other business cultures. On the other hand, a bank that has

experienced M&As may have knowledge and skills how to efficiently integrate different

business practices. In that case, the M&A experience dummy has a positive effect on the

probability of being an acquirer. Finally, to control for industrial or macroeconomic




                                           23
shocks, we add the change in the stock price index for the banking industry and the

growth rate of GDP in the case of major banks, and the growth rate of prefectural GDP in

the case of regional and shinkin banks. All the explanatory variables are lagged by

one-year.

     We checked the correlation among the explanatory variables and found that ROA

and the capital-to-asset ratio are strongly correlated for regional banks and shinkin banks

(The correlation coefficients are 0.045, 0.853, and 0.615 for major banks, regional banks

and shinkin banks, respectively.) To check the robustness, we also estimate Eq. (2) by

entering ROA and the capital-to-asset ratio one by one into the explanatory variables. In

addition, to take into consideration the possibility that it took more than one year to

prepare for mergers, we also present the estimation results in the case of two-year lagged

dependent variables23.

            We estimate Eq. (2) for each bank type: major banks, regional banks, and

shinkin banks. In addition to the full sample period (FY 1990-2004), we divide the

sample period into the pre-crisis period (FY 1990-1997) and the post-crisis (FY

1998-2004). The regulatory authorities did not intervene in bank mergers to rescue weak

banks in the post-crisis period. Furthermore, their attitudes toward major banks’

non-performing loan problems became much severer in the post-crisis period than in the

pre-crisis period. It would be useful to see whether there would be difference in the


23
   Two-year lagged dependent variables may be appropriate in case that a bank that is to be acquired
by a relatively healthy bank in two years gambles on high-risk high-return investment and finally
deteriorates its balance sheet one-year before mergers. This potential moral hazard problem was
pointed out by Hiro Ito.


                                                 24
motives of bank mergers between the pre- and post- crisis periods.




Major banks

         Table 4A shows the estimation results for major banks. Column 1 shows the

estimated coefficients and column 2 shows the estimated marginal effects24 for the full

sample period. Looking at the results of the acquirer equation, we see that the coefficient

on the governmental capital injection dummy is positive and significant, suggesting that

those major banks that had been recapitalized by the government were more likely to be

consolidated. This result is consistent with the too-big-to-fail policy or stabilization

policy hypothesis. It should be noted, however, that because all the major banks were

recapitalized by the government in 1998, the coefficient on the governmental capital

injection dummy may reflect any structural changes after 1998. The other bank

characteristics variables and macroeconomic variables are not significant. Turning to the

target equation, we see that the coefficient on the industrial stock price index is negative

and significant, suggesting that a bank was more likely to be acquired when the equity

values of the banking industry were deteriorated. These results are consistent with the

too-big-to-fail policy or the stabilization policy hypothesis.

         Entering ROA and the capital-to-asset ratio one by one into the explanatory

variables, we obtain similar results (shown in columns 3 to 6), though the coefficient on

the governmental capital injection dummy is positive and significant in the target

equation when only ROA is entered.
24
     The average marginal effects are reported here (Wooldridge, 2001, pp.467).


                                                  25
      Columns 7 and 8 show the results when the changes in individual banks’ stock

prices are used as a bank health measure. We see that its coefficient is not significant in

the acquirer or target equation. In the case of major banks, the overall worsening of bank

heath and the government’s response to a systemic risk may have driven the merger

waves rather than the individual bank health.

      Using two-year lagged explanatory variables, we see (in columns 9 and 10) that no

explanatory variable is significant in the acquirer or the target equation, except for the

capital-to-asset ratio in the target equation that is positive and significant. Though this

result is not consistent with the too-big-to-fail policy hypothesis, two-year lagged

dependent variable may not be suitable in the case of the mergers of major banks,

because every major bank seemed to hasten to choose the bank to consolidate or to be

consolidated by especially in the post-crisis period.

      The sub-period estimation results are presented in columns 11 to 14. While no

pre-merger variable is significant in the pre-crisis period, the coefficient on the cost ratio

is positive and significant in the target equation in the post-crisis period. The fact that a

less cost-efficient major bank tended to be acquired by other banks in the post-crisis

period is consistent with the efficiency-improving hypothesis.




Regional banks

      Table 4B shows the estimation results for regional banks. Looking at the full

sample period estimation result, we see that the coefficients on the governmental capital




                                             26
injection dummy are positive and significant in both the acquirer and target equations,

which supports the too-big-to-fail policy or stabilization policy hypothesis. In the target

equation, the coefficient on the (logarithm of) asset is negative and significant,

suggesting that a smaller regional bank was more likely to be a target. These results hold

even if we enter ROA and capital-to-asset ratio one by one and if we use two-lagged

dependent variables (columns 3 to 8). Looking at the sub-sample period estimation

results (columns 9 to 12), we see that no pre-merger variable is significant in the

pre-crisis period. On the other hand, in the post-merger period, the coefficient on ROA is

positive and significant and the coefficient on capital-to-asset ratio is negative and

significant in the acquirer equation, while none is significant in the target equation. The

result for the acquirer equation in the post-crisis period is consistent both with the

efficiency-improving hypothesis and the too-big-to-fail policy or stabilization policy

hypothesis.




Shinkin banks

      Table 4C displays the estimation results for shinkin banks. We exclude

advertisement expenses from the explanatory variables because shinkin banks do not

disclose them. Looking at the full sample period estimation result of the acquirer

equation (columns (1) and (2)), we see that the coefficients on the (logarithm of) asset

and the M&A experience dummy are positive and significant. A larger shinkin bank is

more likely to acquire another shinkin bank. In the target equation, the coefficient on




                                            27
ROA is positive and significant and the coefficient on the cost ratio is negative and

significant. Efficient shinkin banks tended to be a target, though the efficiency-improving

hypothesis posits that efficient banks tend to be an acquirer. The coefficient on the

capital-to-asset ratio is negative and significant, which is consistent with the

too-big-to-fail or stabilization policy. The coefficient on the Herfindahl index is negative

and significant, suggesting that a shinkin bank tends to be consolidated if it operates in a

less concentrated market, which is consistent with the market power hypothesis. The

coefficients on the (logarithm of) asset and the asset growth are both negative and

significant, suggesting that a small or slowly growing shinkin bank tended to be a target.

     Most of these results still hold even if we enter ROA and the capital-to-asset ratio

separately (columns (3)-(6)) or if we use two-year lagged dependent variables (columns

(7) and (8)), though the coefficients on ROA and the capita-to-asset ratio become

insignificant in the target equation when we enter them separately.

     Though the sub-sample period estimation results yield similar results both in the

pre-merger and post-merger periods, it is notable that the coefficient on the

capital-to-asset ratio is negative and significant in the target equation only in the

post-crisis period, suggesting that the too-big-to-fail or stabilization policy hypothesis is

valid in the post-crisis period. The coefficient on the non-performing loan ratio is also

positive and significant in the target equation in the post-crisis period. The evidences on

the effects of the pre-merger bank efficiency on the likelihood of being a target are

mixed; the signs of the coefficients on ROA change from negative in the pre-crisis period




                                             28
to positive in the post-crisis period, and the coefficient on the cost ratio is negative and

significant in the pre-crisis period.




      In sum, the efficiency-improving hypothesis seems to be valid in the case of the

post-crisis period’s consolidations among major banks and among regional banks. The

market power hypothesis seems to be valid in the case of the consolidations among

shinkin banks. The government’s too-big-to-fail or financial stabilization policy

hypothesis also seems to be valid especially in the case of the post-crisis period’s

consolidations. We find no evidence that supports the managerial empire-building

hypothesis, though we cannot test that hypothesis in the case of the consolidations

among shinkin banks due to the lack of suitable data.




7. Post-Merger Performance

7.1 Background

      Consolidation may have various effects on the consolidated bank’s efficiency,

market power, services provided, healthiness and expenses for managerial private

benefits.

      First, consolidation may increase or decrease efficiency in various ways. A

consolidated bank may be able to achieve a scale or scope economy. It may also improve

X-efficiency by spreading superior acquirers’ managerial skills over targets. On the other

hand, it may take considerable time and costs to integrate different accounting and




                                            29
information systems, ways of doing business, and corporate cultures.

      Second, consolidation may change the availability of loans and other financial

services to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), though such changes may not

be intended either by acquirers or targets. If consolidation improves efficiency, a more

efficient consolidated bank may be able to serve more customers, including SMEs. On

the other hand, if a large bank may find it costly to process relationship-based

information due to its organizational complexity, a consolidated bank may reduce loans

to the SMEs that are informationally opaque (Berger et al., 1999). Consolidated banks

may also increase or reduce other services, including fee businesses, according to their

comparative advantages.

      Third, consolidation may strengthen market power, enabling the consolidated bank

to raise loan interest rates or lower deposit interest rates. This is likely to occur when

acquires and targets operated within the same local market (e.g., Berger et al., 1999).

      Fourth, consolidation may improve or deteriorate healthiness. Although regulators

may promote consolidations by weak banks, it is not clear whether weak banks can

restore healthiness just through consolidation. On one hand, a consolidated bank may

gain from risk diversification through investing various areas and industries (Berger et

al., 1999). In addition, an acquirer may apply its superior risk management skills to a

target. However, if poorly-capitalized banks are consolidated, a consolidated bank must

be highly profitable to fill in the initial shortage of capital and then to recover its capital

to a normal level, unless it raises capital from outside. In addition, a consolidated bank




                                              30
may be exposed to the risk of an unproportionally large amount of loans to some specific

large borrowers as compared with other banks as a result of the consolidation.25

      Finally, consolidation may increase or decrease expenses for the purpose of

managerial private benefits, like advertisement expenses. If a bank acquires another bank

for the purpose of increasing private benefits, a consolidated bank may increase expenses

for private benefits. On the other hand, if a bank becomes a target due to its weak

governance structures that allow large amounts of spending for private benefits, a

consolidated bank may decrease such spending.




7.2 Methodology26

      We investigate the consequences of M&As by comparing the bank financial

variables of pre-merger and post-merger periods. From the viewpoint of existing

shareholders (or members of shinkin banks) of acquirers, it is natural to compare

pre-merger acquiring banks and post-merger consolidated banks. On the other hand,

from the viewpoint of regulators that care about the banking system, it is useful to

compare hypothetical pre-merger combined banks (that is, a weighted average of an

acquirer and a target) and post-merger consolidated banks. We perform both

comparisons.

      Specifically, we first construct the financial ratios of the pre-merger hypothetical
25
   The following example may be useful. Tokai Bank, Sanwa Bank, Fuji bank and Sumitomo Bank
each had almost equal amounts (more than 500 billion yens) of loans outstanding to a large retail
company, Daiei, which was in financial distress. It is said that UFJ Bank, formed from the
consolidation of Tokai Bank and Sanwa Bank, was saddled with a distinguished amount (more than
one trillion yens) of loans to Daiei for a long time after the consolidation.
26
   The approach here is similar to Delong and Deyoung (2007).


                                                31
combined bank and the post-merger consolidated bank in the same way as we depicted

Figure 1. Note that we normalize all the pre-merger and post-merger financial ratios by

subtracting off the same-year, bank-type average. Next, we take the pre-merger average

of the hypothetical combined bank over the five years before mergers. If the pre-merger

data is available for less than five years, we take the pre-merger average over the

maximum years for which we can observe the data. Finally, we take the difference

between the normalized pre-merger bank financial ratios and the normalized post-merger

bank financial ratios. We look at the changes of the bank financial ratios for one to five

years after mergers, respectively, though we report in Table 5 only three and five years

after mergers to save space. Focarelli and Panetta (2003), Focarelli and Pozzolo (2005),

and Rhoades (1998) show that a 2-3 year post-merger period is needed to determine if

there are any post merger gains. We also take the average of the post-merger financial

ratios of the consolidated bank over the (at most) five years after mergers and take the

difference between the pre-merger 5-year average and the post-merger 5-year average.

      We perform the t-test for the null hypothesis that the difference between a

normalized pre-merger financial ratio and a normalized post-merger financial ratio has

mean zero. We also performed the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (z-statistic) for the null

hypothesis that the difference between them has median zero and obtained qualitatively

similar results for most financial ratios. So, we mainly report the t-test results below.

      In this section, we select a sample where data on bank financial ratios are available

for the merger year, one or more pre-merger years, and one or more post-merger years.




                                             32
The dataset here is slightly different from that used in Figure 1, where we choose sample

banks whose data were available for the merger year and one or more pre-merger years

but not necessarily available for post-merger years and sample banks whose data were

available for the merger year and one or more post-merger years but not necessarily

available for pre-merger years.




7.3 Results

Major banks

      Table 5A shows the changes in the financial ratios of the consolidated major banks.

The first column shows the changes from the hypothetical pre-merger combined bank for

the full sample period.

      Looking at the efficiency variables, we see that the changes in ROA are negative

three years after mergers and then turned to positive five years after mergers, though

none of the changes is significant. The changes in the cost ratio are not significant, either,

though consolidated banks seem to have decreased the cost ratio. It seems to take

considerable time for a consolidated bank to realize cost savings or gain economies of

scale or scope.

      Market power variables show that the changes in the average deposit interest rate

and the changes in the loan interest rate are not significant. A consolidated major bank

did not seem to be able to exert market power in the deposit or loan market. This is not

surprising, given that both acquiring major banks and target major banks operated




                                             33
nation-widely.

      Business scope variables suggest that the share of SME loans significantly

increases three years after mergers. One possible reason is that acquirers may have

spread its skills necessary to make SME loans to targets. However, more plausible reason

is that when the government recapitalized banks, it required banks to increase SME loans.

Because banks tended to be consolidated after the government recapitalization,

consolidated banks increased SME loans. This result is different from U.S. bank merger

evidences, especially for the mergers of large banks (Berger et al, 1999, pp.170). The

changes in fees and commissions and in the loan-to-asset ratio are not significant.

      Bank health measures suggest that the changes in the capital-to-asset ratios are

negative and significant three years after mergers and the changes in the risk-based BIS

capital ratios are also negative and significant (for t-statistics) for three years after

mergers. The improvement of ROA after the merger was not quick or sufficient enough

to offset the initial gap of the capital ratios between consolidated banks (i.e., acquirers

and targets) and their peers. In addition, the changes in the non-performing loan ratios,

based either on Bank Law or Financial Rehabilitation Act, are positive and significant 3

years after mergers. Consolidated banks may have applied a stricter standard to

recognize non-performing loans than before, resulting in the increase in disclosed

non-performing loans. It is well known that Japanese banks often manipulated the

amounts of disclosed non-performing loans so that they could satisfy the Basel capital

standards before the Financial Rehabilitation Plan (i.e., Takenaka Plan) in 2002. In




                                            34
addition, a consolidated bank may have been exposed to the risk of an unproportionally

large amount of loans to some specific large borrowers as a result of the consolidation.

When those borrowers fell in financial distress, the consolidated bank may have

continued to lend to them in order to avoid their failures, which would cause a sharp

decrease in the bank’s own capital.27

      Finally, private benefit variables suggest that the change in the advertisement

expenses as a proportion of total assets is not significant. The consolidated bank did not

significantly increase advertisement expenses. In addition, the change in the average loan

growth rate over the post-merger five years is significantly negative. The change in the

average asset growth rate is also negative, though not significant. These results suggest

that mergers triggered asset restructuring. Considering these results together, we may say

that no evidence is found that support the managerial empire building hypothesis.

      The second and third columns of Table 5A report the changes in the post-merger

performance from the hypothesized pre-merger combined bank for the sub-periods of the

pre-crisis period (FY 1990-1997) and the post-crisis period (FY1998-2004), respectively.

In the pre-merger period, the change in the share of SME loans is significantly positive.

On the other hand, in the post-merger period, the changes in the loan growth rate, the

asset growth rate, and the capital ratio are significantly negative and the change in the

non-performing loan ratio based on the Bank Law is significantly positive. The mergers

in the post-merger crisis period seem to have been more directed to asset restructuring


27
  Such a behavior is called “ever-greening” (Peek and Rosen, 2005) or “zombie lending” (Caballero,
Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2006).


                                               35
and yet to have resulted in a worse bank health, though the long-run effects of the

mergers in the early 2000s may not have been realized yet.

      The last column of Table 5A shows the changes of the performance of

consolidated banks from the pre-merger acquirer’s level for the full sample period. Most

of the changes from the pre-merger acquirer’s level are qualitatively the same as the

changes from the pre-merger hypothetical combined bank, except that the changes in the

share of SME loans is not significant, reflecting the fact that the pre-merger acquirer’s

share of SME loans was higher than the average of major banks.




Regional banks

      Table 5B shows the changes in the financial ratios of the consolidated regional

banks. The first column shows the changes from the pre-merger hypothetical combined

bank for the full sample period. Like major banks, the changes in ROA are negative,

though not significant, three years after mergers and then turn to be positive and

significant (for t-statistics) five years after mergers. This increase in ROA is caused

partly by a strengthened market power of a consolidated bank in the loan market, which

can be seen by the positive and significant change in the loan interest rate three and five

years after mergers. Though the increase in the loan interest rate may reflect the change

in the riskiness of the portfolio, the share of SME loans, which can be considered to be

relatively risky, tended to decrease, if any, rather than to increase after mergers.

Furthermore, examining the correlations of the change in the loan interest rate with the




                                            36
Herfindahl Index and with the SME loan share, we find that the former is 0.571, while

the latter is 0.243. A relatively high correlation between the change in the loan interest

rate and the Herfindahl Index is consistent with the market power hypothesis. Though

there is a possibility that consolidated banks implemented more stringent risk

management, it would be difficult to charge higher loan rates without a strengthened

market power. The changes in the capital-to-asset ratio are negative up to five years after

mergers, though significant only the five-year average after mergers. The improvement

of ROA after the merger was too slow and small to offset the initial gap of the capital

ratios between consolidated banks and their peers. The advertisement expenses as a

proportion of total costs decrease significantly three and five years after mergers, which

is not consistent with the managerial empire building hypothesis.

      Dividing the sample period into the pre-crisis period and the post-crisis period (the

second and third columns, respectively), we see that the changes in the capital-to-asset

ratio are negative for both periods but significant only for the post-crisis period, while

the change in the fees and commissions is positive and significant in the post-crisis

period (for the z-statistics).

      The last column shows the changes of the performance of a consolidated bank

from the pre-merger acquirer for the full sample period. The changes from the

pre-merger acquirer are qualitatively the same as the changes from the pre-merger

hypothetical combined bank except for the change in the advertisement expenses from

the pre-merger acquirer, which is negative but not significant.




                                            37
Shinkin banks

     Table 5C shows the changes in the financial ratios of the consolidated shinkin banks

for the full sample period. The first column shows the changes from the hypothetical

pre-merger combined bank. Some financial ratios change in similar ways to those of

major and regional banks. First, the changes in ROA are negative            three years after

mergers and then turn to positive, though not significant. Second, the changes in the loan

interest rate are positive, though not significant. The correlation of the change in the loan

interest with the change in the Herfindahl Index is positive (0.356) and significant,

suggesting that the increase in the loan interest rate, if any, may be caused by a

strengthened market power. Third, the capital-to-asset ratio and the risk-based capital

ratio (BIS) are both negative and significant for most of the post-merger years. Fourth,

the changes in the asset growth rate are negative and significant five years after mergers.

      The second and third columns show the results for the pre-crisis and post-crisis

periods, respectively. The changes in the capita-to-asset ratios and the asset growth rate

are negative and significant in both periods, while the change in the risk-based capital

ratio is negative in both periods but significant only in the post-crisis period.

      The last column shows the changes in the financial ratios of a consolidated bank

from the pre-merger acquirer. The changes in the capita-to-asset ratio, the risk-based

capital ratio and the asset growth rate are similar to the changes from the hypothetical

combined bank, while the changes in the loan growth rates are negative and significant




                                              38
up to five years after M&As and the change in the non-performing loan ratio is positive

and significant for the five-year post-merger average.




     We may summarize the post-merger performance of consolidated banks as follows.

First, consolidated banks tended to go through a decline in ROA at first and then to

increase ROA about five years after mergers, though this recovery was significant only

for the mergers of regional banks. It seems to take considerable time and costs to

integrate different information systems and other business methods. Second, in the case

of the M&As by regional banks or shinkin banks, consolidated banks tended to raise

interest rates on loans, though this is significant only for the mergers by regional banks,

suggesting that their market power was strengthened within the prefecture they operated

in. This is consistent with the U.S. evidence, showing that in-market consolidation

strengthens market power. Third, the changes in services provided are different by bank

type and by period. Consolidated major banks tended to expand SME loans in the

pre-crisis period, while consolidated regional banks tended to expand fees and

commissions business in the post-crisis period. Fourth, consolidated banks did not

recover bank health after mergers. The capital-to-asset ratio tended to decrease rather

than to increase regardless of bank type. The recovery of ROA was too slow and small to

fill in the initial gap of the capita-asset-ratio between consolidated banks and their peers.

In addition, consolidated banks did not decrease non-performing loans. Finally,

consolidated banks tended to decelerate the loan growth rate and the asset growth rate,




                                             39
suggesting that consolidated banks tried to restructure assets and to downsize.

Consolidated banks did not increase the advertisement expenses. Managerial empire

building hypothesis does not seem to be valid in Japan.




8. Conclusion

      The recent waves of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in the banking industries

across the world raise important questions of whether mergers enhance the efficiency of

consolidated banks and contribute to the stabilization of the banking sector. We

investigate the motives and consequences of the consolidation of banks in Japan during

the period of fiscal year 1990 to fiscal year 2004. In particular, we test the four

hypotheses concerning the motives for bank mergers: efficiency improving,

strengthening market power, taking advantage of a too-big-to-fail policy, and managerial

empire building.

      We first investigated the reasons for the recent merger wave using the aggregate

data at the prefecture-level. Our results suggest that M&As tended to occur when the

overall bank health was deteriorated and where the market was less concentrated. These

results are consistent with the too-big-to-fail or stabilization policy hypothesis and the

market power hypothesis, respectively.

      Our analysis concerning the relationship between ex-ante bank characteristics and

the decision of M&As suggests as follows. First, in the post-crisis period (1998-2004),

efficient banks tended to acquire an inefficient bank except for the M&As of corporative




                                             40
(shinkin) banks. This finding is consistent with the efficiency-improving hypothesis.

Second, unhealthy banks tended to be consolidated with each other especially in the

post-crisis period, which is consistent with the too-big-to-fail policy or stabilization

policy hypothesis.

      Our investigation of post-merger performance suggests as follows. First,

consolidated banks tended to go through a decline in ROA at first and then to increase

ROA about five years after mergers, though these changes are not necessarily significant.

Second, in-market consolidation enabled consolidated banks to raise the loan interest

rate. Third, consolidated banks tended to decrease the capital-to-asset ratio and not to

decrease non-performing loans. Finally, consolidated banks tended to restrain loan and

asset growths and not to increase advertisement expenses.

      In sum, our analysis suggests that the government’s too-big-to-fail policy or its

attempt at stabilizing the local financial market through consolidations played an

important role in the M&As, though its attempt does not seem to have been successful.

The efficiency-improving motive also seems to have driven the M&As conducted by

major banks and regional banks in the post-crisis period, while the market-power motive

seems to have driven the M&As conducted by regional banks and corporative (shinkin)

banks. We obtain no evidence that supports managerial motives for empire building.




                                           41
Data Appendix

         Current Pr ofit
• ROA =                  × 100
           Total Asse t
               Personnel Expenditur e + Nonpersonn el Expendi ture + Taxes
• Cost Ratio =                                                             × 100
                                          Total Asse t
                            Fees and C ommisions
• Fees and C ommisions =                            × 100
                                 Total Asse t
                          Loans Outs tanding
• Loan-to-As set Ratio =                       × 100
                              Total Asse t
                    Loans to S MEs
• Loans to S MEs =                   × 100
                       Total Asse t
• Loan Growt h Rate = Growth Rat e of Loans Outstandi ng × 100
                             Interest o n Deposits
• Deposit In terest Rat e =                         × 100
                            Deposits O utstanding
                          Interest o n Loans
• Loan Inter est Rate =                        × 100
                         Loans Outs tanding
                             Equity Cap ital
• Capital-to -Asset Rat io =                  × 100
                               Total Asse t
                                       Regulatory Capital
• Risk-Based Capital R atio (BIS) =                       × 100 (Based on BIS)
                                            Risk Asset
                                          Non-Perfor ming Loan Based on B anking Law
• Non-Perfor ming Loan Ratio (BL) =                                                   × 100
                                                          Total Asse t
                                           Non-Perfor ming Loan Based on F inancial R evitalizat ion Law
• Non-Perfor ming Loan Ratio (FRL ) =                                                                    × 100
                                                                   Total Asse t
• Ln Asset = ln(Total A sset)
• Asset Grow th = Growth Rat e of Total Asse t × 100
• Herfindahl Index = Prefectura l Herfinda hl Index ( calculated by deposi ts outstan ding of re gional and
                       shinki n banks)
• GDP Growth = Growth Rat e of GDP × 100
• Stock Pric e = Growth Rat e of the Stock Pric e × 100
• Industrial Stock Pri ce = Growth Rat e of the S tock Price Index of banking in dustry × 100
                               Advertisem ent Expens es
• Advertisem ent Expens es =                            × 100
                                  Operating Cost




                                                          42
References

Arikawa, Yasuihiro, and Hideaki Miyajima, 2007. Understanding M&A booms in Japan:

       What Drives Japanese M&A? RIETI Discussion Paper 07-E-042.

Berger, Allen N., Rebecca S. Demsetz, and Philip E. Strahan, 1999. The Consolidation of

       the Financial Services Industry: Cause, Consequences, and Implications for the

       Future, Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 135-194.

Bliss, Richard T., and Richard J. Rosen, 2001. CEO Compensation and Bank Mergers,

       Journal of Financial Economics 61, 107-138.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil A. Kashyap, 2006. Zombie Lending and

       Depressed Restructuring in Japan, MIT Economics Working Paper No. 06-06.

Delong, Gayle, and Robert Deyoung, 2007. Learning by Observing: Information

       Spillovers in the Execution and Valuation of Commercial Bank M&As, Journal

       of Finance 52(1), 181-216.

Focarelli, Dario, and Fabio Panetta, 2003. Are Mergers Beneficial to Consumers?

       Evidence from the Market for Bank Deposits, American Economic Review 93,

       1152-1172.

Focarelli, Dario, and Alberto Franco Pozzolo, 2005. Where Do Banks Expand Abroad?

       An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Business 78, 2435-2463.

Harford, Jarrad, 2005. What Drives Merger waves? Journal of Financial Economics 77,

       529-560.

Hoshi, Takeo, and Anil Kashyap, 2001. Corporate Finance and Governance in Japan:




                                          43
        The Road to the Future (MIT Press, MA).

Hosono, Kaoru, Koji Sakai, and Kotaro Tsuru, 2006. Consolidation of Corporative

       Banks (Shinkin) in Japan: Motives and Consequences. RIETI Discussion Paper

       06-E-034.

Kano, M., and Y. Tsutsui, 2003. Geographical Segmentation in Japanese Bank Loan

       Market. Regional Science and Urban Economics 33 (2), 157-174.

Mitchell, Mark L., and J. Harold Mulherin, 1996. The Impact of Industry Shocks on

       Takeover and Restructuring Activity. Journal of Financial Economics 41(2),

       193-229.

Okada, Tae, 2005. Consequences of Bank Mergers [Ginko gappei no kouka, in Japanese],

        paper presented at the Japanese Economic Association Spring Meeting, 2005.

Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 2005. Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the

        Misallocaion of Credit in Japan, American Economic Review 95(4), 1144-1166.

Rhoades, Stephen A., 1998. The Efficiency Effects of Bank Mergers: An Overview of

        Case Studies of Nine Mergers. Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 273-291.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2003. Stock Market Driven Acquisitions.

        Journal of Financial Economics 70.

Wooldridge, Jefferey M., 2001.Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,

        MIT Press.

Yafeh, Yishay, and Oved Yosha, 2003. Large Shareholders and Banks: Who Monitors

        and How? Economic Journal 113 (484), 128-146.




                                          44
Yamori, Nobuyoshi, and Kozo Harimaya, 2004. Governance of Shinkin Banks and

       Choice of Mergers [Shinyou kinko no gabanansu to gappei no sentaku, in

       Japanese], presented at the symposium on The Governance and Contemporary

       Meaning of Cooperative Financial Institutions at Hokkaido University.

Yamori, Nobuyoshi, Kozo Harimaya, and K. Kondo, 2005. Are Banks Affiliated with

       Holding Companies More Efficient than Independent Banks? The Recent

       Experience regarding Japanese Regional BHCs, Asia Pacific Financial Markets.




                                         45
Table 1. Number of Banks and Number of Mergers and Acquisitions (M&As)
                           Major Banks                                   Regional Banks                                  Shinkin Banks
                                            Sale of                                          Sale of                                       Sale of
                Total        Merger                             Total        Merger                            Total         Merger
                                           business                                         business                                      business

      1990        22              1             0                132             0              0               451              3             0
      1991        21              1             0                132             1              0               440              3             0
      1992        21              0             0                130             1              1   (1)         435              4             0
      1993        21              0             0                129             1              0               428              5             0
      1994        21              0             0                129             0              0               421              8             0
      1995        21              0             0                129             0              1   (1)         416              4             0
      1996        20              1             0                128             0              0               410              5             1
      1997        19              0             1 (1)            126             0              1   (1)         401              8             0
      1998        19              0             0                124             0              3   (3)         396              3             0
      1999        19              0             0                123             0              1   (1)         386              5 (1)         1   (1)
      2000        18              1             0                119             1              1   (1)         371              7 (2)         9   (8)
      2001        15              3             0                117             0              0               349             11 (2)         5   (5)
      2002        13              3             0                116             0              0               326             15             6   (6)
      2003        13              0             0                110             2              0               306             14             0
      2004        13              0             0                107             3              0               298              7             0

      Total      276            10              1 (1)         1,851              9              8 (8)         5,834            102 (5)        22 (20)

Notes
1. Major banks include city banks, long-term credit banks, and trust banks. Regional banks include first-tier regional banks and second-tier regional banks.
2. The numbers in the parentheses denote the numbers of mergers or acquisitions of the business of a failed bank.
3. No merger was implemented across bank type during the sample period, and one sales of business of a failed bank was conducted across bank types (in the case of the failure of
    a major bank, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank in 1997).




                                                                                       46
Table2. Pooled-OLS Regression Results for Merger Wave
                                                           1985-2004
                                           (1)                (2)             (3)

ROA                                        -0.352
                                           (0.628)
Post-Crisis Dummy*ROA                      -0.586
                                           (0.648)
Capital-to-Asset Ratio                                        -0.022
                                                              (0.070)
Post-Crisis Dummy*Capital-to-Asset Ratio                      -0.450 ***
                                                              (0.122)
Industrial Stock Price                                                        -0.008 **
                                                                              (0.004)
Post-Crisis Dummy*Industrial Stock Price                                       0.008
                                                                              (0.015)
Herfindahl Index                           -1.625    **       -1.509    **    -2.077 ***
                                           (0.736)            (0.740)         (0.735)
GDP Growth                                 -0.099    **       -0.109    ***
                                           (0.040)            (0.040)
Post-Crisis Dummy                           0.840    ***       3.214    ***    1.377 ***
                                           (0.324)            (0.641)         (0.365)
Cons                                        1.665    ***       1.668    ***    1.421 ***
                                           (0.362)            (0.453)         (0.313)

Number of Observations                     1,963              1,963           1,963
Adj R-sq                                   0.039              0.034           0.022

Notes
1. The dependent variable is the numbers of M&As divided by the total number of banks.
2. Pooled OLS regression results are reported.
3. Standard errors are in parentheses.
4. *** and ** represent significance at the 1% and 5% levels respectively.




                                                            47
Table 3. Descriptive Sample Statistics
                                                 Major Banks                                    Regional Banks                                        Shinkin Banks
                                                         Acquirer    Target-                              Acquirer       Target-                               Acquirer        Target-
                                  Acquirer Target  All                          Acquirer Target     All                               Acquirer Target     All
                                                           -All        All                                  -All           All                                   -All            All
                                   Mean     Mean Mean     Mean        Mean       Mean      Mean Mean       Mean           Mean         Mean      Mean Mean       Mean           Mean
                                   Std.     Std.  Std.     Std.       Std.       Std.      Std.    Std.     Std.          Std.         Std.      Std.    Std.    Std.           Std.
                                   Dev.     Dev.  Dev.     Dev.       Dev.       Dev.      Dev.    Dev.     Dev.          Dev.         Dev.      Dev.    Dev.    Dev.           Dev.

ROA                                  -0.32   -0.36   -0.27   -0.19      0.00       0.13     -0.06    -0.17     0.23        0.06          0.11    -0.27     0.19    -0.01       -0.37 ***
                                    (1.08) (0.79) (1.13)    (0.85)    (0.65)      (0.37)    (0.49)   (2.16)  (0.31)       (0.17)        (0.47) (0.96)     (1.03)   (0.44)     (0.89)
Cost Ratio                            0.85    0.95    0.86    0.01      0.12       1.43      1.48     1.45     0.03        0.07          1.61     1.69     1.64    -0.01        0.07
                                    (0.35) (0.66) (0.41)    (0.32)    (0.64)      (0.25)    (0.17)   (0.26)  (0.22)       (0.16)        (0.20) (0.36)     (0.24)   (0.20)     (0.36)
Fees and Commissions                  0.26    0.29    0.26   -0.01      0.01       0.25      0.20     0.19     0.03       -0.02          0.16     0.15     0.15     0.00        0.00
                                    (0.13) (0.26) (0.16)    (0.13)    (0.26)      (0.10)    (0.10)   (0.06)  (0.08)       (0.07)        (0.04) (0.04)     (0.04)   (0.04)     (0.04)
Loan-to-Asset Ratio                 56.60 57.83 56.12         1.38      2.29      70.85     71.82    69.33     2.44        3.36         61.29 57.77       58.84     3.17 *** -0.19
                                    (6.50) (6.62) (8.81)    (7.53)    (8.57)      (5.28)    (4.43)   (7.03)  (5.15)       (4.93)        (6.95) (10.26)    (8.53)   (6.55)    (10.27)
Loans to SMEs                       28.53 24.22 27.84         2.07     -1.89      47.98     52.13    47.96     2.73        6.34
                                    (7.68) (6.12) (7.75)    (6.84)    (7.49)      (8.11)    (6.43)   (9.52)  (7.24)       (7.75)
Loan Growth Rate                      5.99    0.08    2.32    0.11     -5.34       9.48     -0.41     2.81     7.57       -2.36          2.12    -2.35     4.09    -0.38        -4.46    ***
                                   (10.03) (9.31) (18.58) (12.39)     (8.97)     (23.32)    (5.33)   (8.01) (23.15)       (3.91)        (5.72)   (5.78)   (8.72)   (3.93)       (4.86)
Deposit Interest Rate                 2.29    1.87    3.04   -0.23     -0.13       1.49      1.79     1.75    -0.06        0.07          1.39     1.25     1.91     0.00         0.02
                                    (2.08) (2.01) (2.26)    (0.54)    (0.92)      (2.08)    (2.28)   (1.67)  (0.11)       (0.23)        (1.47)   (1.47)   (1.57)   (0.18)       (0.13)
Loan Interest Rate                    3.47    3.14    3.96   -0.06      0.03       3.85      4.51     4.05    -0.04        0.43 ***      4.24     4.08     4.78     0.01         0.02
                                    (2.19) (1.87) (2.06)    (0.27)    (0.42)      (2.22)    (2.16)   (1.76)  (0.38)       (0.24)        (1.57)   (1.60)   (1.64)   (0.34)       (0.49)
Capital-to-Asset Ratio                3.75    4.02    3.95   -0.46     -0.19       3.27      3.11     3.67    -0.73       -0.81          4.92     4.11     5.34    -0.51 ***    -1.34    ***
                                    (1.37) (1.57) (1.47)    (1.02)    (1.19)      (0.68)    (1.36)   (3.19)  (0.96)       (1.09)        (1.44)   (1.99)   (2.16)   (1.45)       (2.03)
Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)      10.31 10.55 11.50        -1.36     -0.89       7.30      6.15     8.77    -1.72 **    -2.86 **       8.86     7.18     9.65    -1.12 **     -2.98    ***
                                    (1.70) (1.55) (2.58)    (1.37)    (1.54)      (1.31)    (1.70)   (3.80)  (1.27)       (1.76)        (3.15)   (3.44)   (4.11)   (2.87)       (3.45)
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)        8.72    8.99 10.32     -1.46     -1.74       9.40      9.59     7.15     1.56        1.74          9.69    14.15     7.81     0.50         4.67    ***
                                    (4.46) (6.72) (7.87)    (3.66)    (7.13)      (3.03)    (2.62)   (5.15)  (2.63)       (2.06)        (6.42)   (6.69)   (5.75)   (4.98)       (6.05)
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL)       8.92    9.17    9.77   -1.40     -1.75       9.48     10.33     8.01     1.71        2.40
                                    (4.53) (6.80) (6.79)    (3.71)    (7.25)      (3.19)    (3.56)   (4.93)  (2.98)       (2.95)
Advertisement Expenses                1.76    1.47    1.91    0.00     -0.19       1.68      1.99     1.60     0.21        0.50
                                    (0.93) (0.77) (1.07)    (1.02)    (0.76)      (0.90)    (0.94)   (0.65)  (0.90)       (1.00)
Stock Price                        -17.58 -22.60 -10.77      -4.28      6.83
                                   (16.15) (10.61) (28.79) (15.49)   (10.61)
Ln Asset                            17.03 16.87 16.85         0.18      0.00      14.27     13.67    14.19      0.04      -0.54         19.38    18.20    18.82     0.49 ***    -0.70 ***
                                    (0.84) (1.15) (0.96)    (0.82)    (1.13)      (0.56)    (0.74)   (0.89)    (0.54)     (0.71)        (0.86)   (0.93)   (0.97)   (0.84)       (0.89)
Asset Growth Rate                     9.57   -0.60    1.35    3.02     -5.32       9.17      1.99     2.30      7.71       0.64          2.63    -0.68     4.06    -0.62        -3.84 ***
                                   (10.63) (10.63) (17.57)  (6.86)    (9.80)     (21.63)    (4.55)   (8.82)   (21.21)     (4.84)        (4.37)   (8.88)   (8.17)   (3.32)       (8.35)

Number of Observations                  8      11    286                              9         8    1,876                                 64       80    5,928

Notes
1. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5% levels respectively, for the null hypothesis that the difference has zero mean.


                                                                                           48
2.   “Acquirer-All” and “Target-All” are calculated for each M&A and only for the years when there are at least one M&A, while “All” is a simple average over the whole sample
     years. This is the reason why the differences between “Acquirer” (or “Target”) and “All” do not coincide with “Acquirer-All” (or “Target-All”).




                                                                                       49
Table 4A. Multinomial Logistic Regression Results for M&A Choices among Major Banks
                                                           1990-2004                                       1990-2001            1990-2004             1990-1997            1998-2004
                                              Marg.                Marg.                      Marg.                Marg.                Marg.                 Marg.                Marg.
                                Coeff.                  Coeff.                  Coeff.                  Coeff.               Coeff.               Coeff.               Coeff.
                                               Eff.                 Eff.                       Eff.                 Eff.                 Eff.                  Eff.                 Eff.
                                 (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)       (7)         (8)      (9)        (10)      (11)        (12)     (13)        (14)

Acquirer
   ROA                           -0.200      -0.0000     -0.267      -0.0000                                                   0.284   0.0000      17.817    0.0000      0.079    0.0001
                                (0.470)                 (0.342)                                                              (0.843)             (19.158)              (0.900)
   Cost Ratio                     3.157      0.0028       2.451      0.0000       3.138      0.0000       0.433   -0.0046      1.734   0.0020       1.907    0.0000      5.054    0.0155
                                (2.207)                 (2.073)                 (2.201)                 (2.475)              (2.065)              (4.665)              (2.820)
   Capital-to-Asset Ratio        -0.421      -0.0003                             -0.478      -0.0000                           0.313   0.0004      -4.355   -0.0727     -0.954   -0.0323
                                (0.426)                                         (0.416)                                      (0.369)              (3.079)              (0.716)
   Advertisement Expenses         0.218      0.0000       0.129      0.0000       0.195      0.0000       0.092   0.0052      -0.275   -0.0000     -0.505   -0.0000      2.062    0.0030
                                (0.497)                 (0.500)                 (0.499)                 (0.524)              (0.539)              (0.880)              (1.179)
   Ln Asset                       1.255      0.0437       1.284      0.0437       1.178      0.0072       0.766   0.0043       0.937   0.0026      -0.200    0.0024      2.015    0.0641
                                (0.936)                 (0.918)                 (0.916)                 (1.025)              (0.909)              (1.561)              (1.607)
   Asset Growth                   0.017      0.0000       0.018      0.0000       0.017      0.0000       0.024   0.0000       0.019   0.0000      -0.001   -0.0000      0.011    0.0000
                                (0.018)                 (0.017)                 (0.018)                 (0.017)              (0.017)              (0.044)              (0.021)
   Industrial Stock Price        -0.031      -0.0000     -0.038      -0.0000     -0.028      -0.0000                           0.019   0.0000       0.747    0.0000     -0.150   -0.0018
                                (0.033)                 (0.033)                 (0.032)                                      (0.031)              (0.595)              (0.096)
   GDP Growth                     0.527      0.0000       0.455      0.0000       0.508      0.0000                            0.578   0.0000       5.310   -0.0011      0.189    0.0002
                                (0.279)                 (0.266)                 (0.274)                                      (0.324)              (4.326)              (0.793)
   M&A Experience                -2.783      -0.0506     -2.402      -0.0435     -2.729      -0.0499     -1.768   -0.0311     -1.941   -0.0345                          -3.447   -0.1163
                                (1.600)                 (1.479)                 (1.589)                 (1.537)              (1.390)                                   (1.977)
   Governmental Capital           2.987 **   0.1209       2.247 **   0.0745       3.076 **   0.1271       1.685   0.0650       2.617   0.1054
                                (1.338)                 (1.024)                 (1.349)                 (0.894)              (1.353)
   Stock Price                                                                                           -0.005   -0.0000
                                                                                                        (0.016)
   Non-performing Loan Ratio                                                                                                                                            -0.019    0.0024
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.269)
   Cons                         -28.848                 -29.828                 -27.195                 -17.567              -23.765               -5.595              -42.340
                               (18.148)                (17.845)                (17.645)                (19.683)             (17.740)             (30.763)             (31.100)




                                                                                             50
Table 4A. (Continued from previous page)
                                                         1990-2004                                      1990-2001              1990-2004              1990-1997            1998-2004
                                           Marg.                 Marg.                   Marg.                  Marg.                  Marg.                  Marg.                Marg.
                               Coeff.                 Coeff.                 Coeff.                 Coeff.                  Coeff.                Coeff.               Coeff.
                                            Eff.                  Eff.                    Eff.                   Eff.                   Eff.                   Eff.                 Eff.
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)     (13)        (14)

Target
   ROA                          -0.082    -0.0000     -0.092    -0.0000                                                      0.001     0.0000       7.495    0.0000      0.323    -0.0001
                                (0.401)               (0.366)                                                               (0.284)                (9.127)              (0.915)
   Cost Ratio                    2.134     0.0010      2.110     0.0000        2.119    0.0000        6.011     0.0574       1.821     0.0039      -1.494    -0.0000     7.484 ** 0.3149
                                (1.637)               (1.626)                 (1.629)                (4.998)                (1.640)                (3.793)              (3.292)
   Capital-to-Asset Ratio       -0.051     0.0001                             -0.075    0.0000                               0.613 ** 0.0090       -2.184    -0.0272     0.209     0.0153
                                (0.355)                                       (0.334)                                       (0.305)                (1.778)              (0.702)
   Advertisement Expenses       -0.286    -0.0000     -0.294    -0.0000       -0.297    -0.0000     -11.020    -0.0692      -0.645    -0.0000      -0.545    -0.0000     0.344    -0.0024
                                (0.519)               (0.516)                 (0.515)                (6.692)                (0.527)                (0.641)              (0.970)
   Ln Asset                      0.868     0.0082      0.895     0.0103        0.832    0.0116        3.524     0.0282       1.195     0.0596      -1.689    -0.0288     1.513     0.0518
                                (0.792)               (0.762)                 (0.769)                (3.155)                (0.789)                (1.586)              (1.718)
   Asset Growth                 -0.028    -0.0000     -0.028    -0.0000       -0.029    -0.0000       0.094     0.0000       0.001     0.0000       0.018    0.0000     -0.055    -0.0000
                                (0.032)               (0.031)                 (0.032)                (0.071)                (0.022)                (0.054)              (0.064)
   Industrial Stock Price       -0.083 ** 0.0000      -0.084 ** -0.0000       -0.083    -0.0000                             -0.021    -0.0000       0.458    0.0000     -0.427    -0.0203
                                (0.042)               (0.042)                 (0.042)                                       (0.027)                (0.383)              (0.315)
   GDP Growth                    0.499     0.0000      0.493     0.0000        0.495    0.0000                               0.351     0.0000       3.305    0.0064      1.204     0.0039
                                (0.282)               (0.277)                 (0.284)                                       (0.242)                (2.837)              (1.870)
   M&A Experience               -1.164    -0.0290     -1.146    -0.0292       -1.142    -0.0287      -2.962    -0.0275      -1.283    -0.0337                           -1.744    -0.0495
                                (0.972)               (0.965)                 (0.967)                (3.029)                (0.978)                                     (1.359)
   Governmental Capital          1.792     0.0576      1.721 ** 0.0610         1.838    0.0586        2.525     0.0178       1.011     0.0281
                                (1.010)               (0.844)                 (0.986)                (3.004)                (0.930)
   Stock Price                                                                                       -0.035    -0.0000
                                                                                                     (0.055)
   Non-performing Loan Ratio                                                                                                                                             -0.399   -0.0090
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.281)
   Cons                        -21.920               -22.526                -21.181                 -60.254                -27.602                 23.337              -42.943
                               (15.593)              (14.882)               (15.110)                (54.140)               (15.501)               (29.490)             (34.366)


   Number of Observations           279                  280                     279                    225                     279                    170                   90
   Pseudo R-sq                   0.168                 0.162                   0.167                  0.272                  0.166                  0.277                0.446
   Log Likelihood              -68.457               -69.027                 -68.547                -34.234                -68.641                -21.780              -25.370

Notes
1. The probability of being an acquirer or a target as compared with being neither of them is estimated using the maximum-likelihood estimator.
2. Standard errors are in parentheses.
3. *** and ** represent significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.
4. Independent variables are lagged one year for columns (1)-(8) and (11)-(14), while they are lagged two years for columns (9) and (10).



                                                                                        51
Table 4B. Multinomial Logistic Regression Results for M&A Choices among Regional Banks
                                                                          1990-2004                                                  1990-1997             1998-2004
                                              Marg.                   Marg.                     Marg.                   Marg.                Marg.                 Marg.
                                Coeff.                  Coeff.                    Coeff.                  Coeff.                  Coeff.               Coeff.
                                               Eff.                    Eff.                      Eff.                    Eff.                 Eff.                  Eff.
                                 (1)           (2)       (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)       (7)           (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)        (12)

Acquirer
   ROA                            0.321      0.0000       0.258      0.0000                                -0.086      -0.0000      1.231   0.0000       5.329 *** 0.0000
                                (0.171)                 (0.227)                                           (0.394)                 (4.907)              (1.724)
   Cost Ratio                    -0.643      -0.0000     -0.308      -0.0000       -0.567      -0.0000      0.276      0.0000       0.258   0.0000       3.284      0.0063
                                (2.184)                 (2.218)                   (2.116)                 (2.346)                 (4.026)              (3.314)
   Capital-to-Asset Ratio        -0.173      -0.0000                               -0.043      -0.0000      0.063      0.0000      -0.663   -0.0000     -1.622 *** -0.0000
                                (0.103)                                           (0.077)                 (0.300)                 (1.065)              (0.575)
   Advertisement Expenses         0.219      0.0000       0.212      0.0000         0.224      0.0000      -0.018      -0.0000      0.042   0.0000      -0.028     -0.0000
                                (0.459)                 (0.441)                   (0.446)                 (0.577)                 (1.091)              (0.421)
   Ln Asset                      -0.145      0.0001      -0.110      0.0001        -0.143      0.0001      -0.045      0.0001       0.161   0.0000       1.190      0.0037
                                (0.631)                 (0.639)                   (0.615)                 (0.680)                 (1.259)              (1.083)
   Asset Growth                   0.017      0.0000       0.018      0.0000         0.018      0.0000      -0.048      -0.0000      0.033   0.0000       0.001      0.0000
                                (0.012)                 (0.012)                   (0.012)                 (0.072)                 (0.050)              (0.016)
   Herfindahl Index               0.480      0.0000       0.170      0.0000         0.216      0.0000      -0.066      -0.0000      5.948   0.0000      -1.046     -0.0000
                                (2.195)                 (2.175)                   (2.161)                 (2.165)                 (4.042)              (3.063)
   GDP Growth                     0.016      0.0000       0.022      0.0000         0.022      0.0000       0.085      0.0000      -0.007   -0.0000     -0.052     -0.0000
                                (0.096)                 (0.097)                   (0.097)                 (0.115)                 (0.157)              (0.235)
   Governmental Capital           2.125 **   0.0257       2.106 **   0.0258         1.983 **   0.0227       1.965 **   0.0221                            1.080      0.0112
                                (0.894)                 (0.891)                   (0.878)                 (0.874)                                      (1.082)
   Non-Performing Loan Ratio                                                                                                                             0.201      0.0000
                                                                                                                                                       (0.180)
   Cons                          -2.570                  -4.073                   -3.089                   -5.609                  -9.029              -21.882
                               (11.904)                (11.983)                 (11.524)                 (13.038)                (23.551)             (18.934)




                                                                                               52
Table 4B. (Continued from previous page)
                                                                      1990-2004                                                   1990-1997            1998-2004
                                           Marg.                  Marg.                   Marg.                   Marg.                   Marg.                Marg.
                               Coeff.                 Coeff.                  Coeff.                  Coeff.                  Coeff.               Coeff.
                                            Eff.                   Eff.                    Eff.                    Eff.                    Eff.                 Eff.
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)     (11)        (12)

Target
   ROA                           0.279     0.0000       0.095     0.0000                               -0.145    -0.0000        1.892    0.0000       2.221   0.0000
                                (0.226)                (0.385)                                         (0.376)                 (2.142)              (1.491)
   Cost Ratio                   -3.315    -0.0000      -3.083    -0.0000       -3.227     0.0000       -1.951    -0.0000       -2.785    -0.0000     -4.467   -0.0053
                                (2.242)                (2.256)                 (2.167)                 (2.006)                 (3.671)              (4.473)
   Capital-to-Asset Ratio       -0.177    -0.0000                              -0.057    -0.0000        0.123     0.0000       -1.708    -0.0021     -0.543   -0.0000
                                (0.117)                                        (0.084)                 (0.300)                 (0.969)              (0.517)
   Advertisement Expenses        0.441     0.0000       0.457     0.0000        0.459     0.0000        0.454     0.0000       -0.440    -0.0000      0.674   0.0000
                                (0.396)                (0.379)                 (0.388)                 (0.439)                 (1.241)              (0.480)
   Ln Asset                     -1.497 ** -0.0028      -1.482 ** -0.0029       -1.484 ** -0.0028       -1.317 ** -0.0032       -1.732    -0.0021     -1.435   -0.0069
                                (0.625)                (0.621)                 (0.613)                 (0.622)                 (1.347)              (0.991)
   Asset Growth                 -0.017    -0.0000      -0.022    -0.0000       -0.014    -0.0000       -0.093    -0.0000        0.013    0.0000      -0.073   -0.0000
                                (0.060)                (0.072)                 (0.061)                 (0.060)                 (0.099)              (0.125)
   Herfindahl Index             -1.399    -0.0000      -1.725    -0.0000       -1.547    -0.0000       -1.725    -0.0000       -0.435    -0.0000      1.334   0.0000
                                (2.227)                (2.195)                 (2.203)                 (2.288)                 (3.479)              (4.129)
   GDP Growth                    0.006     0.0000       0.019     0.0000        0.014     0.0000        0.114     0.0000       -0.051    -0.0000      0.083   0.0000
                                (0.115)                (0.119)                 (0.115)                 (0.109)                 (0.167)              (0.306)
   Governmental Capital          2.511 *** 0.0324       2.418 *** 0.0300        2.405 *** 0.0297        2.442 *** 0.0297                              1.643   0.0133
                                (0.929)                (0.920)                 (0.906)                 (0.914)                                      (1.311)
   Non-Performing Loan Ratio                                                                                                                          0.245   0.0001
                                                                                                                                                    (0.209)
   Cons                         20.334                 19.234                  19.589                  14.645                 28.199                19.328
                               (11.402)               (11.261)                (11.057)                (11.030)               (23.502)              (18.866)


   Number of Observations        1,869                  1,869                   1,869                   1,866                   1,039                  628
   Pseudo R-sq                   0.100                  0.089                   0.088                   0.092                   0.130                0.308
   Log Likelihood              -97.683                -98.878                 -99.034                 -98.603                 -35.724              -40.175


See the notes to Table 4A.
Independent variables are lagged one year for columns (1)-(6) and (9)-(12), while they are lagged two years for columns (7) and (8).




                                                                                         53
Table 4C. Multinomial Logistic Regression Results for M&A Choices among Shinkin Banks
                                                                       1990-2002                                             1990-1997            1998-2002
                                             Marg.                 Marg.                    Marg.                 Marg.              Marg.                Marg.
                               Coeff.                Coeff.                    Coeff.               Coeff.                Coeff.              Coeff.
                                              Eff.                  Eff.                     Eff.                  Eff.               Eff.                 Eff.
                                (1)           (2)     (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)     (7)           (8)     (9)        (10)     (11)        (12)

Acquirer
   ROA                          0.113     0.0000      0.050        0.0000                            0.089     0.0000     -0.447     0.0000     0.072     0.0000
                               (0.151)               (0.115)                                        (0.159)               (1.528)              (0.238)
   Cost Ratio                   0.397     0.0000      0.504        0.0000       0.443     0.0000     0.571     0.0000      0.859     0.0000     0.036     0.0000
                               (0.655)               (0.631)                   (0.648)              (0.640)               (0.856)              (1.076)
   Capital-to-Asset Ratio      -0.055    -0.0000                               -0.014    -0.0000    -0.039    -0.0000     -0.143    -0.0000     0.051     0.0000
                               (0.083)                                         (0.055)              (0.085)               (0.168)              (0.110)
   Ln Asset                     0.521 *** 0.0000      0.546 *** 0.0000          0.534 *** 0.0000     0.573 ** 0.0000       0.541 ** 0.0000      0.536 ** 0.0071
                               (0.168)               (0.165)                   (0.167)              (0.166)               (0.215)              (0.274)
   Asset Growth                -0.029    -0.0000     -0.029    -0.0000         -0.025    -0.0000    -0.016    -0.0000     -0.021    -0.0000    -0.033    -0.0000
                               (0.022)               (0.022)                   (0.020)              (0.019)               (0.034)              (0.028)
   Herfindahl Index             0.495     0.0000      0.441     0.0000          0.439     0.0000     0.451     0.0000      0.746     0.0000    -0.138    -0.0000
                               (0.789)               (0.785)                   (0.786)              (0.784)               (1.082)              (1.209)
   GDP Growth                  -0.021    -0.0000     -0.018    -0.0000         -0.019    -0.0000     0.007     0.0000      0.006     0.0000    -0.149    -0.0000
                               (0.039)               (0.039)                   (0.039)              (0.031)               (0.038)              (0.093)
   M&A Experience               0.989 *** 0.0161      1.030 *** 0.0171          0.998 *** 0.0164     1.009 *** 0.0163                           1.280 *** 0.0268
                               (0.334)               (0.328)                   (0.334)              (0.332)                                    (0.422)
   Non-Performing Loan Ratio                                                                                                                    0.061     0.0000
                                                                                                                                               (0.035)
   Cons                        -14.915 ***           -15.837 ***              -15.422 ***           -16.361 ***           -15.626 ***         -15.662 **
                                (4.074)               (3.858)                  (4.000)               (4.045)               (5.276)             (6.735)




                                                                                        54
Table 4C. (Continued from previous page)
                                                                             1990-2002                                                        1990-1997                  1998-2002
                                                  Marg.                  Marg.                     Marg.                        Marg.                 Marg.                      Marg.
                                Coeff.                      Coeff.                   Coeff.                   Coeff.                      Coeff.                     Coeff.
                                                   Eff.                   Eff.                      Eff.                         Eff.                  Eff.                       Eff.
                                  (1)              (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)              (8)        (9)        (10)           (11)        (12)

Target
   ROA                            0.445    ***   0.0000       0.079      0.0000                                 0.505    ***   0.0000      -3.783    *** -0.0000      0.549    ***   0.0000
                                 (0.110)                     (0.055)                                           (0.122)                     (1.336)                   (0.132)
   Cost Ratio                    -1.167    *** -0.0002       -1.265 *** -0.0001      -1.356    *** -0.0001     -1.111    ***   0.0000      -1.398    **   -0.0000    -0.943          -0.0008
                                 (0.416)                     (0.437)                 (0.437)                   (0.403)                     (0.590)                   (0.694)
   Capital-to-Asset Ratio        -0.284    *** -0.0000                               -0.043       -0.0000      -0.304    *** -0.0000       -0.087         -0.0000    -0.236    **    -0.0000
                                 (0.072)                                             (0.040)                   (0.073)                     (0.136)                   (0.093)
   Ln Asset                      -0.955    *** -0.0014       -0.876 *** -0.0012      -0.944    *** -0.0013     -0.868    *** -0.0010       -1.157    *** -0.0011     -0.911    *** -0.0170
                                 (0.141)                     (0.137)                 (0.138)                   (0.136)                     (0.216)                   (0.212)
   Asset Growth                  -0.129    *** -0.0000       -0.141 *** -0.0000      -0.098    *** -0.0000     -0.121    *** -0.0000       -0.037         -0.0000    -0.158    *** -0.0000
                                 (0.026)                     (0.027)                 (0.025)                   (0.025)                     (0.031)                   (0.046)
   Herfindahl Index              -2.588    *** -0.0003       -2.701 *** -0.0000      -2.890    *** -0.0000     -2.450    *** -0.0000       -2.426    **   -0.0000    -3.663    *** -0.0000
                                 (0.753)                     (0.756)                 (0.753)                   (0.736)                     (1.180)                   (1.105)
   GDP Growth                    -0.066          -0.0000     -0.048     -0.0000      -0.065       -0.0000      -0.004          -0.0000     -0.054         -0.0000    -0.052          -0.0000
                                 (0.040)                     (0.041)                 (0.039)                   (0.036)                     (0.057)                   (0.088)
   M&A Experience                -0.369          -0.0042     -0.166     -0.0022      -0.398       -0.0045      -0.369          -0.0043                               -0.282          -0.0051
                                 (0.663)                     (0.641)                 (0.721)                   (0.622)                                               (0.666)
   Non-Performing Loan Ratio                                                                                                                                          0.112    ***   0.0000
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.028)
   Cons                         17.821 ***                  15.151 ***               16.835 ***               16.125 ***                  21.240 ***                 15.637    ***
                                (2.971)                     (2.926)                  (2.972)                  (2.865)                     (4.288)                    (4.763)


   Number of Observations         5,626                       5,626                   5,626                     5,758                       3,432                      2,167
   Pseudo R-sq                    0.098                       0.087                   0.086                     0.085                       0.098                      0.158
   Log Likelihood              -681.741                    -690.583                -691.122                  -706.882                    -327.212                   -320.765



See the notes to Table 4A.
Independent variables are lagged one year for columns (1)-(6) and (9)-(12), while they are lagged two years for columns (7) and (8).




                                                                                                 55
Table 5A. Post-Merger Performance of Major Banks
                                                                                                   Pre-Merger
Change from:                                                         Pre-Merger Combined Bank
                                                                                                    Acquirer
                                                            1990-2004     1990-1997   1998-2004    1990-2004
ROA
   ΔROA (3-year post-merger)                                -0.200                                 -0.212
   ΔROA (5-year post-merger)                                 0.149                                  0.125
   ΔROA (post-merger average)                               -0.219        0.150       -0.377       -0.230
Cost Ratio
   ΔCost Ratio (3-year post-merger)                         -0.015                                 -0.054
   ΔCost Ratio (5-year post-merger)                         -0.058                                 -0.124
   ΔCost Ratio (post-merger average)                        -0.018        0.015       -0.033       -0.058
Fees and Commissions
   ΔFees and Commissions (3-year post-merger)               0.079                                  -0.032
   ΔFees and Commissions (5-year post-merger)               0.110                                   0.048
   ΔFees and Commissions (post-merger average)              0.006         0.065       -0.024       -0.029
Loan-to-Asset Ratio
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (3-year post-merger)                -0.235                                 -0.398
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (5-year post-merger)                 2.498                                  1.817
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (post-merger average)               -1.037        0.580       -1.730       -1.200
Loans to SMEs
   ΔLoans to SMEs (3-year post-merger)                       1.700 b                               -1.850
   ΔLoans to SMEs (5-year post-merger)                      -0.384                                 -4.909
   ΔLoans to SMEs (post-merger average)                      1.727 b**    1.064 b     2.390        -2.047
Loan Growth Rate
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (3-year post-merger)                   -2.760                                 -3.784
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (5-year post-merger)                   -4.478                                 -6.387
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (post-merger average)                  -3.058 b**    0.014       -4.375 a**   -4.082 b**
Deposit Interest Rate
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (3-year post-merger)               0.008                                  0.114
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (5-year post-merger)              -0.354                                 -0.249
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (post-merger average)             -0.058        0.023       -0.093        0.048
Loan Interest Rate
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (3-year post-merger)                  0.062                                  0.075
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (5-year post-merger)                 -0.057                                 -0.010
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (post-merger average)                -0.001        0.167       -0.073        0.012
Capital-to-Asset Ratio
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (3-year post-merger)             -1.319 a**                             -1.342 a**
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (5-year post-merger)             -0.509                                 -0.498
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (post-merger average)            -1.158 a*** -0.432        -1.470 a**   -1.181 a***
Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (3-year post-merger)     -2.108 b                               -1.788 b
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (5-year post-merger)
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (post-merger average)    -1.376                    -1.376       -1.104
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (3-year post-merger)     4.118 b                                4.301 a**
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (5-year post-merger)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (post-merger average)    3.697 b                   3.697 b      3.880 b**
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL) (3-year post-merger)    3.589 b                                3.835 b**
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL) (5-year post-merger)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL) (post-merger average)   3.202                     3.202        3.448 b**
Advertisement Expenses
   ΔAdvertisement Expenses (3-year post-merger)             -0.268                                 -0.339
   ΔAdvertisement Expenses (5-year post-merger)              0.243                                  0.038
   ΔAdvertisement Expenses (post-merger average)            -0.164        0.240       -0.337       -0.234
Asset Growth
   ΔAsset Growth (3-year post-merger)                        -3.450                               -4.497
   ΔAsset Growth (5-year post-merger)                        -3.891                               -5.557
   ΔAsset Growth (post-merger average)                       -2.617       1.973       -4.585 a**  -3.665
Notes
1. The columns under the heading of “Pre-Merger Combined Bank” denote the average change from the
    pre-merger hypothetical combined bank that is a weighted average of an acquirer and a target.
2. The column under the heading of “Pre-Merger Acquirer” denotes the average changes from the pre-merger
    acquirer.
3. ΔX (t-year post-merger) is the difference of the variable X between t-year post-merger and the pre-merger



                                                      56
     average over five years (or less if data is not available).
4.   ΔX (post-merger average) is the difference between X(post-merger average) and X(pre-merger average), where
     X(post-merger average) is the post-merger average of the variable X over five years (or less if data is not
     available) and X(pre-merger average) is the pre-merger average of the variable X over five years (or less if data
     not available).
5.   a and b denote significance at the 1% and 5 % level, respectively, for the null hypothesis that ΔX (or X) has zero
     mean.
6.   *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5 % level, respectively, for the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for the
     null hypothesis that ΔX (or X) has median zero.




                                                         57
Table 5B. Post-Merger Performance of Regional Banks
                                                                        Weighted average        Acquirer
                                                           1990-2004    1990-1997 1998-2004    1990-2004
ROA
   ΔROA (3-year post-merger)                             -1.869                                -1.934
   ΔROA (5-year post-merger)                              0.504   b                             0.481 b
   ΔROA (post-merger average)                            -0.471          0.067    -0.793       -0.530
Cost Ratio
   ΔCost Ratio (3-year post-merger)                      -0.003                                 0.021
   ΔCost Ratio (5-year post-merger)                      -0.084                                -0.045
   ΔCost Ratio (post-merger average)                      0.009         -0.064     0.053        0.021
Fees and Commissions
   ΔFees and Commissions (3-year post-merger)             0.013                                -0.001
   ΔFees and Commissions (5-year post-merger)            -0.003                                -0.010
   ΔFees and Commissions (post-merger average)            0.034         -0.005     0.057 **     0.014
Loan-to-Asset Ratio
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (3-year post-merger)             -2.131                                -0.623
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (5-year post-merger)             -3.387                                -2.100
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (post-merger average)            -2.163         -2.299    -2.082       -1.303
Loans to SMEs
   ΔLoans to SMEs (3-year post-merger)                   -1.556                                -1.079
   ΔLoans to SMEs (5-year post-merger)                   -1.320                                -0.721
   ΔLoans to SMEs (post-merger average)                  -0.335         -1.310     0.249        0.415
Loan Growth Rate
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (3-year post-merger)                -3.471                                -3.587
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (5-year post-merger)                -1.928                                -2.549
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (post-merger average)               -0.846         -0.974    -0.768       -0.818
Deposit Interest Rate
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (3-year post-merger)           -0.010                                0.015
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (5-year post-merger)            0.125                                0.143
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (post-merger average)          -0.006          0.025    -0.024       0.023
Loan Interest Rate
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (3-year post-merger)               0.187   b                            0.269
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (5-year post-merger)               0.177   b                            0.221
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (post-merger average)              0.069          0.174     0.007       0.178 b**
Capital-to-Asset Ratio
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (3-year post-merger)          -0.371                                -0.416
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (5-year post-merger)          -0.202                                -0.283
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (post-merger average)         -0.892   b**   -0.135    -1.347 a**   -0.995 b**
Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (3-year post-merger)
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (5-year post-merger)
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (post-merger average) -0.543                   -0.543       -0.718
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (3-year post-merger)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (5-year post-merger)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (post-merger average) 0.813                     0.813       0.870
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL) (3-year post-merger)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL) (5-year post-merger)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL) (post-merger average 1.478                     1.478       0.560
Advertisement Expenses
   ΔAdvertisement Expenses (3-year post-merger)          -0.353   a                            -0.300
   ΔAdvertisement Expenses (5-year post-merger)          -0.251   b                            -0.154
   ΔAdvertisement Expenses (post-merger average)         -0.052         -0.203     0.038        0.064
Asset Growth
   ΔAsset Growth (3-year post-merger)                    -2.223                                -2.018
   ΔAsset Growth (5-year post-merger)                    -1.652                                -2.126
   ΔAsset Growth (post-merger average)                    0.242         -0.158     0.482        0.298

See the notes to Table 5A.




                                                      58
Table 5C. Post-Merger Performance of Shinkin Banks
                                                                 Weighted average                    Acquirer
                                                         1990-2002 1990-1997 1998-2002              1990-2002
ROA
   ΔROA (3-year post-merger)                             -0.032                                     -0.047
   ΔROA (5-year post-merger)                              0.107                                      0.093
   ΔROA (post-merger average)                             0.003          0.064        -0.098        -0.019
Cost Ratio
   ΔCost Ratio (3-year post-merger)                      -0.002                                     -0.011
   ΔCost Ratio (5-year post-merger)                       0.011                                     -0.014
   ΔCost Ratio (post-merger average)                      0.000          0.018        -0.029         0.000
Fees and Commissions
   ΔFees and Commissions (3-year post-merger)             0.004                                     0.003
   ΔFees and Commissions (5-year post-merger)             0.007                                     0.005
   ΔFees and Commissions (post-merger average)            0.003          0.003        0.003         0.003
Loan-to-Asset Ratio
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (3-year post-merger)              0.718                                     -0.120
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (5-year post-merger)              1.127                                      0.186
   ΔLoan-to-Asset Ratio (post-merger average)             0.765          0.328        1.492          0.178
Loan Growth Rate
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (3-year post-merger)                -0.916                                     -1.833 a***
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (5-year post-merger)                -0.971                                     -2.029 b**
   ΔLoan Growth Rate (post-merger average)               -0.823          -0.744       -0.956        -1.940 a***
Deposit Interest Rate
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (3-year post-merger)            0.037                                     0.052
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (5-year post-merger)            0.039                                     0.064
   ΔDeposit Interest Rate (post-merger average)           0.022          0.049        -0.021        0.029
Loan Interest Rate
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (3-year post-merger)               0.084                                     0.052
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (5-year post-merger)               0.088                                     0.045
   ΔLoan Interest Rate (post-merger average)              0.062          0.079        0.033         0.040
Capital-to-Asset Ratio
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (3-year post-merger)          -0.547   b**                               -0.659 a***
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (5-year post-merger)          -0.476                                     -0.551
   ΔCapital-to-Asset Ratio (post-merger average)         -0.510   a***   -0.487 b**   -0.548 a***   -0.625 a***
Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (3-year post-merger)  -1.508                                     -1.801 b**
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (5-year post-merger)  -3.331   b                                 -3.354 b
   ΔRisk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS) (post-merger average) -0.969   a***   -1.820       -0.733 a***   -1.311 a***
Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (3-year post-merger) 0.697                                       1.565
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (5-year post-merger) 0.842                                       1.338
   ΔNon-Performing Loan Ratio (BL) (post-merger average) 0.625           0.094        0.782         1.426 b**
Asset Growth
   ΔAsset Growth (3-year post-merger)                    -1.070                                     -1.358 b**
   ΔAsset Growth (5-year post-merger)                    -1.844   b**                               -2.011 a**
   ΔAsset Growth (post-merger average)                   -1.904   a***   -1.462 b**   -2.640 a***   -2.543 a***

See the notes to Table 5A.




                                                      59
Figure 1A. Pre-Merger and Post-Merger Performances of Major Banks
                        ROA                                             Cost Ratio




                                                        .15
  .4




                                                        .1
  .2




                                                        .05
  0




                                                        0
  -.2




                                                        -.05
  -.4




                                                        -.1
         -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                            Period                                               Period
                  Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                  Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




              Fees and Commissions                                  Loan-to-Asset Ratio
  .05




                                                        4
  0




                                                        3
  -.05




                                                        2
  -.1




                                                        1



         -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                            Period                                               Period
                  Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                  Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




                 Loans to SMEs                                      Loan Growth Rate
  4




                                                        2
                                                        0
  2




                                                        -2
  0




                                                        -4
  -2




                                                        -6




         -5                    0               5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                              Period
                  Acquirer            Target
                                                                       Acquirer           Target
                  Weighted Average
                                                                       Weighted Average




              Deposit Interest Rate                                 Loan Interest Rate
   0




                                                        .1
                                                        .05
   -.2




                                                        0
                                                        -.05
   -.4




                                                        -.1
   -.6




                                                        -.15




         -5                    0               5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                              Period
                  Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                  Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




                                                   60
(Figure 1A. Continued from previous page)
                     Capital-to-Asset Ratio                                  Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)




                                                                 1
    0




                                                                 0
    -.5




                                                                 -1
    -1
    -1.5




                                                                 -2
            -5                        0                 5              -5                         0                5
                                    Period                                                      Period

                          Acquirer             Target                                 Acquirer            Target
                          Weighted Average                                            Weighted Average




                 Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)                             Non-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL)




                                                                 2
    0




                                                                 0
    -2




                                                                 -2
    -4




                                                                 -4
                                                                 -6
    -6




            -5                        0                 5             -5                          0                5
                                    Period                                                      Period

                          Acquirer             Target                                Acquirer            Target
                          Weighted Average                                           Weighted Average




                     Advertisement Expenses                                          Asset Growth
   0




                                                                 2
   -.2




                                                                 0
                                                                 -2
   -.4




                                                                 -4
   -.6




                                                                 -6




           -5                        0                  5             -5                         0                 5
                                   Period                                                      Period

                         Acquirer             Target                                 Acquirer            Target
                         Weighted Average                                            Weighted Average



Notes
1. Period zero designates the year when the bank merger occurred. Negative periods denote pre-merger years and
    positive periods denote post-merger years.
2. We connect the period (-1) value and period (+1) value with a straight line.
3. Weighted average denotes the hypothetical pre-merger combined bank, calculated as a weighted average of the
    acquirer and the target with their total assets being used as weights.




                                                            61
Figure 1B. Pre-Merger and Post-Merger Performances of Regional Banks
                         ROA                                             Cost Ratio




                                                         .15
   .5
   0




                                                         .1
   -.5




                                                         .05
   -1




                                                         0
   -1.5




                                                         -.05
   -2




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




               Fees and Commissions                                  Loan-to-Asset Ratio
   .06




                                                         6
   .04




                                                         4
                                                         2
   .02




                                                         0
   0




                                                         -2
   -.02




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




                  Loans to SMEs                                      Loan Growth Rate
                                                         0
   8
   6




                                                         -1
   4




                                                         -2
   2




                                                         -3
   0
   -2




                                                         -4




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




               Deposit Interest Rate                                 Loan Interest Rate
   .15




                                                         .4
   .1




                                                         .3
   .05




                                                         .2
   0




                                                         .1
   -.05




                                                         0




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




                                                    62
(Figure 1B. Continued from previous page)
                  Capital-to-Asset Ratio                                Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)
   .5




                                                             1
                                                             0
   0




                                                             -1
   -.5




                                                             -2
                                                             -3
   -1




         -5                       0                 5             -5                        0               5
                                Period                                                    Period

                      Acquirer             Target                               Acquirer           Target
                      Weighted Average                                          Weighted Average




              Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)                           Non-Performing Loan Ratio (FRL)
   6




                                                             6
   4




                                                             4
   2




                                                             2
   0




                                                             0
   -2




                                                             -2




         -5                       0                 5             -5                        0               5
                                Period                                                    Period

                      Acquirer             Target                               Acquirer           Target
                      Weighted Average                                          Weighted Average




                  Advertisement Expenses                                        Asset Growth
   .5




                                                             2
                                                             0
   0




                                                             -2
   -.5




                                                             -4




         -5                       0                 5             -5                        0               5
                                Period                                                    Period

                      Acquirer             Target                               Acquirer           Target
                      Weighted Average                                          Weighted Average



See the notes to Figure 1A.




                                                        63
Figure 1C. Pre-Merger and Post-Merger Performances of Shinkin Banks
                         ROA                                             Cost Ratio




                                                         .04
  .1




                                                         .03
  0




                                                         .02
  -.1




                                                         .01
  -.2




                                                         0
  -.3




                                                         -.01
  -.4




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




               Fees and Commissions                                  Loan-to-Asset Ratio




                                                         4
  .002




                                                         3
  0
  -.002




                                                         2
  -.004




                                                         1
  -.006




                                                         0




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




                                                                     Loan Growth Rate
                                                         0
                                                         -1
                                                         -2
                                                         -3
                                                         -4




                                                                -5                  0               5
                                                                                  Period

                                                                        Acquirer           Target
                                                                        Weighted Average




               Deposit Interest Rate                                 Loan Interest Rate
  .02




                                                         .1
                                                         .05
  0




                                                         0
  -.02




                                                         -.05
  -.04




                                                         -.1




          -5                   0                5               -5                  0               5
                             Period                                               Period

                   Acquirer            Target                           Acquirer           Target
                   Weighted Average                                     Weighted Average




                                                    64
(Figure 1C. Continued from previous page)
                   Capital-to-Asset Ratio                               Risk-Based Capital Ratio (BIS)
   .5




                                                              0
                                                              -1
   0
   -.5




                                                              -2
   -1




                                                              -3
   -1.5




                                                              -4
          -5                       0                 5             -5                        0               5
                                 Period                                                    Period

                       Acquirer             Target                              Acquirer            Target
                       Weighted Average                                         Weighted Average




               Non-Performing Loan Ratio (BL)
   4
   3
   2
   1
   0




          -5                       0                 5
                                 Period

                       Acquirer             Target
                       Weighted Average




                                                                                Asset Growth
                                                              0
                                                              -1
                                                              -2
                                                              -3
                                                              -4




                                                                   -5                        0               5
                                                                                           Period

                                                                                 Acquirer           Target
                                                                                 Weighted Average



See the notes to Figure 1A.




                                                         65
