                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CONTRACTS, CREDIBILITY, AND DISINFLATION



                        Stanley Fischer



                     Working Paper No. 1339




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 1981k




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1339
                                                   April 1984


               Contracts, Credibility, and Disinflation

                                  ABSTRACT


      Estimates of the cost of disinflation made before the recent reduction in the

 inflation rate varied widely. Estimates were made in terms of the sacrifice

ratio-—the percentage points of GNP at an annual rate lost per percentage point

reduction in the inflation rate. At one extreme it was argued that a resolute and

credible monetary policy could reduce inflation virtually costlessly. At the

other extreme were estimates that the sacrifice ratio exceeded 10.

     Costless immediate disinflation is not possible in an economy with long—

term labor contracts. This paper sets out a simple contracting model of wage and

output determination and uses it to calculate sacrifice ratios for a disinflation

program, under the assumption that announced policy changes are immediately

believed. Under this assumption disinflation with a structure of labor contracts

like those of the United States would be less costly than typically estimated.

The model is then modified to allow for the slow adjustment of expectations of

policy to actual policy; sacrifice ratios then approach the ranges typically

estimated.

     The sacrifice ratio for the current disinflation is calculated in the last

section: the current disinflation was somewhat more rapid and less costly than

previous estimates suggested. The calculated sacrifice ratio is consistent with

the predictions of the simple contracting model.



                                                   Stanley Fischer
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   M.I.T., E52—280A
                                                   Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                   (617) 253—6666
                                                              August 1983
                                                              Revised January 1984



                         CONTRACTS, CREDIBILITY, AND DISINFLATION

                                     Stanley Fischer*



        Predictions of the costs of disinflation made in the few years preceding the

recent recession and disinflation ranged from the pessimism of Arthur Okun's

(1978) summary of six Brookings papers relating to the United States that "the

cost of a 1 point reduction in the basic inflation rate is 10 percent of a year's

GNP, with a range of 6 percent to 18 percent" (p.348) to the carefully hedged

optimism of Thomas Sargent (1981) that "under the proper hypothetical conditions,

a government could eliminate inflation very rapidly and with virtually no

'Phillips curve' costs in terms of foregone real output or increased unemployment"

(p.4).

        The difference between the two forecasts reflects Sargent's emphasis on the

credibility of policy as the key determinant of the flexibility of wages and

prices, and the lesser emphasis placed on expectations by the researchers quoted

by Okun.1 Once long—term nominal contracts are taken into account, however,

credibility of policy is not enough for rapid disinflation. John     Taylor   (1983)

concludes that, given the structure of labor contracts in the United States, it

would take four years to disinflate from a rate of wage increase of 10% per year

to 3%   without   creating unemployment, even if there were no doubts about the

continuance of disinflationary policy.


*Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and National
Bureau of Economic Research. I am indebted to: Katherine Abraham, Otto Eckstein,
and James Medoff for useful discussions; Olivier Blanchard, Rudi Dornbusch, l4ervyn
King, Julio Rotemberg and Jeff Sachs for comments; David Wilcox for research
assistance; and the National Science Foundation for financial support.

'The quotation from Sargent continues "The 'measure' that would accomplish this
would be a once—for—all, widely understood, and widely agreed upon change in the
monetary or fiscal policy regime. Here a regime is taken to be a function or rule
for repeatedly selecting the economic policy variable in question as a function of
the state of the economy."
                                         2



     In this paper I first describe the contracting approach to the problem of

disinflation and discuss criticisms of the approach and characteristics of

contracts that affect the possible speed of disinflation. In Section II I

calculate the sacrifice ratio——the percentage points of GNP lost per one percent

reduction in the inflation rate——for alternative policies and parameter values.

Section III examines the problem of the credibility of policy intentions, and the

effects of a lack of belief that a policy will be maintained; Section IV briefly

describes alternate policies to disinflate. In Section V, I compare the costs of

disinflation in the United States from 1979 to 1986 with predictions of those

costs.



I. A Contracting Model.

     In this section I set out a simple model, which combines elements of the

Taylor (1980) and Fischer (1977a) approaches to the modelling of labor contracts

in macroeconomic models. The model attributes the existence of wage and price

stickiness, and thus the difficulties of disinflation, to the existence of long—

term contracts. Labor contracts, agreed upon at different dates in the past,

specify the nominal wage to be paid in period t to workers under each contract.

The price level increases with the average nominal wage. The level of output is

determined by aggregate demand.

     The aggregate demand function is:

(1) ytmt_           Vt
Here y is the level of output, m the nominal money stock, p the price level, and v

a disturbance term, for instance a shift of the demand for money function. Lower

case letters denote logarithms. From the viewpoint of the analysis of

disinflation, the major simplifications in this equation are first, the omission
                                        3



of interest rates, and thus expectations of inflation, as determinants of

aggregate demand, and second the omission of fiscal variables and the exchange

rate.2 The price level is related to the average wage:

(2) Ptwt+ut
Here w. is the average wage, and u is the percentage excess of the price level

over the wage. The formulation is sufficiently general that u can be thought of

as a supply shock, or could be systematically related to the behavior of any of

the other variables in the model, such as the level of output. The price equation

is that used by Taylor (198O).

        In any period, the proportion    (j1,...,J) of the work—force is being paid

a wage that was agreed upon j periods back. Thus the average wage is


          = e
where         is the wage that was agreed to for period t in period (t—j). It is

assumed that the wage specified for period t in period (t—j) is the same for all


2The aggregate demand function derived from an IS—L'i model includes the expected
rate of inflation as a determinant of aggregate demand. The inclusion of the
expected rate of inflation would complicate the solution of the model, because it
makes the current price level a function of all future money stocks. A solution
for a related model, which explicitly uses the IS—LN framework, is presented in
Fischer (1977b).

3Fischer (1977a) includes an aggregate supply function that makes the level of
output an increasing function of the real wage. This formulation is frequently
critized on the empirical grounds that it implies the real wage is
countercyclical. However, the behavior of the real wage resulting from such a
(Keynesian) supply function differs depending on whether output is changing
because of a supply or a demand shock. In response to a supply shock, the real
wage in such models moves procyclically; in response to demand shocks, the real
wage moves countercyclically. Although (2) above can be made consistent with the
earlier supply function by allowing u to be correlated with y, I use the present
formulation to avoid taking a stand on the inessential (from the viewpoint of this
paper) issue of the response of the real wage to demand shocks. Factors omitted
from this model, such as capacity utilization, certainly affect the response of
the real wage to disturbances.
                                         4



contracts,     of whatever duration.

        The relationship between the proportion of contracts of length k, defined as

       and the weights    in the expression for the average wage is:


        e.=
               Jm
(ii)
              k=j

where it is assumed that the distribution of signing dates of contracts of a given

length is uniform.

        The wage set in period (t—j) for period t is assumed to be:


        t_t   =              +
                                 (1_x)_1p + ht_Yt
                                                    +        +
                                                                 t-jt
         t—P means the expectation formed at time (t—j) of p,
The notation                                                              and similarly

for    other variables except w. The wage setting equation assumes     that the real

wage    responds to the expected level of output, with coefficient h representing the
sensitivity    of the real wage to output; the real wage is also permitted to respond

to expectations of the variable u, thereby providing an interpretation of

equation (5) as asserting that the (logarithm of the) expected real wage is set

equal to its expected equilibrium value.

       The coefficient , represents the extent to which contracts are based on the

relative wage, rather than the real wage. The larger is .t, the less the weight of

the fundamental factors——the price level, the level of output, and u——in

determining the nominal wage, and the greater the weight of the average wage. The

notion that workers are concerned with the relative wage does not necessarily

reflect irrationality or envy, but may result rather from a sophisticated

understanding of a labor market in which there are costs to mobility: if the wage


1This too is a substantial simplification. In particular, it will be assumed
below that the extent of indexing in contracts is independent of the length of the
contract. In practice, longer term contracts are more likely to be indexed.
                                      5



diverges far from the average, there are incentives for one side or the other in

the labor contract to initiate a separation.

     The coefficient X is a measure of the extent of price indexation of

contracts. When X is equal to unity, there is no price indexation, and contracts

are fully nominal. When X is equal to zero, the nominal wage to be paid in period

t is determined at the end of period (t—i), on all contracts of whatever length.

It is important to note that wage indexation here adjusts the nominal wage to the

expected price level rather than for past changes in prices. Indexation in

practice tends rather to adjust nominal wages for past inflation. The nominal

wage is indexed only for changes in the expected price level that have occurred

since the signing of the contract—— there is no adjustment for other unforeseen

contingencies that have taken place since period (t—j).

Criticisms of the Contracting Approach: Before using this model to examine

disinflation, I briefly discuss criticisms of the labor contracting model (e.g.

Barro, 1977). The basic criticism is that labor contracts that specify a wage

rate without also specifying a rule for the efficient determination of output are

incomplete. In this context, an efficient level of output is one at which the

marginal value product of labor is equal to the shadow marginal value of leisure.

(Hall and Lilien, 1979). Taking this argument further, it is sometimes asserted

that the wage need play no allocative role in contracting models, serving merely

to determine the transfer payments made by firms to their workers (Hall, 1980).

     There is no question that the type of labor contract assumed in this paper

leads to inefficient allocations of resources in the face of disturbances not

taken into account when the contracts were entered into. Such inefficient

allocations are precisely the central problem of macroeconomics; they have

alternatively been explained as resulting from incomplete information. I have

little to add to my (1977c) response to Barro on the issue. The essential point
                                     6



is that a careful examination of actual labor contracts in the United States

suggests that they are of the form assumed in this paper: the contracts specify

the wage and leave output to be determined by the firm. The omission of explicit

conditions for output determination is not a casual matter that can be glossed

over by reference to implicit contracts, for a remarkable feature of labor

contracts is their very detailed specifications about many aspects of the job,

including for instance the order of layoffs by seniority. It is reasonable to

embody relevant characteristics of the wage setting process of the economy in

models used to study price and output determination——and indeed it seems to be

essential to understanding the process of disinflation.

     At the same time, the Barro critique does point to the need for a theory to

explain the existing form of labor contracts. There has been significant

microeconomic research in this area (for summaries of the literature, see

Azariadis and Stiglitz (1983) and Hart (1983)) examining the effects of

differential risk aversion and differential information between firms and workers

on the optimal form of contract. In some of these contracts, it is optimal for

the firm to determine the level of output. The research to date has not examined

reasons for specification of wages in nominal rather than real terms, and thus

omits the most important link between contracting and price behavior.      It is

likely that the costs of complexity in contracts, and differences in price indexes

relevant to different economic agents, will play a key role in the explanation of

nominal contracting.

     A second criticism of the contracting approach as applied to the United
                                                    and formal contracts in the labor
States is that it exaggerates the role of unions

market.5 It is argued that it is misleading to base a theory on long term labor
                                                                            of the
contracts when less than 25% of the labor force is unionized, and when some


I have benefitted from discussions on    this   point with James Medoff.
                                     7



unionized labor force works on one year contracts.6

     Including professional associations, or white collar unions, about 28%,

rather than less than 25%, of the labor force is unionized. More significantly,

about 50% of the labor force works in establishments in which some workers belong

to unions.7 Presumably the wages received by the unionized workers in such

establishments influence the wages received by the remaining workers. Further,

there are large firms that are entirely non—unionized and whose devotion to

remaining that way leads them to provide wage and benefit packages that on balance

match those obtained by unionized workers. The a priori case for building a

theory on the characteristics of observed labor contracts is stronger if we assume

that more than 50% of the labor force, rather than less than 25%, is closely

affected by the terms of union contracts.

     Empirical research on the relationship between union and non-union wages in

the United States, much of it surveyed by Mitchell (1982), has been inconclusive.

Early findings by Flanagan (1976) and Johnson (1977) that nonunion wages cause (in

the Granger sense) union wages have been shown by Mitchell (1980a) and Vroman

(1980) to be sensitive to the data samples used.

    A third criticism of the labor contracting model notes that labor contracts

typically include reopening clauses, and therefore argues that changes in policy

can potentially operate much more rapidly than the contracting model implies.   It

is indeed correct that contracts can be, and sometimes are, reopened. Mitchell


6Most union contracts involving more than 1000 workers are for three years: over
the period 1978—1980, 88% of workers whose contracts were recorded in Current Wage
Developments were on three year contracts, 9% on two year contracts, and less than
3% on one year contracts. The total number of workers recorded as being involved
in a three year settlement involving at least 1000 workers during that three year
period was 7.5 million, less than 10% of the labor force. (Calculations are based
on data presented in Taylor, 1983.)

7This statistic is developed in Freeman and Medoff (1984).
                                     8



(1982) examines concessions in union contracts during the recent recession,

including twenty—six renegotiations of existing contracts (mostly in industries

affected by international competition or deregulation). Less than two million

workers were covered by the contracts on which there were concessions, as defined

by Mitchell, and most contracts were not reopened. The infrequency of

renegotiation confirms the suggestion from the existing form of United States

labor contracts that there are major costs to the negotiating process.

     A related criticism of the contracting approach notes that the form of

contracts responds to changes in economic policy regimes. 8 This is undoubtedly

true and probably provides a good test for detecting a change in policy regime.

There is no general way of handling the problem of the potential endogeneity of

elements that are taken as structural, beyond examining the reasons for, and the

likely effects on the conclusions reached, of induced changes in the model.

     There is no denying the logic of the criticisms of the labor contracting

model discussed above. They point to potential theoretical and empirical problems

with using the model. The significance of those problems for the particular

conclusions reached using the contracting model has to be evaluated in each case,

and, at the extremes, could produce results that are equivalent to those that

would obtain if wages were continually readjusted as in a spot market. But there

is no reason to think that the extreme versions apply in fact, and therefore the

criticisms do not imply that the contracting approach should be abandoned.

Solving the Model: We return now to the model. Expectations are assumed to be

rational, in the sense that expectations of prices and output are based on the


8I is surprising that Stigler's (1977) "Conference Handbook" does not include
among its list of comments "Of course, it is not appropriate to treat that feature
                           "
of the model as exogenous.
                                                                 9



structure of the model.9 A solution for the price level and output are obtained

for arbitrary paths of the money stock and disturbances.'°

        Substituting (5) into (3) and (2), and using (1) to substitute for                                            we

obtain the price level equation:

                 J
(6)     t =                                   +                      +                           +
                 e{[(1—L)(x—h)                                                                       (1_i)ht[mt+vt]
                           +    [(1—)q    —
                                              ]t_ut                  +
                                                                         ut
Since the velocity shock, v, always enters additively with m, it will be dropped

and mt should henceforth be understood to represent the sum (mt+vt).

        The rational expectations solution for the price level is:

                                                                              J—1
()          =             + (l+q_h)tt             +
                                                          1=
                                                                c.x
                                                                 ii      +
                                                                              i=1
                                                                                    11
                                                                                    y.z. +
                                                                                             t


                                                  J_1                    J—1
            =             + (1+q)
                                    t JUt +
                                                           C•X• +
                                      h               1
                                                               1 1
                                                                          1
                                                                               y1z + (ut_t_jut)

where

            =               —
      x.
        1       t_j+mt
      z. =
        1       tJ+it
                            —
                                tJ+i1t
                h(1 _)bj_
      C.1 =          D.
                      1


                                                                             in
9The rational expectations assumption is not an innocent one, for adjustment
the model to preannounced policy changes will be much slower if expectations are
formed adaptively than if they are formed rationally. In Section III below we
examine a situation in which expectations about future policy adjust adaptively;
this produces reaction patterns that are similar to those obtained when
expectations of inflation are adaptive.

'01t is more usual in rational expectations models to specify a feedback rule for
monetary policy. The form of the solution presented below is more convenient for
discussing the implications of private sector beliefs about future policy.
                                                10



              [q(1 -ii)—.t]b_1
                         D.
                          1

              J-i
   b      =         e.
              j=1

       B1 =   b_(1_i)h            + (1_bj_)[(1_)x+]

The level of output can be deduced from the aggregate demand equation (1).

       The solution for the price level is based on expectations of the money stock

and of u formed at time (t—J), and updated by innovations in expectations of mt

and Ut occurring in subsequent periods.11

       To understand the solution for the price level, we first consider the

equilibrium levels of output and prices when there are no surprises. In that

case, the innovations, x and z in (7) are zero, and


(8) Pt = mt     + (1+q)

From (5), noting that                = 1, we have


                    =         +
(9) wt - Pt             hYt

so that the real wage is determined solely by the level of output and the supply

shock (q may be negative). Substituting (9) into (2), we obtain

              —(1 +q)u
(10) t=             h

The (logarithm of the) level of output is zero when the supply shock is zero.   The


11The variable u will henceforth be referred to as a supply shock, though it
should be understood from the earlier discussion that it has other potential
interpretations.
                                         11




supply shock reduces the level of output, to an extent that depends on q, the

sensitivity of the real wage to the shock and h, the sensitivity of the wage to

output. Returning to equation (8), we see that the price level is proportional to

the money stock, with a factor of proportionality ut1' that depends on the

supply shock.'2

     Any   fully   believed change in the money stock, expected at least J periods

before it occurs, has no effect on output and has its full effects on the price

level. Thus an implication of the structure of contracts in this model is that a

monetary change announced and believed far enough in advance will be fully

neutral. 13

     The coefficients c. in (7) determine the dynamics of prices and output during

a disinflation. Before examining the properties of the c1, we indicate the way

the c1 should behave. First, the longer the time a change in the money stock has

been expected, the larger the effect of that change on the price level and the

smaller the effect on output. Accordingly we should have

     C. > C.
      ]    i+1

We also expect that price indexation should increase the responsiveness of the

price level to monetary changes, that a concern over relative wages will lessen

that responsiveness, and that the response of prices to monetary shocks will be

larger the steeper the Phillips curve (the larger h). Thus we should find


12Note, incidentally, that if (1) were generalized slightly to
(1)' yt = a(mt—pt) + Vt
the coefficient h would be replaced everywhere by czh: Thus the dynamics of the
price level are affected by the product of the strength of the effects of changes
in the money stock on aggregate demand and the effect of aggregate demand on the
real wage.

13Alternative contract structures, to be discussed below, do not have this
implication.
                                             12




     Oc.                  Oc.        Oc.
       1                    1          1
                     '
     ox                  Oi.t
                                '




     Since bj is decreasing in i, we can discover whether c > c41 by checking
           Oc.
whether              is positive. Writing


(ii) c = __________________
       i
                          h(1 —)b1

it is clear that c > c1. It is similarly clear from inspection of (ii) that

increases in both X and h increase the sensitivity of the price level to monetary

innovations and therefore reduce the sensitivity of output to innovations.

Rewriting [(i-)x+] as [(i-x)+x] it can also be confirmed that               < 0.

Thus a concern over relative, rather than real, wages reduces the responsiveness

of the price level to monetary shocks.

     In the extreme case in which indexation is complete (x0) and there is no

concern over relative wages (=O), we find

(12) c. E        1




In this case monetary innovations are completely reflected in prices and not at

all in output. This is obviously because the contract terms are able to adjust

fully to purely nominal disturbances so long as they occur in any period before t.

From the viewpoint of the response to nominal disturbances, indexation is

completely equivalent to the use of one period contracts. However, this result

disappears if t           0, that is, if wages are based in part on the average wage. In

this case it is assumed in (5) that the nominal wage is partly predetermined,

based on the expectation t—jt

    Figure 1 presents a smoothed version of the typical responses of output and

prices to changes in the money stock. The right hand side of the diagram shows
                                        12a




                                              ——
                                                                       Price
                                                   o1t,.


since change
in money stock.



Figure 1: Price Level aixi Output Responses to a Permanent thange in the Money Stock.
                                            13




the responses of prices and output in the period the money stock changes to a pre—

announced change in the money stock as a function of the announcement lead time.

The left hand side shows the responses of prices and output to an unanticipated

change in the money stock, as a function of the length of time since the change

occurred.

Examples: To provide some intuition for the implied price and output level

responses, I present several examples.

(a) Assume that all contracts last three periods (years). In this case                       =      =

   = 1/3.   Assume further that .j   = 0,        =   1   (no indexing), and h     .2. Then

        =   2/7   =   .29

     c2 = 1/11 =       .09

With this set of parameters, changes in the money supply have very little effect

on prices until all contracts have been renegotiated. The main reason is that

only one third of the contracts come up for renewal each year. In addition, until

all the contracts have been renegotiated, it is the coefficient h that primarily

determines the response of prices to the monetary shock.

(b) Suppose that we have the same parameters except that h =               .5.    This means that

a 1% shortfall in real output reduces the real wage by 1/2%.              Then:


     c1 =   .5

     c2 =   .2

Thus within the period during which existing contracts remain outstanding, the

slope of the Phillips curve (h) has a substantial impact on price and output

responses to monetary disturbances.
                                                                                             =   1/2.
(c) We now allow for the role of relative wages in contracts, by setting

We maintain h =       .5.
                                                14



      c1 =    .33

      C2 = .11


 Relative wage concerns in contracts thus slow down the response of prices to

 monetary policy.

 (d) 'Indexation speeds up responses. Setting x back to zero and with h = .5 (so

 that (b) is the baseline case); and assuming X =               .5 (instead of 1)
        = .67


     c2 =    .33

(e) Next consider the effects of assuming that one third of all contracts are for

one year, one third for two years, and one third for three years. Thus

     81 =    11/18   82 =   5/18   83 =   1/9

With such a structure of contracts, the economy should react much faster to

monetary changes. Assuming X = 1, h =            .5,   =   0,   we obtain

     C1 =    .80

     c2 =    .44

The responses are much more rapid in this case. Nearly half the response is

completed in the first period (since 61 of the labor force signs new contracts

each year, this is not surprising) and 80% within two years.



II. Disinflation.

     Suppose now that the government wishes to disinflate. The money stock and

thus the price level have been growing at the rate g, implying that in and p have
                                        15



each been increasing by amount g from period to period. The new target rate of

inflation is (g -   .01).   The government will announce and implement a growth rate

of the money stock equal to (g —    .01).    In this section we assume that the

announcement is completely and immediately believed by private agents.

     As noted earlier, if the change in monetary policy is announced at least J

periods (for example, three years) ahead, it will have no real effects. But by

the same token, it will also have no nominal effects until it goes into

operation.1 Thus in this model, adjustment to a disinflation program that is

announced sufficiently far ahead is abrupt. There is no effect on inflation until

the date monetary policy actually changes; on that date the rate of inflation

adjusts completely to the change in policy, and there is no effect on output.

     It might thus seem that a disinflation program would have no real costs if

only it were announced long enough in advance. However, the delay in

implementation means that the existing inflation rate is maintained until policy

is changed. If there were no costs to the high rate of inflation, there would be

no call for the disinflation program. Accordingly, the strategy of delaying a

change in monetary policy should be recognized as involving the trade-off of

continued inflation at the original rate for J periods for the avoidance of

unemployment. Alternative strategies that incur the costs of unemployment can

result in more rapid disinflation.

  At the opposite pole from the policy announced J periods in advance is a

monetary policy change implemented without warning. Assume that the growth rate

of money is reduced in the current period by 1%, and that the lower growth rate is

maintained in perpetuity. Assume also that expectations of policy adjust


14The sensitivity of this result to model structure is examined below.
                                            16




simultaneously with the policy change. With policy changing in period t, the

effects on the inflation rate and output in subsequent periods are given by:

(12)                    =
                            Cj_1 + i(cj__cj_1..1)
                                                         cJo
(13) t+i =              —
                Amt+1

The adjustment is complete after J periods.

Examples: Suppose that all contracts last for three years, but wages are re-
                                        =
adjusted every six months. Then             1/6, i=1,...,6. Table 1 shows, in examples
A through C, the effects on inflation (at an annual rate, period over period) and

output of a reduction in the growth rate of money by 1% per year (1/2% per

period), under alternate assumptions about indexation and the role of the relative

wage in wage determination.

       The basic pattern is the same in cases (A—c). There is very little effect on

the inflation rate to begin with, and there is at the end of the adjustment period

a very low rate of inflation. The rate of inflation falls throughout the

adjustment period. This characteristic is however a result of the assumption that

all contracts are for three years. Example D in Table 1 shows the disinflation

path when one third of the contracts are for one, two, and three years,

respectively with the wage being adjusted every six months. In this case the

disinflation is much more rapid, and the inflation rate does not behave

monotonically. It remains true in example D that the largest reduction in the

inflation rate occurs in period J, but that too is a result of the structure of

contracts.

       The last column of Table 1 shows the sacrifice ratio implied by this model to

reduce the inflation rate by 1%, through the policy of reducing the growth rate of
                                             17




      Table 1: Disinflationary Effects of a Reduction in the Growth Rate of Money


e = 1/6,        1 =   1,...,6                             Period                       Sacrifice
h = .5                                                                                   ratio

                                        0     1      2     3       4     5     6       7

             Inflation rate (%p.a.)     0 —.18 —.42 -.73 —1.17 —1.78 -2.72 -1               -

                )ut                   —.5 —.91 —1.2 —1.33 —1.25 —.86                0 0 3.03

                                        0 —.10 —.24 —.47 —.86 —1.67 -3.67 —1                -
         Inflation rate

         Output                       —.5 —.95 —1.33 —1.60 —1.67 —1.33             0 0 3.65

                                        0 —.33 —.67 —1.00 —1.33 —1.67 —2.0 —1               —
         Inflation rate

                ut                    —.5 —.83 —1.0 —1.0        —.83 —.5        0      0 2.32

      — 11      — 11      —5
    e1— 3E          3   e3—

 e4=          e5=       e6=

D                                                                                           -
 0       Inflation rate                 0   —.36   —.97 —1.07 -1.6     -1.37 -1.69 —1

 X1      Output                       -.5   —.82   —.83   —.0   —.5     -.32       0   0   1.89
                                       18



 the money stock immediately to its new steady state level. The sacrifice ratio is

 the ratio of the cumulated percentage loss of output (at an annual rate) to the

reduction in the inflation rate. These sacrifice ratios are substantially below

the range of 6 to 18 quoted by Okun.15 Thus the model implies faster disinflation

than the standard econometric estimates. The model also implies that the

sacrifice ratio could be reduced to zero by announcing a policy change

sufficiently far in advance. 16

Alternate Monetary Policies: Alternative paths of the money stock imply different

paths of inflation and output. I examine here the path of the money stock that is

needed to reduce the inflation rate immediately to its new steady state level,

assuming for simplicity that the change in monetary policy is announced one period

ahead. With Mt as the desired change in the inflation rate, equation (7) implies

that the change in the money stock needed to achieve the new price path is given

by:

(14) Am+. —-
               iMt
                J—i

It is understood that the reduction in the money stock in (14) is relative to the

path that was previously expected.

      When all contracts are of the same duration, the monetary policy implied by

(14) consists of a sharp first period reduction in the money stock, followed later

by a higher rate of increase than the new steady state inflation rate. After J

periods the money stock is back at the level it would have reached had the money


15me Okun sacrifice ratios, calculated in 1978, assumed a 3 to 1 Okun coefficient
translating unemployment into GNP; with a 2.5 to 1 ratio, the sacrifice ratios
would range from 5 to 15 rather than 6 to 18. (I am indebted to Ben Friedman for
this point.

'6Recent estimates by Gordon (1982) imply a sacrifice ratio of less than 5, well
below his earlier estimates. The change reflects the inclusion of an exchange
rate channel in the inflation process: tight money causes an appreciation that
reduces the prices of imports.
                                     19




growth rate been reduced immediately in period 1 to its new steady state level.

This path of the money stock of course induces a large recession in the first

period, and produces a much larger sacrifice ratio than the examples in Table 1.

     The general point to be made about the sacrifice ratio for alternate policies

is clear from the fact that a policy change delayed J periods has no output cost:

policies that attempt to reduce the inflation rate rapidly have high output costs.

This is because in the short run policy can drive the inflation rate down only by

forcing reductions in the wage rates negotiated in contracts that come up for

renewal in those periods. 17

Model Specification and the Speed of Response: The dynamic patterns shown in

Table 1, particularly in Example D, appear to suggest that the inflation rate

would respond very quickly to changes in monetary policy, with small output costs.

For instance, in Example D,'8 the inflation rate is down by nearly 1% (per annum)

within 18 months of a reduction of 1% in the growth rate of money. In this

section, I briefly examine characteristics of the model that produce this rapid
                                            19
response of inflation to monetary policy.

     A major factor responsible for the rapid response in this model is the

synchronization of adjustments to wages. Every contract specifies a potentially


17The contracting model used in this paper implies that workers with different
contract renewal dates work at different wage rates. Accordingly, further
development of the model would imply that relative price dispersion increases when
there are unanticipated changes in the inflation rate.

18Although the maturity structure of contracts in D is much shorter than that
discussed above for United States union contracts, it is an open question how non-
union workers should be treated in the contract model-—and thus example D may be
relevant to United States behavior.

19Despite the emphasis on factors that might make the response of prices and
output less rather than more rapid than implied in the model described above, it
should also be recalled that the reopening of contracts would make for more
rapid responses. Further, if the existence of long term contracts is a result of
large negotiating costs, a very large change in monetary policy would be more
likely than a more gradual change in policy to lead to reopening of contracts and
thus to a rapid response of the inflation rate to policy.
                                      20



 different wage rate for each period. Examining equation (5), we see that all the

 expectations that affect the wage set for period t relate to variables in period

t. Thus the contracts aim to obtain the "correct" wage in every period. It is

well known that non—synchronized adjustments create the possibility of slower

adjustment. For example, Taylor (1980) produces long adjustment lags in a model

with two—period labor contracts in which the same wage applies in both periods of

the contract.2° When wage adjustments are not synchronized, wages for any given

future period are based not only on expectations of conditions in that period, but

also on expectations of conditions in other periods. Adjustment lags may be very

long even with short contracts, in particular when wage determination reflects

concern about relative wages.

     Non—synchronization of wage adjustments in the United States takes the form

of wages being held constant within each year of a contract, though not for its

entire life. Results by Taylor (1983) suggest that non—synchronization in this

context does not substantially change the speed of disinflation. But it is clear

that non—synchronization is potentially important in explaining, for instance, the

difficulties of disinflating in Britain as compared with the relative ease of

doing so in Japan.21

     The adjustment patterns in this model are simplified too by basing all the

dynamics on wage contracting. Independent lags in price adjustment, for instance

by including a lagged price term in equation (2) that results from modelling a

cost of price change, (Rotemberg (1982)) would slow the response. It would also


20Blanchard (1983) shows how non—synchronization of price changes can lead to long
lags in the adjustment of prices to monetary policy changes.

211 plan to extend the model of this section in a subsequent paper to include non—
synchronization.
                                     21




result in the adjustment to a change in the growth rate of money being spread over

the entire future, rather than being complete within J periods. Backward—looking

elements in wage—setting, for instance attempts by labor to catch up for the

effects of past inflation, would also slow and smooth the responses of wages and

prices to monetary policy changes.

     Similarly, the inclusion of the expected rate of inflation in the aggregate

demand equation would affect the time profile of adjustment to monetary policy

changes. A major change in the conclusions of the analysis of disinflation in

that case would be that even long pre-announced changes in monetary policy would

have real effects. Any announcement of a future change in monetary policy would

trigger a rise in wages, and thus in prices, and result in the short run in

changes in output. These changes would be smaller the longer in advance the

change in policy is announced, and would be completed by the time the change in

policy took place.

     A third reason that adjustment of inflation to policy changes is relatively

rapid in the examples studied earlier is that all policy announcements are

immediately believed and incorporated in wages being negotiated for the future.

Adjustment is much less rapid when policy intentions are not believed.



III. Credibility.

     In the present model the credibility of policy affects prices and output

entirely by its effects on expectations of future money stocks. We can thus use

the model to examine output and price effects of monetary policy changes under

alternative assumptions about expectations of policy.

     I consider two examples in this section. In the first, the growth rate of

money isreduced by 1% per annum, starting in period t. The reduction may be

announced in advance, but is simply not believed by private agents, who continue
                                                 22



 to expect that money growth will proceed at its former rate. The policy change

 thus has no effects on wages before it goes into effect. After the policy change,

 economic agents do not believe there has been a change in the growth rate of

money. Each reduction in the money stock relative to expectations is treated as a

permanent, but one—time, shock. Wages do adjust to the unanticipated changes in

the money stock, because such changes are believed to be permanent and reduce

estimates of the level but not the growth rate of future money stocks.

       The price and output effects that follow from this set of assumptions are

shown in Example A in Table 2. The inflation rate does fall by 1 as a result of

the new policy and a new steady state is reached——but the expected inflation rate

is by assumption not equal to the actual inflation rate. Correspondingly, the

level of output is permanently below the full employment level. This extreme

example indicates the effects of a lack of credibility of monetary policy in this

model in which wages are set entirely on the basis of expectations of future

events.


             Table 2: Disinflation Under Alternate Expectations of Policy.


   = 1/6,    i =   1,...,6                                  Period               Sacrifice
h =   .5,   x0, X1                      0    1        2   3      4    5     6      Ratio

A. Policy              Inflation rate   0   —.09 —.20 —.33 —.5       —.71 -1.0      —-
change not
believed               Output           —.5 —.95 —1.35 —1.69 —1.94 —2.08 —2.08      ——

B. Adaptive            Inflation rate   0 —.12 —.26 —.50 —.78 —1.18 —1.80           ——
                   —
expectations
about money            Output           —.5 —.94 —1.31 —1.56 —1.67 —1.58 —1.18      6.0
growth



      Example B in Table 2 allows expectations of policy to adjust to experience.
                                     23




All observed changes in the level of the money stock, resulting from unanticipated

policy actions, are believed to be permanent. But now there are adaptive

expectations about the growth rate of the moneystock. In each period (half

year), the expected rate of increase of the money stock is increased by one

quarter of the excess of the actual growth rate of money over the expected rate.

Eventually the economy will converge to full employment with a 1% reduction in the

inflation rate. But Table 2 shows that the adjustment is lengthy. After six

periods output remains more than 1% below the full employment level. At that

stage the expected growth rate of money is over 8O of the way to converging to

the new rate. The sacrifice ratio in this latter case——summed over the entire

adjustment period——is 6.

     It is clear from these examples that a lack of credibility of policy can

substantially prolong the adjustment of output and the inflation rate to

disinflationary policy.22 But credibility is unfortunately very difficult to

obtain. This is partly because the private sector knows that the government

(usually) is not prepared to go to any lengths to reduce inflation. In the model

of this paper, the monetary authority can monitor the effects of its announcements

on wages by examining contract terms in newly negotiated contracts.    A long

preannounced policy will have small output effects when implemented only if

contract terms have adjusted appropriately. But what is the monetary authority to

                                                      contract terms have not
do with its preannounced policy if it observes that

changed? It is then precisely in the position it was in when it announced its

future policy change some periods back. Namely, it knows that putting the policy

change into effect immediately will cause unemployment.    That is why it chose in

the first place to announce a future policy change, rather than to implement it


                                                      credibility in a related
22See DiTata (1983) for an interesting analysis of
context.
                                     24



immediately.

     Proposals for enhancing the credibility of policy changes typically rely on

some form of precommitment of policy. But there are two difficulties with

precommjtment. First, intelligent policy—makers cannot be sufficiently certain of

their understanding of the dynamics of the response to disinflationary policy to

be sure that precommitment to a rigorous policy will succeed in bringing the

inflation rate down at low cost. It may at some point be necessary to change

policy. Second, in democracies it is difficult to devise methods of committing

future governments to policies——particularly potentially costly and controversial

policies——being undertaken at present. The credibility of policy, while obviously

important, may be one of the stickiest of the elements that determines the

response of the economy to attempts to change the inflation rate.
                                     25




IV. Alternate Policies.

     I will not discuss other policies to speed disinflation in any detail. The

variable ut in equation (2) above can be taken to represent supply side factors

that can affect the price level. Changes in u, for instance in payroll taxation,

could be a useful adjunct to the start of a disinflation program. One difficulty

of using such supply side policy instruments is that it is rarely obvious when

payroll taxes should be increased for stabilization reasons. A one time reduction

may be desirable if a major effort is being made to institute a change in policy,

and if quick success is needed to persuade economic agents that the policy will be

successful.

     Ingenious tax incentive plans (TIP's) to reduce the inflation rate have

received considerable attention. Such plans are discussed in detail in Okun and

Perry (1978); at least in the United States, their implementation looks

administratively too complicated for success. Layard (1982) suggests a tax on

wage increases above a certain norm and begins to discuss the "nuts-and—bolts

issues of tax design" (p.229) in the English context.

     Any approach to the problem of disinflation that emphasizes the role of

expectations is bound to consider the possibility of using incomes policies, or

wage and price controls. The argument for wage and price controls at the macro

level is that they can be used to force prices and wages to follow the paths they

would follow if all contracts were immediately renegotiable.   Controls have the

further advantage that they enhance the credibility of any restricitive policy

measures undertaken at the same time. Wage and price controls not accompanied by

restrictive policies are a waste of time. Unfortunately, it appears that controls

are frequently used instead of, rather than along with, restrictive monetary and

fiscal policies.
                                      26




      Because the distortions produced by controls increase the longer the controls

 are in place, they cannot be used for long. But there is no reason to shrink

 totally from the use of controls because some distortions
                                                             are bound to be created:
 the unemployment that results from the implementation of
                                                            disinflationary policies
 is also a distortion.



V. United States Disinflation, 1979—1986.

     In October of 1979, with the inflation rate for the previous twelve months at

over 12%, the Fed announced a new monetary policy designed to reduce the inflation

rate. Four years and two recessions later the twelve month inflation rate (cPi,

October over October) was down to 2.9%. What lessons about disinflation can be

learned from this episode?22 The main lesson is that there is no cheap way out of

an entrenched inflation. The cure for inflation during this period used the old-

time medicine of recession.

     Figure 2 shows the unemployment rate and the GNP deflator inflation rate

(quarter over the same quarter a year earlier) for the United States over the

period since 1950. Vertical lines mark off recessions. The rate of increase of

the deflator is now somewhat below the lowest level it reached in the seventies,

but it has taken a prolonged period of high unemployment to achieve that low

inflation. Further, the inflation rate is now cyclically low.

     The general outlines of the disinflation were as expected. Quantitatively,

though, the disinflation may have been slightly faster than predicted. I have

calculated the sacrifice ratio for this disinflation making the following

assumptions: the Okun's law coefficient is 2.5; the stabilization period begins in

early 1980; unemployment will move smoothly from the current (last quarter of


22Eckstein (1983) and Friedman (1983) examine this episode, concluding that the
disinflation is consistent with earlier estimates of the Phillips relationship.
I2


1ff




      50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82

      Fiqure 2: Unemp1oent and Inflation ((VP deflator)   in the United   States±q*JJ
                                      27



 1983) 8.4% to 6.5% at the end of 1985; and the inflation rate will by 1985 have

fallen from 10% to 5%.

     Assuming the natural rate of unemployment is 6.5%, the cumulative output loss

is 23.6%; with a 6% natural rate, the output loss would be 29.8%. These

estimates give a sacrifice ratio around 5 or 6, at the lower end of the range

quoted by Okun. This estimate is however very sensitive to the assumption that

the fall in the inflation rate is 5%: with a 4% decline, the sacrifice ratio would

be 6 to 7.5, closer to the mean Okun estimate; with a 6% drop in the inflation

rate the ratio would be 4 or 5, below the Okun range. All these estimates are

below the median sacrifice ratio suggested by Okun.

     The calculated value of the sacrifice ratio of 5 to 6 thus suggests that

disinflation this time was somewhat less costly than in past episodes.2

Examination of some earlier estimates of the output costs of reducing inflation

gives the same impression. Perhaps the most famous of these is by Tobin (1980),

who examines in a model that is a "stylized version of the consensus view" (p.67),

the effects of a policy that reduces the rate of increase of nominal GNP with the

aim of reducing the inflation rate to zero. The path he illustrates, described as

a cautionary tale, starts in 1980 and shows the unemployment rate hitting 10% and

an inflation rate of 2.5% in 1987. We succeeded in reaching this point in less

than half the predicted time. However, Tobin notes that the inflation rate might

well come down more rapidly than his diagram suggests.

     Among the reasons he offers is the possibility that actual and prospective

bankruptcies and plant closings could lead to more rapid changes in wage and price


2'The favorable oil price shock has received some of the credit for the relatively
rapid disinflation. However, low demand during the recession contributed
substantially to creating this "shock". The exchange rate channel——attributable
to the fiscal—monetary policy mix——is appropriately credited with speeding the
disinflation.
                                     28



patterns than had been experienced in the post—World War II period. There were

such concessions in the recent recessions, in industries and plants that were

threatened with bankruptcy or closing. Similar concessions have taken place in

earlier recessions (Mitchell, 1982) but were later taken back. The depth of the

recession, and the high real interest rates that made bankruptcies more likely,

both probably contributed then to greater flexibility of wages than would be

predicted by a simple contract model.25 But the general outlines of the

disinflation path taken in the United States since 1979 are consistent with the

contracting model, with appropriate allowance being made for the slowness with

which expectations of future policy adjust to actual policy.


25ThiS suggests that the monetary-fiscal mix, which produced high real interest
rates and thus a greater risk of bankruptcy, was partially responsible for the
speed of the disinflation.
                                     29


                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Azariadis, Costas and Joseph Stiglitz (1983), "Implicit Contracts and Fixed Price
      Equilibria," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98 (Supplement), 1—22.

Barro, Robert J. (1977), "Long-Term Contracing, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
      Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, (July), 305—316.

Blanchard, Olivier J. (1983), "Price Desynchronization and Price Stickiness,"
      unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, M.I.T.

DiTata, Juan Carlos (1983), "Credibility Gaps and Persistent Disequilibria: Some
     Intriguing Ideas," Central Bank of Argentina, Discussion Paper No.13 (June).

Eckstein, Otto (1983), "Disinflation," Data Resources Inc., Economic Studies
     Series, No. 114 (October).

Fischer, Stanley (1977a), "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the
      Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85, (April), 191—
      206.

                (1977b), "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," in
      Stabilization of the Domestic and International Economy, Karl Brunner and
      Alan H. Meltzer (eds.), Carnegie—Rochester Series on Public Policy, Vol. 5,
      North Holland, 1048.
                (1977c), "'Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
      Policy': A Comment," Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, (July), 317—324.

Flanagan, Robert J. (1976), "Wage Interdependence in Unionized Labor Markets,"
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 635—673.

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff (1984), What Do Unions Do?, forthcoming, Basic
      Books.

Friedman, Benjamin M. (1983), "Recent Perspectives In and On Macroeconomics,"
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1208 (September).

Gordon, Robert j. (1982), "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural
      Rate of Unemployment," in Martin N. Baily (ed.), Workers, Jobs, and
      Inflation, Brookings Institution, 89—152.

Hall, Robert E. (1980), "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 91—133.

                and David Lilien (1979), "Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain
      Supply and Demand," American Economic Review, 69 (December), 868-879.

Hart, Oliver D. (1983), "Optimal Labour Contracts Under Asymmetric Infortnatiofl
      An Introduction," Review of Economic Studies, 50 (January), 3—36.

                                              of Wages in the Union and Non—Union
Johnson, George E. (1977), "The Determination
      Sectors," British Journal of Industrial Relations, 15, (July), 211—225.

                            Incomes Policy the Answer to Unemployment?",
Layard, Richard (1982), "Is
     Economica, 49 (August), 219—239.
                                       30



Mitchell, Daniel J.B. (1980a), "Union/Non—Union Wage Spillovers: A Note," British

      Journal of Industrial Relations, 18, (November), 372—375.



                (198Gb), Unions, Wages, and Inflation, Brookings Institution.



                (1982), "Recent Union Contract Concessions," Brookings Papers on

      Economic Activity, 1, 165—201.


Modigliani, Franco and Lucas Papademos (1978), "Optimal Demand Policies Against
      Stagflation," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 114, (December), 736—782.

Okun, Arthur M. (1978), "Efficient Disinflationary Policies," American Economic
      Review, Papers and Proceedings, 68, (May), 348-352.

               and George L. Perry (1978), (eds.), Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity, 2, Special Issue.

Phelps, Edmund S. (1978), "Disinflation Without Recession: Adaptive Guideposts and
      Monetary Policy," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 114 (December), 783-809.

Rotemberg, Julio j. (1982), "Sticky Prices in the United States," Journal of
      Political Economy, 90, (December), 1187—1211.

Sargent, Thomas J. (1981), "Stopping Moderate Inflations: The Methods of Poincare
      and Thatcher," unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota.

Stigler, George (1977), "Conference Handbook," Journal of Political Economy, 85,
      (April), 441-443.

Taylor, John B. (1980), "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of
      Political Economy, 88, (February), 1—23.

               (1983), "Union Wage Settlements During A Disinflation," American
    Economic Review, 73, 5(December), 981—993.

Tobin, James (1980) "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After," Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity, 1, 19—79.

Vroman, Susan (1980), "Research Note. Union/Non-Union Spillovers," British
      Journal of Industrial Relations, 18, (November), 369—372.
