                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CAPITAL TAXATION AND OWNERSHIP WHEN MARKETS ARE INCOMPLETE

                                          Emmanuel Farhi

                                       Working Paper 13390
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13390


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




My debt to my advisors Ricardo Caballero, George-Marios Angeletos and Ivan Werning cannot be
overstated. For helpful discussions and insightful comments, I thank Daron Acemoglu, Abhijit Banerjee,
Olivier Blanchard, V.V Chari, Xavier Gabaix, Mike Golosov, Patrick Kehoe, Narayana Kocherlakota,
Guido Lorenzoni, Veronica Guerrieri, and seminar participants at the Minneapolis Fed, MIT, Chicago,
Harvard, Princeton, Berkeley, Stanford, NYU, Columbia, Yale. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Emmanuel Farhi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Capital Taxation and Ownership when Markets are Incomplete
Emmanuel Farhi
NBER Working Paper No. 13390
September 2007
JEL No. A1,E21,E22,E23,E6,E60,E62,E66,H21,H3,H31,H32,H6,H60,H61,H62

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the theoretical and quantitative implications of optimal capital taxation in the
neoclassical growth model with aggregate shocks and incomplete markets. The model features a representative-agent
economy with proportional taxes on labor and capital. I first consider the case that the only asset the
government can trade is a real risk-free bond. Taxes on capital are set one period in advance, reflecting
inertia in tax codes and ruling out replication of the complete markets allocation. Because capital income
varies with the state of the economy, capital taxation provides a state contingent source of revenues.
I thus identify a novel potential role for capital taxation as a risk sharing instrument between the government
and private agents. However, this benefit must be weighted again the distortionary cost of capital taxation.
For a baseline case, the optimal policy features a zero tax on capital. Moreover, numerical simulations
show that the baseline case provides an excellent benchmark. I next allow the government to hold
a non trivial position in capital. Capital ownership provides the same benefit or risk sharing but without
the cost of tax distortions. In a variety of quantitative exercises, I show that capital ownership allows
the government to realize about 90% of the welfare gains from moving to complete markets. Large
positions are typically required for optimality. But smaller positions achieve substantial benefits. In
a business-cycle simulation, I show that a 15% short equity position achieves over 40% of the welfare
gains from completing markets.

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu
  Capital Taxation and Ownership when Markets
                  are Incomplete∗
                                           Emmanuel Farhi
                                                   Harvard
                                             efarhi@harvard.edu



                                            August 26th, 2007.


                                                   Abstract
             This paper analyzes the theoretical and quantitative implications of optimal capital tax-
        ation in the neoclassical growth model with aggregate shocks and incomplete markets. The
        model features a representative-agent economy with proportional taxes on labor and capital.
        I first consider the case that the only asset the government can trade is a real risk-free bond.
        Taxes on capital are set one period in advance, reflecting inertia in tax codes and ruling out
        replication of the complete markets allocation. Because capital income varies with the state of
        the economy, capital taxation provides a state contingent source of revenues. I thus identify a
        novel potential role for capital taxation as a risk sharing instrument between the government
        and private agents. However, this benefit must be weighted again the distortionary cost of
        capital taxation. For a baseline case, the optimal policy features a zero tax on capital. More-
        over, numerical simulations show that the baseline case provides an excellent benchmark. I
        next allow the government to hold a non trivial position in capital. Capital ownership provides
        the same benefit or risk sharing but without the cost of tax distortions. In a variety of quanti-
        tative exercises, I show that capital ownership allows the government to realize about 90% of
        the welfare gains from moving to complete markets. Large positions are typically required for
        optimality. But smaller positions achieve substantial benefits. In a business-cycle simulation, I
        show that a 15% short equity position achieves over 40% of the welfare gains from completing
        markets.



1       Introduction

In this paper, I explore the issue of capital taxation and government ownership when fiscal expen-
ditures and aggregate income are random, and the government can only trade a limited number of
assets. Markets are incomplete, and hedging of the government budget is limited in scope. This
    ∗
    My debt to my advisors Ricardo Caballero, George-Marios Angeletos and Ivan Werning cannot be overstated.
For helpful discussions and insightful comments, I thank Daron Acemoglu, Abhijit Banerjee, Olivier Blanchard, V.V
Chari, Xavier Gabaix, Mike Golosov, Patrick Kehoe, Narayana Kocherlakota, Guido Lorenzoni, Veronica Guerrieri,
and seminar participants at the Minneapolis Fed, MIT, Chicago, Harvard, Princeton, Berkeley, Stanford, NYU,
Columbia, Yale.


                                                       1
creates a new potential role for capital taxation and ownership as risk sharing instruments between
the government and private agents. In the model, capital taxation and capital ownership provide
a state contingent source of revenues. For example, if the marginal product of capital is positively
correlated with adverse shocks to the government budget, positive capital taxes, or a long position
in the capital stock, might provide the government with a good hedging instrument.
    I approach these issues by taking a minimal step away from the complete markets case: I
consider the stochastic neoclassical growth model with homogenous consumers and a benevolent
government facing fiscal expenditure shocks. I allow the government to trade a risk free bond, to
levy fully state contingent linear taxes on labor, and to levy linear taxes on capital that are not
fully state contingent. Specifically, I assume that taxes on capital are set one period in advance,
at the time investment decisions are made. This assumption is meant to capture inertia in fiscal
policy. With fully state contingent taxes on capital the government would be able to replicate the
complete markets allocation, as shown by Judd (1992) and Chari, Christiano and Kehoe (1994).1
With a lag in capital taxes, the complete markets allocation is not achievable.
    An important insight in this paper is that when contemplating the hedging consequences of
a marginal increase in capital taxes, the government needs to take two eﬀects into consideration.
First is the direct eﬀect in the form of increased revenues in proportion to the marginal product
of capital. Second is an opposing indirect eﬀect through the adjustment of capital: Lower capital
accumulation reduces the revenues from labor and capital taxes. The hedging benefits of capital
taxation depend only on the covariance of these two eﬀects with the government’s need for funds
across states of the world on a given date. An important benchmark is the baseline case where the
production function is Cobb Douglas and preferences are quasi-linear. I show in this case that taxes
on capital should be set to zero from the first period on. With these specifications, the covariances
of the direct and indirect eﬀects with the government’s need for funds exactly cancel out, leaving
no role for capital taxes.
    For general preferences, I show that optimal taxes on capital can be decomposed into two terms.
The first "hedging" term — the only one present when preferences are quasi-linear — reflects the
hedging role of capital taxes, and would be zero if markets were complete. The second "intertem-
poral" term corresponds to the motive for capital taxation when markets are complete: It might
be optimal for the government to distort capital accumulation to smooth available resources in the
economy across time. Echoing the result in the previous paragraph, I show that the hedging term is
zero when the production function is Cobb Douglas. Regarding the intertemporal term, the optimal
policy prescribes a one time capital tax (respectively subsidy) following a high (respectively low)
government expenditure shock in order to reduce the variability of the net present value of labor
tax surpluses across states.
   1
     An intuition for this result can be given along the following lines: Since investment only reacts to average taxes
on capital, the government can vary capital taxes across states while keeping the average constant, leaving investment
in physical capital unaﬀected. This endows the government with enough degrees of freedom to perfectly shift the
tax burden across states and to replicate the complete markets outcome as long as long as it can also trade a risk
free bond.



                                                          2
    Numerical simulations show that the baseline case provides a good benchmark: the hedging
term, while not theoretically zero, turns out to be negligible. Incomplete markets do not seem
to make a case for using capital taxation as a hedging instrument. The intertemporal term is
approximately zero mean. Its volatility decreases sharply with the period length.
    In contrast to capital taxes, capital ownership may provide the government with a powerful hedg-
ing instrument. The reason is that unlike taxing, trading does not introduce additional distortions:
The indirect eﬀect on labor and capital tax bases arising with capital taxation is absent for capital
trading. 2 Indeed, when preferences are quasi-linear and the only disturbance in the economy takes
the form of government expenditures shocks, I show that the government can perfectly approximate
the complete markets allocation by taking a very large position in capital, counterbalanced by an
equally large opposite position in the risk free bond.
    Outside of this benchmark case, numerical simulations show that capital ownership allows to
realize about 90% of the welfare gains from moving to complete markets. Government expenditure
shocks tend to call for a long position, while productivity shocks typically require a short position.
In business cycle simulations, productivity shocks dwarf government expenditure shocks as a source
of variation in the government’s budget, calling for a short position.
    Optimality typically requires large position. The magnitude of the position decreases sharply
with the period length. Moreover, smaller positions allow to reap substantial benefits: In a business
cycle simulation with a five years period length, I show that a short position of 15% of the capital
stock achieves more than 40% of the gains from completing markets.
    I then characterize the optimal holding of capital by the government in a more general portfolio
problem with additional assets. I derive the government’s optimal liability structure in a unified
framework, that I term the GCAPM — Government Capital Asset Pricing Model — and that re-
sembles the CCAPM: Assets that covary with the government’s need for funds command a lower
expected return. I am able to explicitly derive the pricing kernel of the government. This can be
used to price non-traded assets, and provides theoretical foundations for capital budgeting rules in
public, non traded companies.3
    Related Literature.
    An extensive literature on capital taxation with complete markets has emerged from the cele-
brated zero long run capital tax result established by Chamley (1986) and Judd (1985). This paper
adds to this literature by studying the case of incomplete markets.
    Chamely (1986) and Judd (1985) showed that in all steady states of the economy, taxes on capital
are optimally set to zero. Zhu (1992) proved a stochastic analog of the Chamley-Judd result:
In every stochastic steady state of the neoclassical growth model, depending on the underlying
parameters of the model, taxes on capital are either zero or take both signs with positive probability.
   2
     Another way to interpret trading is that it allows the government to tax capital excess returns: As is well known,
this form of non-linear capital taxation is non-distorsionary.
   3
     This is also potentially useful to compute the value of non-traded government liabilities, as for example dispensing
with future nuclear waste, honoring implicit social contracts etc.




                                                           3
I prove that in my model, an analogous result holds for the intertemporal term. Moreover, as
Zhu (1992) and Chari, Christiano and Kehoe (1994) pointed out, if preferences are homogenous
and separable between consumption and leisure, a stronger version of the zero capital tax result
applies: Taxes on capital should be zero from the second period on. Echoing this result, I show
that if preferences are quasi-linear, the intertemporal term is zero. However outside of this case,
homogenous preferences do not imply that the intertemporal term should be zero in my model.
    The paper also contributes to the literature on fiscal policy in incomplete markets pioneered
by Barro (1979). Barro considered a deterministic, partial equilibrium environment and associated
an exogenous convex deadweight cost to taxes. Variations in the deadweight costs are costly; a
benevolent government should therefore seek to smooth taxes across time. Barro showed that
just like consumption smoothing problems, tax smoothing by the government imparts a random
walk component to taxes and public debt. Most closely related to this paper is Aiyagari, Marcet,
Sargent and Seppälä (2002) and, more recently, Werning (2005). They studied fiscal policy in general
equilibrium under incomplete markets. They analyzed a version of the no capital economy in Lucas
and Stokey (1983) with only risk free debt. They showed that Ramsey outcomes display features
of Barro’s model. In particular, labor taxes inherit a near unit root component. I extend this line
of research by introducing capital along with a more general asset structure, and studying capital
taxation in addition to labor taxation. I demonstrate that the results of Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent
and Seppälä (2002) carry through when capital is introduced: Labor taxes and government debt
inherit a random walk component.
    Finally, this paper is related to literature studying the optimal liability structure of the gov-
ernment under incomplete markets. The foundational paper is Bohn (1990). Bohn considered a
stochastic version of Barro’s model with risk neutral consumers and an ad hoc convex cost for
distortionary taxes. The literature on the optimal portfolio of the government under incomplete
markets has entirely focused Bohn’s model, maintaining the assumption of risk neutrality and adopt-
ing an ad hoc deadweight cost for taxes. My model provides microfoundations for Bohn’s findings,
and shows that important caveats to his theory need to be introduced. I also analyze explicitly the
situation where consumers are risk averse. This goes beyond existing contributions.
    Angeletos (2002) and Buera and Nicolini (2004) assume that markets are incomplete: the gov-
ernment can only trade risk free debt with multiple maturities. They show that generically, the
government can replicate the complete market allocation when enough maturities are traded, and
characterize the optimal maturity structure of government debt in such instances.
    The central idea in this paper that non-state contingent taxes have important risk sharing impli-
cations can be traced back to Stiglitz (1969)4 . Stiglitz considered the partial equilibrium problem of
a consumer that must decide how to allocate a given amount of wealth between a riskless asset and
a risky asset. He examined how the government can aﬀect the allocation of wealth and welfare using
a variety of linear taxes. My model can be seen as a general equilibrium risk sharing model between
the government and the agents. As in Stiglitz (1969), linear taxes on assets — here capital — have
  4
      I thank Abhijit Banerjee for pointing this analogy to me.


                                                          4
hedging consequences. However, I show that taking into account the distortionary consequences of
linear taxes by analyzing the savings margin — taken as inelastic in Stiglitz’s analysis — is crucial.
    On the methodological side, this paper builds on Werning (2005). Existing models either adopt a
Lagrangian approach — as for example Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent and Seppälä (2002) — or develop a
recursive representation by incorporating some multipliers in the state space — an approach initiated
by Marcet and Marimon (1998). Werning (2005) revisits Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent and Seppälä’s
model and develops a recursive representation with three state variables: debt, expected marginal
utility one period ahead, and the state of the Markov shock process. I develop a parsimonious
recursive representation of the Ramsey problem with only four state variables, which are directly
related to the allocation: the present value of government liabilities, capital, past marginal utility
and the state of the Markov shock process. In the particular case where preferences are quasi-
linear, I am able to reduce the state space to two state variables: the present value of government
liabilities and the state of the Markov shock process. Developing a recursive approach using only
variables directly linked to the allocation allows a better understanding of the properties of Ramsey
outcomes, is useful for developing intuition, simplifies calculations, and in some cases, permits easier
numerical simulations.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the economic environment, sets
up the Ramsey problem, and develops a recursive representation. Section 3 presents the properties
of debt and taxes in the quasi-linear preferences case. I analyze the general case in Section 4.
In Section 5, I study capital ownership by the government and characterize the optimal liability
structure of the government. All proofs omitted in the main text are contained in the Appendix.


2       The Economy
The model is a neoclassical, stochastic production economy. The economy is populated by a con-
tinuum of identical, infinite-lived individuals and a government.
     Time is discrete, indexed by t ∈ {0, 1, ...}. The exogenous stochastic disturbances in period
t are summarized by a discrete random variable st ∈ S ≡{1, 2, ..., S} : the state at date t. I let
st ≡{s0 , s1 , ..., st } ∈ St denote the history of events at date t. I assume that st follows a Markov
process with transition density P (s0 |s) and initial distribution π 0 = P (.|s−1 ).
     In each period t, the economy has two goods: a consumption-capital good and labor. Households
have access to an identical constant returns to scale technology to transform capital kt−1 and labor
lt into output via the production function kt−1 + F (kt−1 , lt , st )5 . The production function is smooth
in (kt−1 , lt ) and satisfies the standard Inada conditions. Notice that this formulation incorporates
a stochastic productivity shock. The output can be used for private consumption ct , government
consumption gt , and new capital kt . Throughout, I will take government consumption gt = g(st ) to
be exogenously specified. Therefore, the resource constraints in the economy are
    5
    This formulation allows for capital depreciation. The depreciation of capital is subsumed in the production
function F (kt−1 , lt , st ).


                                                      5
                            ct + gt + kt ≤ F (kt−1 , lt , st ) + kt−1 ,                     ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St                  (1)

       Households rank consumption streams according to

                                                               X
                                                               ∞
                                                         E−1         β t u(ct , lt , st )                                       (2)
                                                               t=0


where β ∈ (0, 1) and u is smooth and concave in (ct , lt ), increasing in consumption, decreasing
in labor, and satisfies the standard Inada conditions. Note that this formulation incorporates a
stochastic preference shock.
       The government raises all revenues through a tax on labor income τ lt and a tax on capital income
τ kt . Except for taxes on capital τ kt , households and the government make decisions whose time t
components are functions of the history of shocks st up up to t. By contrast, I assume that taxes
on capital are predetermined: the government makes decisions on τ kt one period in advance. Hence
τ kt is a function of the history of shocks up to t − 1, st−1 . The capital stock k0 is inelastic, hence
providing a non distortionary source of revenues to the government. In order to limit the amount
of revenues the government can extract at no cost, I assume that the date 0 tax rate on capital τ k0
is exogenously fixed.
       The assumption that taxes on capital are set one period in advance deserves some discussion.
It is more eﬃcient to postpone this discussion below after some definitions have been introduced.
       Incomplete markets and debt limits. Households and the government borrow and lend
only in the form of risk-free one period bonds paying interest rt (st−1 ) in every state at date t. The
government budget and debt limit constraints are6 :

               (1 + rt )bgt−1 ≤ τ lt lt wt + τ kt (F (kt−1 , lt , st ) − wt lt ) + bgt ,               ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St       (3)

          M(kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ) ≤ uc (ct , lt , st )bgt ≤ M(kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ),        t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St   (4)

Here bgt is the amount of government debt outstanding at date t. When (3) holds with strict inequal-
ity, I let the diﬀerence between the right hand side and the left hand side be a nonnegative level of
lump sum transfers Tt to the households. The upper and lower debt limits M(kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ),
M(kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ) in (4) influence the optimal government plan. In full generality, I allow the
debt limits to depend on the capital stock of the economy and the current marginal utility of
consumption. I discuss alternative possible settings for M(kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ), M(kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st )
below. Note that I define debt and asset limits on uc (ct , lt , st )bgt instead of bgt . This is natural
given my definition of debt: bgt is the amount of debt issued at the end of period t. The quantity
uc (ct , lt , st )bgt is therefore just debt weighted by the state price density.
    The representative household operates a firm and supplies and hires labor at wage wt on a
   6
   Note that in a specification with capital depreciation, this formulation supposes that capital depreciation is
deductible.



                                                                       6
competitive market.7 The household’s problem is to choose stochastic processes {ct , lt , ltd , kt } to
maximize (2) subject to the sequence of budget constraints
                  ¡        ¢       ¡        ¢
        ct + bgt ≤ 1 − τ lt wt lt + 1 − τ kt (F (kt−1 , ltd , st ) − wt ltd ) + kt−1 − kt + (1 + rt )bgt−1 + Tt             (5)

    taking wages, interest rates and taxes {wt , rt , τ lt , τ kt }t≥0 as given. Here bgt represents the house-
hold’s holding of government debt, ltd the household’s labor demand and lt the household’s labor
supply. The stochastic processes {ct , lt , ltd , kt }t≥0 must be measurable with respect to st . The labor
market clears if lt = ltd .
    The household also faces debt limits analogous to (4), which I assume are less stringent than
those faced by the government. Therefore, in equilibrium, the household’s problem always has an
interior solution. The household’s first order conditions require that two Euler equations hold, one
for the risk free rate and the other for the net return on capital, in addition to a labor-leisure
arbitrage condition and the condition that labor is paid its marginal product.
                                              ½            ¾
                                                    uc,t+1
                     1 =      (1 + rt )Et β                  ,      ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St                                      (6)
                                                     uc,t
                                  ½                                     ¾
                                     uc,t+1 £           ¡      k
                                                                 ¢     ¤
                     1 =      Et β                 1 + 1 − τ t Fk,t+1 ,          ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St                         (7)
                                       uc,t
                                    ul,t
                    τ lt =    1+            ,          ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St                                                   (8)
                                   uc,twt
                    wt =      Fl (kt−1 , ltd , st ),        ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St                                              (9)

Remark 1 Note for future reference that wt = Fl (kt−1 , ltd , st ) implies, using the constant return
to scale assumption, that F (kt−1 , ltd , st ) − wt ltd = kt−1 Fk (kt−1 , ltd , st ). Hence if this condition holds,
revenues from capital taxation can be written as τ kt kt−1 Fk (kt−1 , ltd , st ).

Definition 1 Given bg−1 , r0 , k0 , τ k0 and a stochastic process {st }t≥0 , a feasible allocation is a
stochastic process {ct , lt , kt }t≥0 satisfying (1) whose time t elements are measurable with respect
to st .A risk free rate process {rt }t≥0 , a wage process {rt }t≥0 and a government policy
{τ lt , τ kt , bgt }t≥0 is a set of stochastic processes such that wt , τ lt and bgt are measurable with respect to
st , τ kt and rt are measurable with respect to st−1 .


Definition 2 Given bg−1 , r0 , k0 , τ k0 and a stochastic process {st }, a competitive equilibrium is
a feasible allocation, a risk free rate process, a wage process and a government policy such that
{ct , lt , lt , kt }t≥0 solves the household’s optimization problem, and the government budget constraints
(3) and (4) are satisfied.8
   7
      Giving the firms to consumers is just one of the many equivalent ways of resolving the indeterminacy of the the
objective of competitive firms under incomplete markets.
    8
      Note that this definition imposes that the labor market clears by imposing that the third argument in {ct , lt , lt , kt }
is equal to the second.



                                                               7
Definition 3 The Ramsey problem is to maximize (2) over competitive equilibria. A Ramsey
outcome is a competitive equilibrium that attains the maximum.

     Discussion of debt limits. By analogy with Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent and Seppälä (2002),
henceforth AMSS, I shall study two kinds of debt limits, called natural and ad hoc. Natural debt
limits amount to imposing that debt be less than the maximum debt that could be repaid almost
surely under an optimal tax policy. Following AMSS, I call a debt or asset limit ad hoc if it is more
stringent than the natural one. In this model, natural debt limits, which depend on the capital
stock kt in the economy, are in general diﬃcult to compute. But as mentioned above, it is easy
                                                                                               n
to see that they are of the form M n (kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ) ≤ uc (ct , lt , st )bgt ≤ M (kt , uc (ct , lt , st ), st ).
Imposing that debt limits are weakly tighter than the natural ones rules out Ponzi schemes.
     Discussion of the measurability assumption for τ kt . It is well known since the work of
Judd (1992) and Chari, Christiano and Kehoe (1994) that with complete markets, taxes on capital
are indeterminate: the government faces an embarrassment of riches, with too many instruments to
implement the Ramsey outcome. In fact, the complete markets optimum can be implemented with
complete markets and taxes on capital set one period in advance, or under incomplete markets with
only a risk free bond but fully adjustable taxes on capital. The reason for this is that investment
depends only on the average tax rate on capital, and not on the particular way it is spread between
states. When only a risk free bond is traded, the government can take advantage of this and
adjust taxes on capital to hedge its burden across states — thereby replicating the complete markets
outcome.
     Inertia in fiscal policy — captured here by the assumption that taxes have to be set one period
in advance — restricts the state-contingency of capital taxes, prevents replication of the complete
markets allocation, and requires analyzing optimal taxes on capital in a truly incomplete markets
environment.
     Because they are not the focus of this paper, taxes on labor, on the other hand, are left fully
adjustable. One may wonder whether this asymmetric treatment of labor and capital taxes doesn’t
bias the results in favor of labor taxation. But in fact, most of the insights that I derive would
still be valid if additional restrictions were put on labor taxes. Of course, the exact results depend
on the particular form of these restrictions. But for example, if the production function is Cobb
Douglas — with or without depreciation — the formulas for taxes on capital (22) and (28) are still
valid if taxes on labor are also restricted to be set one period in advance. The reason is that in this
case, capital can be factored out from the additional restrictions imposed on the planing problem.


3      A Recursive Representation for the Ramsey Problem
The following lemma characterizes the restrictions that the government budget and behavior of
households place on competitive equilibrium feasible allocations, risk free rate processes and gov-
ernment policies.


                                                              8
Lemma 1 A feasible allocation {ct , lt , kt }t≥0 , a risk free rate process {rt }t≥0 , a wage process {wt }t≥0 ,
and a government policy {τ lt , τ kt , bgt }t≥0 constitute a competitive equilibrium if and only if (1), (3),
hold with equality and (4), (6), (7), (8) and (9), hold, with lt = ltd .

    I develop a recursive representation of the Ramsey problem from t = 1 on. This recursive
representation uses four state variables: The value of the capital stock k inherited from the previous
period, the value of government debt from the previous period b, the marginal utility of consumption
in the previous period θ ≡ uc (c− , l− , s− ) and the shock that hit the economy in the previous period
s− . It is easy to see that the planning problem is recursive in these four state variables, and that
the value function of the government satisfies the following Bellman equation.
    Bellman equation 1

                    V (k, b, θ, s− ) = max E {u(cs , ls , s) + βV (ks0 , b0s , uc (cs , ls , s), s)|s− }

subject to
                                        (1 + r)E {βuc (cs , ls , s)|s− } = θ
                               ©                 £   ¡       ¢              ¤ ª
                              E βuc (cs , ls , s) 1 + 1 − τ k Fk (k, ls , s) |s− = θ
                                                      ul (cs , ls , s)
                                  τ ls = 1 +                                  ,      ∀s ∈ S
                                               uc (cs , ls , s)Fl (k, ls , s)
                    (1 + r)b + gs ≤ τ ls ls Fl (k, ls , s) + τ k kFk (k, ls , s) + b0s ,            ∀s ∈ S

                                   cs + gs + ks0 ≤ F (k, ls , s) + k,               ∀s ∈ S

               M(ks0 , uc (cs , ls , s), s) ≤ uc (cs , ls , s)b0s ≤ M(ks0 , uc (cs , ls , s), s),      ∀s ∈ S

    The constraints on the problem are, in order of appearance: (i) that the risk free rate satisfies
the usual Euler equation; (ii) that the net return on capital satisfies the usual Euler equation; (iii)
that agents equalize their marginal rates of substitutions between leisure and consumption to the
net real wage; (iv) that the budget constraint of the government is satisfied in each state s ∈ S; (v)
that the resource constraint holds in each state s ∈ S and (vi) that the amount of government debt
issued in each state s ∈ S satisfies the debt and asset limits.
    The initial period must be treated in isolation since there, marginal utility of consumption in the
previous period is not defined. Equivalently, one can think of the problem at date t = 0 as solving
V (k0 , bg−1 , θ0 , s−1 ) with the additional constraint that the date 0 tax on capital is given by τ k0 and
that θ0 is such that the implied date 0 risk free rate is equal to r0 . Hence it is straightforward to
obtain the entire solution for the Ramsey problem once the solution to the Bellman equation above
has been found.
    It will prove convenient to replace b by a new state variable b̃ = bθ representing debt weighted
by the state price density. I can then define the corresponding value function Ṽ (k, b̃, θ, s− ) =
V (k, bθ, θ, s− ). In order to write the Bellman equation satisfied by Ṽ , I first rearrange the constraints.
I use the first constraint to substitute r, the third to substitute τ ls , and I multiply the fourth

                                                                9
constraint by uc (cs , ls , s). To save on notation I write Xs for any function X(k, ks0 , b̃0s , ls , s) in state
s.
   Bellman equation 2
                                                          n                                   o
                                                                       0 0
                                Ṽ (k, b̃, θ, s− ) = max E us + β Ṽ (ks , b̃s , uc,s , s)|s−                (10)

subject to
                                          ©     £   ¡       ¢    ¤ ª
                                         E βuc,s 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s |s− = θ                                    (11)
                        uc,s
               b̃                  + gs uc,s ≤ ls Fl,s uc,s + ls ul,s + τ k kFk,s uc,s + b̃0s ,   ∀s ∈ S     (12)
                    βE {uc,s |s− }
                                          cs + gs + ks0 ≤ Fs + k,             ∀s ∈ S                         (13)

                                  M(ks0 , uc,s , s) ≤ b̃0s ≤ M(ks0 , uc,s , s),       ∀s ∈ S                 (14)

The presence of capital, capital taxes, and marginal utility make the constraint set in (10) non-
convex. This poses two kinds of problems. First, first order conditions are necessary but not
suﬃcient for characterizing the solution. Second, it considerably complicates the task of establishing
the diﬀerentiability of the value function Ṽ — which is required to partially characterize the solution
by a set of necessary first order conditions.
   All the properties of Ramsey outcomes I derive can be established using either a Lagrangian
approach, or expanding the Bellman equation (10) over two periods — hence bypassing this technical
diﬃculty, but at the cost of heavier notations and poorer intuition. I therefore proceed assuming the
value function Ṽ is diﬀerentiable in (k, b̃, θ), and refer the reader to the appendix for an approach
that does not rely on this assumption.


4     The Quasi-Linear Case
In the Ramsey problem, the government simultaneously chooses taxes and manipulates intertem-
poral prices. Manipulating prices substantially complicates the problem, especially with incomplete
markets. Here I simplify by adopting a specification of preferences that eliminates the government’s
ability to manipulate prices. As in AMSS, this brings the model into the form of a consumption
smoothing model and allows me to adapt results for that model to the Ramsey problem.
    I assume that u(c, l, s) = c + H(l, s), where H is a smooth, decreasing and concave function. I
assume H 0 (0) = ∞ in order for labor supply to be interior. Making preferences linear pins down
intertemporal prices. This allows a drastic simplification of (10), as two state variables b — which is
equal to b̃ in this case — and s− are now suﬃcient to describe the state of the economy. Intuitively,
the reasons for this simplification are twofold. The first reason is that θ is now fixed and equal to 1
— hence θ can be dropped as a state variable. The other reason is that, intertemporal prices being
entirely pinned down, I can perform a change of timing in the recursive approach: The optimal
investment in capital k can now be thought as being chosen simultaneously with the the tax rate


                                                               10
on capital τ k — which allows to turn the state variable k into a control variable.
    Under this specification, natural debt limits are independent of the capital stock, and marginal
                                                 n                n
utility is constant: M n (k, uc , s) = M ns and M (k, uc , s) = M s . Consistent with this property, in
this setup, I consider only fixed debt limits M s and M s . After further simplifying the constraints
by using the resource constraint to substitute cs , I derive a new Bellman equation.
    Bellman equation 3
                                           ½      µ      ¶                          ¾
                                                       1                  0
                       Ṽ (b̃, s− ) = max E Fs + k 1 −     − gs + β Ṽ (b̃s , s)|s−               (15)
                                                       β
subject to
                                           © £   ¡       ¢    ¤ ª
                                          E β 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s |s− = 1                            (16)
                                1
                           b̃     + gs ≤ ls Fl,s + ls Hl,s + τ k kFk,s + b̃0s ,       ∀s ∈ S      (17)
                                β
                                             M s ≤ b̃0s ≤ M s ,          ∀s ∈ S                   (18)


4.1     Stochastic properties of Ramsey outcomes
I attach a multiplier μ to (16), ν s to (17) and ν 2,s and ν 1,s to the two constraints in (18). I can
then form a Lagrangian associated with the right hand side of (15)
              ½       µ         ¶                                                      ¾
                             1                   0
                                                           £     £   ¡      k
                                                                              ¢   ¤¤
L(b̃, s− ) = E Fs + k 1 −         − gs + β Ṽ (b̃s , s) + μ 1 − β 1 + 1 − τ Fk,s |s−
                             β
                ½ ∙                                              ¸      h       i      h        i ¾
                                         k             0   1              0                   0
             +E ν s ls Fl,s + ls Hl,s + τ kFk,s + b̃s − b̃ − gs + ν 2,s b̃s − M + ν 1,s M − b̃s |s−
                                                           β

where μ, ν s , ν 1,s and ν 2,s are functions of b̃ and s− .
   The Envelope condition delivers

                                               β Ṽb (b̃, s− ) = −E{ν s |s− }                     (19)

   and the first order condition for b̃0s gives

                                            β Ṽb (b̃0s , s) = −ν s + ν 1,s − ν 2,s               (20)

Combining these two equations, I find that, denoting by ν s− , ν 1,s− and ν 2,s− the corresponding
multipliers in the previous period, the following martingale equation hold

                                            ν s− = E{ν s |s− }+ν 1,s− − ν 2,s−                    (21)

   In the rest of the this section, I will often, with some abuse of notation, switch from recursive
notations to sequential notations.
   Therefore, oﬀ debt-limits, ν s− = E{ν s |s− }. Using sequential notations, the process {ν t } is a

                                                              11
positive martingale. Equation (20) then shows that debt b̃t is a non-linear invariant function of
−ν t + ν 1,t − ν 2,t and st , and hence inherits a near random walk component. The policy functions
{ls , k, τ k } associated with (15) show that for a Ramsey outcome, ct , lt and τ lt are invariant functions
of b̃t−1 , st−1 and st , while kt−1 and τ kt are invariant functions of b̃t−1 and st−1 .
     Debt and taxes — on both labor and capital — therefore inherit a random walk component,
reflecting the desire to smooth distortionary taxes across states and time. This tax smoothing
intuition is familiar in incomplete markets environments since the work of Barro (1979) and AMSS.
Note that under complete markets, a similar Bellman equation would hold, but ν t would be constant
across time and states, and not a mere martingale. Therefore debt and taxes would depend only
on the current shock st aﬀecting the economy as well as on st−1 , and would hence inherit the serial
correlation properties of {st }, as in Lucas and Stokey (1983).
     The fact that capital taxes, when set optimally, have a random walk component — and hence
are persistent — is new, and might come as a surprise when confronted with the results of Chamley
(1986) and Judd (1985). This reflects the fact that hedging needs of the government depend on
the level of government debt, which has a random walk component. When public debt is low, the
government is free to raise debt when confronted with an adverse shock : debt is then a good shock
absorber. By contrast, when public debt is close to the debt limit, the ability of the government
to shift the tax burden to the future is restricted. Hedging through capital taxes is then more
attractive. As the simulations below will show, τ kt is an extremely non-linear function of b̃t−1 — in
all simulations increasing and convex. This reflects the non-linearity in government hedging needs,
and is a contrast with labor taxes.


4.2    Taxes on capital
Manipulating the first order conditions, it is possible to derive a formula to characterize taxes on
capital

                       E{−(1−τ k )kFkk,s |s− }   ∙                                                    ¸
                  k        E{Fk,s |s− }              Cov {kFk,s , ν s |s− } Cov {kFkk,s , ν s |s− }
                 τ =        E{F ν |s }
                                                                           −                              (22)
                        1 + E{Fk,sk,s |ss −−}          E{kFk,s |s− }          E{kFkk,s |s− }

    The left hand side of (22) is increasing in τ k . The right hand side comprises three terms. The
first term
                                           E{−(1−τ k )kFkk,s |s− }
                                               E{Fk,s |s− }
                                                E{F ν |s }
                                                                                                 (23)
                                            1 + E{Fk,sk,s |ss −−}

has as its numerator the inverse of the elasticity of capital k to taxes on capital τ k . This inverse
elasticity factor is standard in the taxation literature. The higher the elasticity, the lower the
absolute value of the tax rate.
    The second term
                                        Cov {kFk,s , ν s |s− }
                                                                                                  (24)
                                            E{kFk,s |s− }

                                                             12
represents the direct eﬀect of an increase in τ k : it relaxes the budget constraint of the government
(17) in state s in proportion to the tax base of τ k , kFk,s . The more kFk,s is correlated with ν s , the
higher the optimal τ k , as taxes on capital pay better in states where the budget constraint of the
government is more binding, i.e. where the need for funds is higher.
   The third term
                                          Cov {kFkk,s , ν s |s− }
                                        −                                                             (25)
                                              E{kFkk,s |s− }
reflects the indirect eﬀect of an increase in τ k . Increasing τ k aﬀects investment k and hence the
capital tax base kFk,s and the revenues from labor taxation ls Fl,s + ls Hl,s in each state s ∈ S.
The formula makes use of the constant returns to scale assumption to replace ls Fkl,s by −kFkk,s .
How adverse these eﬀects are depends on the correlation between kFkk,s and ν s . The higher the
correlation, the bigger the eﬀects in states where the need for funds is high, and hence the lower τ k .
    Hence, (22) brings together a standard inverse elasticity factor with two terms that have an asset
pricing feel, and reflect the government’s desire to use taxes on capital set one period in advance to
hedge its need for funds across states. This illustrates that the government uses capital taxes not
to levy funds on average, but only to smooth its need for funds across states — a stark diﬀerence
with labor taxes.
    In a complete market environment, (22) still holds, but ν s is constant across states, so that τ k
is equal to 0. This outcome is then a particular case of the classical uniform taxation result by
Atkinson and Stilgitz (1972), transposed to this Ramsey setup by Zhu (1992) and Chari, Christiano
and Kehoe (1994), which holds more generally for preferences which are CRRA and separable
between consumption and leisure.
    As the following proposition shows, this zero tax result carries through in a particular case.

Proposition 1 If F is Cobb Douglas, τ kt = 0 for all t ≥ 1.

    Therefore, for the strong Cobb Douglas benchmark, taxes on capital are 0 from period 1 on. In
this case where the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor σ is equal to 1, the hedging
benefits from the direct eﬀect of a marginal increase in τ k at τ k = 0 are exactly oﬀset by the
marginal hedging cost from the indirect eﬀect through the capital tax base and labor revenues.

Remark 2 Equation (22) and Proposition 1 are valid irrespective of the asset structure of the
economy. It holds for example if the government is required to balance its budget in every period, if
it is restricted to trade only a perpetuity etc.

    In the general non Cobb Douglas case, the sign of τ k is ambiguous — it may be optimal to tax
or subsidize capital. The sign of τ k will in general depend on the way productivity shocks and
preference shocks interact with government consumption shocks and on the particular functional
form for the production function. Under technical conditions, It is possible to characterize the sign
of τ k in special cases.


                                                   13
Proposition 2 1) Assume that F is CES with elasticity of substitution σ. Consider the case where
productivity shocks are Hicks neutral. The following holds: (i) if σ > 1, and if ls > ls0 if and only
if ν s < ν s0 , then τ k > 0; (ii) if σ > 1, and if ls < ls0 if and only if ν s < ν s0 , then τ k < 0; (iii) if
σ < 1, and if ls > ls0 if and only if ν s < ν s0 , then τ k < 0; (iv) if σ < 1, and if ls < ls0 if and only
if ν s < ν s0 , then τ k > 0. 2) Assume that F (k, l) = A(s)kα l1−a − δk: then τ k has the same sign as
Cov {Fk,s , ν s |s− }.

    This proposition is partly unsatisfactory as it relies on an assumption on endogenous objects ls
and ν s . It is natural, for example, to expect case (i) in the absence of productivity or preference
shocks: it is reasonable to expect that in this environment with no wealth eﬀects, a higher need
for funds calls for higher taxes on labor resulting in lower labor supply. Non-convexities in (15)
considerably complicate the task of establishing how ls co-varies with ν s .9

Remark 3 Note that taxes on capital are zero when σ = 1 and when σ = ∞ : absent productivity
shocks, the marginal product of capital is fixed if capital and labor are perfect substitutes, and hence
capital taxation provides no hedging benefits.


4.3     Long run behavior
The long run behavior of Ramsey outcomes is similar to AMSS. I refer the reader to this paper for
an extensive discussion, and sketch the principal properties. Here the diﬀerence between natural
and ad hoc debt limits is marked.
    Under natural asset limits, the multiplier ν 2,t is zero throughout. The natural asset limit −M ns
is the amount of assets that allows the government to withstand any sequence of shocks with zero
taxes. It makes no sense for the government to accumulate more assets than −M ns . When favorable
shocks cause government assets to grow beyond −M ns , it is optimal for the government to rebate
consumers the diﬀerence via a lump sum rebate. Therefore (21) becomes

                                             ν s− = E{ν s |s− }+ν 1,s−

so that the stochastic process {ν t } is a nonnegative supermartingale. Therefore, the supermartingale
convergence theorem (see Lòeve (1977)) asserts that ν t converges almost surely to a nonnegative
random variable. As in AMSS, there are two possibilities:
    (i) If the Markov process {st }t≥0 is ergodic then the lemma below shows that under the condition
that Ṽ is concave in b̃ and that the policy functions in (15) are continuous, ν t converges almost
surely to zero. In that case, taxes τ kt and τ lt converge to the first best levels τ kt = 0 and τ lt = 0. In
the limit, the level of government assets converges in state s is −M ns , the level of assets suﬃcient
to finance the worst possible sequence of shocks forever from interest earnings.
   9
    In the case where F is CES with only government expenditure shocks or only technological shocks, for all
the numerical simulations that I have performed, only cases (i) and (iii) ever occured. In the case where F (k, l) =
A(s)kα l1−a −δk, with only technological shocks or only government expenditure shocks, for the numerical simulations
that I have performed, Cov {Fk,s , ν s |s− } was always negative.

                                                        14
    (ii) If the Markov process {st }t≥0 has an absorbing state, then ν t can converge to a strictly
positive value; ν t converges when st enters the absorbing state. From then on, taxes and all other
variables in the model are constant. Taxes on capital are zero.
    A technical assumption is necessary to rule out non-generic cases where the planner is able to
achieve the complete markets allocation.

Assumption 1 For any (b, s) such that b > M ns , the complete markets allocation with initial con-
dition (b, s) is not a competitive equilibrium with incomplete markets.

Lemma 2 Consider the case of natural debt and asset limits. Assume that Assumption 1 holds,
that the Markov process {st }t≥0 is ergodic, that the value function Ṽ is continuously diﬀerentiable
and concave in b̃, and that the policy functions in (15) are continuous. Then ν t converges to zero
almost surely.

     When the asset limit is more stringent than the natural one, convergence to the first best can be
ruled out. In this case, the lower debt limit occasionally binds. This puts a nonnegative multiplier
ν 2,t in (21), and {ν t } ceases to be a supermartingale. This fundamentally alters the limiting behavior
of the model in the case where the Markov process {st }t≥0 has a unique invariant distribution. In
particular, rather than converging almost surely, ν t continues to fluctuate randomly. Oﬀ debt limits,
ν t behaves like a martingale, and capital taxes do not converge to 0.
     In addition, if the range of the policy functions b̃0s can be restricted to a compact set, one can
show that an invariant distribution for government debt exists.


5     The general case
The insights from the simple example examined in the previous section largely carry through to
the case where preferences are not risk neutral and separable. But the possibility to manipulate
intertemporal prices brings about the traditional motive for taxes on capital, which interacts with
the motive uncovered in the previous section.


5.1     Stochastic properties of Ramsey outcomes
Let us attach a multiplier μ to (11), ν s to (12), ν 2,s and ν 1,s to the two constraints in (14), and ψs
to (13). I can then form a Lagrangian associated with the right hand side of (10)
                    n                                      £      £       ¡         ¢    ¤    ¤ o
L(k, b̃, θ, s− ) = E us + β Ṽ (ks0 , b̃0s , uc,s , s) + μ βuc,s 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s − θ |s−
                      ½ ∙                                                                                 ¸ ¾
                                     uc,s                                               k               0
                   +E ν s −b̃                     − gs uc,s + ls Fl,s uc,s + ls ul,s + τ kFk,s uc,s + b̃s |s−
                                βE {uc,s }
                      n                                             h                      i         h              i o
                   +E ψs [Fs + k − cs − gs − ks0 ] + ν 2,s b̃0s − M(ks0 , uc,s , s) + ν 1,s M(ks0 , uc,s , s) − b̃0s |s−

where μ, ν s , ν 1,s , ν 2,s and ψs are functions of k, b̃, θ and s− .

                                                        15
       Using the Envelope condition for b̃, a martingale equation similar to (21) can be derived

                                                   E{ν s uc,s |s− }
                                         ν s− =                     +ν 1,s− − ν 2,s−                                (26)
                                                    E{uc,s |s− }

   Oﬀ debt limits, the multiplier ν t is a now a risk adjusted martingale, imparting, as in the simple
example in the previous section, a unit root component to the solution of (10). The condition

                                       β Ṽb (ks0 , b̃0s , uc,s , s)) = −ν s + ν 1,s − ν 2,s                        (27)

shows that the vector of endogenous state variables {kt−1 , b̃t , uc,t−1 } inherits a near random walk
component. The policy functions {cs , ls , k, τ k } associated with (10) imply that for a Ramsey out-
come, kt , b̃t , ct , lt and τ lt are invariant functions of kt−1 , b̃t−1 , uc,t−1 , st−1 and st , while τ kt is invariant
function of kt−1 , b̃t , uc,t−1 and st−1 . Therefore, kt , b̃t , ct , lt , τ lt and τ kt inherit a unit root component.
    As in the risk neutral case, debt and taxes display a random walk component, reflecting the
desire to smooth distortionary taxes across time, a sharp contrast with the complete markets Ramsey
outcome, where a similar Bellman equation holds, but with ν t constant across time and not a mere
martingale.
    Hence, the stochastic properties of Ramsey outcomes are similar to those discussed in the quasi-
linear example. The analysis is only made more diﬃcult by the need to keep track of additional
state variables kt−1 and uc,t−1 .


5.2        Taxes on capital
A formula similar to (22) can be derived

                              τ k = T h (k, b̃, θ, s− ) + T i (k, b̃, θ, s− ) + T b (k, b̃, θ, s− )                 (28)

To save on space, I report the formulas for T h , T i and T b in the first part of the Appendix. It
should be noted that these are valid from t = 1 on. There are three motives for taxing capital,
corresponding to the three terms T h , T i and T b on the right hand side of (28).10
    The first term, T h is the "hedging" term and reflects the hedging motive discussed in the previous
section. Two diﬀerences with (22) should be emphasized. First, the formula is adjusted for risk
through uc,s . Second, the multiplier ψs on the resource constraint (13) appears. In the quasi-
linear case, ψs is equal to one. When risk aversion is introduced, the stochastic process {β t ψt }t≥0
represents the intertemporal prices
                                  n theo government would be willing to pay for additional resources
                                    ψt
at diﬀerent dates. The process uc,t         converts these prices in consumption equivalent units.The
                                        t≥0
presence of ψs is natural since taxes on capital aﬀect capital accumulation and hence resources
available.
    The second term T i is the "intertemporal" term and corresponds to the traditional motive for
  10
       The superscrpits "h", "i" and "b" stand respectively for "hedging", "intertemporal" and "bounds".


                                                               16
capital taxation: The government can induce intertemporal resource transfers by aﬀecting capital
accumulation through capital taxation to reduce the burden taxation. The formula calls for subsi-
dizing capital between t and t + 1 when resources are expected to be scarcer at t + 1 than at t — i.e.
       ψ t+1
when uc,t+1  is expected to be larger on average than uψc,tt — especially if the net marginal product of
             ¡        ¢                                                                 ψ t+1
capital 1 + 1 − τ kt+1 Fk,t+1 or marginal utility uc,t+1 is positively correlated with uc,t+1 .
                             k
    This formula (28) for τ is valid under complete markets, with the only diﬀerence that ν s is
constant. Under complete markets, T h is equal to zero, but not T i in general. The well known case
where taxes on capital are zero under complete markets is the case of CRRA preferences, separable
between consumption and leisure. Indeed, under complete markets,

                                            ψs        cs ucc,s ucl,s
                                                 =1+ν         −      ls
                                            uc,s       uc,s     uc,s

                          c1−σ −1
so that if u(c, l, s) =     1−σ
                                    + H(l, s),
                                                  ψs
                                                       = 1 − νσ
                                                  uc,s
is constant along the optimal path, and T i is equal to zero from period 2 on.
    When markets are incomplete, uψc,ss is not constant anymore at a Ramsey outcome when prefer-
ences are CRRA and separable, so that T i is not equal to zero even in this particular case: At the
Ramsey outcome, the government would be willing to pay a diﬀerent price — in consumption equiv-
alent units — for additional resources at diﬀerent dates and in diﬀerent states, so that the traditional
motive for capital taxation remains. In fact, as already mentioned, the zero capital taxation result
under CRRA and separable preferences is an application of the uniform commodity taxation result
of Atkinson and Stigitz (1972). This result relies crucially on the assumption of complete markets.
    The last term T b imparts a role for relaxing debt limits to capital taxes. For example, if the
maximum debt limit is increasing in the capital stock in the economy, it is optimal to subsidize
capital when the limit is binding to relax this constraint and allow for more debt accumulation.
This term is zero if the imposed debt limits do not depend on capital. Note that this term would
have been present in (22) if I had allowed debt limits to depend on capital.
    The case where the production function is Cobb Douglas still provides a useful benchmark.

Proposition 3 If F is Cobb Douglas, then Tth = 0. for t ≥ 1.

   As in the quasi-linear case, T h is zero as soon as the need for hedging disappears.

Remark 4 If the Markov process {st }t≥0 enters an absorbing state at t0 , then Tth = 0 for t ≥ t0 +1.

Remark 5 As in the quasi-linear case, equation (28) and Proposition 3 are valid irrespective of the
asset structure of the economy.

   It is also possible to give a characterization of T i along the lines of Zhu (1992).


                                                        17
Assumption 2 The stochastic process xt = {kt , b̃t , uc,t , st } is a stationary, ergodic, first order
Markov process on a compact set X ∞ : There exists a probability measure P ∞ on a compact set X ∞
such that for all t, and measurable set A,

                                         Pr{xt ∈ A} = P ∞ {A}

                                   lim Pr{xt+j ∈ A|xt } = P ∞ {A}
                                   j→∞

Assumption 3 The policy functions in (10) — including the multipliers — are continuous and for
every closed set A ⊆ X ∞ , and t > 0, Pr{xt ∈ A|x0 = x} is continuous in x.
                     ¡       ¢
Assumption 4 P ∞ {1 + 1 − τ k Fk,t > 0} = 1.

Proposition 4 If assumptions 2, 3 and 4 hold, then one of the following holds: (i) P ∞ {Tti = 0} =
1; (ii) P ∞ {Tti > 0} > 0 and P ∞ {Tti < 0} > 0.

    This proposition shows, that the insights of Zhu (1992) are still valid for the traditional motive
for capital taxation embodied in T i . At a stochastic steady state, T i cannot be always positive or
always negative.


6     Capital Ownership and the Structure of Government Li-
      abilities
So far, I have restricted the government to trade only a risk free bond with consumers, whereas
consumers faced a non-trivial portfolio decision in allocating their savings between government debt
and capital. Preventing the government from trading on capital is without loss of generality under
complete markets. But in environments with incomplete markets, this arbitrary restriction regains
bite. Allowing the government to trade on the capital gives the government more ways to smooth
taxes across time and states, and to hedge government expenditure shocks.
    As we already mentionned, another way to interpret trading is that it allows the government to
tax capital excess returns. This form of non-linear capital taxation is non-distorsionary and oﬀers
the same hedging benefits as a non-trivial position on the stock market.


6.1    The Government Capital Asset Pricing Model
I now remove this restriction. To illustrate that physical capital is an asset among others that the
government can trade with consumers, I also introduce exogenous assets indexed by i ∈ Is− . The
subscript s− allows for the possibility to let the investment opportunity set formed by the exogenous
assets to vary with the state variable s.
    I now allow the government and consumers to trade three kinds of assets: (i) a risk free bond;
                                                         ¡     ¢
(ii) capital — an asset whose return in state s is 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s ; (iii) and #Is− assets in zero net

                                                  18
supply indexed by i ∈ Is− — whose return in state s when the shock in the previous period was s−
is Rsi,s− .
     Generically, if the number of traded assets is less than the number of shocks, markets are truly
incomplete and the complete markets Ramsey outcome is not attainable. I will maintain this
assumption throughout.
     It is easy to see that the planning problem is still recursive with the same state variables
k, b̃, θ, s− , where b̃ is now the value of the government’s net financial position vis-a-vis the private
sector. Denoting by xi government’s holdings of asset i ∈ Is− and by kg government’s holdings of
capital, the government’s value function satisfies a modified version of (10):
     Bellman equation 2’
                                                         n                                     o
                               Ṽ (k, b̃, θ, s− ) = max E us + β Ṽ (ks0 , b̃0s , uc,s , s)|s−                 (29)

subject to
                                         ©     £   ¡          ¢   ¤ ª
                                        E βuc,s 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s |s− = θ                                       (30)
                                                ©               ª
                                              E βuc,s Rsi,s− |s− = θ                                           (31)

        X                         θ                     ¡       ¢           θ                   uc,s
               xi (Rsi,s− −              )uc,s + kg (1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s −            )uc,s + b̃            + gs uc,s
       i∈Is−
                              βE {uc,s }                                βE {uc,s }            βE {uc,s }

   ≤ ls Fl,s uc,s + ls ul,s + τ k kFk,s uc,s + b̃0s ,        ∀s ∈ S                                            (32)

                                         cs + gs + ks0 ≤ Fs + k,             ∀s ∈ S                            (33)

                                 M(ks0 , uc,s , s) ≤ b̃0s ≤ M(ks0 , uc,s , s),       ∀s ∈ S                    (34)

   There are two diﬀerences between (10) and (29). First, there is now one Euler equation for each
exogenous asset (31). The second diﬀerence is in the budget constraint of the government (32),
where the total liability the government has to repay or refinance in state s is now
        X                          θ                    ¡       ¢            θ                     1
               xi (Rsi,s− −                  ) + kg (1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s −                ) + b̃
       i∈Is−
                              βE {uc,s |s− }                            βE {uc,s |s− }        βE {uc,s |s− }

   The government therefore faces a non-trivial portfolio decision. It must decide not only the level
but also the composition of its liabilities.
   As is clear from (29), introducing more assets only relaxes the constraints in the planning
problem. Therefore, as in the quasi-linear case, introducing more traded assets, or allowing the
government to trade capital, improves the Ramsey outcome.

Remark 6 Expanding the set of assets the government can trade with consumers improves the
Ramsey outcome

   Here, more traded assets only give the government more flexibility to smooth distortionary taxes.

                                                              19
This result hinges crucially on the absence of consumer heterogeneity. In this case, the introduction
of additional traded assets would impose new constraints since heterogenous agents will generally
engage in trades between themselves — which could potentially render the task of the planner more
diﬃcult.
    Assuming an interior solution exists and that debt limits do not bind in state s− , the following
set of first order conditions characterize the optimal asset and liability structure of the government.
                                                                 θ
For this, it is convenient to label the risk free rate Rs− ≡ βE{uc,s |s− }
                                                                           .

                                       E {βRs− uc,s ν s |s− } = θν s−                                  (35)

                                © £    ¡      ¢        ¤        ª
                               E β 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s uc,s ν s |s− = θν s−                               (36)
                                      ©                   ª
                                    E βRsi,s− uc,s ν s |s− = θν s−                                     (37)

    These equations form the government counterpart of the standard CCAPM Euler equations: I
refer to them as the Government Capital Asset Pricing Model (GCAPM). Assets that pay well in
states of the world where government funds are scarce require a lower expected rate of return, as
can be seen for example from rewriting (37) in the following way

                              ©          ª        Cov {Rsi,s− , uc,s ν s |s− }
                             E Rsi,s− |s− = Rs− −
                                                     E {uc,s ν s |s− }

   Equations (35), (36) and (37) hold together with the standard CCAPM Euler equations

                                          E {βRs− uc,s |s− } = θ
                                   © £    ¡      ¢       ¤     ª
                                  E β 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s uc,s |s− = θ
                                         ©                ª
                                       E βRsi,s− uc,s |s− = θ

    Equations (35), (36) and (37) show that {β t uc,t ν t }t≥0 can be thought of a pricing kernel for the
government. This pricing kernel applies to assets traded with consumers — which is the case for all
assets considered so far. It characterizes the price the government is willing to pay for an asset trade
with consumers. Note that the result that ν s is a risk adjusted martingale is simply a restatement
of (35).
    If consumers are not on the other side of the trade, the pricing kernel {β t uc,t (ν t + uψc,tt )}t≥0 is
diﬀerent and involves the shadow costs of resources ψt . Indeed, the price the government would be
willing to pay for a non traded investment project paying out Xs in state s is
                                         n                             o
                                                           ψs
                                        E Xs uc,s (ν s +   uc,s
                                                                )|s−
                                                         ψ s−
                                                ν s− +    θ




                                                    20
   It should also be emphasized that the results on capital taxation still hold when more traded
assets are introduced. In particular, taxes are still given by (28). The only diﬀerence is in the
hedging term: the elasticity of capital to the tax rate has to be replaced by the elasticity of the
part of the capital stock held by the private sector to the tax rate

                                      E{−(k − kg )(1 − τ k )Fkk,s uc,s |s− }
                                              E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }

    The GCAPM, together with the CCAPM, provides a simple and powerful framework for address-
ing the optimal liability structure of the government in various contexts. In ongoing work, Farhi
and Werning (2005) study the optimal maturity structure of government debt when the government
is restricted to issue only risk-free debt of a limited number of maturities.



6.2       The GCAPM in The Quasi-Linear Case
I consider here the case where preferences are quasi-linear. This stripped down setup will allow me
to derive stark results on the optimal structure of government liabilities.
    As in the previous subsection, I allow the government and consumers to trade three kinds of
                                                                                      ¡       ¢
assets: (i) a risk free bond; (ii) capital — an asset whose return in state s is 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s ; (iii)
and #Is− assets in zero net supply indexed by i ∈ Is− — whose return in state s when the shock
in the previous period was s− is Rsi,s− . The definitions of feasible allocations, competitive equilibria
and Ramsey outcomes can be straightforwardly extended to this new setup.
    It is easy to see that the planning problem is still recursive with the same state variables b̃ and
s− , where b̃ is now the value of the government’s net financial position vis-a-vis the private sector.
Denoting by xi government’s holdings of asset i ∈ Is− and by kg government’s holdings of capital,
the government’s value function satisfies a modified version of (15) analogous to (32).
    Bellman equation 3’
                                             ½      µ      ¶                          ¾
                                                         1                  0
                         Ṽ (b̃, s− ) = max E Fs + k 1 −     − gs + β Ṽ (b̃s , s)|s−                 (38)
                                                         β
subject to
                                        © £      ¡     ¢   ¤ ª
                                       E β 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s |s− = 1                                   (39)
                                        ©           ª
                                       E βRsi,s− |s− = 1     ∀i ∈ Is−                                 (40)
 X                   1        ¡       ¢      1    1
         xi (Rsi,s− − )+kg (1+ 1 − τ k Fk,s − )+b̃ +gs ≤ ls Fl,s +ls Hl,s +τ k kFk,s +b̃0s ,   ∀s ∈ S (41)
 i∈Is−
                     β                       β    β

                                         M s ≤ b̃0s ≤ M s ,      ∀s ∈ S                               (42)

   To make the comparison with (32), I have left as constraints in the program the conditions
E {βRsi,s− |s− } = 1 which do not depend on the allocation when the marginal utility of consumption


                                                        21
is constant, and are just in this case exogenous conditions that need to be met for an equilibrium
to exist.
    In a particular case, allowing the government to trade physical capital actually allows its to
reach the complete markets Ramsey outcome.

Proposition 5 Absent productivity and preference shocks, the government can perfectly approx-
imate the complete markets Ramsey outcome with a larger and larger long or short position in
capital.

    The intuition for this proposition is that absent productivity and preference shocks, the complete
markets Ramsey outcome features constant labor supply across states. Hence the return on physical
capital is risk free: physical capital and the risk free bond are colinear assets. By commanding small
deviations from the constant level labor supply of the complete markets allocation, the government
can align the variations of the returns on capital with its need for funds. By taking extreme
positions in capital, compensated by opposite positions on the risk free bond, the government can
then leverage these variations and smooth perfectly its need for funds across states.
    The extreme positions required for replicating the complete markets allocation are reminiscent
of the findings of Angeletos (2002) and Buera and Nicolini (2004) . Both contributions analyze
how the government can use diﬀerent maturities of risk free debt to implement complete markets
Ramsey outcome. They find that generically, if the number of maturities is larger than the number
of shocks, then the complete markets allocation can be implemented, but that typically, very large
positions in the diﬀerent maturities are required. It is also worth noting that in this example with
quasi-linear preferences, diﬀerent maturities of risk free debt would not permit the government to
replicate the complete markets Ramsey outcome since the entire term structure is entirely pinned
down by preferences.
    With productivity and preferences shocks, the government can typically no longer replicate the
complete markets Ramsey outcome if fewer assets than states of the world are traded. The GCAPM
takes the particularly simple form11
                                      ©£   ¡       ¢        ¤       ª
                                  E     1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s − R ν s |s− = 0                                    (43)
                                             ©£ i,s− ¤       ª
                                         E     Rs − R ν s |s− = 0                                           (44)

where R ≡ β1 is the risk free rate.
   Equations (43) and (44) can be compared to the standard CCAPM Euler equations
                                       ©   ¡       ¢           ª
                                      E 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,s − R|s− = 0
                                              ©             ª
                                             E Rsi,s− − R|s− = 0
  11
    I choose to write the GCAPM and CCAPM equations in this "excess return" format to allow for easier comparison
with Bohn (1990).


                                                       22
     which characterize the optimal portfolio for consumers. The only diﬀerence between the two
sets of equations is that the marginal utility of consumption, 1, is replaced by ν s — the multiplier
measuring the severity of the government budget constraint in state s. The stochastic process
{β t (1 + ν t )}t≥0 can be interpreted as the pricing kernel of the government. A way to see this is to
introduce, instead of assuming an exogenous process for government expenditures, a standard utility
for government funds v(gt , st ). In this case, the first order condition for government expenditures is
vg (gt , st ) = 1 + ν t .
     Note that the pricing kernel of the government is not trivial — i.e. has a positive variance —
despite the face that agents are risk neutral. The variation in the pricing kernel comes only from
the imperfect ability to smooth taxes across time under incomplete markets. Indeed, if markets
were complete, the pricing kernel of the government and the pricing kernel of the agents would be
colinear — in this instance, constant.
     These equations can be compared to the results in Bohn (1990).     ˙ Following Barro (1979), Bohn
considers an environment with incomplete markets, no capital and risk neutral consumers, where
the government must finance an exogenous stream of expenditures using distortionary taxes. Taxes
τ are assumed to impose an ad hoc increasing convex deadweight cost h(τ ). Bohn derives the
following formula for the return of any traded asset R

                                         E {[Rt − R] h0 (τ t )} = 0                                     (45)

     Hence (44) can be seen as a microfounded version of (45). Some important diﬀerences are worth
noting. In particular it is not generally true in my model that ν t is a function of τ lt and τ kt or even
of tax revenues, as a perfect analogy with (45) would require. In fact, ν t is a function of the #S2 + 1
variables st , st−1 and ebt−1 . Generically, ν t is therefore not a function of the #S + 1 functions τ ls and
τ k . In the specification with a utility v(gt , st ) from government expenditures, ν t = vg (gt , st ) − 1,
so that ν t is a function of gt and st — which can be expressed as a function of st−1 , st and ebt−1 .
Importantly, the state st appears in this formula along with government expenditures. Even if I
were to assume that v(gt , st ) is independent of st , this discussion would suggest that a non linear
function of government expenditures vg (gt ) − 1 is better suited for approximating the marginal cost
of public funds that an increasing function of taxes or tax revenues h0 (τ t ) as in (45). This discussion
is important, as tests and implications of this theory rely crucially on sorting out correctly the time
series properties of the pricing kernel of the government.
     I have focused so far on traded assets. Uncovering the pricing kernel of the government allows me
to determine the price the government would be willing to pay for non traded assets. In particular,
consider a marginal public investment project requiring an outlay I, and whose payoﬀ Xs is not
spanned by traded assets. Then the government should follow the following capital budgeting rule:
invest in the project if and only if

                                              E{Xs |s− }
                                              Cov {Xs /I,1+ν s |s− }
                                                                       ≥I                               (46)
                                        R−        1+E{ν s |s− }


                                                       23
     where R = β1 . This capital budgeting rule (46) shows that the government should discount cash
flows using the beta associated with its own pricing kernel, and not with that of consumers. Hence
the government should attach a public risk premium to returns that covary negatively with shocks
aﬀecting adversely its budget.
     It is interesting to note that the asset holdings in the optimal portfolio of government liabilities
   i
{xt , kg,t } has a unit root component. Hence not only do the government’s total liabilities b̃t have a
random walk component, but the composition of its liabilities display a similar kind of persistence.


7     Numerical Simulations

7.1    Numerical method and parameter values
Numerical method. I approach the problem by solving the dynamic programming problems (10),
(29), (15) and (38), and then back out the optimal policies. In my calculations, I restrict the state
space to be rectangular and bounded. I check numerically that enlarging the rectangle doesn’t alter
the results. The dynamic programming problem is then solved by a value iteration algorithm with
Howard acceleration. I approximate the value function with cubic splines.
   Calibration of the risk averse case. To permit comparability of my results to those in Chari,
Christiano and Kehoe (1994), I consider the same parameters and functional forms. I assume that
preferences are of the form

                                 u(c, l) = (1 − γ) log(c) + γ log(1 − l)

Technology is described by a production function

                               F (k, l, z, t) = kα (exp(ρt + z̃)l)1−α − δk

This incorporates two kinds of labor augmenting technological change in the production function.
The variable ρ captures deterministic growth in this technical change. The variable z̃ is a zero
mean technological shock that follows a two-state Markov chain with mean z̄ and autocorrelation
ρz . Let government expenditure be given by gt = G exp(ρt + g̃) where G is a constant and g̃ follows
a two-state Markov chain with mean ḡ and autocorrelation ρg . I take γ = 0.75, β = 0.98, α = 0.34,
ρ = 0.016, G = 0.07, ρg = 0.89, σ g = 0.07, ρz = 0.81 and σ z = 0.04.
                                               fb                fb             fb
     I impose fixed debt limits M = −0.2GDP and M̄ = GDP , where GDP is the mean across
states of first best level of GDP that would occur if the state were absorbing.
     Notice that without technological shocks, the economy has a balanced growth path along which
consumption, capital and government spending grow at rate ρ and labor is constant. As in Chari,
Christiano and Kehoe (1994), it is straightforward to modify the model to allow for exogenous
growth.


                                                   24
    The length of the accounting period where capital are held fixed by assumption is an important
parameter. I analyze two series of simulations, one where the period length is one year, and one
where the period length is five years.
    Calibration of the quasi-linear case. I also calibrate a model with quasi-linear preferences
given by
                                       u(c, l) = c + γ log(1 − l)

To ensure that labor is stationary, I impose that growth is zero in this case. I also adjust γ to 0.5.


7.2    Results
Results in the quasi-linear case. Figure 1 displays several variables along a typical path, in an
economy with only government expenditure shocks and no capital ownership. The top left panel
displays the path of shocks, which take only two possible values, one and two, corresponding to low
and high expenditures respectively. Note that debt, labor taxes, labor and capital all appear to
be more persistent than the shock process, reflecting the fact that they incorporate a random walk
component. The bottom left panel represents taxes on capital. Taxes on capital are negative — as
predicted by Proposition 2— but are never larger than 10−5 . I experimented with other specifications
of the production function (CES) and never got a result larger than 10−4 . Note that capital taxes
also seem to incorporate some persistence, although less than other variables in the economy. Capital
taxes are relatively larger in absolute value when debt approaches its upper limit.
    Figure 2 (respectively 3) displays the policy functions when the previous government expendi-
ture shock was low (respectively high). On the horizontal axis of every graph is inherited debt. On
the vertical axis is the variable whose name indexes the graph. The solid blue (respectively dashed
green) lines correspond to the policy functions when the contemporaneous shock is low (respectively
high). The second graph on the top row is a zoom on the top left graph representing the policy
functions for debt. The thick red line is the 45 degree line. As is apparent from this graph, a high
shock is partially absorbed through an increased debt, and a low shock through a decrease in debt.
The bottom left graph displays the policy functions for the multipliers. Both are increasing in the
level of inherited debt. The multiplier associated with the high shock is always larger than the
multiplier associated with the low shock. Moreover, the bottom right panel shows that the variance
of ν s across states for a given s− is increasing in the level of inherited debt: As inherited debt gets
close to the upper debt limit, the government is more limited in its ability to use debt as a shock
absorber if the high shock hits. Note that this variance is always minuscule here, reflecting the fact
that with reasonable debt limits, risk free debt is a very good shock absorber. Capital taxes are
small for two reasons: First because of the Cobb Douglas benchmark, second because the variance
of ν s is small. As government debt approaches the upper limit, the variance of ν s increases and
with it the absolute value of the tax rate.
    Table 1 displays the optimal capital ownership level in the invariant distribution, depending on
the environment. I first discuss the results when the period length is set to one year. With only


                                                  25
government expenditure shocks, Proposition 5 shows that the government takes an infinite long or
short position in capital and replicates the complete markets allocation. With only two possible
productivity shocks, the government can also replicate the complete markets allocation, with a finite
                                               fb
— but large — short position of −295% of k , where is the mean across states of first best level of
capital that would prevail if the state were absorbing. That a short position is required is easily
understood: The marginal product of capital correlates positively with productivity shocks, and
hence with government revenues. The magnitude of the position results from the fact that capital
is very colinear with risk free debt. Hence a large leveraged position, short in capital, long in the
risk free bond, is required to provide the government with a state contingent source of revenues that
matches the desired variations in the net present value of government surpluses. With government
expenditure shocks and productivity shocks, the government cannot replicate the complete markets
allocation anymore. The optimal government capital ownership level is almost identical to the
one that prevails with only technological shocks. This reflects the fact that in this business cycle
calibration, technological shocks are a bigger source of variation in the government needs for funds
than government expenditure shocks.
     Increasing the period length to five years does not alter the result of Proposition 5. By contrast,
optimal government capital ownership in the case of productivity shocks, or both productivity
shocks and government expenditure shocks drops from −295% to −59%. The reason is that as the
period length is increased, shocks per period become less persistent - getting closer and closer to
i.i.d. Hence the variation of the net present value of government surpluses that the government seeks
to hedge becomes smaller — approximately 5 times smaller. Hence a smaller position in capital is
required.
     In this model, the welfare gains from completing markets are small. In all simulations, I compute
them to be less than 0.01% of lifetime consumption. This confirms the finding of AMSS for business
cycle type calibrations. The size of welfare gains is well understood from AMSS: They depend on
the size and persistense of the shocks, the curvature in the uitlity function, and the debt limits. The
welfare gains are much larger in a war and peace exercise I report below. Nevertheless, an interesting
question is: How much of the gap between welfare in the incomplete markets, no government
ownership allocation and welfare in the complete markets allocation can government ownership
cover? In all simulations, I find this number to be above 85%. Moreover, in the simulation with a
5 year period length and both government and productivity shocks, I find that a short position of
           fb
15% of k allows to realize 47% — a large, but more reasonable position— of these welfare gains.
     I also calibrate a war and peace example, with a one year period length and only government
expenditure shocks. The parameters are the same as in the business cycle simulation, except for
σ g which I take to be equal to 0.7 instead of 0.07. I compute the mean welfare gains to be 0.6%
of lifetime consumption. The welfare gains reach 1.5% of lifetime consumption if debt is close to
the debt limit and the economy experienced a high government expenditure shock in the previous
period. With such large shocks, taxes on capital are larger in absolute value than in the business-
cycle simulations, but small — between 0 and −1% with probability 75%. Taxes on capital become


                                                  26
large — up to −20% — when debt is very close to the debt limit.
    Results in the risk averse case. I first start with a limited experiment: I start the economy
in period 0 with a given value of (b0 , k0 , θ0 , s− ) with s− = 1, corresponding to the low government
expenditure shock. In period 1, a permanent government expenditure shock hits the economy. This
shock can be high — correpsonding to s = 2 — or low — corresponding to s = 1 — with probabilities
5% and 95% respectively. Capital ownership by the government is disallowed. All the uncertainty
in the economy is resolved in period 1. Figures 4 and 5 display the impulse responses of several
variables in the economy corresponding to the high and low shock respectively.
    First note that the hedging term is non-zero only in the first period, and is smaller than 10−3 .
Hence taxes on capital are dominated by the intertemporal term. Following a high shock, taxes
on capital spike at 150% and then fall back to 0. The interest rate drops to −2% and then reverts
almost immediately to 2%. This eﬀect would be present even in an economy without capital as in
AMSS. Werning (2005) coins the term "interest rate manipulation".
    Debt initially goes up to absorb the high government expenditure shock in period 1, and then
drops permanently to a level lower than b0 . From the government’s budget constraint, it is apparent
that this is the mechanical result of the spike in capital taxation revenues and the low interest rate
that prevails between period 1 and period 2. The lower post period 2 debt level helps reduce the
burden of interest payments on the government’s budget constraint. Capital taxes therefore play a
important role in absorbing the shock: They help reduce the debt burden after a high shocks both
by lowering the interest rate and by directly collecting revenues. Note that in the case where the
low shock hits, capital is subsidized between period 1 and period 2. Capital taxes are therefore not
used to raise revenues on average, but rather to help absorb the variations in the net present value
of government expenditures.
    Consumption initially increases. This is just an intertemporal substitution eﬀect as consumers
face a low interest rate between period 1 and period 2. From period 2 on, consumption is permanently
lower. Labor and labor taxes also move up permanently after period 2, hinting at the random walk
properties of these variables. The fact that labor and labor taxes increase is just the result of
a wealth eﬀect, as consumption drops after period 2. Capital drops after the shock. From the
resource constraint, one can see that this drop in investment is the mirror image of the increase in
consumption stemming from interest rate manipulation and the increase in government expenditure.
    Figures 6 and 7 display impulse responses for a similar exercise with respectively a low and high
productivity shock. The technological shock inperiod 1 can be low — correpsonding to s = 2 — or
high — corresponding to s = 1 — with probabilities 5% and 95% respectively.
    Figure 8 displays a typical path for several variables in an economy with only government
expenditure shock and no capital ownership. After a transition from a low shock to a high shock,
the tax on capital spikes at about 200% and then reverts to a level of about 5%. That taxes on
capital are positive until a new low shock hits reflects the fact that resources are scarcer today
than tomorrow on average, given the possibility that a low shock occurs. Symmetrically, after a
transition from a high shock to a low shock, the tax on capital spikes at about −200% and then


                                                  27
reverts to a level of about -5%.
    The volatility of capital taxes depends crucially on the period length. The reason can be ex-
plained as follows. Ultimately, the welfare costs associated with capital taxes come through the
distortion that they impose on the path of consumption. The distortion associated with a one time
capital tax becomes larger as the period length is increased, because consumption is distorted for
a longer period. By contrast, the benefits in terms of reduced debt following a high shock decrease
as shocks become less persistent per period. In the continuous time limit, the costs are zero, and
the government is able to replicate the complete markets allocation with infinite taxes or subsidizes
during an infinitely small period following the shock.
    Figure 9 displays a typical path for several variables in the economy when the period length is
set to five years. The positive and negative spikes in capital taxes are now 20% and -20%. Table
2 summarizes the statistical properties of capital and labor taxes depending on the period length.
Standard deviations and autocorrelations are reported per period and not per year. The standard
deviation of labor taxes — 5.1% — is close to the number reported by Chari, Christiano and Kehoe
(1994) — 6%—for this case. Labor taxes are quite persistent, and more persistent when the period
length is 5 years: this is the consequence of less abrupt movements in capital taxes and the capital
stock when the period length is longer. Importantly, note that capital taxes hardly display any
persistence. This is due to the fact that the magnitudes of capital taxes is essentially by a diﬀerence
              ψ
term uψc,ss − θs− , which tends to remove the unit root component in uψc,ss .
    For an economy with only two government expenditure shocks and a one year period length,
the government can replicate the complete markets allocation with a capital ownership of about
             fb                                   fb
2300% of k . This position drops to 680% of k when the period length is extended to five years.
For an economy with only two productivity shocks and a one year period length, the government
                                                                                                     fb
can replicate the complete markets allocation with a capital ownership of about −400% of k .
                                      fb
This position drops to −157% of k when the period length is extended to five years.The welfare
gains from completing markets are small — 0.09% of lifetime consumption — albeit larger than in
the quasi-linear case.


8    Conclusion
I have characterized optimal capital taxation and government ownership when markets are incom-
plete. In this context, capital taxation and ownership are two ways for the government to collect
state dependent revenues and hedge its burden from distortionary taxation across states. Although
I have focused on capital taxation, the insight that with incomplete markets and a policy lag, taxes
acquire a direct hedging role, and that the indirect hedging consequences of the distortions they
generate should be taken into account, is more general.
    I have found that this hedging motive for capital taxation is always negligible: Capital taxes
come with distortions through the adjustment of capital. This aﬀects the capital tax base and labor
tax revenues across states in a way that almost perfectly undoes the direct hedging benefits. In a

                                                  28
baseline case, capital taxes are exactly zero. Away from this benchmark, the hedging component
of capital taxes is always computed to be minuscule.
    By contrast, capital ownership provides the government with a powerful hedging instrument.
The reason is that trading, unlike taxing, does not involve distorsions. In a baseline case, I have
shown that the government can perfectly approximate the complete markets allocation by taking
an infinitely long or short position in capital. Away from this benchmark, optimal positions are
large and decrease sharply when the period length is increased. Substantial benefits can be reaped
from smaller positions. Government expenditure shocks call for a long position while productivity
shocks push in the direction of a short position. In a business cycle calibration, I have shows that
productivity shocks is the leading force — resulting in an optimal long position.
    Refining these propositions would require developing a more realistic model for investment —
incorporating adjustment costs and time to build — and asset valuation. It would also be interesting
to move away from the representative agent framework I have analyzed. Unobservable agent het-
erogeneity together with the government’s concern for redistribution would provide an endogenous
reason for the use distorsionary taxes. Finally, the large capital positions called for by the model
put strain on the assumption of a benevolent government with full commitment. In this light,
incorporating relevant political economy constraints into Ramsey type models of optimal taxation
appears as a promissing research avenue. I leave these issues for future work.


9       Appendix
The three terms in (28)
  The three terms in (28) are


                               τ k = T h (k, b̃, θ, s− ) + T i (k, b̃, θ, s− ) + T b (k, b̃, θ, s− )

where
                             E{−k(1−τ k )Fkk,s uc,s |s− }                 ∙                                                              ¸
    h                            E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }                            Cov {kFk,s uc,s , ν s |s− } Cov {kFkk,s uc,s , ν s |s− }
T (k, b̃, θ, s− ) =               ψs                                                                     −
                      E{Fk,s uc,s u
                                  c,s
                                      |s− }       E{Fk,s ν s uc,s |s− }         E{kFk,s uc,s |s− }          E{kFkk,s uc,s |s− }
                        E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }
                                              +    E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }

                                                                q                          ψ
                                                                                                    r
                                                                                        ψ
                                                               E [1+(1−τ k )Fk,s ]uc,s u s − s−
                                                                                              θ
                                                                                                 |s−
                                                                                                 c,s
                                                                                βE{uc,s Fk,s |s− }
                                T i (k, b̃, θ, s− ) = −                        ψs
                                                               E{Fk,s uc,s u       |s− }       E{Fk,s ν s uc,s |s− }
                                                                               c,s
                                                                  E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }
                                                                                           +    E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }
                                                                      ν 2 ,s−        ν ,s
                                                                         β
                                                                              M k,s − 1β − M k,s−
                                                                                   −
                                                                               βE{uc,s Fk,s |s− }
                                  T b (k, b̃, θ, s− ) =                    ψ
                                                              E{Fk,s uc,s u s |s− }        E{Fk,s ν s uc,s |s− }
                                                                           c,s
                                                                E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }
                                                                                       +    E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }

where ψs− is the multiplier on the resource constraint in the previous period.

                                                                          29
    Proof of Lemma 1
    The consumer’s problem is a convex program, and u and F are not satiated. Then the first order
conditions (6), (7) and (8) together with (5) holding with equality are necessary and suﬃcient for
an optimum in the consumer’s problem. It is straightforward to see that if (1) holds with equality,
the fact that (3) holds with equality implies that (5) holds with equality — a version of Walras law.
    A derivation of (26) and (28) using a Lagrangian approach
    The approach in the text relies on the assumption that the value function is diﬀerentiable.
An alternative to making that assumption is to approach the task of characterizing the Ramsey
allocation by composing a Lagrangian for the Ramsey problem. I keep notations as close as possible
to those in the text.
    I attach stochastic processes {β t Pr(st )μt , β t Pr(st )ν t , β t Pr(st )ν 1,t , β t Pr(st )ν 2,t , β t Pr(st )ψt }t≥0
to the constraints
                               ©       £   ¡          ¢      ¤ª
                      uc,t = Et βuc,t+1 1 + 1 − τ kt+1 Fk,t+1 ,                       ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St ,

                  uc,t
      b̃t−1                 + gt uc,t ≤ lt Fl,t uc,t + lt ul,t + τ kt kt−1 Fk,t uc,t + b̃t ,     ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St ,
              βEt−1 {uc,t }
                        M(kt , uc,t , st ) ≤ b̃t ≤ M(kt , uc,t , st ),        ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St and

                                  ct + gt + kt ≤ Ft + kt−1 ,              ∀t ≥ 0 and st ∈ St .

    Then the Lagrangian for the Ramsey problem can be represented as

 ¡ g                  ¢     X
                            ∞
                    k
L b−1 , r0 , k0 , τ 0 = E−1   β t ut
                                     t=0
                                     X
                                     ∞
                                              £                    ¡   ¡        ¢     ¢¤
                               E−1         β t −μt uc,t + μt−1 uc,t 1 + 1 − τ kt Fk,t
                                     t=0
                                       X∞         µ                                                                                     ¶
                                              t            uc,t
                               +E−1          β ν t −b̃t−1              − gt uc,t + lt Fl,t uc,t + lt ul,t + τ kt kt−1 Fk,t uc,t + b̃t
                                    t=0
                                                       βEt−1 {u c,t }
                                    X∞     h     ³                        ´       ³                          ´i
                               +E−1     β t ν 2,t b̃t − M(kt , uc,t , st ) + ν 1,s M(kt , uc,t , st ) − b̃t
                                       t=0
                                      X
                                      ∞
                               +E−1          β t ψt (Ft + kt−1 − cs − gt − kt )
                                       t=0


   where I have introduced for notational convenience the multiplier μ−1 , which I impose to be
zero: μ−1 = 0.
   I am now in position to derive the first order conditions associated with this Lagrangian.
   The first order condition for b̃t is

                                                    Et {uc,t ν t+1 }
                                             νt −                    + ν 2,t − ν 1,t = 0
                                                      Et {uc,t }


                                                                 30
   which proves equation (26).
   The formula for the optimal tax on capital (28) can be derived by combining the first order
conditions for τ kt and kt−1 .The first order condition for τ kt can be written as

                                         −μt−1 Et−1 {uc,t Fk,t } + Et−1 {uc,t kt−1 Fk,t ν t } = 0                                           (47)

For t ≥ 1,the first order condition for kt−1 is
                   ©     ¡        ¢     ª      ©    ¡                                                     ¢ª
      0 = μt−1 Et−1 βuc,t 1 − τ kt Fkk,t + Et−1 βν t lt Fkl,t uc,t + τ kt Fk,t uc,t + τ kt kt−1 Fkk,t uc,t (48)
               −ν 2,t−1 M k,t−1 + ν 1,t−1 M k,t−1 + Et−1 {βψt (1 + Fk,t )} − ψt−1

   I use (47) to replace μt−1 . I then use the constant return to scale assumption to replace lt Fkl,t
by −kt−1 Fkk,t , to rearrange (47) as follows

         ¡         ¢ Et−1 {uc,t kt−1 Fk,t ν t }
0 =       1 − τ kt                              Et−1 {βuc,t Fkk,t } + τ kt Et−1 {βν t Fk,t uc,t } − (1 − τ kt )Et−1 {βν t kt−1 Fkk,t uc,t }
                        Et−1 {uc,t Fk,t }
                                             ψ                                    ψ
         +τ kt Et−1 {βψt Fk,t } + Et−1 { t β(1 + (1 − τ kt )Fk,t )uc,t } − t−1 Et−1 {β(1 + (1 − τ kt )Fk,t )uc,t }
                                            uc,t                                  uc,t−1
         −ν 2,t−1 M k,t−1 + ν 1,t−1 M k,t−1

which in turn can be rewritten as
                                                               τ kt = Tth + Tti + Ttb

where
                        Et−1 {−kt−1 (1−τ kt )Fkk,t uc,t }              ∙                                                                ¸
                               Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }                           Et−1 {kt−1 Fk,t uc,t , ν t } Et−1 {kt−1 Fkk,t uc,t , ν t }
         Tth   =                   ψt                                                                  −
                   Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t u
                                   c,t
                                       }       Et−1 {Fk,t ν t uc,t }        Et−1 {kt−1 Fk,t uc,t }       Et−1 {kt−1 Fkk,t uc,t }
                     Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }
                                           +    Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }

                                                                                                              
                                                                                                 ψt     ψ
                                                         Et−1    [1+(1−τ k )Fk,t ]uc,t          uc,t
                                                                                                     − u t−1
                                                                                                        c,t−1
                                                                             βEt−1 {uc,t Fk,t }
                                            Tti = −                            ψt
                                                            Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t u      }       Et−1 {Fk,t ν t uc,t }
                                                                               c,t
                                                              Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }
                                                                                       +    Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }

and                                                              ν 2 ,t−1          ν ,t−1
                                                                     β
                                                                          M k,t−1 − 1 β M k,t−1
                                                                           βEt−1 {uc,t Fk,t }
                                                Ttb =                         ψt
                                                          Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t u       }       Et−1 {Fk,t ν t uc,t }
                                                                              c,t
                                                             Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }
                                                                                      +    Et−1 {Fk,t uc,t }

This in turn shows that (28) holds.

   Proof of Proposition 1




                                                                              31
   If F (k, l, s) = A(s)k α l1−α , then kFkk,s = (α − 1)Fk,s so that

                 Cov {kFkk,s , ν s |s− }   (α − 1) Cov {Fk,s , ν s |s− }   Cov {kFk,s , ν s |s− }
                                         =                               =
                   E{kFkk,s |s− }             (α − 1)E{Fk,s |s− }            E{kFk,s |s− }

By (28), this implies that τ k = 0.
   Since (28) applies from t = 1 on, this shows that τ kt = 0 for all t ≥ 1.

   Proof of Proposition 2
   I first prove the following lemma

Lemma 3 Consider {xn , yn , zn }1≤n≤N ∈ RN    ++ , and probability distribution {pn }1≤n≤N with pn > 0
for all n. Assume that there exists n and n0 such that zn 6= zn0 . The following holds: (i) assume that
xn < xn0 if and only if zn > zn0 , then E{xn yn zn }
                                         E{xn yn }
                                                     < E{yn zn }
                                                        E{yn }
                                                                 ; (ii) assume that xn < xn0 if and only if
                E{xn yn zn } E{yn zn }
zn < zn0 , then E{xn yn } > E{yn } .

Proof.
                                                E{xn yn zn }   E{yn zn }
                                                             <
                                                 E{xn yn }      E{yn }
if and only if
                                   E{xn yn zn }E{yn } < E{yn zn }E{xn yn }

if and only if
                                 X                                     X
                                        pn pn0 xn yn zn yn0 <                 pn pn0 yn zn xn0 yn0
                                 n,n0                                  n,n0

if and only if
                                                X
                                         0<            pn pn0 yn zn yn0 [xn0 − xn ]
                                                n,n0

if and only if
                                         1X
                                 0<              pn pn0 yn yn0 [zn − zn0 ] [xn0 − xn ]
                                         2 n6=n0

which trivially proves claims (i) and (ii) in the lemma.
   Assume F is CES with elasticity of substitution σ with Hicks neutral technology shocks:
                                                h σ−1               i σ
                                                                 σ−1 σ−1
                                 F (k, l) = A(s) αk σ + (1 − α)l  σ




   Then                                                       h                                   i σ−1
                                                                                                     1
                                                         −1            σ−1                  σ−1
                             Fk (k, l) = αA(s)k          σ        αk    σ     + (1 − α)l     σ



and
                                                1
                                                                              −1
                                                                                   h σ−1               i 1
                                                                                                    σ−1 σ−1
                                                σ
                  −kFkk (k, l) =          ¡ k ¢ σ−1           αA(s)k          σ     αk σ + (1 − α)l  σ
                                     α
                                    1−α     l
                                                 σ
                                                       +1



                                                                  32
so that
                                                                     1
                                                                     σ
                                        −kFkk (k, l) =         ¡ k ¢ σ−1        Fk (k, l)
                                                          α
                                                         1−α     l
                                                                      σ
                                                                           +1
                                                                                             1
Proposition 2 now follows. Consider for example case (i). Then                               σ
                                                                                                   σ−1     is a decreasing function
                                                                                    α
                                                                                   1−α   ( lks )    σ +1

of ν s . Lemma 3 shows that

                                        E{−kFkk,s , ν s |s− }   E{kFk,s , ν s |s− }
                                                              <
                                         E{−kFkk,s |s− }         E{kFk,s |s− }

which proves that τ k > 0. Cases (ii), (iii) and (iv) in Proposition 2 can be proved along the same
lines.
    I then prove the second part of the proposition. If F (k, l, s) = A(s)kα l1−α − δk, then kFkk,s =
(α − 1)(Fk,s + δ) so that

               Cov {kFkk,s , ν s |s− }     (α − 1) Cov {Fk,s , ν s |s− }   Cov {kFk,s , ν s |s− }
                                       =                                 =
                 E{kFkk,s |s− }          (α − 1)δ + (α − 1)E{Fk,s |s− }     E{kFk,s |s− } + δ

Hence
                                    Cov {kFkk,s , ν s |s− }   Cov {kFk,s , ν s |s− }
                                                            <
                                      E{kFkk,s |s− }            E{kFk,s |s− }
if and only if Cov {kFk,s , ν s |s− } > 0. This proves the second part of the proposition.
    Proof of Lemma 2
    It is clear that Ve is decreasing in eb. Since Ve is diﬀerentiable, this is equivalent to Veb ≤ 0. Since,

β Veb,t = −ν t + ν 1,t , this proves that ν t − ν 1,t ≥ 0.
     Under natural debt limits, (21) becomes

                                                ν s− = E{ν s |s− }+ν 1,s−

which I can rewrite as
                                  ν s− − ν 1,s− = E{ν s − ν 1,s |s− } + E{ν 1,s |s− }
                    n o
    This proves that Veb,t              is a nonnegative supermartingale. Therefore, the supermartingale
                                  t≥1
convergence theorem (see Lòeve (1977)) asserts that Veb,t converges almost surely to a finite non-
negative random variable Veb,∞ . Let Se be the unique ergodic set of {st }t≥0 . Consider, for every
s ∈ Se , the random sets S s = {t, st = s}. Let φs (−1) = −1 and for all t ≥ 0, define the sequence
of random numbers φs (t) = inf{t > φs (t − 1), st = s}. Since Ve is continuously diﬀerentiable and
concave, this implies in turn that there are finite random variable eb∞,s such that for every s ∈ Se ,
{ebφs (t) }t≥0 converges to eb∞,s . Since policy functions in (15) are continuous, this implies that every
point {ebs }s∈Se in the support of {eb∞,s }s∈Se is such that for every states s and s− in the unique
ergodic set of {st }t≥0 , eb0s (ebs− , s− ) = ebs and Veb,s (ebs , s) = Veb,s− (ebs− , s− ). This implies that for starting
at such a point (ebs , s), the planner is able to implement the optimal complete markets allocation.

                                                            33
By Assumption 1, this is only possible if ebs = −M ns for all s. This proves Lemma 2.
   Proof of Proposition 3
   If F (k, l, s) = A(s)k α l1−α , then kFkk,s = (α − 1)Fk,s so that

           Cov {kFkk,s uc,s , ν s |s− }   (α − 1) Cov {Fk,s uc,s , ν s |s− }   Cov {kFk,s uc,s , ν s |s− }
                                        =                                    =
             E{kFkk,s uc,s |s− }             (α − 1)E{Fk,s uc,s |s− }            E{kFk,s uc,s |s− }



   Proof of Proposition 4
   The proof follows closely Zhu (1992). More details can be found there.
   Note that T2,t > 0 if and only if
                                        n£   ¡       ¢    ¤            o
                                 Et−1     1 + 1 − τ k Fk,t uc,t uψc,tt             ψt−1
                                                                               >
                                    Et−1 {[1 + (1 − τ k ) Fk,t ] uc,t }            uc,t−1
T2,t < 0 if and only if                 n£                             o
                                             ¡       ¢    ¤
                                 Et−1     1 + 1 − τ k Fk,t uc,t uψc,tt             ψt−1
                                                                               <
                                    Et−1 {[1 + (1 − τ k ) Fk,t ] uc,t }            uc,t−1
and T2,t = 0 if and only if
                                     n£  ¡       ¢  ¤          o
                                               k          ψt
                                 Et−1 1 + 1 − τ Fk,t uc,t uc,t                     ψt−1
                                                                               =
                                    Et−1 {[1 + (1 −      τ k ) Fk,t ] uc,t }       uc,t−1
                    £    ¡      ¢    ¤
   Let me denote 1 + 1 − τ k Fk,t uc,t by Kt and uψc,tt by ξ t . Since policy functions in (10) are
continuous, Kt and ξ t are continuous functions K(xt ) and ξ(xt ) of xt = {kt , b̃t , uc,t , st }. Call π(x0 , x)
the transition function.
   Let Υ be the operator mapping the space z of continuous functions of x into itself, defined by
                                                     R
                                                         f (x0 )K(x0 )π(x0 , x)
                                        Υ(f )(x) ≡       R
                                                            K(x0 )π(x0 , x)

    Therefore, T2 (x) > 0 if and only if Υ(ξ)(x) > ξ(x), T2 (x) < 0 if and only if Υ(ξ)(x) < ξ(x) and
T2 (x) = 0 if and only if Υ(ξ)(x) = ξ(x). Thus the sign of T2 is entirely determined by the sign of
Υ(ξ) − ξ.
    Suppose P ∞ {Υ(ξ)(x) ≤ ξ(x)} = 1. Let ξ ≡ max{ξ, P ∞ {ξ(x) ≥ ξ} = 1}. Define At = {x, ξ(x) ≥
Υt ξ(x)}, Bt = {x, Pr{ξ(xt ) ≥ ξ|x0 = x} = 1}, A = ∩∞                    ∞
                                                      t=0 At and B = ∩t=0 Bt . Then At , Bt , A and B
are closed, and P ∞ {At } = P ∞ {Bt } = 1. Hence A ∩ B is closed and P ∞ {A ∩ B} = 1. By definition
of ξ, there exists x ∈ A ∩ B such that ξ(x) = ξ. This implies Pr{ξ(xt ) = ξ|x0 = x} = 1. Using the
ergodicity of xt ,
                           P ∞ {ξ(x) = ξ} = lim Pr{ξ(xt ) = ξ|x0 = x} = 1
                                                   t→∞

   Hence P ∞ {ξ(x) = ξ} = 1. Similarly P ∞ {Υ(ξ)(x) ≥ ξ(x)} = 1 implies P ∞ {ξ(x) = ξ} = 1 where

                                                           34
ξ ≡ inf{ξ, P ∞ {ξ(x) ≤ ξ} = 1}. This proves Proposition 4.
    Proof of Proposition 5
    Consider the complete markets allocation {kc , lc , eb0c } in state (eb, s− ). Labor lc and net government
liabilities in the end of the period eb0c are constant across states of the world s. Define Xs ≡ β1 eb+gs −eb0c .
    Consider next the incomplete markets environment. Denote by R(k, ls ) ≡ ls Fl,s + ls Hl,s the
revenues from labor taxation in state s. Set τ k = 0 and solve, for a given kg , the following system
in {k, ls }.

                                          E{R(k, ls )|s− } = E{Xs |s− }                                     (49)
                                                 R(k, ls )   Xs
                             (Fk (k, ls ) − r) +           =    ,       ∀s ∈ S                              (50)
                                                    kg       kg

   Note that if (50) holds and |kg | < ∞, then (49) is equivalent to E{Fk (k, ls )|s− } = r. If (50) holds
and |kg | = ∞, then E{Fk (k, ls )|s− } = r holds automatically.
   Denote by {k(kg ), ls (kg )} the solution: together with eb0c,s (kg ) ≡ eb0c for all s, the variables
{k(kg ), ls (kg ), eb0c,s } satisfy the constraints in (15). Then

                           lim {k(kg ), ls (kg )} = lim {k(kg ), ls (kg )} = {kc , lc }
                          kg →∞                    kg →−∞


   Therefore, by choosing kg large and picking {k(kg ), ls (kg ), eb0c,s }, the government can approximate
as well as desired the complete markets allocation in state (eb, s− ). By doing this in every state and
date, the government can therefore perfectly approximate the complete markets allocation. This
proves proposition 5.




                                                       35
10       Figures and Tables


                                     Table 1: Optimal capital ownership (as a fraction of k) in the quasi-linear model


                                                                                                                                                                    Government and productivity
                                                                          Government shocks                      Productivity shocks
                                                                                                                                                                            shocks


           Period length = 1 year                                                     infinity                                 -295%                                                  -295%

           Period length = 5 years                                                    infinity                                     -59%                                                -59%




                                                                   Table 2: Summary statistics in the general model


                                                                                                                            Period length = 1 year                             Period length = 5 years


 mean of labor taxes                                                                                                                                        26.2%                                26.9%

 per period std of labor taxes (% of mean)                                                                                                                    5.1%                                5.2%

 per period autocorrelation of labor taxes                                                                                                                        0.62                             0.94

 mean of capital taxes                                                                                                                                       -4.8%                                1.2%

 per period std of capital taxes                                                                                                                                  0.72                             0.10

 per year autocorrelation of capital taxes                                                                                                                    -0.06                                0.03




                                                                     s                                                                                b
                            2
                                                                                                                  0.3

                           1.8                                                                                    0.2

                           1.6                                                                                    0.1

                           1.4                                                                                     0


                           1.2                                                                                   -0.1


                            1                                                                                    -0.2
                                 0         100   200   300   400    500   600   700     800   900   1000                0    100    200   300   400   500   600    700   800   900   1000



                                                                     l                                                                                k
                         0.556

                         0.554                                                                                   3.52

                         0.552
                                                                                                                  3.5
                          0.55

                         0.548                                                                                   3.48

                         0.546
                                                                                                                 3.46
                         0.544
                                 0         100   200   300   400    500   600   700     800   900   1000                0    100    200   300   400   500   600    700   800   900   1000


                                      -6                             τk                                                                               τl
                                 x 10
                          -3.8                                                                                  0.115


                          -3.9                                                                                   0.11


                            -4                                                                                  0.105


                          -4.1                                                                                    0.1


                          -4.2                                                                                  0.095

                          -4.3
                                 0         100   200   300   400    500   600   700     800   900   1000                0    100    200   300   400   500   600    700   800   900   1000




         Figure 1: A typical path, quasi-linear preferences, government expenditure shocks.

                                                                                                           36
                                 b pol                                         b pol                                                    k pol                                        l pol
                1.5                                                                                         3.6                                                   0.56

                                                         0.32                                              3.55
                  1                                                                                                                                               0.55

                                                        0.315                                               3.5
                0.5                                                                                                                                               0.54
                                                                                                           3.45
                                                         0.31
                  0                                                                                                                                               0.53
                                                                                                            3.4
                                                        0.305
               -0.5                                                                                        3.35                                                   0.52
                  -0.5   0       0.5         1   1.5         0.305     0.31      0.315       0.32             -0.5             0         0.5           1   1.5       -0.5   0        0.5         1   1.5



                                  v                                            τl pol                                -5                 τk pol
                                                                                                                  x 10
               14.1                                      0.16                                                 0

                                                                                                           -0.5
              14.05                                      0.14
                                                                                                             -1

                 14                                      0.12                                              -1.5

                                                                                                             -2
              13.95                                       0.1
                                                                                                           -2.5

               13.9                                      0.08                                                -3
                  -0.5   0       0.5         1   1.5        -0.5       0        0.5          1      1.5       -0.5             0         0.5           1   1.5


                                 νs                                         mean of νs                               -6                var of νs
                                                                                                                  x 10
                0.2                                       0.2                                                 6

               0.18                                      0.18                                                 5

               0.16                                      0.16                                                 4

               0.14                                      0.14                                                 3

               0.12                                      0.12                                                 2

                0.1                                       0.1                                                 1

               0.08                                      0.08                                                0
                  -0.5   0       0.5         1   1.5        -0.5       0        0.5          1      1.5      -0.5              0         0.5           1   1.5




Figure 2: Policy functions, quasi-linear preferences, government expenditure shocks, s− low.




                                 b pol                                         b pol                                                   k pol                                        l pol
               1.5                                                                                        3.55                                                   0.57

                                                        0.35                                               3.5                                                   0.56
                  1
                                                       0.345                                              3.45                                                   0.55
               0.5
                                                                                                           3.4                                                   0.54
                                                        0.34
                  0
                                                                                                          3.35                                                   0.53
                                                       0.335
              -0.5                                                                                         3.3                                                   0.52
                  -1         0           1        2                0.335 0.34 0.345 0.35                      -1                   0               1       2         -1         0            1       2


                                  v                                            τl pol                                     -5           τk pol
                                                                                                                  x 10
              14.1                                      0.16                                                 0

             14.05
                                                        0.14                                                -1
                14
                                                        0.12                                                -2
             13.95
                                                         0.1                                                -3
              13.9

             13.85                                      0.08                                                -4
                  -1         0           1        2         -1             0             1          2         -1                   0               1       2


                                 νs                                        mean of νs                                     -6       var of νs
                                                                                                                  x 10
              0.25                                      0.25                                                 6


               0.2                                       0.2
                                                                                                             4

              0.15                                      0.15

                                                                                                             2
               0.1                                       0.1


              0.05                                      0.05                                                 0
                  -1         0           1        2         -1             0             1          2         -1                   0               1       2




Figure 3: Policy functions, quasi-linear preferences, goverment expenditure shocks, s− high.

                                                                                                    37
                       τk                                            τk,inter                                  -4                τk,hedge
                                                                                                            x 10

  1.5                                            1.5                                                   -2
   1                                              1                                                    -4
  0.5                                            0.5                                                   -6
   0                                              0                                                    -8
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       τl                                               b                                                           k
 0.28                                                                                               1.415
                                                0.18
0.275
                                                0.16                                                 1.41
 0.27
                                                0.14                                                1.405
0.265
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       c                                               uc                                                           l
0.238                                           1.09
0.236                                                                                               0.223
                                                1.08
0.234                                                                                               0.222
                                                1.07
0.232                                                                                               0.221
                                                1.06
 0.23                                                                                                0.22
                                                1.05
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       s                                        primary surplus                                                  surplus
   2                                                                                                 0.06
                                                0.04                                                 0.04
  1.5                                           0.02                                                 0.02

                                                  0                                                    0
   1
    0        10        20        30        40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                        r
 0.04

 0.02

   0

-0.02
     0       10        20        30        40




        Figure 4: Impulse responses, high permanent government expenditure shock




                                                                 38
                       τk                                                    τk,inter                                   -4                τk,hedge
                                                                                                                     x 10

 -0.2                                            -0.2                                                           -2

 -0.4                                            -0.4                                                           -4
                                                                                                                -6
 -0.6                                            -0.6
                                                                                                                -8
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       τl                                                       b                                                            k
0.262                                            0.21                                                        1.419
 0.26
                                                  0.2                                                        1.418
0.258
0.256                                            0.19                                                        1.417
0.254
                                                 0.18
                                                                                                             1.416
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       c                                                       uc                                                            l
                                                1.065
0.239                                            1.06                                                        0.223
0.238
                                                1.055
0.237                                                                                                        0.223
                                                 1.05
0.236
                                                1.045                                                       0.2229
0.235
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       s                                   -3           primary surplus                                                   surplus
                                                        x 10
   2                                                                                                            0
                                                   0
                                                   -5                                                        -0.01
   1
                                                  -10
                                                  -15                                                        -0.02
   0
    0        10        20        30        40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                   5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                        r
 0.04



 0.03


 0.02
     0       10        20        30        40




        Figure 5: Impulse responses, low permanent government expenditure shock




                                                                         39
                       τk                                             τk,inter                                  -3                τk,hedge
                                                                                                             x 10
                                                                                                        0
   2                                               2
                                                                                                        -2

   1                                               1                                                    -4
                                                                                                        -6
   0                                               0                                                    -8
         5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                        τl                                               b                                                           k
                                                 0.18
                                                                                                     1.415
 0.28                                            0.16                                                 1.41
 0.27                                                                                                1.405
                                                 0.14
                                                                                                       1.4
 0.26                                            0.12                                                1.395
         5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                                                                        uc
                        c                                                                                                            l
0.238
                                                 1.09                                                 0.22
0.236
0.234                                            1.08
                                                                                                     0.218
0.232                                            1.07
 0.23                                            1.06                                                0.216
                                                 1.05
         5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                        s                                        primary surplus                                                  surplus
   2
                                                 0.06                                                 0.06

                                                 0.04                                                 0.04
  1.5
                                                 0.02                                                 0.02

   1                                                                                                    0
    0        10        20         30        40          5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                        r
 0.05



   0


-0.05
     0       10        20         30        40




                  Figure 6: Impulse responses, low permanent technology shock




                                                                  40
                       τk                                                   τk,inter                                  -3                τk,hedge
                                                                                                                   x 10
                                                                                                              0
   0                                              0                                                           -2

 -0.2                                           -0.2                                                          -4
                                                                                                              -6
 -0.4                                           -0.4
                                                                                                              -8
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40                 5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       τl                                                      b                                                           k
0.265                                           0.22
                                                                                                            1.43
 0.26
                                                                                                           1.425
0.255                                            0.2
 0.25                                                                                                       1.42

0.245                                           0.18                                                       1.415
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40                 5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                       c                                                      uc                                                           l
                                                                                                           0.229
 0.24                                           1.06
                                                                                                           0.228
0.238
                                                1.05
                                                                                                           0.227
0.236
                                                1.04                                                       0.226
         5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40                 5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                                                          -3
                       s                               x 10            primary surplus                                                  surplus
   2                                                                                                          0
                                                  0
                                                                                                           -0.01
   1
                                                 -10
                                                                                                           -0.02

   0                                             -20
    0        10        20        30        40                 5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40                  5   10   15    20        25   30   35   40

                        r
 0.04

 0.03

 0.02

 0.01
     0       10        20        30        40




                  Figure 7: Impulse responses, high permanent technology shock




                                                                        41
                                 s                                            τk
       2
                                                         2


      1.5                                                0

                                                         -2

       1
            0        100   200       300   400   500          0   100   200        300   400   500

                -4          τk,hedge                                          τl                                             b
            x 10
                                                        0.3
       0                                                                                              0.05
                                                       0.28
       -5                                                                                               0
                                                       0.26
      -10                                                                                            -0.05
                                                       0.24

      -15
            0        100   200       300   400   500          0   100   200        300   400   500           0   100   200       300   400   500


                                 k                                            θ                                              l
      1.2                                               1.2                                          0.235

     1.18

     1.16                                              1.15                                           0.23
     1.14

     1.12                                               1.1
                                                                                                     0.225
            0        100   200       300   400   500          0   100   200        300   400   500           0   100   200       300   400   500




Figure 8: A typical path: government expenditure shocks, one year period length



                                 s                                            τk
       2
                                                        0.2


                                                         0
      1.5

                                                       -0.2

       1
            0        20    40        60    80    100          0   20    40         60    80    100

                            τk,hedge                                          τl                                             b

     0.02                                              0.29
                                                                                                       0.2
                                                       0.28
    0.015
                                                       0.27                                            0.1
     0.01
                                                       0.26
    0.005                                                                                               0
                                                       0.25
       0
            0        20    40        60    80    100          0   20    40         60    80    100           0   20    40        60    80    100


                                 k                                            θ                                              l
                                                                                                     0.232
      1.2
                                                       1.18                                           0.23

     1.18                                                                                            0.228
                                                       1.16
                                                                                                     0.226
     1.16                                              1.14
                                                                                                     0.224
                                                       1.12                                          0.222
     1.14
            0        20    40        60    80    100          0   20    40         60    80    100           0   20    40        60    80    100




Figure 9: A typical path: government expenditure shocks, five years period length



                                                                        42
References
 [1] Aiyagari, S.R, Marcet, A., Sargent, T.J, and Juha Seppälä (2002): "Optimal Taxation without
     State Contingent Debt", Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1220-1254.

 [2] Angeletos, George-Marios (2002): “Fiscal Policy with Non-Contingent Debt and the Optimal
     Maturity Structure”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1105-1131.

 [3] Atkeson, A., Chari, V.V., and Patrick J. Kehoe (1999): “Taxing Capital Income: A Bad Idea”,
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23, 3-17..

 [4] Atkinson, A.B and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1972): "The Structure of Indirect Taxation and Economic
     Eﬃciency", Journal of Public Economics, 1, 97-119.

 [5] Barro, Robert J. (1979): "On the Determination of Public Debt", Journal of Political Economy,
     87, 940-971.

 [6] Bohn, Henning (1990): “Tax Smoothing with Financial Instruments”, American Economic
     Review, 80, 1217-1230.

 [7] Buera, F. and Juan P. Nicolini (2004): "Optimal Maturity Structure of Government Debt
     without State Contingent Bonds", Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 531-554.

 [8] Chamley, Christophe (1986): "Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium
     with Infinite Lives", Econometrica, 54, 607-622.

 [9] Chari, V.V., Christiano, L.J. and Patrick J. Kehoe (1994): “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business
     Cycle Model”, Journal of Political Economy, 102, 617-652.

[10] Farhi, E. and Ivan Werning (2005): "The Optimal Maturity Structure of Government Debt
     when Markets are Incomplete", mimeo MIT.

[11] Judd, Kenneth L. (1985): "Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model",
     Journal of Public Economics, 28, 59-83.

[12] Judd, Kenneth L. (1992): "Optimal Taxation in Dynamic Economies: Theory and Evidence",
     mimeo.

[13] Loève, M. (1977): "Probability Theory II", Springer Verlag, 4th edition.

[14] Lucas, R. and Nancy Stokey (1983): "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy
     without Capital", Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55-93.

[15] Ramsey, Frank P. (1927): "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation", Economic Journal,
     XLVIII, 47-61.



                                                43
[16] Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1969): “The Eﬀects of Income, Wealth, and Capital Gains Taxation on
     Risk-Taking”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83, 263-283.

[17] Werning, Ivan (2005): "Tax Smoothing with Incomplete Markets", MIT mimeo.

[18] Zhu, Xiaodong (1992): "Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Stochastic Growth Model", Journal of
     Economic Theory, 58, 250-289.




                                             44
