                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        "CONDITIONAL SCHOLARSHIPS" FOR HIV/AIDS HEALTH WORKERS:
                 EDUCATING AND RETAINING THE WORKFORCE
                  TO PROVIDE ANTIRETROVIRAL TREATMENT
                         IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

                                         Till Bärnighausen
                                          David E. Bloom

                                       Working Paper 13396
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13396


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Till Bärnighausen and David E. Bloom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
"Conditional scholarships" for HIV/AIDS Health Workers: Educating and Retaining the Workforce
to Provide Antiretroviral Treatment in Sub-Saharan Africa
Till Bärnighausen and David E. Bloom
NBER Working Paper No. 13396
September 2007
JEL No. I18,I22,J2,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Without large increases in the number of health workers to treat HIV/AIDS (HAHW), most developing
countries will be unable to achieve universal coverage with antiretroviral treatment (ART), leading
to large numbers of potentially avoidable deaths among people living with HIV/AIDS. We use Markov
Monte Carlo microsimulation to estimate the expected net present value (eNPV) of a scholarship for
health care education that is conditional on the recipient entering into a contract to work for a number
of years after graduation delivering ART in sub-Saharan Africa. Such a scholarship could increase
the number of health workers educated in the region and decrease the probability of HAHW emigration.
"Conditional scholarships" for a team of health workers sufficient to provide ART for 500 patients
have an eNPV of 1.23 million year-2000 US dollars, assuming that the scholarship recipients are in
addition to the health workers who would have been educated without scholarships and that the scholarships
reduce annual HAHW emigration probabilities from 15% to 5% for five years. When individual variable
values are varied from this base case within plausible bounds suggested by the literature, eNPV of
the "conditional scholarships" never falls below 0.5 million year-2000 US dollars.

Till Bärnighausen
Africa Centre for Health and Population Studies
University of KwaZulu-Natal
PO Box 198
Mtubatuba 3935
South Africa
and Harvard University
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Population and International Health
665 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
tbaernig@hsph.harvard.edu

David E. Bloom
Harvard University
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Population and International Health
655 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu
Introduction

Global epidemiology of HIV and HIV/AIDS health worker need

According to the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and

the World Health Organization (WHO), in 2006 about 40 million people worldwide

were HIV-positive, 37 million of whom lived in developing countries

(UNAIDS/WHO, 2006). Sub-Saharan Africa bears the brunt of the HIV epidemic

with 25 million HIV-positive people as of 2006, followed by South-East Asia with

7.8 million HIV-positive people. The number of people living with HIV continues

to grow. From 2004 to 2006 the global total increased by 2.6 million

(UNAIDS/WHO, 2006), despite substantial mortality from HIV/AIDS. In sub-

Saharan Africa alone, 2.1 million people died of AIDS in 2006 (UNAIDS/WHO,

2006).




The number of people in developing countries who receive antiretroviral

treatment (ART) has grown rapidly in the last three years – in sub-Saharan

Africa, from less than 300,000 by the end of 2004 to more than 800,000 by the

end of 2005 (WHO/UNAIDS, 2006b) and to more than 1 million by the end of

2006 (UNAIDS/WHO, 2006). Yet current ART coverage falls far short of need.

In 2006, an estimated 4.6 million people in sub-Saharan Africa needed ART,

more than four times the number of people on treatment (WHO/UNAIDS, 2006a).

According to WHO/UNAIDS, in 2006 only 8 out of 92 developing countries for

which data on ART coverage were available achieved coverage of 80% or higher

(Figure 1) (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007).


                                        3
                             < Figure 1 about here >



The unmet need for ART means the loss of many lives that could have been

saved. It is well known that ART is effective in reducing HIV-related mortality

(Hogg, Yip, Kully, Craib, O'Shaughnessy, Schechter et al., 1999). Recent

evidence from Botswana (The Global Fund, 2007) and South Africa (Herbst,

Cooke, Bärnighausen, KanyKany, & Newell, 2007) suggests that, even while a

large proportion of people who currently need ART are not yet receiving

treatment, the reduction in mortality among those who do receive ART has led to

an overall decline in mortality among people living with HIV.



One of the main constraints in scaling up ART is human resources (Clark, 2006;

Habte, Dussault, & Dovlo, 2004; Hosseinipour, Kazembe, Sanne, & van der

Horst, 2002; Kober & Van Damme, 2004; Ooms, Van Damme, & Temmerman,

2007). A number of recent reports and international initiatives, such as the

Commission for Africa (Commission for Africa, 2005; MSF, 2007a), the Institute

of Medicine (IOM)’s 2007 evaluation of the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS

Relief (PEPFAR) (IOM, 2007), the 2004 report on human resources by the Joint

Learning Initiative (JLI) (JLI, 2004b), the 2006 World Health Report (WHO, 2006)

and a 2007 report by Médecins sans frontièrs (MSF) (MSF, 2007a) have

identified the shortage of health workers in developing countries as one of the

main impediments to human development in general and access to ART




                                         4
specifically. The report of the Commission for Africa estimates that Africa’s

health workforce needs to be tripled over the coming decade in order to achieve

human development goals (Commission for Africa, 2005). The 2007 IOM report

states that “[s]evere human resource shortages are a continuing challenge to

PEPFAR implementation” and proposes a shift in PEPFAR’s involvement in

national human resources strategies (IOM, 2007; The Lancet, 2007). IOM

recommends that PEPFAR should not limit its activities to the provision of AIDS

care-specific training to existing health workers and the promotion of task shifting

between different types of health workers, but should actively work to increase

national health workforces.



There are two main reasons for the shortage of health workers to treat HIV/AIDS

(HAHW) in the developing world (JLI, 2004b; MSF, 2007a; USAID Bureau for

Africa, 2003; WHO, 2006). First, education rates in many developing countries

are too low to produce the number of health workers needed to deliver ART. In

2006, only 66 of the worldwide 1,691 medical schools and only 288 of the

worldwide 5,492 nursing and midwifery schools were located in Africa (WHO,

2006). The United Republic of Tanzania is a case in point. In 2002, about 740

doctors were available to care for Tanzania’s population of about 37 million

people. We estimate that Tanzania would need between 229 and 458 additional

doctors to be able to provide universal ART coverage (see Table 1a in the

appendix). However, each year only about 90 doctors graduate from a medical

school in Tanzania (JLI, 2004b).




                                         5
Second, of the small numbers of health workers educated in developing

countries, especially in Africa, large proportions tend to emigrate. It has been

estimated that 20,000 health workers migrate each year from Africa to developed

countries (WHO, 2004). According to the 2005 Report of the Global Commission

on International Migration (GCIM), 16,000 African nurses migrated to the UK

alone between 2000 and 2005 (GCIM, 2005). A 2002 WHO survey of health

workers in six sub-Saharan countries found that between 38% and 68% intended

to emigrate (WHO, 2003).



Countries where the need to expand ART is high commonly have low numbers of

health workers per capita. Figure 2 shows scatter plots of national HIV

prevalence (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007; World Bank, 2007) against health worker

densities (WHO, 2007c). Countries with higher HIV prevalence tend to have

lower physician, nurse, and pharmacist densities than countries with lower

prevalence (Figure 2, panels 1-3).



                             < Figure 2 about here >



The low health worker densities indicate that many developing countries must

considerably increase their health workforce in order to be able provide ART to

all people who currently need it. Table 1a in the appendix shows estimates of

the numbers of additional doctors, nurses, and pharmacists that would have




                                         6
been needed in 88 developing countries to provide universal coverage with ART

in December 2006 (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007).1 These estimates assume that all

added health workers would spend all of their work time providing ART – i.e.

these estimates are the lower bounds of actual need. In our calculations, we use

numbers of doctors, nurses, and pharmacists needed to provide ART per 1,000

patients from a recent review of ART programs in developing countries

(Hirschhorn, Oguda, Fullem, Dreesch, & Wilson, 2006). We find that in order to

treat the approximately 3.6 million people in sub-Saharan Africa who in

December 2006 needed ART, but did not receive it, the stock of health workers

in sub-Saharan Africa would have had to be increased by 3,600 to 7,200 doctors,

7,200 to 25,200 nurses, and 3,600 to 10,800 pharmacists.



The number of future health workers needed to achieve universal ART coverage

depends on the development of the epidemic. Projections of the number of

people living with HIV diverge considerably because both HIV incidence and

mortality among HIV-positive people are determined by factors whose

development over time is highly uncertain (Grassly, Morgan, Walker, Garnett,

Stanecki, Stover et al., 2004; Mathers & Loncar, 2006). On the one hand, HIV

incidence is a function of sexual behavior, which can change significantly over

the course of a few years, e.g. as observed in Uganda (Hallett, Aberle-Grasse,

Bello, Boulos, Cayemittes, Cheluget et al., 2006) and Thailand (Saengdidtha,



1
 The 88 developing countries are all developing countries for which data on ART need and ART
coverage are available from UNAIDS/WHO (2007) (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007).



                                             7
Lapparat, Torugsa, Suppadit, & Wakai, 2002) following successful national

campaigns to reduce the spread of HIV. On the other hand, mortality among

HIV-positive people depends inter alia on the speed of expansion of access to

ART, people’s ability to adhere to ART over their lifetimes, and technical

advances that increase the effectiveness of ART. Moreover, general human and

economic development is likely to influence both the spread of HIV and HIV-

related mortality (Broughton, 1999).



In a UNAIDS scenario analysis for Africa, estimates of the total number of new

HIV infections in adults and children that will occur between 2003 and 2025

range from 46 million in the best-case scenario to 89 million in the worst-case

scenario, while estimates of total deaths from AIDS between 1980 and 2025

range from 67 to 83 million (UNAIDS, 2005). Another study suggests that HIV

prevalence (and thus in the long run treatment need) may either significantly

increase or decline in sub-Saharan Africa by the year 2020, depending on the

success of future HIV prevention and treatment efforts (Salomon, Hogan, Stover,

Stanecki, Walker, Ghys et al., 2005). However, the study finds that even in the

best-case scenario, the number of people in need of ART in sub-Saharan Africa

would decline only slightly by 2020 in comparison to 2006 (to 4.2 million), while it

would double if the worst-case scenario came true (to 9.2 million) (Salomon et

al., 2005). In the latter case, universal ART coverage could only be achieved if

sub-Saharan countries were able to increase their human resources for health




                                         8
over 2006 numbers by 8,200 to 16,400 doctors, 16,400 to 57,400 nurses, and

8,200 to 24,600 pharmacists.




“Conditional scholarships”

Table 2a in the appendix provides an overview of interventions that have been

implemented or proposed to address health worker shortages in developing

countries. We focus here on one particular intervention: scholarships for health

care education given to qualified candidates conditional on their entering into a

contract to work for a number of years after graduation delivering ART in a sub-

Saharan African country. Such “conditional scholarships” could have two effects

on national health workforces in the region. First, the “scholarship” could

increase the number of health workers educated in the country by enabling the

health care education of secondary school graduates who would otherwise not

have the means to finance such an education. Second, the “condition” could

increase the retention of recently graduated health workers in the country. As

such, the “conditional scholarships” could address the two main factors

contributing to a shortage of health workers in many developing countries: a low

rate of health worker education and a high rate of health worker emigration (JLI,

2004b).



For “conditional scholarships” to work at least one of the following two

assumptions must be true. First, there are qualified candidates in developing

countries who desire a health care education but cannot obtain financing for such



                                         9
studies because of market imperfections in the supply of loans for education

(Barr, 2004). There is evidence that secondary school graduates in developing

countries do indeed forego a health care education because of financial

constraints (Colborn, 1991, 1992; Frey & Frey, 1995; IRIN Humanitarian News

and Analysis, 2006). Candidates may lack the financial means to pay for

different components of a health care education: tuition and fees, living expenses

while attending school, or the cost of required learning materials, such as books

or medical equipment. Second, there are qualified candidates in developing

countries who desire a health care education and do have access to sources of

finance for such an education (e.g. loans from the extended family or access to

bank loans) but find the “conditional scholarship” the most attractive amongst all

available funding options. For instance, students may prefer a “conditional

scholarship” to a bank loan. Unlike “conditional scholarships”, which students

receive in exchange for a commitment to work in a national ART program, bank

loans carry the risk of bankruptcy because the borrower may not be able to meet

future interest or redemption payments.



In the following we will first investigate whether the “conditional scholarships”

would be socially worthwhile investments by estimating their expected social net

present value (eNPV). In order to understand the specific contribution of each of

the two possible effects of the “conditional scholarships” on scholarship eNPV,

we will separately examine three types of scenarios: first, the only effect of the

scholarships is to increase HAHW education rates; second, the scholarships




                                         10
increase HAHW education rates and decrease HAHW emigration rates; third, the

only effect of the scholarships is to decrease HAHW emigration rates. We will

then discuss choices countries would need to make if they decided to implement

“conditional scholarships”. These include the source of finance, selection of

candidates, specification of the condition, enforcement mechanisms, and

supporting interventions.



Methods

Model description

In order to calculate eNPV of the “conditional scholarships”, we use a Markov

Monte Carlo microsimulation.2 Markov models are well suited for the question at

hand because they allow different states of HAHW effectiveness with different

costs and benefits at different times, and can easily incorporate discounting to

calculate present values of future states. Markov models capture uncertainty as

transition probabilities between different states (Hunink, Glasziou, Siegel, Weeks,

Pliskin, Elstein et al., 2001). Microsimulation as one method to evaluate a

Markov model has the advantage over the alternative cohort simulation that it

yields an approximate distribution of NPV in addition to its expected value, eNPV,




2
  Markov models divide a target population (here: of health worker teams) into a series of
mutually exclusive states (here: of health worker effectiveness). Transitions between these health
states are assigned probabilities and the model's predictions are evaluated over a series of
cycles (Sonnenberg & Beck, 1993).



                                               11
thus enabling assessment of uncertainty in the calculations due to individual

heterogeneity (Weinstein, 2006).3



In providing ART, health workers reduce mortality among HIV-positive people

and induce costs (salaries and costs of drugs). Both HAHW effectiveness and

costs depend on the type of ART that they provide to their patients. First-line

therapy in the first year of treatment is less effective than first- or second-line

therapy in later years; second-line therapy is more expensive than first-line

therapy. To capture these differences, we distinguish between the following

mutually exclusive HAHW states in our Markov model: first-line ART in the first

year of treatment (ART1); first-line ART in the second or a later year of treatment

(ART2); second-line ART (ART3); and an absorbing state (Exit) which HAHW

enter if they die or leave their assigned posts before completion of the service

commitment. The unit of our analyses is a “minimum team” of health workers,

consisting of nurses, treatment counselors, doctors, and pharmacists. We define

a minimum team as the team with the smallest number of members in which

none of the four categories of HAHW has less than one member. We fix the ratio

of nurses to treatment counselors to doctors to pharmacists at 3:10:1:1 based on



3
  Markov models can be evaluated deterministically by cohort simulation or stochastically by
Monte Carlo microsimulation. In cohort simulation, large cohorts of people are sent through the
model simultaneously. The initial distribution of people in different Markov states and the
transition probabilities between the states completely determine how many people are in each
state after each cycle. In contrast, in microsimulation individuals are simulated moving between
states from cycle to cycle one at a time. The transition probabilities in this case are realized as
random events, so that different microsimulations with equal numbers of individuals are unlikely
to yield exactly the same result. However, if a large number of individuals are simulated in
microsimulation, the results from different microsimulations will be approximately the same and
will closely approximate the result of the cohort simulation.



                                                12
a 2006 review of staffing patterns at ART sites in Africa and Asia (Hirschhorn et

al., 2006). In the base case, a minimum team is assumed to be able to provide

treatment to 500 patients (Hirschhorn et al., 2006). We assume that in their first

year of service commitment the minimum team treats only patients who are

newly initiated on ART. This assumption closely resembles the situation in many

developing countries with large unmet ART need (Braitstein, Brinkhof, Dabis,

Schechter, Boulle, Miotti et al., 2006). After having completed the first year in

ART1, the minimum team either leaves the required service prematurely

(because of emigration or deaths of members) or continues its service. If the

team continues its service, it will transition to ART2 if its patients survive, to

ART1 if its patients die or are lost to follow-up, or to ART3 if its patients need to

switch from first-line to second-line therapy because of toxicities or treatment

failure. Similarly, in any future cycle a minimum team that does not end its

service prematurely will transition either to ART1, ART2, or ART3, depending on

whether it continues to see the same patients on first line treatment (ART2), the

same patients on second-line treatment (ART3) or starts treating new patients

(ART1).



The cycle length for the model is set to 1 year. In each cycle, the minimum team

induces benefits (the monetary value of the life-years saved because of ART)

and costs depending on its current Markov state. We adopt a modified societal

perspective, in that the indirect costs of antiretroviral treatment that accrue to

patients (time and travel costs) are not included in the analyses. Further, we do




                                          13
not take into account reductions in health spending that come about because

patients on ART fall ill less often and less severely than people who need ART

but do not receive it. In the base case, future costs and benefits were discounted

at 3% per year, as recommended by the US Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in

Health and Medicine (Siegel, Torrance, Russell, Luce, Weinstein, & Gold, 1997)

and as is commonly done in priority setting for health in developing countries

(Goldie, Yazdanpanah, Losina, Weinstein, Anglaret, Walensky et al., 2006; C. J.

Murray & Lopez, 1996). In sensitivity analyses, we varied the discount rate

between 2% and 8%. All costs and benefits were measured in year-2000 US

dollars. Unless otherwise indicated, all dollar amounts in the text below are

expressed in year-2000 US dollars. The model was implemented in TreeAge Pro

Suite 2007 (TreeAge Software Inc., Williamstown, MA, USA).



Simulated scenarios

The two possible effects of the “conditional scholarship” – an increase in health

care education rates and a decrease in health worker emigration rates – may

play out differently in different countries. In some countries, health care

education capacity is not fully utilized, i.e. additional health workers could be

trained without additional investment in facilities or hiring of additional teachers.

In these countries, “conditional scholarships” will lead to an increase in the output

of trained health workers in the short term, if there is a pool of qualified

candidates who desire a health care education but do not have access to a

source of finance of a health care education other than the “conditional




                                          14
scholarships” because of market failures in formal or informal capital markets. In

all countries – independent of their utilization of health care education capacity –

the “conditional scholarships” could increase HAHW retention if scholarship

recipients’ emigration rates are on average lower than the migration rates of

people who do not receive the scholarships.



We thus estimate eNPV of the “conditional scholarships” in different scenarios:

first, all scholarship recipients are in addition to the HAHW who would have been

in place in the absence of the scholarship program, and emigration rates among

scholarship recipients are the same as the rates among health workers who do

not receive the scholarship; second, all scholarship recipients are in addition to

the HAHW who would have been in place in the absence of the program, and

emigration rates among scholarship recipients are lower than the rates among

other health workers; third, the scholarship program does not increase the

number of health workers but decreases emigration rates among health workers

who receive the scholarships.



A new dataset published by the World Bank International Migration and

Development Program contains doctor emigration rates from 46 sub-Saharan

African countries for a total of 642 country-years (Docquier & Bhargava,

2006). When the number of doctors in each country in each year of observation

is used as weighting factor and the annual rates are converted to annual

probabilities, the weighted average annual probability of doctor emigration across




                                         15
the 642 country-years is 13.4%. In our model, we use values for the annual

probability of HAHW emigration in the absence of “conditional scholarships” that

are slightly higher (15%) or slightly lower (12%) than this weighted average.

Further, in different scenarios we vary the effect of the “conditional scholarships”

on annual emigration probabilities as a reduction to either 5% or 3% per year

during the period of the service commitment. Finally, we vary the length of the

service commitment (3, 5, or 7 years) (Table 2).



Estimates for model variables

Estimates for model variables, as derived from published studies, are shown in

Table 1. The baseline costs of the “conditional scholarships” are based on

estimates of the costs of medical school and nursing school in Malawi in 2006

(Muula, Panulo, & Maseko, 2006) and the cost of medical school in Kenya in

2005 (Kirigia, Gbary, Muthuri, Nyoni, & Seddoh, 2006). The estimates from

Malawi and Kenya include tuition and the cost of living during the time of health

care education (Kirigia et al., 2006; Muula et al., 2006). In univariate sensitivity

analysis we vary the cost of the “conditional scholarships” up to a maximum

(725,000 dollars) that would cover tuition and living expenses of a minimum team

of HAHW, if such a team were educated in the United States (American Medical

Student Association, 2007; Morrison, 2005).



Other costs included in the model are doctor, nurse, pharmacist, and treatment

counselor salaries and treatment costs (first- and second-line ART,




                                         16
cotrimoxazole prophylaxis, CD4 counts). We use weighted averages of the

prices of antiretroviral drugs across all sub-Saharan countries for which price

information was available in the WHO Global Price Reporting Mechanism

(GPRM) in June 2007 (WHO, 2007a). As weighting factors we use the number

of people in each sub-Saharan country who according to WHO and UNAIDS

needed ART in December 2006 but did not receive it (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007).

Information on both drug price and people with unmet ART need was available

for 35, 34, 32, 29, 23, 21, 19, and 16 sub-Saharan countries for nevirapine

(NVP), efavirenz (EFV), lamivudine (3TC), stavudine (d4T), abacavir (ABC),

lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r), didanosine (ddI), and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate

(TDF), respectively. In the base case, we assume that first-line ART consists of

d4T, 3TC, and NVP, which are offered as first-line ART in many sub-Saharan

countries (South African Department of Health, 2004; WHO, 2007b). We

calculate weighted average prices for three other first-line regimens (d4T, 3TC

and EFV; zidovudine (AZT), 3TC and NVP; AZT, 3TC and EFV) and vary the

price of first-line therapy in univariate sensitivity analysis, using the weighted

average price of the most expensive of the four first-line ART (AZT, 3TC and

EFV) as the maximum. Similarly, we assume in the base case that second-line

ART in sub-Saharan Africa consists of ddI, 3TC and LPV/r (WHO, 2007b), but

calculate weighted average prices for three alternative regimens (ddI, ABC and

LPV/r; TDF, ABC and LPV/r; TDF, 3TC and LPV/r) to estimate the eNPV of the

“conditional scholarships” if the least expensive and the most expensive of the

four regimens are used as second-line ART (Table 3a).




                                          17
Estimates of mortality among people with CD4 count below 200 who do not

receive ART are taken from a study in South Africa (Badri, Lawn, & Wood, 2006),

and estimates of mortality among people with CD4 count below 200 at initiation

of ART in the first and subsequent years of treatment are based on a 2006

review of 18 ART programs in low-income countries (Braitstein et al., 2006).

Mortality among patients who are switched from first- to second-line therapy

because of toxicity or therapy failure are assumed to be the same as those on

first-line therapy in the second or later years of treatment (MSF, 2007b).



The dominant benefit of an ART program is the reduction in mortality as a result

of treatment (Cameron, Gibson, Helmers, Lim, Tressler, & Vaddanak, 2006).

Only a few estimates of the monetary value of a statistical life year (VSLY)

(Johansson, 2001, 2002) exist for developing countries and these estimates vary

widely (Viscusi & Aldy, 2003). No estimate of the VSLY in Africa has been

published. In our baseline estimation, we thus follow the convention suggested

by the 2001 WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health to value a

statistical life year at three times the per capita GDP (Commission on

Macroeconomics and Health, 2001). This valuation is intended to capture “value

of leisure time in addition to market consumption, the pure longevity effect, and

the pain and suffering associated with disease” (World Bank, 2007). A number

of recent studies both in developed and developing countries adopt this

convention (Cutler & Richardson, 1997; C.J. Murray, Lauer, & Hutubessy, 2003;




                                        18
Philipson & Soares, 2001). We use the weighted average of per capita GDP

across sub-Saharan African countries (World Bank, 2007), with the numbers of

patients who needed but did not receive ART in December 2006 as weighting

factors (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007).



                              < Table 1 about here >



Results

Scenario analysis

Table 2 shows the eNPV of “conditional scholarships” for one minimum team of

HAHW in 26 scenarios. The scenarios differ with regard to, first, whether the

scholarships affect education output, migration, or both; second, the level of

migration with and without scholarships; and third, the length of the service

commitment. Using 10,000 microsimulation trials, all 26 scenarios yield large

positive eNPV estimates for “conditional scholarships” for one minimum HAHW

team. The eNPV of all scenarios in which the “conditional scholarships” increase

education output of HAHW and decrease emigration (1.12 to 1.61 million dollars)

is significantly higher than the eNPV of the scenarios in which the scholarships

only increase education output (0.80 and 0.95 million dollars). In turn, the eNPV

of the two scenarios in which the scholarships only affect education output is

significantly higher than the eNPV of any of the scenarios in which the

“conditional scholarships” only reduce HAHW emigration probabilities (0.15 and

0.56 million dollars). As must necessarily be the case in valid models, ceteris




                                        19
paribus all scenarios with shorter service commitments have lower eNPV than

scenarios with longer commitments, and all scenarios with a larger reduction in

emigration probabilities due to the scholarships have higher eNPV than

scenarios with smaller reductions.



                             < Table 2 about here >



Sensitivity analysis

Figure 3 shows how eNPV varies with changes in selected variables from the

base case (i.e. when it is assumed that the “conditional scholarships” increase

education output and decrease the annual probability of emigration from 15% to

5% during a five-year service commitment, and all variables are set to their base-

case values as shown in Table 1). The selected variables cause the largest

changes in eNPV amongst all variables in the model, when each individual

variable is varied between the minimum and maximum values shown in Table 1.

The results were most strongly affected by variations in the number of patients

treated by one minimum HAHW team, the value of a statistical life year and the

costs of first-line ART. However, when individual variables are varied within

plausible bounds suggested by the literature (see Table 1) (Bertozzi, Gutierrez,

Opuni, Walker, & Schwartlander, 2004; Calmy, Pinoges, Szumilin, Zachariah,

Ford, & Ferradini, 2006; Coetzee, Hildebrand, Boulle, Maartens, Louis, Labatala

et al., 2004; Dovlo, 2007; Etard, Ndiaye, Thierry-Mieg, Gueye, Gueye, Laniece et

al., 2006; Ferradini, Jeannin, Pinoges, Izopet, Odhiambo, Mankhambo et al.,




                                       20
2006; Gutierrez, Johns, Adam, Bertozzi, Edejer, Greener et al., 2004; Lawn,

Myer, Bekker, & Wood, 2006; MSF, 2004, 2006, 2007b; C.J. Murray et al., 2003;

Padarath, Chamberlain, McCoy, Ntuli, Rowson, & Loewenson, 2003; Philipson &

Soares, 2001; Sambo, 2006; Yazdanpanah, Losina, Anglaret, Goldie, Walensky,

Weinstein et al., 2005), eNPV never falls below 0.48 million dollars. The VSLY

would need to be less than 1400 dollars in order for eNPV to be negative, when

all other variables are set to their base-case values.



                              < Figure 3 about here >



Discussion

Value of “conditional scholarships”

“Conditional scholarships” pay for a health care education in return for a

commitment to serve for a few years in an ART program in sub-Saharan Africa.

They are socially highly desirable investments under a range of plausible

assumptions about the cost of health care education, the efficiency of health

workers providing ART, the cost and effectiveness of ART, and the value of a

year of life, as well as the probabilities of emigration and death among health

workers and of treatment failure, loss to follow-up, and death among patients.

The values of some of the variables used in the model may change over time, for

instance, as new models of ART delivery are developed or new antiretroviral

medicines with different efficacies and costs become available. However, our

main finding – that “conditional scholarships” would have large social benefits in




                                         21
countries in sub-Saharan Africa – is quite robust to changes in key model

variables. It seems unlikely that this conclusion would be altered by reasonable

changes in the values of some variables. One extreme – and given current

knowledge unexpected (amfAR, 2007) – case of technological change would be

a cure for HIV infection. A cure would dramatically alter the eNPV of the

“conditional scholarships” as it would eliminate the need for ART. But it is unlikely

that a “conditional scholarship” program would lead to large financial losses for a

country because the program could stop accepting new entrants and existing

scholarship recipients could be deployed to administer the HIV cure or work as

part of the general health service.



Although either of the two possible effects of the “conditional scholarships” (an

increase in health care education output and a decrease in emigration of HAHW)

is sufficient on its own to make the scholarship a socially desirable investment,

the social value of the education effect is much higher than the value of the

migration effect. However, in countries where health care education capacity is

currently fully utilized, the “conditional scholarships” will not affect national health

education output in the short-term and can only increase the number of HAHW

by increasing retention rates. Nevertheless, they may increase the demand for

health care education. Where some “conditional scholarships” cannot be taken

up because the current education capacity is too low, they will still give some

people who were previously willing but not able to pay for health education the

ability to pay for it. In countries with substantial private health care education




                                          22
markets, the increase in demand should lead to an increase in education supply

via the price mechanism. In countries that currently do not have private

education markets, governments could decide to increase public sector health

care education capacity. Alternatively, governments in such countries could pass

legislation legalizing private health care education institutions, while limiting their

own role to accreditation and quality control (Cueto, Burch, Adnan, Afolabi,

Ismail, Jafri et al., 2006; WHO and World Federation for Medical Education

(WFME) Task Force on Accreditation, 2004). In many developing countries, for

instance in India (Bansai, 2003), the Philippines, Nigeria (Cueto et al., 2006),

Côte d’Ivoire, the Republic of Congo (Verspoor, Mattimir, & Watt, 2001), South

Africa (South African Nursing Council, 2006), and Angola (De Carvalho,

Kajibanga, & Heimer, 2007), private sector medical and nursing education

institutions already produce a large proportion of the national health worker

output, usually of quality en par with public sector institutions.



A constraint to the expansion of health care education capacity may be the lack

of health educators (WHO, 2006). This problem may be made worse by the HIV

epidemic. At least in the early phases of the epidemic, teachers and professors

were more likely to die of AIDS than the general population (Cohen, 2002). One

solution to this problem may be to organize extended stays of volunteer health

workers from developed countries, including retired doctors and nurses, to teach

in developing country education institutions. Charities that organize such

volunteer stays to teach and train health workers in developing countries already




                                          23
exist, for instance US Physicians for Africa ("US doctors for Africa: about us,"

2007) and the International Center for Equal Healthcare Access ("International

Center for Healthcare Access: about us," 2007). Other means of overcoming

shortages of health care teachers include distance education and twinning

arrangements between institutions in developing and developed countries (Hern,

Vaughn, Mason, & Weitkamp, 2005; The Tropical Health and Education Trust,

2007).



An alternative to expanding education capacity in sub-Saharan African countries

is to utilize education capacity in developed countries. “Conditional scholarships”

could be offered to African nationals – or to any student independent of his or her

nationality – who would be willing to commit to work in an ART program in sub-

Saharan Africa after completion of a health care education in a developed

country. We show that the social value of “conditional scholarships” is still highly

positive if the value of the scholarships is increased to levels that could finance a

health care education in the United States.



Value of a statistical life year

In order to measure the eNPV of a health care intervention that reduces

mortality, a monetary value must be assigned to a year of life. We follow the

suggestion of the 2001 WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health to

value a life year at three times the per capita GDP (Commission on

Macroeconomics and Health, 2001). However, this value was not derived from




                                         24
scientific studies, but arrived at through a consensus process amongst members

of the Commission. VSLY can be investigated in two types of studies. In

contingent valuation studies, respondents are asked how much they would be

willing to pay for an additional year of life. Monetary values for a year of life can

also be derived from preferences revealed in the market place via studies of

prices of interventions that reduce mortality risk or differences in wage levels

across jobs that are comparable except for the fact that they carry different

mortality risks. No study of the VSLY in Africa has been published. However, a

few estimates of VSLY exist for other developing countries (Viscusi & Aldy,

2003). Following Moore and Viscusi (1988) (Moore & Viscusi, 1988), we derive

VSLY from the value of a statistical life (VSL) given in three studies of VSL in

developing countries.4 For India in 1990 we thus derive VSLY of 69,000 and

96,000 dollars from two VSL estimates published in a study of revealed

preferences observed in the Indian labor market (Shanmugam, 2000). For

Thailand in 2003 and Cambodia in 2004 we derive, respectively, VSLY of 10,000

and 20,000 dollars from studies of stated preferences (Cameron et al., 2006;

Gibson, Barns, Cameron, Lim, Scrimgeour, & Tressler, 2007). These values

represent multiples of per capita GDP which are higher than our base case

assumption of 3 times per capita GDP – 220 and 306 times per capita GDP for

India in 1990; 4.5 times per capita GDP for Thailand in 2003; and 55 times per

capita GDP for Cambodia in 2004 (World Bank, 2007).



4 We use a discount rate of 3% and the life expectancy in the year of the study in the country of
the study (India in 1990, Thailand in 2003, and Cambodia in 2004) and assume that the average
respondent in the study was 30 years of age.



                                               25
As Viscusi and Aldy note in a review of VSL estimates throughout the world,

“[e]stimates for the Indian labor market yield a value of a statistical life greater

than the VSLs in other developing countries despite the fact that per capita

income in India is an order of magnitude smaller than in these countries” (Viscusi

& Aldy, 2003). While the high VSLY-to-GDP ratios estimated for India may thus

not be generalizable to other developing countries, even the substantially lower

ratios observed in Cambodia and Thailand suggest that we underestimate –

perhaps severely – the monetary benefit from the “conditional scholarships” by

valuing a statistical life year at three times GDP.



Implementation decisions

Obtaining repayment of education finance through labor in sectors with excess

social demand for labor is not a new idea. For instance, Ethiopia, South Africa,

and Thailand (Wibulpolprasert & Pengpaibon, 2003) require medical students to

perform community service in rural areas after graduating from publicly funded

medical schools. However, in all three countries there continue to be health

worker shortages in rural areas. In Ghana, doctors are “bonded” to serve for five

years in the public sector or to repay their training costs. However, because the

monetary value of the bond is defined in nominal terms and inflation is high in

Ghana, many doctors choose to repay their training costs (at a large financial

loss to the government) rather than serve in the public sector. Moreover,

because enforcement of the bonding policy is poor, some doctors emigrate




                                          26
without either completing the required public service or paying their bond

(Mensah, 2005).



As the example of Ghana suggests, the attributes chosen for the scholarships

will determine their effectiveness in increasing the national health workforce for

ART. Attributes of the “conditional scholarships” include the source of finance,

selection of candidates, specification of the conditional term, enforcement

mechanisms, and supporting interventions.



1. Sources of finance

Finance for the “conditional scholarships” could come from tax revenues,

international aid agencies, or the International Finance Facility (IFF). Because

the scholarships have a positive social eNPV, in the absence of other sources of

finance governments should always choose to finance them from the public

sector budget, if funds are available even after projects with higher eNPV have

been chosen. However, governments of developing countries may face

borrowing constraints or may not be able to allocate monies to the “conditional

scholarships” for political reasons. An alternative is to finance the scholarships

through aid from international agencies. However, aid agencies tend to finance

projects for periods that may not be sufficiently long to create a sustainable

“conditional scholarships” program and they may be reluctant to provide “running

cost” support for training health workers. The latter problem is highlighted by

recent discussions about whether large disease-specific aid agencies, e.g.,




                                        27
PEPFAR, the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and the GAVI

Alliance, should invest in human resources for health in developing countries

(GAVI, 2003; JLI, 2004b; Ooms et al., 2007; The Global Fund, 2007).



Another funding option would be through the IFF as proposed by the UK’s

Department for International Development (DFID) (DFID and HM Treasury,

2003). An IFF would leverage development aid by issuing bonds on international

capital markets against long-term commitments of annual payments from

developed countries to developing countries. A project financed by the IFF

would need to pass two economic tests (DFID and HM Treasury, 2004). First, its

rate of return must be higher than the cost of borrowing needed to raise funds for

the project. Second, the rate of return must be greater than the recipient

country’s target rate of return for public investment. It is likely that the project

would pass both tests. On the one hand, the cost of borrowing would be very low

because the financial pledges would come from countries with the highest

creditworthiness ratings. On the other hand, we find that the eNPV of the

“conditional scholarships” remains positive if the discount rate in our model is

increased to 8%, i.e., the internal rate of return of the “conditional scholarship” is

higher than the commonly used target rate of return of 8% for public investment

in developing countries (DFID and HM Treasury, 2004).




                                          28
2. Selection of candidates

The optimal selection of candidates for the scholarships will depend on whether

policy makers want to achieve additional objectives with the intervention.

Financial equity in access to tertiary education could be improved if eligibility for

the scholarships were based on a means test. Merit could be rewarded if

eligibility were based on secondary school performance. The proportion of

health care students from traditionally underrepresented population groups (e.g.,

women or people from rural areas) could be increased if these groups received a

proportion of the scholarships higher than their proportion in the population.



The selection of candidates may also influence the effectiveness of the

scholarships. For instance, there is evidence from both developing and

developed countries that medical students from rural areas are more likely than

their peers from urban areas to take up practice in rural areas after graduation

(Daniels, Vanleit, Skipper, Sanders, & Rhyne, 2007; World Organization of

Family Doctors (WONCA) Working Party on Rural Practice, 2002). For instance,

a 2003 study from South Africa found that ten years after graduating from

medical school doctors of rural origin were 3.5 times more likely than doctors of

urban origin to practice in rural areas (de Vries & Reid, 2003). People who grew

up in rural areas may be more likely than urban candidates to honor their

“conditional scholarship” contracts and to remain at the station of their service

commitments after completion of their contracts in rural ART programs, possibly




                                         29
because they feel a greater sense duty to help rural patients or because they

prefer rural life-styles.



One possible problem with the “conditional scholarships” is that it takes time to

train health workers, while human resources to deliver ART are needed now.

The “conditional scholarship” policy may address this problem if scholarships are

made available to people at any stage of their training and health care careers.

The scholarships could be attractive to people who are already fully qualified

health workers as an option for repaying education loans. A case in point is the

U.S. National Institute of Health loan repayment program which requires medical

graduates to work for some years in research rather than in (better paying)

practice (Ley & Rosenberg, 2005). It is likely that such a model could be

successful in those developing countries where health education graduates have

usually incurred substantial amounts of debt. For instance, it has been estimated

that in Colombia it takes a non-specialist doctor on average 4 years and a

physiotherapist on average 10 years to pay back health care education loans

(JLI, 2004a).



3. Specification of the condition

Our eNPV model rests on the assumption that scholarship recipients work in

ART programs after graduation. This exclusive condition might be perceived as

institutionalizing a priority for AIDS treatment over other health care. However,

the finding that the “conditional scholarships” are eNPV-positive is robust to




                                        30
changes in the assumption that scholarship recipients spend all of their work time

in ART programs. Microsimulation suggests that even if scholarship recipients

spend only a proportion of their work time delivering ART, eNPV will remain

highly positive. For instance, we find an eNPV of 0.45 million dollars for

scholarships for a minimum team of HAHW assuming that scholarship recipients

work only half-time in an ART program, that the probability of emigration is 5%

during a 5 year service commitment and 15% otherwise, and that the

scholarships increase education output. Rather than not implement a

“conditional scholarship” program, countries should ask recipients of “conditional

scholarships” to commit to part-time work in an ART program.



In addition, our estimates of the numbers of different types of health workers

needed to provide ART to one patient come from real-life ART programs. In

these programs, HIV-positive patients commonly receive not only ART but also

treatment for other HIV-related diseases, especially tuberculosis, and care for

conditions that are not related to HIV. Although we estimate the “conditional

scholarship” project’s economic value with benefits stemming from ART delivery

alone, its costs include care for HIV-positive patients over and above ART. The

work of scholarship recipients in an ART program thus frees up time of health

workers in other health services, where HIV-positive patients without access to

an ART program would present with their illnesses. Moreover, people who need

ART but do not receive it fall ill more frequently and more severely than patients

on ART. In countries with generalized epidemics, large proportions of in- and




                                        31
outpatient admissions in the general health services are related to HIV (Bardgett,

Dixon, & Beeching, 2006; Dedicoat, Grimwade, Newton, & Gilks, 2003; Floyd,

Reid, Wilkinson, & Gilks, 1999). Thus, a scholarship condition requiring work in

ART services will likely strengthen the overall health care system, especially in

countries with high HIV prevalence.



In addition to requiring service in ART delivery, the condition may specify the

setting of the service. The effectiveness of the scholarships in addressing health

care worker shortages may be increased if this setting is defined by a

characteristic that increases the probability that the area is underserved (as in

rural areas). They may be most effective if the setting is not defined ex ante, but

rather if scholarship recipients are asked to commit to serve in an ART program

in any setting that policy makers identify as being most in need of additional

HAHW at the time of the worker’s service.



Finally, the condition may specify alternatives to the service commitment, for

instance, a certain payment. Payment as an alternative to service has the

advantage that it renders the condition less restrictive, and may thus increase the

attractiveness of the “conditional scholarships” to candidates. However, without

prior experience it may be difficult for governments to set the appropriate price,

such that it is neither too high to be paid back by any candidate (which would

make the payment option meaningless), nor so low as to be easily paid back by

most recipients immediately after graduation (which would make the “conditional




                                        32
scholarship” meaningless). Price setting will be especially difficult in countries

with high inflation, because policy makers in such countries will either need to

accurately predict the real future values of a current nominal price or link the

value of the payment to inflation.



4. Enforcement mechanisms

Enforcement mechanisms will depend on legal, institutional, and technological

factors specific to a country. Regulation, such as withholding diplomas or

licenses from scholarship recipients until they have completed their community

service, may decrease the risk that scholarship recipients breach their contracts

(Table 2a). Other enforcement mechanisms, such as visa restrictions on health

workers before completion of their required service times or employment of

private monitoring agencies to check that graduates fulfill their conditions as

stipulated (for instance, that they do not work in private practice), may be

effective in enforcing the condition, but may come with the disadvantage of

limiting basic freedoms or impinging on the privacy of health workers. Information

management systems may help to plan and monitor the flow of scholarship

recipients through the education system and into their assigned posts.



5. Supporting interventions

Other interventions to increase the number of health workers in a country (or to

improve their distribution) could be implemented simultaneously with the

“conditional scholarships” in order to increase the effectiveness of the




                                         33
scholarships. For instance incentives that increase the attractiveness of service

in the country (or underserved parts of the country) may, in addition to promoting

an increase in health workers more generally, increase retention rates after

health workers have completed their service commitment. Such incentives might

include improved working conditions, more attractive career paths, or free ART

for health workers and their families (Table 4). Focusing health education

curricula on the health care needs that scholarship recipients are most likely to

encounter when delivering ART (such as opportunistic infections, HIV-related

cancers, or ART toxicities) may increase the effectiveness of scholarship

recipients’ clinical services.



Conclusions

In spite of recent large-scale efforts to roll out ART in developing countries,

millions of people who need ART currently do not receive it. Among the

resources needed to deliver ART in developing countries, health workers are one

of the scarcest. Without large increases in health workers in the coming years,

most developing countries will be unable to achieve universal coverage with

ART, leading to large numbers of potentially avoidable deaths. A scholarship for

health care education that is conditional on the recipient entering into a contract

to work for a number of years after graduation delivering ART in sub-Saharan

Africa could address two of the main reasons for the low numbers of health

workers in developing countries. First, the “scholarship” could increase the

number of health workers educated in the country. Second, the “condition” could



                                         34
decrease the probability of emigration of HAHW. We use microsimulation to

estimate the eNPV of “conditional scholarships” in sub-Saharan Africa. We find

that under a wide range of plausible assumptions the scholarships are highly

eNPV positive. “Conditional scholarships” for a team of health workers sufficient

to provide ART for 500 patients have an eNPV of 1.23 million dollars, assuming

that HAHW who receive the scholarships are in addition to the health workers

who would have been educated without scholarships and that the scholarships

reduce HAHW annual emigration probabilities from 15% to 5% for five years.

When individual variable values are varied from this base case within plausible

bounds suggested by the literature, eNPV of the “conditional scholarships” never

falls below 0.5 million dollars. Although the “conditional scholarships” are a

socially desirable investment, implementation success will likely depend on the

sources of finance, selection of candidates, specification of the condition,

enforcement mechanisms and supporting interventions.




                                        35
References

American Medical Student Association (2007). Medical school tuition
     frequently asked questions.
     http://www.amsa.org/meded/tuition_FAQ.cfm (accessed 25 June
     2007).
amfAR (2007). Treatment and cure. http://www.amfar.org/cgi-
     bin/iowa/programs/resrch/record.html?record=1 (accessed 21
     July 2007).
Badri, M., Lawn, S. D., & Wood, R. (2006). Short-term risk of AIDS or
      death in people infected with HIV-1 before antiretroviral therapy in
      South Africa: a longitudinal study. Lancet, 368(9543), 1254-1259.
Bansai, R. K. (2003). Private medical education takes off in India. Lancet,
     361, 1748-1749.
Bardgett, H. P., Dixon, M., & Beeching, N. J. (2006). Increase in hospital
     mortality from non-communicable disease and HIV-related
     conditions in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, between 1992 and 2000. Trop
     Doct, 36(3), 129-131.
Barr, N. (2004). Higher education funding. Oxford Review of Economic
      Policy, 20(2), 264-283.
Bertozzi, S., Gutierrez, J. P., Opuni, M., Walker, N., & Schwartlander, B.
      (2004). Estimating resource needs for HIV/AIDS health care
      services in low-income and middle-income countries. Health Policy,
      69(2), 189-200.
Braitstein, P., Brinkhof, M. W., Dabis, F., Schechter, M., Boulle, A.,
      Miotti, P., et al. (2006). Mortality of HIV-1-infected patients in the
      first year of antiretroviral therapy: comparison between low-income
      and high-income countries. Lancet, 367(9513), 817-824.
Broughton, B. (1999). Guide to HIV/AIDS and development. Canberra,
     Australia: Commonwealth of Australia.
Calmy, A., Pinoges, L., Szumilin, E., Zachariah, R., Ford, N., & Ferradini,
     L. (2006). Generic fixed-dose combination antiretroviral treatment
     in resource-poor settings: multicentric observational cohort. Aids,
     20(8), 1163-1169.
Cameron, M., Gibson, J., Helmers, K., Lim, S., Tressler, J., & Vaddanak,
    K. (2006). The value of statistical life and the economics of
    landmine clearance in developing countries.
    http://gemini.econ.umd.edu/conference/NEUDC2005/program/N
    EUDC2005.html (accessed 3 June 2007).




                                    36
Carter, M. (2004). Clinton Foundation secures cut price CD4 and viral
      load tests for resource limited countries.
      http://www.aidsmap.com/en/news/A62F59CF-0590-4FE9-AAD4-
      E6253B5BF027.asp (accessed 26 July 2007).
Clark, J. (2006). HIV programmes in poor countries lack health workers.
      Bmj, 333(7565), 412.
Coetzee, D., Hildebrand, K., Boulle, A., Maartens, G., Louis, F., Labatala,
      V., et al. (2004). Outcomes after two years of providing
      antiretroviral treatment in Khayelitsha, South Africa. Aids, 18(6),
      887-895.
Cohen, D. (2002). Human capital and the HIV epidemic in sub-Saharan
     Africa. Geneva: ILO Programme on HIV/AIDS and the World of
     Work.
Colborn, R. P. (1991). Medical students' financial dilemma. A study
      conducted at the University of Cape Town. S Afr Med J, 79(10),
      616-619.
Colborn, R. P. (1992). Can medical graduates afford to become state
      medical officers? S Afr Med J, 82(4), 264-266.
Commission for Africa (2005). Our common interest - report of the
    commission for Africa. London: Commission for Africa.
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (2001). Macroeconomics
    and health: investing in health for economic development. Geneva:
    World Health Organization.
Cueto, J., Burch, V., Adnan, N., Afolabi, B., Ismail, Z., Jafri, W., et al.
     (2006). Accreditation of undergraduate medical training programs:
     practice in nine developing countries as compared with the United
     States. Education for Health: Change in Learning & Practice, 19(2),
     207-222.
Cutler, E. M., & Richardson, E. (1997). Measuring the health of the U.S.
      population. Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, 217-271.
Daniels, Z. M., Vanleit, B. J., Skipper, B. J., Sanders, M. L., & Rhyne, R.
     L. (2007). Factors in recruiting and retaining health professionals
     for rural practice. J Rural Health, 23(1), 62-71.
De Carvalho, P., Kajibanga, V., & Heimer, F.-H. (2007). Country higher
     education profiles: Angola.
     http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/soe/cihe/inhea/profiles/Angola.h
     tm (accessed 10 May 2007).
de Vries, E., & Reid, S. (2003). Do South African medical students of
      rural origin return to rural practice? S Afr Med J, 93(10), 789-793.



                                    37
Dedicoat, M., Grimwade, K., Newton, R., & Gilks, C. (2003). Changes in
     the patient population attending a primary health care clinic in
     rural South Africa between 1991 and 2001. S Afr Med J, 93(10),
     777-778.
DFID and HM Treasury (2003). International finance facility: a technical
     note. Norwich, UK: HM Treasury.
DFID and HM Treasury (2004). International finance facility proposal -
     April 2004. Norwich, UK: HM Treasury.
Docquier, F., & Bhargava, A. (2006). The medical brain drain: a newe
     data set on physicians' emigration rates (1991-2004).
     http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRES/Resources/DataSetD
     ocquierBhargava_Medical_BD100306.xls (accessed 25 June 2007).
Dovlo, D. (2007). Migration of nurses from sub-Saharan Africa: a review
      of issues and challenges. Health Serv Res, 42(3 Pt 2), 1373-1388.
Etard, J. F., Ndiaye, I., Thierry-Mieg, M., Gueye, N. F., Gueye, P. M.,
      Laniece, I., et al. (2006). Mortality and causes of death in adults
      receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy in Senegal: a 7-year
      cohort study. Aids, 20(8), 1181-1189.
Ferradini, L., Jeannin, A., Pinoges, L., Izopet, J., Odhiambo, D.,
      Mankhambo, L., et al. (2006). Scaling up of highly active
      antiretroviral therapy in a rural district of Malawi: an effectiveness
      assessment. Lancet, 367(9519), 1335-1342.
Floyd, K., Reid, R. A., Wilkinson, D., & Gilks, C. F. (1999). Admission
      trends in a rural South African hospital during the early years of
      the HIV epidemic. Jama, 282(11), 1087-1091.
Foundation for hospices in sub-Saharan Africa (2007). How far can a
     U.S. dollar go for hospices in Africa? .
     http://www.fhssa.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3300
     (accessed 27 February 2007).
Frey, B., & Frey, E. (1995). Financial assistance needed for Tanzanian
      medical student. Cmaj, 152(11), 1751.
GAVI. (2003). 11th GAVI board meeting: human resources and
     immunization. GAVI.
GCIM (2005). Migration in an interconnected world: new directions for
     action - report of the global commission on international migration.
     Geneva: GCIM.
Gibson, J., Barns, S., Cameron, M., Lim, S., Scrimgeour, F., & Tressler,
     J. (2007). The value of statistical life and the economics of
     landmine clearance in developing countries. World Development,
     35(3), 512-531.


                                     38
Goldie, S. J., Yazdanpanah, Y., Losina, E., Weinstein, M. C., Anglaret, X.,
      Walensky, R. P., et al. (2006). Cost-effectiveness of HIV treatment
      in resource-poor settings--the case of Cote d'Ivoire. N Engl J Med,
      355(11), 1141-1153.
Grassly, N. C., Morgan, M., Walker, N., Garnett, G., Stanecki, K. A.,
     Stover, J., et al. (2004). Uncertainty in estimates of HIV/AIDS: the
     estimation and application of plausibility bounds. Sex Transm
     Infect, 80 Suppl 1, i31-38.
Gutierrez, J. P., Johns, B., Adam, T., Bertozzi, S. M., Edejer, T. T.,
      Greener, R., et al. (2004). Achieving the WHO/UNAIDS
      antiretroviral treatment 3 by 5 goal: what will it cost? Lancet,
      364(9428), 63-64.
Habte, D., Dussault, G., & Dovlo, D. (2004). Challenges confronting the
     health workforce in sub-Saharan Africa. World Hosp Health Serv,
     40(2), 23-26.
Hallett, T. B., Aberle-Grasse, J., Bello, G., Boulos, L. M., Cayemittes, M.
      P., Cheluget, B., et al. (2006). Declines in HIV prevalence can be
      associated with changing sexual behaviour in Uganda, urban
      Kenya, Zimbabwe, and urban Haiti. Sex Transm Infect, 82 Suppl 1,
      i1-8.
Herbst, K., Cooke, G., Bärnighausen, T., KanyKany, A., & Newell, M. L.
     (2007). Early impact on adult population mortality following the
     introduction of a government ART prgramme in rural KwaZulu-
     Natal. South African AIDS Conference, 5-8 June 2007. Durban.
Hern, M. J., Vaughn, G., Mason, D., & Weitkamp, T. (2005). Creating an
      international nursing practice and education workplace. Journal of
      Pediatric Nursing, 20, 34-44.
Hirschhorn, L. R., Oguda, L., Fullem, A., Dreesch, N., & Wilson, P.
      (2006). Estimating health workforce needs for antiretroviral
      therapy in resource-limited settings. Hum Resour Health, 4, 1.
Hogg, R. S., Yip, B., Kully, C., Craib, K. J., O'Shaughnessy, M. V.,
      Schechter, M. T., et al. (1999). Improved survival among HIV-
      infected patients after initiation of triple-drug antiretroviral
      regimens. Cmaj, 160(5), 659-665.
Hosseinipour, M., Kazembe, P., Sanne, I., & van der Horst, C. (2002).
     Challenges in delivering antiretroviral treatment in resource poor
     countries. AIDS, Suppl 4(16), 177-187.
Hunink, M., Glasziou, P., Siegel, J., Weeks, J., Pliskin, J., Elstein, A., et
     al. (2001). Decision making in health and medicine. Cambridge,
     UK: Cambridge University Press.



                                      39
INDEPTH Network (2004). INDEPTH model life tables for sub-Saharan
     Africa. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.
International Center for Healthcare Access: about us.(2007).
      http://www.iceha.org/about/ (accessed 20 May 2007).
IOM (2007). PEPFAR implementation: progress and promise.
      Washington, D.C.: National Academic Press.
IRIN Humanitarian News and Analysis (2006). Guinea: "If you don't have
      courage, you can't study".
      http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=61685 (accessed
      7 July 2007).
JLI (2004a). Health human resource demand and management:
      strategies to confront crisis: report of the working group on
      demand. Boston, MA: Joint Learning Initiative.
JLI (2004b). Human resources for health: overcoming the crisis. Boston:
      Harvard University Press.
Johansson, P. O. (2001). Is there a meaningful definition of the value of a
     statistical life? J Health Econ, 20(1), 131-139.
Johansson, P. O. (2002). The value of a statistical life: theoretical and
     empirical evidence. Appl Health Econ Health Policy, 1(1), 33-41.
Kirigia, J. M., Gbary, A. R., Muthuri, L. K., Nyoni, J., & Seddoh, A.
       (2006). The cost of health professionals' brain drain in Kenya. BMC
       Health Serv Res, 6, 89.
Kober, K., & Van Damme, W. (2004). Scaling-up access to antiretroviral
     treatment in southern Africa: who will do the job? Lancet,
     364(9428), 103-107.
Lawn, S. D., Myer, L., Bekker, L. G., & Wood, R. (2006). CD4 cell count
     recovery among HIV-infected patients with very advanced
     immunodeficiency commencing antiretroviral treatment in sub-
     Saharan Africa. BMC Infect Dis, 6, 59.
Ley, T. J., & Rosenberg, L. E. (2005). They physician-scientist career
      pipeline in 2005: built it, and they will come. JAMA, 294(11), 1343-
      1351.
Marazzi, M. C., Guidotti, G., Liotta, G., & Palombi, L. (2005). DREAM: an
     integrated faith-based initiative to treat HIV/AIDS in Mozambique.
     Geneva: World Health Organization.
Mathers, C. D., & Loncar, D. (2006). Projections of global mortality and
     burden of disease from 2002 to 2030. PLoS Med, 3(11), e442.




                                     40
Mensah, K., Makintosh, M., Henry, L. (2005). The 'skills drain' of health
     professionals form the developing world: a framework for policy
     formulation. London: Medact.
Moore, M. J., & Viscusi, W. K. (1988). The quantity-adjusted value of life.
     Economic Inquiry, 26, 369-388.
Morrison, G. (2005). Mortaging our future - the cost of medical
      education. N Engl J Med, 352(2), 117-119.
MSF (2004). Untangling the web of price reductions: a pricing guide for
     the purchase of ARV for developing countries, 6th edition. Geneva:
     Médecins sans frontièrs.
MSF (2006). Untangling the web of price reductions: a pricing guide for
     the purchase of ARV for developing countries, 9th edition. Geneva:
     Médecins sans frontièrs.
MSF (2007a). Help wanted - confronting the health care worker crisis to
     expand access to HIV/AIDS treatment: MSF experience in
     southern Africa. Johannesburg: Médecins sans frontières.
MSF (2007b). MSF study shows good outcomes for second-line AIDS
     treatment in resource-poor settings. http://www.accessmed-
     msf.org/prod/publications.asp?scntid=6320071452324&contentty
     pe=PARA& (accessed 17 July 2007).
Murray, C. J., Lauer, J. A., & Hutubessy, R. C. (2003). Effectiveness and
     costs of interventions to lower systolic blood pressure and
     cholesterol: a global and regional analysis on reduction of
     cardiovascular-disease risk. Lancet, 361, 717-725.
Murray, C. J., & Lopez, A. D. (1996). The global burden of disease.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Muula, A. S., Panulo, B., Jr., & Maseko, F. C. (2006). The financial losses
     from the migration of nurses from Malawi. BMC Nurs, 5, 9.
Nacher, M., El Guedj, M., Vaz, T., Nasser, V., Randrianjohany, A.,
     Alvarez, F., et al. (2006). Risk factors for follow-up interruption of
     HIV patients in French Guiana. Am J Trop Med Hyg, 74(5), 915-
     917.
Ooms, G., Van Damme, W., & Temmerman, M. (2007). Medicines without
     doctors: why the Global Fund must fund salaries of health workers
     to expand AIDS treatment. PLoS Med, 4(4), e128.
Orrell, C., Harling, G., Lawn, S. D., Kaplan, R., McNally, M., Bekker, L.
       G., et al. (2007). Conservation of first-line antiretroviral treatment
       regimen where therapeutic options are limited. Antivir Ther, 12(1),
       83-88.



                                      41
Padarath, A., Chamberlain, C., McCoy, D., Ntuli, A., Rowson, M., &
     Loewenson, R. (2003). Health personnel in southern Africa:
     confronting maldistribution and brain drain, equinet discussion
     paper No. 4. Harare: Regional Network for Equity in Health in
     Southern Africa.
Philipson, T., & Soares, R. (2001). Human capital, longevity and
      economic growth: a quantitative assessment of full income
      measures. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
ReaMetrix (2007). Products and services.
     http://www.reametrix.com/tritstat?gclid=CL_a7o3--
     YwCFRtJEAodlVvUbQ (accessed 26 June 2007).
Saengdidtha, B., Lapparat, G., Torugsa, K., Suppadit, W., & Wakai, S.
     (2002). Sexual behaviors and human immunodeficiency virus
     infection among Thai army conscripts between 1992 and 1998. Mil
     Med, 167(4), 272-276.
Salomon, J. A., Hogan, D. R., Stover, J., Stanecki, K. A., Walker, N.,
     Ghys, P. D., et al. (2005). Integrating HIV prevention and
     treatment: from slogans to impact. PLoS Med, 2(1), e16.
Sambo, L. G. (2006). Message of the regional director, Dr. Louis G.
    Samob, on occasion of world health day 2006.
    http://www.afro.who.int/regionaldirector/speeches/rd20060407.h
    tml (accessed 26 June 2007).
Shanmugam, K. R. (2000). Valuations of life and injury risks.
    Environmental and Resource Economics, 16, 379-389.
Siegel, J. E., Torrance, G. W., Russell, L. B., Luce, B. R., Weinstein, M.
      C., & Gold, M. R. (1997). Guidelines for pharmacoeconomic
      studies. Recommendations from the panel on cost effectiveness in
      health and medicine. Panel on cost effectiveness in health and
      medicine. Pharmacoeconomics, 11(2), 159-168.
Sonnenberg, F. A., & Beck, J. R. (1993). Markov models in medical
     decision making: a practical guide. Med Decis Making, 13(4), 322-
     338.
South African Department of Health (2004). National antiretroviral
     treatment guidelines, South Africa. Pretoria: Department of Health.
South African Nursing Council (2006). Private nursing education
     providers must register with department of education.
     http://www.sanc.co.za/ (accessed 20 May 2007).
The Global Fund (2007). Partners in impact: results report. Geneva: The
     Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.




                                    42
The Lancet (2007). PEPFAR and the fight against AIDS. Lancet, 369,
     1141.
The Tropical Health and Education Trust (2007). Strengthening health
      systems: promoting an integrated response for chronic care.
      http://www.thet.org.uk (accessed 12 June 2007).
UNAIDS (2005). AIDS in Africa: three scenarios to 2025. Geneva:
     UNAIDS.
UNAIDS/WHO (2006). AIDS epidemic update: special report on
     HIV/AIDS: December 2006. Geneva: UNAIDS.
UNAIDS/WHO (2007). UNAIDS/WHO global HIV/AIDS online database.
     http://www.who.int/globalatlas/default.asp (accessed 12 June
     2007).
US doctors for Africa: about us.(2007).
     http://www.usdfa.org/guidingprinciples.htm (accessed 20 May
     2007).
USAID Bureau for Africa (2003). The health sector human resource crisis
     in Africa: an issues paper. Washington, D.C.: USAID.
Verspoor, A., Mattimir, A., & Watt, P. A. (2001). A chance to learn:
     knowledge and finance for education in sub-Saharan Africa.
     Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Viscusi, W. K., & Aldy, J. (2003). The value of a statistical life: a critical
      review of market estimates throughout the world. The Journal of
      Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1), 5-76.
Vujicic, M., Zurn, P., Diallo, K., Adams, O., & Dal Poz, M. R. (2004). The
      role of wages in the migration of health care professionals from
      developing countries. Hum Resour Health, 2(1), 3.
Weinstein, M. C. (2006). Recent developments in decision-analytic
     modelling for economic evaluation. Pharmacoeconomics, 24(11),
     1043-1053.
WHO (2003). Migration of health professionals in six countries: a
    synthesis report. Brazzaville: World Health Organization, Regional
    Office for Africa.
WHO. (2004). Recruitment of health workers from the developing world.
    WHO Executive Board Meeting 114 Session. Geneva.
WHO (2006). World health report 2006: working together for health.
    Geneva: WHO.
WHO (2007a). Global price reporting mechanism (GPRM).
    http://www.who.int/hiv/amds/gprm/en/ (accessed 12 June
    2007).


                                      43
WHO (2007b). HIV/AIDS country information.
    http://www.who.int/hiv/countries/en/ (accessed 12 June 2007).
WHO (2007c). WHO global atlas of the health workforce.
    http://www.who.int/globalatlas/default.asp (accessed 10 June
    2007).
WHO and World Federation for Medical Education (WFME) Task Force on
    Accreditation (2004). Accreditation of medical education: report of
    a technical meeting, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4-8 October 2004.
    Geneva: World Health Organization.
WHO/UNAIDS (2006a). Progress in scaling up access to HIV treatment in
    low- and middle income countries, June 2006. Fact sheet. Geneva:
    WHO/UNAIDS.
WHO/UNAIDS (2006b). Progress on global access to HIV antiretroviral
    therapy: a report on "3 by 5" and beyond. Geneva: WHO.
Wibulpolprasert, S., & Pengpaibon, P. (2003). Integrated strategies to
     tackle the inequitable distribution of doctors in Thailand: four
     decades of experience. Hum Resour Health, 1(1), 12.
World Bank (2007). World development indicators. Washington: World
     Bank.
World Organization of Family Doctors (WONCA) Working Party on Rural
     Practice (2002). Policy on quality and effectiveness of rural health
     care.
     http://www.globalfamilydoctor.com/aboutWonca/working_groups
     /rural_training/Quality_of_Rural_Healthcare.htm#35a (accessed
     20 July 2007).
Yazdanpanah, Y., Losina, E., Anglaret, X., Goldie, S. J., Walensky, R. P.,
     Weinstein, M. C., et al. (2005). Clinical impact and cost-
     effectiveness of co-trimoxazole prophylaxis in patients with
     HIV/AIDS in Cote d'Ivoire: a trial-based analysis. Aids, 19(12),
     1299-1308.




                                    44
Figures

Figure 1: Distribution of ART coverage across 92 developing countries in 2006
              20
              15
  Frequency
              10
              5
              0




                   0   20        40        60         80        100
                            ART coverage (in %)



Source: (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007)




                                                      45
Figure 2 (panel 1): Doctor density and HIV prevalence
                       20
                       15
  HIV prevalence (%)
                       10
                       5
                       0




                            0            2                4             6
                                Doctor density (per 1,000 population)



Sources: (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007; WHO, 2007c; World Bank, 2007)




                                                                  46
Figure 2 (panel 2): Nurse density and HIV prevalence
                       20
                       15
  HIV prevalence (%)
                       10
                       5
                       0




                            0           5                10            15
                                Nurse density (per 1,000 population)

Sources: (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007; WHO, 2007c; World Bank, 2007)




                                                                 47
Figure 2 (panel 3): Pharmacist density and HIV prevalence
                       20
                       15
  HIV prevalence (%)
                       10
                       5
                       0




                            0             1                2                3
                                Pharmacist density (per 1,000 population)



Sources: (UNAIDS/WHO, 2007; WHO, 2007c; World Bank, 2007)




                                                                    48
Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis of selected model variables


     Number of patients treated by minimum team
                      (333 to 1,000)
    Value of a statistical life year
                     ($2,056 to $4,111)
     Treatment costs per patient-year, first-line ART
                      ($355 to $100)
  Cost of 'conditional scholarships' per HAHW minimum
              team ($725,000 to $124,000)
     Mean annual probability of death without ART
                    (0.218 to 0.256)
     Discount rate
                        (0.08 to 0.02)
     Salaries per year per HAHW mininum team
                   ($56,000 to $14,000)
    Treatment costs per patient-year, second-line ART
                    ($642 to $1,232)
    Mean annual probability of first-line ART failure
                   (0.025 to 0.041)

                                                     0.0 0.5    1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5     3.0
   Expected net present value of "conditional scholarships" for one minimum team of HIV/AIDS
   health workers (in million year-2000 US dollars ($))




                                                         49
Tables
Table 1: Values of model variables
                                                               Base-case       Minimum   Maximum   Reference
Value of a statistical life year (year-2000 US dollars)        3,084           2,056     4,111     (Commission on Macroeconomics and
                                                                                                   Health, 2001)

HAHW minimum team
Ratio nurses:treatment counselors:doctors:pharmacists          3:10:1:1                            (Hirschhorn et al., 2006)
Number of patients treated by minimum team                     500             333       1,000     (Hirschhorn et al., 2006)

Education costs = value of “conditional scholarship”
(year 2000 $)
Doctors                                                        42,000          32,000    200,000   (Muula et al., 2006)
Nurses                                                         24,000          19,000    95,000    (Kirigia et al., 2006; Muula et al., 2006)
Pharmacists                                                    35,000          25,000    140,000
Treatment counselors                                           3,000           1,000     10,000
HAHW minimum team                                              179,000         124,000   725,000

Salaries per year (year-2000 US dollars)
Doctors                                                        7,000           3,000     15,000    (Vujicic, Zurn, Diallo, Adams, & Dal Poz,
                                                                                                   2004)
Nurses                                                         2,000           1,000     7,000     (Vujicic et al., 2004)
Pharmacists                                                    5,000           3,000     10,000
Treatment counselors                                           700             500       1,000     (Foundation for hospices in sub-Saharan
                                                                                                   Africa, 2007)
HAHW minimum team                                              25,000          14,000    56,000

Patient probabilities
Mean annual probability of death without ART                   0.237           0.218     0.256     (Badri et al., 2006)
Mean annual probability of death in first year of treatment,   0.064           0.057     0.071     (Braitstein et al., 2006)
first-line ART
Mean annual probability of death in second or later year of    0.027           0.022     0.032     (Braitstein et al., 2006)
treatment, first-line ART




                                                                          50
Mean annual probability of death in second or later year of   0.027          0.022   0.032
treatment, second-line ART
Mean annual probability of loss to follow-up                  0.100          0.024   0.156   (Marazzi, Guidotti, Liotta, & Palombi, 2005;
                                                                                             Nacher, El Guedj, Vaz, Nasser,
                                                                                             Randrianjohany, Alvarez et al., 2006)
Mean annual probability of first-line treatment failure       0.033          0.025   0.041   (Orrell, Harling, Lawn, Kaplan, McNally,
                                                                                             Bekker et al., 2007)

HAHW minimum team probabilities
Mean annual probability of emigration                         See table 2                    (Docquier & Bhargava, 2006)
Minimum team, age-specific probability of death               Age and sex-                   (INDEPTH Network, 2004)
                                                              specific

Treatment costs per patient-year (year-2000 US
dollars)
First-line ART                                                120            100     355     (South African Department of Health, 2004;
                                                                                             WHO, 2007a, b)
                                                                                             (South African Department of Health, 2004;
Second-line ART                                               698            641     1,232   WHO, 2007a, b)
CD counts                                                     8              5       20      (Carter, 2004; ReaMetrix, 2007)
Cotrimoxazole prophylaxis                                     3              2       4       (WHO, 2007a)

Discount rate                                                 0.03           0.02    0.08




                                                                      51
Table 2: Expected net present value of “conditional scholarships” for one minimum team of HIV/AIDS health
workers

                                                              Mean        95% CI         Mean        95% CI         Mean        95% CI
            Increased education output only
               15% mean annual probability of emigration      799,067     (781,688 -
                                                                          816,446)
               12% mean annual probability of emigration      954,097     (934,586 -
                                                                          973,607)

            Length of service commitment                      3 years                    5 years                    7 years
            Increased education output and decreased
            emigration
            5% mean annual probability of emigration during   1,119,711   (1,102,096 -   1,238,763   (1,220,025 -   1,354,293   (1,334,562 -
            the service requirement; 15% otherwise                        1,137,325)                 1,257,501)                 1,374,024)
            5% mean annual probability of emigration during   1,284,889   (1,264,631 -   1,349,004   (1,328,526 -   1,417,743   (1,396,472 -
 Scenario




            the service requirement; 12% otherwise                        1,305,147)                 1,369,482)                 1,439,015)
            3% mean annual probability of emigration during   1,223,939   (1,206,584 -   1,385,393   (1,366,789 -   1,507,784   (1,488,342 -
            the service requirement; 15% otherwise                        1,241,295)                 1,403,997)                 1,527,226)
            3% mean annual probability of emigration during   1,343,552   (1,324,126 -   1,476,995   (1,456,459 -   1,607,055   (1,585,487 -
            the service requirement; 12% otherwise                        1,362,978)                 1,497,532)                 1,628,623)
            Decreased emigration only
            5% mean annual probability of emigration during   168,209     (143,923 -     287,261     (262,350 -     402,792     (377,232 -
            the service requirement; 15% otherwise                        192,496)                   312,172)                   428,351)
            5% mean annual probability of emigration during   148,670     (120,755 -     212,785     (184,481 -     281,524     (252,956 -
            the service requirement; 12% otherwise                        176,585)                   241,088)                   310,093)
            3% mean annual probability of emigration during   272,438     (248,674 -     433,891     (408,920 -     556,283     (530,696 -
            the service requirement; 15% otherwise                        296,202)                   458,863)                   581,869)
            3% mean annual probability of emigration during   207,333     (179,934 -     340,776     (312,364 -     470,836     (441,869 -
            the service requirement; 12% otherwise                        234,731)                   369,188)                   499,803)




                                                                          52
Appendix
Table 1a: Number of additional doctors, nurses, and pharmacists needed to provide universal ART coverage

Country           Estimated     Estimated   Estimated        Number of doctors         Number of nurses          Number of
                  number of     ART         number of        needed to achieve         needed to achieve         pharmacists needed
                  people        coverageb   people who       universal ART             universal ART             to achieve universal
                  needing                   needed ART       coveragec                 coveraged                 ART coveragee
                  ARTa                      but did not
                                            receive it

                                                             Low         High          Low         High          Low         High
                                                             estimate    estimate      estimate    estimate      estimate    estimate
Algeria                 2,300         25%            1,725           2             3           3           12            2           5
Angola                 66,000         10%           59,604          60           119         119          417           60         179
Argentina              42,000         79%            8,780           9            18          18           61            9          26
Azerbaijan                590         <1%              590           1             1           1            4            1           2
Bangladesh              1,700         <3%            1,700           2             3           3           12            2           5
Barbados                  710         87%               94           0             0           0            1            0           0
Belarus                 2,400         20%            1,926           2             4           4           13            2           6
Belize                    680         59%              280           0             1           1            2            0           1
Benin                  20,000         38%           12,379          12            25          25           87           12          37
Bolivia                 1,100         24%              837           1             2           2            6            1           3
Botswana               84,000        >95%            4,200           4             8           8           29            4          13
Brazil                210,000         85%           30,880          31            62          62          216           31          93
Burkina Faso           33,000         39%           19,985          20            40          40          140           20          60
Burundi                31,000         26%           22,805          23            46          46          160           23          68
Cameroon              110,000         25%           82,057          82           164         164         574            82         246
Central African        49,000          6%           46,016          46            92          92          322           46         138
Republic
Chad                   36,000         14%           31,035          31            62          62           217          31          93
Chile                   8,900         83%            1,524           2             3           3            11           2           5
China                 110,000         27%           79,849          80           160         160           559          80         240
Colombia               37,000         50%           18,500          19            37          37           130          19          56




                                                               53
Country         Estimated     Estimated   Estimated        Number of doctors         Number of nurses          Number of
                number of     ART         number of        needed to achieve         needed to achieve         pharmacists needed
                people        coverageb   people who       universal ART             universal ART             to achieve universal
                needing                   needed ART       coveragec                 coveraged                 ART coveragee
                ARTa                      but did not
                                          receive it

                                                           Low          High         Low          High         Low          High
                                                           estimate     estimate     estimate     estimate     estimate     estimate
Congo                23,000         17%           19,059           19           38           38          133           19           57
Costa Rica            1,900        >95%               95            0            0            0            1            0            0
Côte d'Ivoire       110,000         28%           79,078           79          158         158           554           79          237
Cuba                  1,500        >95%               75            0            0            0            1            0            0
Democratic          200,000         10%          179,041         179           358         358         1,253          179          537
Republic of
the Congo
Djibouti              3,100         19%            2,496           2             5           5            17           2               7
Dominican            14,000         37%            8,822           9            18          18            62           9              26
Republic
Ecuador               5,200         34%            3,438           3             7           7            24           3              10
Egypt                   910         22%              709           1             1           1             5           1               2
El Salvador           8,500         39%            5,156           5            10          10            36           5              15
Equatorial            1,800         24%            1,377           1             3           3            10           1               4
Guinea
Eritrea              12,000          8%           11,002          11            22          22            77          11           33
Gabon                12,000         35%            7,751           8            16          16            54           8           23
Gambia                3,500         12%            3,072           3             6           6            22           3            9
Georgia                 700         32%              476           0             1           1             3           0            1
Ghana                63,000         16%           53,123          53           106         106           372          53          159
Guatemala            12,000         52%            5,725           6            11          11            40           6           17
Guinea               17,000         10%           15,225          15            30          30           107          15           46
Guinea-               6,300          6%            5,932           6            12          12            42           6           18
Bissau
Guyana                2,500         72%              712           1            1            1             5           1               2
Haiti                22,000         39%           13,490          13           27           27            94          13              40




                                                             54
Country         Estimated     Estimated   Estimated        Number of doctors         Number of nurses          Number of
                number of     ART         number of        needed to achieve         needed to achieve         pharmacists needed
                people        coverageb   people who       universal ART             universal ART             to achieve universal
                needing                   needed ART       coveragec                 coveraged                 ART coveragee
                ARTa                      but did not
                                          receive it

                                                           Low          High         Low          High         Low         High
                                                           estimate     estimate     estimate     estimate     estimate    estimate
Honduras             11,000         40%            6,646           7            13           13           47           7              20
Indonesia            25,000         20%           19,912          20            40           40          139          20              60
Iran, Islamic         8,400          5%            7,973           8            16           16           56           8              24
Republic of
Jamaica               4,500         56%           1,996             2            4           4           14            2            6
Kazakhstan            3,700         10%           3,320             3            7           7           23            3           10
Kenya               290,000         44%         162,400           162          325         325        1,137          162          487
Lesotho              57,000         31%          39,373            39           79          79          276           39          118
Madagascar            8,100          1%           8,008             8           16          16           56            8           24
Malawi              190,000         43%         108,126           108          216         216          757          108          324
Malaysia             12,000         22%           9,375             9           19          19           66            9           28
Mali                 27,000         37%          17,135            17           34          34          120           17           51
Mauritania            2,400         17%           1,997             2            4           4           14            2            6
Mexico               46,000         76%          11,065            11           22          22           77           11           33
Morocco               3,400         41%           2,004             2            4           4           14            2            6
Mozambique          280,000         14%         240,604           241          481         481        1,684          241          722
Myanmar              76,000          7%          70,736            71          141         141          495           71          212
Namibia              45,000         71%          12,875            13           26          26           90           13           39
Nepal                13,000          4%          12,464            12           25          25           87           12           37
Nicaragua               940         35%             607             1            1           1            4            1            2
Niger                16,000          6%          15,118            15           30          30          106           15           45
Nigeria             550,000         15%         469,994           470          940         940        3,290          470        1,410
Pakistan             12,000         <1%          12,000            12           24          24           84           12           36
Panama                4,200         70%           1,250             1            3           3            9            1            4
Papua New             9,800          8%           9,018             9           18          18           63            9           27
Guinea




                                                             55
Country        Estimated      Estimated   Estimated        Number of doctors             Number of nurses           Number of
               number of      ART         number of        needed to achieve             needed to achieve          pharmacists needed
               people         coverageb   people who       universal ART                 universal ART              to achieve universal
               needing                    needed ART       coveragec                     coveraged                  ART coveragee
               ARTa                       but did not
                                          receive it

                                                           Low            High           Low            High        Low            High
                                                           estimate       estimate       estimate       estimate    estimate       estimate
Paraguay             1,800          64%              642            1             1              1              4           1              2
Peru                18,000          50%            9,000            9            18             18             63           9             27
Philippines          1,900          10%            1,719            2             3              3             12           2              5
Russian            140,000          11%          124,600          125           249            249            872         125            374
Federation
Rwanda               48,000         72%           13,525           14            27             27             95          14              41
Senegal              12,000         34%            7,924            8            16             16             55           8              24
Sierra Leone          9,400         14%            8,129            8            16             16             57           8              24
Somalia               8,800         <1%            8,712            9            17             17             61           9              26
South Africa      1,000,000         32%          675,196          675         1,350          1,350          4,726         675           2,026
Sri Lanka               710         <8%              675            1             1              1              5           1               2
Sudan                66,000          1%           65,255           65           131            131            457          65             196
Suriname                740         93%               55            0             0              0              0           0               0
Swaziland            44,000         42%           25,565           26            51             51            179          26              77
Tajikistan              500         <5%              500            1             1              1              4           1               2
Thailand            130,000         88%           15,600           16            31             31            109          16              47
Togo                 23,000         24%           17,434           17            35             35            122          17              52
Trinidad and          5,700         45%            3,126            3             6              6             22           3               9
Tobago
Uganda             230,000          41%         135,551           136           271            271            949         136            407
United             280,000          18%         228,981           229           458            458          1,603         229            687
Republic of
Tanzania
Uruguay              2,800          51%            1,386              1              3              3          10              1              4




                                                             56
Country        Estimated       Estimated    Estimated         Number of doctors        Number of nurses          Number of
               number of       ART          number of         needed to achieve        needed to achieve         pharmacists needed
               people          coverageb    people who        universal ART            universal ART             to achieve universal
               needing                      needed ART        coveragec                coveraged                 ART coveragee
               ARTa                         but did not
                                            receive it

                                                              Low         High         Low          High         Low         High
                                                              estimate    estimate     estimate     estimate     estimate    estimate
Venezuela,               23,000            71%              6,616            7    13           13           46          7          20
Bolivarian
Republic of
Viet Nam                 42,000            17%             34,693           35           69           69    243        35         104
Zambia                  230,000            35%            148,950          149          298          298  1,043      149          447
Zimbabwe                350,000            15%            298,463          298          597          597  2,089      298          895
Total                 5,731,080                         3,916,916        3,917        7,834       7,834  27,418    3,917       11,751
a
  estimate as of December 2006 (based on UNAIDS/WHO 2007)
b
  estimates as of December 2006, ART coverage assumed 0% if coverage given as <1% or <5%, ART coverage assumed 5% if given as <8%,
ART coverage assumed 95% if given as >95% (based on UNAIDS/WHO 2007)
c
  assuming 1 (low estimate) or 2 (high estimate) doctors needed to provide ART to 1,000 patients
d
  assuming 2 (low estimate) or 7 (high estimate) nurses needed to provide ART to 1,000 patients
e
  assuming 1 (low estimate) or 3 (high estimate) pharmacists needed to provide ART to 1,000 patients




                                                                57
Table 2a: Interventions to increase health worker densities

INTERVENTIONS TO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF HEALTH WORKER NEED IN A COUNTRY                                                     POTENTIAL TO
                                                                                                                              INCREASE
                                                                                                                            “CONDITIONAL
                                                                                                                           SCHOLARSHIP”
                                                                                                                           EFFECTIVENESS
Incentives
Financial
1    Increase salaries                                                                                                           +
2    Permit health workers in the public sector to do some private practice                                                      +
3    Provide more benefits (pay for education for children, housing, meals, health insurance, pension insurance)                 +
4    Provide financial incentives for health care workers who return to their country of origin
5    Demand compensation from departing workers                                                                                  +
6    Tax income of health workers who leave the country                                                                          +
     Non-financial
7    Increase opportunities for further education and training in the country                                                    +
8    Institute attractive career paths                                                                                           +
9    Decrease workload                                                                                                           +
10   Improve working conditions (workplace safety, supply of medicines and equipment, management information                     +
     systems)
11   Increase health care capital inputs (facilities, laboratory equipment, imaging technologies, surgical technologies)         +
12   Improve human resources management (recruitment, promotion, transfer, discipline, grievances, termination)                  +
13   Offer psychological support for health workers                                                                              +
14   Provide free ART for health workers                                                                                         +
Regulation
15   Delay departure through compulsory service
16   Introduce “ethical” recruitment policies in recipient countries                                                             +
17   Implement inter-country non-migration policies                                                                              +
18   Withhold diplomas from health care workers until have served a period of time in the country                                +
19   Make it easier for foreign health workers to obtain visas and work permits




                                                                        58
20   Make it easier for foreign health workers to obtain health care licenses
Education
21   Provide scholarships for health care studies
22   Provide loans for health care studies
23   Implement marketing campaign for health care careers in schools                                           +
24   Increase number of secondary education graduates per year                                                 +
25   Hire health care teachers from other countries                                                            +
26   Increase training of health care teachers                                                                 +
27   Build health education facilities                                                                         +
Inventions
Technological
28   Train health workers who are not internationally mobile
29   Focus training curricula on local health needs
Programmatic
30   Rotate individual health care workers from developed to developing countries
31   Introduce hospital partnerships with rotations of teams of health care workers
32   Re-employ retired health care workers from the country
33   Hire retired health care workers from other countries
34   Transfer programmatic responsibilities to health care relief organizations
35   Institute recruitment intermediaries between developed and developing countries

INTERVENTIONS TO DECREASE HEALTH WORKER NEED IN A COUNTRY
Inventions
Technological
36   Use telemedicine to provide specialist medicine where there are no specialists
37   Standardize treatment for common disease, so that it can be provided by less educated health workers
38   Provide technological aid to enable less educated health workers to provide diagnosis and treatment
39   Provide patient training to improve performance of self-diagnosis to decrease the number of unnecessary
     provider-patient contacts
40   Invest in prevention interventions




                                                                     59
INTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE DISTRIBUTION OF HEALTH WORKERS IN A COUNTRY
Incentives
Financial
41    1-3 in underserved areas, but not in well-served areas                                             +
42    Introduce education loan payback programs in underserved areas
Non-financial
43    7-14 in underserved areas, but not in well-served areas                                            +
Regulation
44    Make service in underserved areas a requirement for admittance to specialist training
Education
45    Increase recruitment of students from underserved areas into health care education programs        +
46    Build education facilities in underserved areas                                                    +
47    Rotate students through underserved areas during their education and training                      +
Interventions
Technological
48    Train health workers who can only find jobs in underserved areas (e.g. community health workers)
49    Focus training curricula on health needs in underserved areas                                      +
Programmatic
50    30-35 in underserved areas                                                                         +




                                                                      60
Table 3a: Weighted average costs of first- and second-line ART across sub-Saharan African countries


                                          Year-2007 dollars     Year-2000 US dollars
First-line ART
d4T, 3TC and NVP                          145                   120
AZT, 3TC and NVP                          223                   185
d4T, 3TC and EFV                          326                   270
AZT, 3TC and EFV                          404                   335
Second-line ART
ddI, 3TC and LPV/r                        843                   698
ddI, ABC and LPV/r                        1,488                 1,232
TDF, ABC and LPV/r                        1,419                 1,175
TDF, 3TC and LPV/r                        774                   641
CD4 counts                                50                    41
Cotrimoxazole                             4                     3
ART = antiretroviral treatment. d4T = stavudine; 3TC = lamivudine; NVP = nevirapine;
AZT = zidovudine; EFV = efavirenz; ddI = didanosine; LPV/r = lopinavir/ritonavir; ABC =
abacavir; TDF = Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. We used the number of people with
unmet ART need as the weighting factor in the calculation of the weighted average.




                                                                      61
