                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE BREAKUP OF THE EURO AREA

                                         Barry Eichengreen

                                        Working Paper 13393
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13393


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




An earlier version was prepared for the euro preconference at the NBER Summer Institute, July 12,
2007. I thank Alberto Alesina for comments, Mark Hallerberg for help with data, and Jeffrey Greenbaum
for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Breakup of the Euro Area
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 13393
September 2007
JEL No. F15,F33

                                             ABSTRACT

The possibility that the euro area might break up was being raised even before the single currency
existed. These scenarios were then lent new life five or six years on, when appreciation of the euro
and problems of slow growth in various member states led politicians to blame the European Central
Bank for disappointing economic performance. Highly-placed European officials reportedly discussed
the possibility that one or more participants might withdraw from the monetary union. How seriously
should we take these scenarios? And how significant would be the economic and political consequences?
It is unlikely, I argue here, that one or more members of the euro area will leave in the next ten years;
total disintegration of the euro area is even more unlikely. While other authors have minimized the
technical difficulties of reintroducing a national currency, I suggest that those technical difficulties
would be quite formidable. Nor is it certain that the economic problems of the participating member
states would be significantly ameliorated by abandoning the euro. And even if there are immediate
economic benefits, there would be longer-term political costs.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
                                  The Breakup of the Euro Area1
                                        Barry Eichengreen
                                 University of California, Berkeley
                                             July 2007

1. Introduction

         The possibility of the breakup of the euro area was already being mooted even

before the single currency existed.2 These scenarios were then lent new life five or six

years on, when appreciation of the euro against the dollar and problems of slow growth in

various member states led politicians to blame the European Central Bank for

disappointing economic performance.3 Highly-placed officials, including possibly

members of the governing council of the German central bank, reportedly discussed the

possibility that one or more participants might withdraw from the monetary union.4 How

seriously should we take these scenarios? And how much should we care – how

significant, in other words, would be the economic and political consequences?

         The conclusion of the author is that it is unlikely that one or more members of the

euro area will leave in the next ten years and that the total disintegration of the euro area

is more unlikely still.5 The technical difficulties of reintroducing a national currency

should not be minimized. Nor is it obvious that the economic problems of the

participating member states can be significantly ameliorated by abandoning the euro,


1
  An earlier version was prepared for the euro preconference at the NBER Summer Institute, July 12, 2007.
I thank Alberto Alesina for comments, Mark Hallerberg for help with data, and Jeffrey Greenbaum for
research assistance.
2
  See e.g. Garber (1998) and Scott (1998).
3
  Appreciation of the euro against the dollar (and against Asian currencies pegged to the dollar) first
occurred in 2002-4. In June 2005 Italian welfare minister Roberto Maroni declared that “the euro has to
go” and called for the reintroduction of the lira. Then-prime minister Silvio Berlusconi followed by calling
the euro “a disaster.”
4
  Bundesbank president Axel Weber dismissed as “absurd” reports that he had taken part in such a
meeting.” Expatia (2005), p.1.
5
  Note that I have violated the first rule of forecasting: give them a forecast or give them a date, but never
give them both. The point is that over horizons longer than ten years so many things could change that
forecasting becomes prohibitively difficult. But I turn to the question of long-term developments below.


                                                      1
although neither can this possibility be dismissed. And even if there are immediate

economic benefits, there may be longer-term economic costs, and political costs of an

even more serious nature. Still, as Cohen (2000) puts it, “In a world of sovereign

states….nothing can be regarded as truly irreversible.” Policy analysts should engage in

contingency planning, even if the contingency in question has a low probability.

       The remainder of this paper considers such scenarios in more detail. While it is

widely argued that the technical and legal obstacles to a country unilaterally

reintroducing its national currency are surmountable, it will be argued here that the

associated difficulties could in fact be quite serious. To be sure, there are multiple

historical examples of members of monetary unions introducing a national currency. It

has also been suggested that the legal problems associated with the redenomination of

contracts can be overcome, as they were when the ruble zone broke up or when Germany

replaced the mark with the reichsmark in 1923-4. But changing from an old money to a

new one is more complicated today than in Germany in the 1920s or the former Soviet

Union in the 1990s. Computer code must be rewritten. Automatic teller machines must

be reprogrammed. Advance planning will be required for the process to go smoothly, as

was the case with the introduction of the physical euro in 2002. Moreover, abandoning

the euro will presumably entail lengthy political debate and passage of a bill by a national

parliament or legislature, also over an extended period of time. And, all the while, there

will be an incentive for agents anticipating the redenomination of their claims into the

national currency, followed by depreciation of the latter, to rush out of domestic banks

and financial assets, threatening a banking and financial-market collapse. Limiting the




                                              2
negative repercussions would be a major technical and policy challenge for a government

contemplating abandonment of the euro.

        The economic obstacles revolve around the question of how debt servicing costs,

interest rates spreads, and interest-rate-sensitive forms of economic activity would

respond to a country’s departure from the euro area.6 A widespread presumption is that

departure from the euro area would be associated with a significant rise in spreads and

debt-servicing costs. But further reflection suggests that the consequences will depend

on why a country leaves (the defector could conceivably be a Germany concerned with

politicization of ECB policy and inflationary bias rather than an Italy facing slow growth

and an exploding public debt). They will depend on whether credible alternatives to the

ECB and Stability Pact are put in place at the national level (whether national central

bank independence is strengthened and credible fiscal reforms are adopted at the same

time the exchange rate is reintroduced and depreciated). It seems likely that there would

be economic costs but that these could be minimized by appropriate institutional reforms.

        The political costs are likely to be particularly serious. The Treaty of European

Union makes no provision for exit. Exit by one member would raise doubts about the

future of the monetary union and likely precipitate a further shift out of euro-

denominated assets, which would not please the remaining members. It might damage

the balance sheets of banks in other countries with investments in the one abandoning the

euro. Diplomatic tension and political acrimony would follow, and cooperation on non-

monetary issues would suffer. The defector would be relegated to second-tier status in

intra-European discussions of nonmonetary issues. And, insofar as they attach value to


6
  There is also the question of whether other EU member states would retaliate against a country
reintroducing and depreciating its national currency with trade sanctions – considered below.


                                                     3
their participation in this larger process of European integration, incumbents will be

reluctant to leave.



2. Scenarios

       Different countries could abandon the euro for different reasons. One can

imagine a country like Portugal, suffering from high labor costs and chronic slow growth,

reintroducing the escudo in the effort to engineer a sharp real depreciation and export its

way back to full employment. Alternatively, one can imagine a country like Germany,

upset that the ECB has come under pressure from governments to relax its commitment

to price stability, reintroducing the deutschemark in order to avoid excessive inflation.

       These different scenarios would have different implications for whether defection

implies breakup – that is, for whether one country’s leaving reduces the incentive for

others to remain. In the case of Portuguese defection the residual members might suffer a

further loss of export competitiveness, while in the event of German exit they might find

their competitiveness enhanced. Specifically, if other countries are similarly experiencing

high unemployment associated with inadequate international competitiveness, then

Portugal’s leaving will aggravate the pain felt by the others and may lead them to follow

suit – but Germany’s leaving may have no or even the opposite effect. Similarly, if

discomfort with the inflationary stance of ECB policy is shared by other countries, then

Germany’s leaving, by removing one voice and vote for price stability, may heighten the

incentive for others to do likewise.

       More generally, if the country that leaves is an outlier in terms of its preferences

over central bank policy, then its defection might better enable the remaining participants




                                             4
to secure an ECB policy more to their liking, in which case the likelihood of further

defection and general breakup would be reduced. Disagreements over the stance of

policy being an obvious reason why a participating member state would be disaffected,

one might think that the defector would automatically be an outlier in terms of its

preferences over central bank policy. But this is by no means certain: countries whose

preferences differ insignificantly from those of other members could choose to defect for

other reasons, for example in response to an exceptionally severe asymmetric shock, or

because of disagreements over non-economic issues.7

        And if the country that leaves is small, this would be unlikely to much affect the

incentives of other members to continue operating a monetary union that is valued

primarily for its corollary benefits. The contribution of the euro to enhancing price

stability would not be significantly diminished by the defection of one small member.8

The impetus for financial deepening ascribed to the single currency would not be

significantly diminished.9 If Portugal left the euro area, in other words, would the other

members notice? Even if it used its monetary autonomy to engineer a substantial real

depreciation, would its euro-area neighbors experience a significant loss of

competitiveness and feel serious pain?

        If, on the other hand, Germany defected, the size of the euro area would decline

by more than a quarter. This would imply significant diminution of the scale of the

market over which the benefits of the euro were felt in terms of increased price

transparency and financial deepening. Countries balancing these benefits against the


7
  These issues were analyzed in an influential early article by Alesina and Grilli (1993).
8
  The literature on price transparency and the euro is reviewed by Martha (2003).
9
  On the stimulus to the development of European financial markets, see Bishop (2000) and Biais et al.
(2006). On the corollary benefits of monetary union more generally, see Mongelli and Vega (2006).


                                                    5
costs of being denied their optimal national monetary policy might find themselves tipped

against membership. Defection by a few could then result in general disintegration.

           In practice, a variety of asymmetric shocks could slow growth and raise

unemployment in a euro area member state and create pressure for a real depreciation.

The shocks that have attracted the most attention are those highlighted in Blanchard’s

model of rotating slumps (Blanchard 2006). The advent of the euro has brought

credibility benefits to members whose commitment to price stability was previously least

firm and where interest rates were previously high.10 Enhanced expectations of price

stability have brought down domestic interest rates, bidding up bond, stock and housing

prices. Foreign capital has flooded in to take advantage of this convergence play. The

cost of capital having declined, investment rises in the short run. Households feeling

positive wealth effects, consumption rises as well. The capital inflow has as its

counterpart a current account deficit. In the short run the result is an economic boom,

driven first and foremost by residential construction, with falling unemployment and

rising wages.

           But once the capital stock adjusts to the higher levels implied by the lower cost of

capital, the boom comes to an end. Unless the increase in capital stock significantly

raises labor productivity (which is unlikely insofar as much of the preceding period’s

investment took the form of residential construction), the result is a loss of cost

competitiveness. The country then faces slow growth, chronic high unemployment and

grinding deflation, as weak labor market conditions force wages to fall relative to those

prevailing elsewhere in the euro area. The temptation, then, is to leave the euro zone so



10
     Benefits that in some sense reflect the operation of the barriers to exit described below.


                                                         6
that monetary policy can be used to reverse the erosion of competitiveness with a

“healthy” dose of inflation.

         This particular scenario has attracted attention because it suggests that the

tensions that could eventually result in defections from the euro area are intrinsic to the

operation of the monetary union. It suggests that the intra-euro-area divergences that are

their source are direct consequences of the monetary union’s operation. This story tracks

the experience of Portugal since the mid-1990s – first boom, then overvaluation, and

finally slumpl. There are signs of similar problems in Italy, where the difficulties caused

by slow growth are compounded by the existence of a heavy public debt, and in Spain,

which experienced many of the same dynamics as Portugal. The implication is that

Greece and Slovenia (and future EMU members like Estonia and Latvia) will then

follow.11



3. Economic Barriers to Exit

         But would reintroducing the national currency and following with a sharp

depreciation against the euro in fact help to solve these countries’ competitiveness and

debt problems? The presumption in much of the literature is negative.12 A country like

Italy where slow growth combined with high inherited debt/GDP ratios to raise the

specter of debt unsustainability (that it would become necessary to restructure the debt or

for taxpayers and transfer recipients to make inconceivable sacrifices) might be tempted



11
   One can also argue that Greece and Slovenia will have learned from the problems of Portugal, Spain and
Italy, and that they will take preventive measures – aggressively tightening fiscal policy, for example, to
prevent capital inflows from fueling an unsustainable construction-led investment boom and leading to a
consequent loss of competitiveness. In this view, the negative shocks experienced by the first cohort of
convergence economies may not be felt by their successors.
12
   See for example Gros (2007).


                                                     7
to reintroduce the lira as a way of securing a more inflationary monetary policy and

depreciating away the value of the debt; but doing so would result in credit-rating

downgrades, higher sovereign spreads and an increase in interest costs, as investors

anticipate and react to the government’s actions. A country like Portugal where high real

wages combine with the absence of exchange rate independence to produce chronic high

unemployment might be tempted to reintroduce the escudo as a way of securing a more

expansionary monetary policy and pushing down labor costs; but doing so will only

result in higher wage inflation, as workers anticipate and react to the government’s

actions. Estimates in Blanchard (2006) suggest that Portugal would require a 25 per cent

real depreciation in order to restore its competitiveness.13 It is not clear if the government

sought to engineer this through a substantial nominal depreciation that workers would

look the other way. Observers pointing to these effects conclude that exiting might not

be especially beneficial for a country with high debts or high unemployment. To the

contrary, the principal obstacle to exiting the euro area in this view is that doing so may

have significant economic costs.

        Yet one can also imagine circumstances in which reintroducing the national

currency might constitute a useful treatment. Assume that Portuguese workers are

prepared to accept a reduction in their real wages but confront a coordination problem:

they are willing to accept a reduction only if other workers or unions accept a reduction,

perhaps because they care about relative wages.14 Under these circumstances there will

be a reluctance to move first, and wage adjustment will be suboptimally slow. Then a


13
  Absent further divergences in productivity growth.
14
  Or because the aggregate rate of growth, from which everyone benefits, depends on the national average
level of costs. One can imagine still other formulations of this coordination problem. A survey is Cooper
(1999).


                                                    8
monetary-cum-exchange-rate policy that jumps up the price level, reducing real wages

across the board, may be welfare enhancing; this is the so-called “daylight savings time”

argument for a flexible exchange rate. Importantly, in the circumstances described here

there will be no incentive for individual workers or unions to push for higher wages to

offset the increase in prices. The lower real wages obtained as a result of depreciating the

newly-reintroduced currency deliver the economy to the same full employment

equilibrium that would have resulted from years of grinding deflation, only faster.

          Note the assumption here: that whatever caused real wages to get out of line in the

first place is not intrinsic to the economy, so that the problem will not recur. Thus, the

Portuguese example contemplated here is described under the assumption that real wages

have fallen out of line for reasons extrinsic to the operation of the economy – for example,

irrational exuberance on the part of workers in the run-up to Stage III of the Maastricht

process, something that will not recur. If, on the other hand, real wages are too high

because of the existence of domestic distortions, for example the presence of powerful

trade unions that exclusively value the welfare of their employed members, then it is

implausible that a different monetary-cum-exchange-rate policy will have an enduring

impact.

          There are similar counterarguments to the view that a country like Italy that

reintroduced the lira in order to pursue a monetary-cum-exchange-rate policy that stepped

down the value of the debt would necessarily be penalized with lower credit ratings and

higher debt-servicing costs. Sovereign debt is a contingent claim; when debt is rendered

unsustainable by shocks not of the government’s own making and the source of those

shocks can be verified independently, there are theoretical arguments for why investors




                                               9
will see a write-down as excusable.15 Even when the country’s debt problem is of its own

making, credible institutional and policy reforms – strict legal or constitutional limits on

future budget deficits, stronger independence to insulate the central bank from pressure to

help finance future debts – may reassure the markets that past losses will not recur. The

fact that the debt burden has been lightened similarly makes it look less likely that prior

problems will be repeated. There is ample evidence from history that governments that

default, either explicitly by restructuring or implicitly by inflating, are able to regain

market access following appropriate institutional and policy reforms. The mixed findings

of studies seeking to identify a reputational penalty in the form of higher interest rates are

consistent with the view that this penalty can be avoided by countries that follow up with

institutional and policy reforms reassuring investors that the experience will not be

repeated. The implication is that the cost in terms of reputation may not be a prohibitive

barrier to exit.

           How applicable is this scenario to countries like Italy? It is hard to argue that

Italy’s heavy debt burden is due to factors not of its own making. Italy does not have a

reassuring history of guarding the central bank’s independence or of adopting budgetary

procedures and institutions that limit free-rider and common-pool problems. Whether

exiting the euro area and reintroducing the lira would therefore result in credit-rating

downgrades and increases in spreads sufficient to deter any such decision is an empirical

question.16

           The other economic barrier to exit cited in this connection is that a country that

abandoned the euro and reintroduced its national currency might be denied the privileges


15
     See e.g. Grossman and van Huyck (1988).
16
     More on which below.


                                                10
of the single market. A country that reintroduced its national currency at levels that

stepped down its labor costs by 20 per cent might be required to pay a 20 per cent

compensatory duty when exporting to other members of the EU, reflecting concerns that

it was unfairly manipulating its currency and solving its economic problems at the

expense of its neighbors. Whatever the compensatory tariff, collecting it would require

the reestablishment of customs posts and border controls, adding to transactions costs.

Other states might seek to tax foreign investment outflows on the grounds that the

defector was using an unfair monetary-cum-exchange-rate policy to attract FDI. In this

climate of ill will and recrimination, they might seek to limit the freedom of movement of

its citizens.

           But it is not clear that other member states could or would respond in this way.

Sweden, Denmark, the United Kingdom and all but one of the new member states have

their own national currencies, yet they are not denied the privileges of the single market.

If Germany, Italy or Portugal decided to join their ranks, it is not clear that it could be

treated any differently under European law. To be sure, the new members states are

obliged to keep their currencies within the plus-or-minus 15 per cent bands against the

euro specified by the ERM-II, which limits the scope for currency manipulation, but the

UK and Sweden do not participate in the ERM. It can be objected that the UK and

Sweden anchor their monetary policies by inflation targeting, which frees them of

accusations that they are manipulating their currencies relative to the euro. But a country

like Germany that left the euro area out of dissatisfaction with the ECB’s inflationary bias

would presumably do likewise.17 Even a country abandoning the euro because it saw a

need to step up the price level as a way of addressing debt and unemployment problems
17
     Or, who knows, adopt a two-pillar strategy targeting inflation and a monetary aggregate.


                                                      11
might then adopt inflation targeting as a way of avoiding reputational damage. In turn

this could insulate it from accusations that it was continuing to manipulate its currency.

Countries can remain EU member states in good standing and enjoy all the privileges

associated with that status without adopting the euro. To be sure, most of the new

members have not adopted the euro because they do not yet meet the preconditions laid

down by the Maastricht Treaty, where there is a presumption that this status is purely

transitional. The UK, for its part, negotiated a derogation permitting it to remain outside

the ERM and to retain sterling indefinitely as a condition for agreeing to the Maastricht

Treaty. An Italy or Portugal that abandoned the euro would enjoy no such derogation.

Would it then have to joint the ERM-II? But Sweden, alluding to the British precedent,

announced unilaterally that it would not enter the ERM or follow a fixed schedule for

adopting the euro. Is it clear that a Sweden that never entered the euro area should be

treated differently, in terms of its access to the single market, than an Italy that left it?



4. Political Barriers to Exit

        More generally, a country that abandoned the euro and reintroduced its national

currency because of problems of inadequate international competitiveness, high

unemployment and slow growth might suffer political costs by being relegated to second-

class status in negotiations over other issues. One interpretation of the process of

monetary integration that culminated in the advent of the euro is that monetary

integration is a stepping stone to political integration, which is the ultimate goal of the

architects of the European Union. As the point was once put by Jacques Delors,

“Obsession about budgetary constraints means that the people forget too often about the




                                               12
political objectives of European construction. The argument in favor of the single

currency should be based on the desire to live together in peace.”18 Like the EU’s blue

flag with 12 yellow stars, the single currency is a visible symbol which fosters a sense of

Europeanness among the continent’s residents. As suggested by the theory of

neofunctionalist spillovers (Haas 1958), the existence of the euro and the European

Central Bank generates pressure for a more powerful European Parliament to hold the

ECB democratically accountable for its actions.19 A country that unilaterally abandons

the euro, something for which there is no provision in the Treaty of European Union,

would deal a setback to these larger political ambitions. It would signal that it did not

attach high value to the larger process of political integration.

           On both grounds such a country would be unlikely to be regarded as a respected

interlocutor in discussions of how to push the process forward. An Italy that abandoned

the euro would have a diminished role in discussions of how to strengthen the powers of

the European Parliament. It would have less sway in discussions of how to revise and

ratify the European constitution. Other member states would be less likely to grant it a

seat at the table in discussions of whether to formulate a common foreign policy or to

create a European army. For better or worse, the common European position on such

issues has grown out of discussions among a core of countries centered on France and

Germany that first develop a common position and then sell it to the other members. For

a country like Italy that has participated in this larger process of European integration

from the foundation of the European Economic Community half a century ago, precisely




18
     Cited in Prior-Wandesforde (2005), p.23.
19
     See Section 5 below.


                                                13
as a way of elevating itself to the status of a “first-tier” European country, these political

costs would be substantial. In turn this constitutes a major barrier to exit.

        What about Germany? If Germany abandoned the euro out of dissatisfaction with

excessively inflationary ECB policies, this would significantly diminish the prospects for

political integration. Germany would be indicating that it regarded the experiment with a

supra-national institution with real powers, in this case the power to make monetary

policy, as a failure. The idea that Germany would then cede to other supra-national

institutions at the EU level the power to make its security policy, its foreign policy or its

fiscal policy, these being three of the key prerogatives of a sovereign state, would become

less plausible. Germany has always been a strong proponent of the larger European

project. Reflecting memories of World War II, it continues to feel limits on its ability to

formulate an assertive foreign policy, maintain a standing army, and deploy troops

abroad; at a basic level its interest in political integration is to regain a foreign policy

voice in the context of an EU foreign policy. And without German support, European

political integration is unlikely to display the same momentum.

        Given this, Germany will presumably attempt to fix the problems it perceives

with the ECB in order to salvage its vision of political integration rather than concluding

that further integration is infeasible and abandoning the euro – or at least that it will

invest more in seeking to fix perceived problems than another member state with a

weaker commitment to the larger European process. It will choose voice and loyalty over

exit, complaining publicly about the inflationary stance of ECB policy and lobbying to

change it, precisely in order to demonstrate that supra-national European institutions can

work and that its integrationist vision is still viable. This is not to deny that there could




                                               14
come a point where the German government and its constituents conclude that voice and

loyalty have failed. But this argument does suggest that Germany may be prepared to

suffer with a monetary policy not to its liking, and that it will work to change that policy

rather than abandoning the euro, for longer than other member states less committed to

the larger process.

         Not everyone will agree that a monetary union process that adds to momentum for

political integration is desirable on these grounds. Some would argue that the EU should

concentrate on economic integration while shunning aspirations of political integration.

For them, if a failure of monetary union means a failure of political union, then the latter

is not a cost.20 But for influential political elites, political integration remains a valued

goal. For them, exits from the euro area that set back its progress would be a significant

cost.



5. Technical and Legal Barriers to Exit

         A final set of barriers to exit are the technical and legal obstacles to reintroducing

the national currency. Take the case where a country suffering from inadequate

competitiveness and high unemployment reintroduces its national currency in order to

depreciate it against the euro. It would be straightforward for it to pass a law stating that

the state and other employers will henceforth pay workers and pensioners in, say, lira.

With wages and other incomes redenominated into the national currency, it would

become politically necessary to redenominate the mortgages and credit-card debts of

residents into the national currency as well; otherwise currency depreciation would have


20
  This is not to say that the opponents of political union necessarily see the failure of monetary union as
desirable, since the latter may have other benefits, including the impetus it provides to economic integration.


                                                     15
adverse balance-sheet effects for households, leading to financial distress and

bankruptcies. But with mortgages and other bank assets redenominated, bank deposits

and other bank balance sheet items would have to be redenominated as well in order to

avoid destabilizing the financial sector. With government revenues redenominated into

the national currency, not just public-sector wages and pensions but also other

government liabilities, notably the public debt, would have to be redenominated to

prevent balance-sheet effects from damaging the government’s financial position.

        The idea that redenomination has to be comprehensive to limit financial distress is

a lesson of Argentina’s exit from convertibility in 2001.21 It is also an implication of the

literature on dollarization, where it is argued that partial dollarization creates scope for

destabilizing balance-sheet effects. Better to be either fully dollarized (or euroized in the

present example) or to de-dollarize (or de-euroize) by redenominating claims in the

national currency.22

        Technically, nothing prevents the legislature from passing a law requiring banks,

firms, households and governments to redenominate their contracts in this manner. But

in a democracy this decision will require discussion. And for it to be executed smoothly,

it will have to be accompanied by planning. Computers will have to be reprogrammed.

Vending machines will have to be modified. Payment machines will have to be serviced

to prevent motorists from being trapped in subterranean parking garages. Notes and




21
   Note that across-the-board redenomination, while insulating domestic banks from destabilizing balance
sheet effects, might create problems for foreign banks, which saw their euro-denominated investments in,
say, Italian government bonds now redenominated into lira and then saw this currency depreciate against
the euro. This is another reason why other euro area countries would not welcome exit by an incumbent
seeking to restore competitiveness by reintroducing and depreciating its national currency.
22
   See e.g. Levy Yeyati (2005, 2006).


                                                   16
coins will have to be positioned around the country. One need only recall the planning

that preceded the introduction of the physical euro in 2002.

       The difference between the transition to the euro and the transition back to

national currencies is that in the first instance there was little reason to expect subsequent

changes in exchange rates and thus little incentive for currency speculation, while in the

second case such changes would be viewed as virtually inevitable. In 1998 the founding

members of the euro area agreed to lock their exchange rates at the then-prevailing levels

as of the beginning of 1999. This precommitment effectively ruled out efforts to depress

national currencies designed to steal a competitive advantage prior to the locking of

parities in 1999. In contrast, if a participating member state now decided to leave the

euro area, no such precommitment would be possible. Pressure from other member states

would be ineffective, by definition. And the very motivation for leaving would

presumably be to change the parity.

       Market participants would be well aware of this fact. Households and firms

anticipating that domestic deposits would be redenominated into lira, which would then

lose value against the euro, would shift their deposits to other euro-area banks. In the

worst case a system-wide bank run could follow. Investors anticipating that their claims

on the Italian government would be redenominated into lira would presumably shift into

claims on other euro-area governments, leading to a bond-market crisis. If the

precipitating factor was parliamentary debate over abandoning the lira, it would be

unlikely that the ECB would provide extensive lender-of-last-resort support. And if the

government was already in a tenuous fiscal position, it would not be able to borrow to

bail out the banks and buy back its debt. Presumably the government would respond with




                                              17
a “corralito,” Argentine style, limiting bank withdrawals. It would suspend the operation

of the bond market, although this might be of limited effectiveness insofar as the same

bonds and derivative instruments based on them are also traded on other national markets.

        When the ruble zone broke up in the 1990s and new national currencies were

introduced, the successor states of the former Soviet Union were able to limit the

destabilizing financial consequences because their banking and financial systems were

not well articulated, so that limits on deposit withdrawals and other forms of arbitrage

were relatively effective. They could limit the substitution of foreign for domestic assets

by imposing or simply retaining exchange controls, an option that is not available to EU

members with commitments to the single market. They could seal their borders to

provide time to stamp old currencies or swap old currencies for new ones. Firms did not

have computerized financial accounts and inventory-management systems. Europe today

is a more complicated place. All this means that the technical obstacles to exit may be

greater than in the past. While these technical obstacles may be surmountable, they pose

greater challenges than in earlier instances where monetary unions broke up.

        And even if there is agreement that the transition would be smoothed by

redenominating all Italian debt contracts into lira, there is the question of what exactly

constitutes an Italian debt contract. Not all such contracts are between Italian debtors and

Italian creditors, are issued in Italy, and specify Italian courts for adjudicating disputes.

Italian companies issue bonds abroad and borrow from foreign banks. Foreign

multinationals sell bonds in Italy. Foreigners hold the bonds of Italian governments. A

further complication is that contracts are not simply being redenominated from one

Italian currency to another; rather, they are being redenominated from a European




                                              18
currency to an Italian currency. Foreign courts might therefore take EU law as the law of

the currency issuer (Italy) and invalidate the redenomination of certain contracts.

          Mann (1960) argues when a case involves two competing currencies the courts

should apply the law specified in the contract. For instruments like Italian government

bonds issued domestically, this is Italian law. But foreign laws govern a variety of other

Italian financial instruments, such as corporate bonds issued abroad. And in some cases

no explicit choice of law is specified in the contract. This is the case, for example, of

loans by German banks to Italian corporations or purchases of parts in Germany by

Italian manufacturing firms. Italian courts would presumably rule in favor of the

redenomination of all loans to Italian borrowers, including those from German banks, but

German courts might rule against redenomination. And there are few precedents to guide

the courts’ decision in such circumstances.23 This opens the door to litigation and to an

extended period of uncertainty.

         Argentina’s dealings with its creditors suggest that the government of a country

altering its currency arrangements is in a relatively strong position. While that case also

gave rise to litigation in a variety of venues, it did not force the re-dollarization of

previously pesified contracts or force other compensation to aggrieved creditors. But

cases involving suits against Italian debtors in the courts of other European countries and

in the European Court of Justice could be messier. And the Italian government would be

loath to disregard their judgments insofar as it attached value to the country’s other links

with the European Union.


23
  Technically, the country in which delivery is physically taken (where the transaction is physically
completed) should be the one whose law governs international contracts. In the present instance, this
would be German law if the Italian company’s truck drives to Stuttgart to pick up parts at the German
factory but Italy if the German company’s truck is used to transport the parts to the Italian assembly plant.


                                                     19
6. Evidence

        Since 2002, Eurobarometer has conducted annual surveys of public opinion

regarding the euro in the participating member states. Here I analyze answers to the

question: “In your opinion, for [COUNTRY], is the adoption of the euro advantageous

overall and will it strengthen us for the future, or rather the opposite, disadvantageous

overall and will it weaken us?” Figure 1 shows the pattern of responses from the most

recent survey at the time of writing. Evidently, the euro is least popular, as measured

here, in low-income euro-area member states (Greece, Portugal) and slowing growing

economies (Italy and again Portugal), but also in the Netherlands (where concerns are

disproportionately over inflation – see Figure 2).

        Table 1 shows regressions of the share of the population, by country and year, that

views the euro as disadvantageous. The dependent variable, a logit transformation of this

share, is regressed on inflation and growth in the current year.24 The results are

consistent with the notion that higher inflation raises dissatisfaction with the euro, while

higher growth reduces dissatisfaction. In the basic regression on pooled data, in column

1, the growth term is statistically significant at conventional levels, while the inflation

term is not quite significant. When year effects are added in column 2, the coefficients

on both the inflation and growth terms differ significantly from zero at standard

confidence levels. When we estimate the same equation with random country effects in

column 3, it is the inflation term but not the growth term that is statistically significant.




24
  One can imagine more sophisticated specifications, but the limited amount of data available do not really
permit their estimation.


                                                    20
           Thus, while there are not enough data to obtain precise point estimates, there are

consistent indications that slow growth and high inflation could fan dissatisfaction with

membership in the euro area.

           The second empirical exercise has in fact been undertaken recently by Hallerberg

and Wolff (2006), although they do not draw out the implications for exit from the euro

area. They test whether both membership in the monetary union and fiscal reforms that

reduce deficit bias have a negative impact on sovereign borrowing costs. Thus, they

speak at least obliquely to the hypothesis that a country could minimize any adverse

impact on debt-servicing costs of abandoning the euro by strengthening its fiscal

institutions. They estimate panel regressions with country fixed effects for ten EU

member states, where the dependent variable is the yield on ten year government bond

rates relative to the corresponding German yield and the period covered is 1993-2005.

This spread is regressed on the difference in the budget deficit between country i and

Germany, and the difference in the public debt/GDP ratio between country i and

Germany. Control variables include a measure of market liquidity and a measure of

global risk aversion. The key explanatory variables are then a dummy variable for

membership in the euro area and the strength of fiscal institutions, which are entered by

themselves and interacted with the deficit measure.25

           The authors follow von Hagen (1992) in arguing that deficit bias reflects a

common pool problem: that special interests benefiting from additional public spending

fail to internalize the implications for the deficit and therefore for the government’s

borrowing costs. They argue that this bias can be minimized by assigning authority over

the budget to a single individual, the finance minister, who will have a greater tendency
25
     In addition, the EMU variable is interacted with the measure of market liquidity and with the debt ratio.


                                                       21
to internalize such effects. They operationalize this idea by constructing an index

measuring the ability of the finance minister to affect the budget. They also consider a

survey-based measure of the structure of the budget process and a synthetic measure that

relies not on delegation but on fiscal targets for countries where the ideological distance

between coalition partners is large and therefore delegation is unlikely to be effective.26

Results are similar for the alternative measures, so I discuss the most straightforward

ones, those for delegation of authority to the finance minister, here.

         Higher debts and deficits increase spreads, although the effects are small. The

effect of EMU is also evident: an increase in the deficit by 1 per cent of GDP raises the

spread by 4 basis points for a non-euro-area country but only by 1.5 per cent for a euro-

area member. An increase in the finance minister’s powers from Portuguese to Austrian

levels reduces the spread by 2 to 4 basis points; it also reduces the impact of an increase

in the deficit by one per cent of GDP by 2 basis points. These results are consistent with

the hypothesis that EMU and strengthened budgetary procedures are alternative ways of

strengthening fiscal discipline.27 They suggest that countries exiting the monetary union

can avoid higher interest costs if they put in place efficient budgetary procedures that

mitigate common-pool problems. At the same time, the small size of the effects is

curious. Just 4 ½ additional basis points for a euro area country whose deficit grows

from zero to 3 per cent of GDP makes one wonder whether these estimates are picking up

the full effect or if something else is going on.


26
   In addition they consider a measure of the degree of the legislature or parliament over the budget
(Lienert’s (2005) parliamentary index). However, it is possible to raise questions about the relevance of
this particular measure to the issues at hand. Hence I do not consider it further in what follows.
27
   The assumption underlying this interpretation is that the smaller impact of deficits on spreads in euro
area countries reflect the disciplining effect of the monetary union – that deficits will not persist, or that
larger deficit now will be followed by smaller deficits later – rather than myopia on the part of governments
or that the latter will receive a debt bailout from their partners in the event of fiscal difficulties.


                                                     22
         I further investigated the robustness of these results by analyzing the impact of

EMU and fiscal institutions on sovereign credit ratings. This involved analyzing their

impact on three credit-rating measures: Fitch’s, Standard and Poor’s, and an average of

the two rating agencies. In the interest of space, here I report the results using the

average of the two ratings as the dependent variable.28 The country sample and period

are essentially the same as in the Hallerberg and Wolff study, since the analysis is

constrained by the availability of their indices of fiscal measures. One difference here is

the use of quarterly data: the fiscal measures are available at a quarterly frequency, and

the credit ratings can be sampled at the end of each quarter. Another difference is that I

look at the absolute level of credit ratings, not ratings (or spreads) relative to Germany

(and not the strength of fiscal institutions relative to Germany).29

         I start with a simple panel regression of the credit rating(s) on the measure of

fiscal institutions (in column 1 of each table). Year fixed effects are then added (column

2), and if these are jointly significant they are then included in the remaining regressions.

Column 3 adds country effects (using the Hausman test to choose between fixed and

random effects). Column 4 adds the entire vector of macroeconomic and financial

variables. The empirical specification follows Christensen and Solomonsen (2007), who

estimate empirical models of credit ratings; the main difference here is the addition of

interaction effects for euro area countries, plus the use of total debt rather than public

debt (following Hallerberg and Wolff). Finally, I incorporate improvements in the

measures of fiscal arrangements developed by the authors since the appearance of their



28
   The additional results for Fitch and S&P separately are available on request. The Fitch and S&P letter
scores are both converted to a numerical score ranging from 1 to 21.
29
   As a result, I have an additional set of country observations for Germany itself.


                                                    23
earlier working paper.30 Specifically, I employ three measures of fiscal arrangements:

“Strong Finance Minister” (a measure of the power of the finance minister during budget

negotiations in the cabinet and with parliament), and “Index S2” (the authors’ synthetic

measure that relies not on delegation to a strong finance minister but on fiscal targets for

countries where the ideological distance between coalition partners is large), “Fiscgov”

(the authors’ survey-based measure of the degree of centralization of the budgetary

process). All three measures are scaled so as to vary from zero to one, with larger values

indicating arrangements better suited for resolving common pool problems.

         The results, in Tables 2 through 4, are broadly consistent with those using spreads

as the dependent variable, although there are some anomalies.31 All three measures of the

centralization of fiscal policy making are positively associated with the rating agencies’

measures of credit quality. This remains the case, except for Index S2, when a wide

range of controls are included in the estimating equation. Macroeconomic and financial

conditions generally affect ratings in the expected direction, although their effects are not

always significant at conventional confidence levels. Inflation unemployment, large

current account deficits, and high debts lower ratings. So far, so good.

         Evidence on whether adopting the euro attenuates the impact of macroeconomic

and financial imbalances on credit ratings is mixed. Consistent with the hypothesis, the

negative effects of inflation and unemployment on credit ratings are attenuated by

participation in the monetary union. Countries with large current account deficits suffer

less in terms of credit rating if they are members of the monetary union. The one


30
  And kindly made available by Mark Hallerberg.
31
  I adopt the same variable names as Hallerberg and Wolff for ease of comparison, except that I refer to the
squared deviation of real GDP per capita from trend as “Trend Deviation” (or simply “Deviation”) as
opposed to “Sustainability” to avoid confusion with debt sustainability.


                                                    24
uncomfortable result is that the interaction of the EMU dummy with the debt ratio

(general government consolidated gross debt as a percentage of GDP) is negative, not

positive as anticipated under the maintained hypothesis. This coefficient is zero in the

final column, where the lagged dependent variable is included (as seems to be preferred

by the data), which makes the result somewhat less perplexing. Sensitivity analysis –

dropping countries one by one – reveals that these anomalous results are driven by

Belgium. Without the observations for this one country, one obtains a negative and

significant coefficient on the debt/GDP ratio and a smaller positive and significant

coefficient on the debt/GDP ratio interacted with EMU. This is not entirely surprising in

that Belgium has long had a relatively high credit rating despite its very high government

debt, for reasons that are not entirely clear.

         One interpretation of these results is that any increase in debt-servicing costs

experienced by a country like Portugal abandoning the euro can be neutralized by

reforming fiscal institutions to delegate more authority to the prime minister, addressing

concerns over the common-pool problem and reassuring investors that exit will not result

in a loss of fiscal discipline. The financial disincentive may not, therefore, be an

insurmountable obstacle to abandoning the euro.

         One reason for questioning these results is that the impact of debts and deficits –

euro adoption and fiscal institutions notwithstanding – are suspiciously small in these

regressions, as in the earlier work of Hallerberg and Wolff on interest rate spreads.32 One

worries that, for whatever reason, these results are not picking up the entire effect of


32
  Thus, an increase in the debt ratio from 50 to 100 per cent of GDP is expected to lower a country’s credit
rating by just one notch, from say A to A-. This small effect is a widely commented upon phenomenon
(see e.g. Buiter and Sibert 2005), although here it applies not just to euro area but also non-euro area
countries.


                                                    25
fiscal conditions, current and prospective, on credit ratings. But the fact that the rating

agencies do not dramatically differentiate between fiscally messy Belgium and Italy and

fiscally responsible Finland and Ireland is widely commented upon – just as it is noted

that markets differentiate between them relatively little in terms of interest rate spreads.

If there is an anomaly, in other words, it would appear to be in the behavior of investors

and rating agencies rather than in the econometrics.

       In addition, one worries that ratings fail to reflect differences in current fiscal

conditions among euro area countries not because the euro represents a commitment to

get one’s fiscal house together in the not too distant future but rather because fiscally

profligate governments can expect a debt bailout from their euro area partners. At the

same time, the prospects for a bailout can be questioned. And even if the mechanism

making for rosier future prospects is a bailout rather than fiscal reform, this does not

change the argument that a potential benefit of euro area membership is an easier fiscal

ride. One worries that in a more turbulent environment (out of sample) the results might

differ – although it is not entirely clear why the Lucas Critique would apply in this

context. Finally, to the extent that fiscal rules are endogenous (to the extent that they

reflect the same political pressures that lead to large observed deficits), it may be naïve to

think that a country abandoning the euro because of chronic deficit problems will then be

able to turn around and strengthen its policy-making institutions. That said, it is

interesting to observe that Italy succeeded in significantly strengthening the ability of the

finance minister to affect the budget following the 1992 crisis that ejected it from the




                                             26
Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System and presumably weakened

the disciplining effect of EMU on its budget.33




7. Reforms to Avert a Breakup

        If one wishes to minimize the likelihood of breakup, then what kind of reforms

are needed? Here there is no magic potion, only the standard measures pointed to by the

literatures on optimum currency areas and the democratic accountability of economic

policy makers.34

        Measures to further enhance labor mobility within the euro area are a first set of

reforms pointed to by OCA theory.35 Regulations to ensure that French ski resorts extend

equality of treatment to instructors trained in other European countries – and, more

generally, removing residual barriers to the mutual recognition of technical credentials,

the portability of pensions, and the receipt of social services in the new labor market –

will relieve the pressure that countries with depressed labor markets otherwise feel to do

something, anything, including reintroducing the national currency, to address their

unemployment problem. Concretely, the EU has made some progress in the requisite

33
   The same was true of, inter alia, Spain and Finland according to the indices of Hallerberg and Wolff
(2006).
34
   An earlier attempt to ask these same questions is Cohen (2000).
35
   Supplemented by measures to enhance the flexibility of real and nominal wages. ECB (2007) argues that
real wages remain less flexible in the euro area than in the United States and that the degree of wage
bargaining centralization and percentage of employees organized in trade unions – factors likely to
condition the extent of such flexibility – have remained largely unchanged. At the same time, there has
been a reduction of wage minima affecting young people and the implementation of sub-minimum wage
regulations for youths in some euro area countries, which some would argue has enhanced wage flexibility
in certain segments of the labor market. Such arguments would suggest that further reforms along similar
lines would make it easier for countries suffering shocks requiring downward wage adjustment to cope with
the single currency. This would appear to be the ECB’s own view (see the same reference).


                                                   27
direction, making qualifications more transparent and transferable by creating a standard

portfolio of documents (“the Europass”), removing many remaining administrative and

legal barriers to mobility, coordinating cross-border social security provisions through the

introduction of a European health insurance card, and making occupational pension rights

more portable.

           Note however some uncomfortable implications of this advice. Facilitating labor

mobility within the monetary union implies reinforcing barriers to immigration, legal and

illegal, from outside the union. Australia allows citizens of New Zealand to work freely

in its country, and vice versa, but only New Zealand permits the relatively free

immigration of citizens of Fiji.36 Customs and immigration officials in Australia spend

much of their time repatriating illegal Fijian immigrants entering through New Zealand,

straining the arrangements designed to ensure integration of the two national labor

markets. In the European context, limiting the strains on the labor markets of the

countries on the receiving end of the labor flow and hence the political fallout may

require limiting immigration from outside the union. Among other things this may mean

limiting labor mobility from North Africa and the Middle East, regions where earnings

differentials vis-à-vis the EU are large and the efficiency effects of freer labor mobility

would be especially pronounced.37 Harsh treatment of undocumented immigrants from

these countries may also create strains with their governments, which would not be

helpful for an EU that is trying to encourage democratic values and market-oriented

economic development in what is sometimes referred to as “Wider Europe.”




36
     For whose foreign policy it has traditionally borne responsibility.
37
     For arguments to this effect see Rodrik (2002) and Bhagwati (2003).


                                                      28
           One can even imagine differential treatment of workers from EU member states

that have and have not adopted the euro. Allowing, indeed encouraging, workers to

relocate freely within the monetary union would become more uncomfortable politically

if workers from member states from outside the euro area were also permitted to freely

migrate to relatively prosperous euro area member states. One can imagine political

pressure to situate the immigration ring-fence at the borders of the euro area, not at the

borders of the EU itself. In the short run this would create problems for the Schengen

Agreement, which has been implemented by Denmark and Sweden as well as most euro

area member states.38 In the longer run it is likely to create strains between EU members

inside and outside the fence and disrupt the operation of the single market. The idea that

euro area member states would only take measures to further enhance labor mobility

among themselves if there was also a credible barrier against immigration from tiny,

prosperous Denmark is not especially compelling, but one can imagine such concerns

becoming serious if and when, say, Turkey is admitted to the EU.

           Measures to enhance the countercyclical use of fiscal policy are the other reforms

pointed to by the literature on optimum currency areas. European countries are

uncomfortable with their loss of monetary autonomy because, having tied the monetary

hand behind their backs, they have little scope for using fiscal policy countercyclically.

Inherited debt ratios are high, which means that increasing deficit spending in slowdowns

threatens rating downgrades and increases in borrowing costs. The Stability and Growth

Pact, whatever the practice, in principle limits the scope for discretionary fiscal policy

and even automatic stabilizers in countries close to or exceeding its 3 per cent of GDP

threshold for excessive deficits. To be sure, for countries like Portugal, where the
38
     And by Norway and Iceland.


                                               29
problem is excessive labor costs and inadequate competitiveness, expansionary fiscal

policy to boost aggregate demand is beside the point; the imperative is to cut labor costs,

and using fiscal policy might only slow the inevitable adjustment while threatening debt

sustainability. Still, one can imagine a variety of other countries suffering negative

aggregate demand shocks that can be offset by temporary increases in budget deficits that

would benefit from greater freedom to use fiscal policy in countercyclical fashion.

         For them, reforms of the Stability Pact that encourage governments to run budgets

close to balance or even in surplus in good times, so that they can allow deficits to widen

in bad times, would make life with the euro more comfortable.39 My own view is that

reform of the Stability Pact should encourage changes in fiscal institutions and

procedures that work to solve common-pool and free-rider problems and thereby contain

deficit bias in good times.40 The alternative where the European Commission and

Council agree to fines and sanctions against countries whose deficits are deemed

excessive assumes a level of political solidarity – a Europe in which different


39
   Ti be clear, I am not arguing that the 3 per cent ceiling is too low, but rather that it leaves inadequate
room for countercyclical policy because deficits are excessive in good times. I assume that the Stability
Pact will be analyzed in another paper for this conference. In any case there are too many alternative
reform proposals for these to be usefully surveyed here. See Fischer, Jonung and Larch (2007) for a survey
of alternatives.
40
   On fiscal decentralization as a source of common pool problems, see Rattso (2003) and Eichengreen
(2003). My own scheme for reform is as follows. The rationale for the Pact is that deficits today may
imply deficits tomorrow, and that chronic deficits will force the ECB to provide an inflationary debt bailout.
But not all deficits are equally persistent. Chronic deficits are a danger only where countries fail to reform
their fiscal institutions. Countries with large unfunded pension liabilities, like Greece and Spain, will
almost certainly have deficits down the road. Where workers are allowed to draw unemployment and
disability benefits indefinitely, deficits today signal deficits tomorrow. Countries that have not completed
privatizing public enterprise, like France, are similarly more likely to find future fiscal skeletons in the
closet. Where revenue-sharing systems that allow states and municipalities to spend today and be bailed
out tomorrow, central governments will almost certainly suffer chronic deficits. Thus, the Pact should
focus not on fiscal numbers, which are arbitrary and easily cooked, but on fiscal institutions. The Council
of Ministers could agree on an index of institutional reform with, say, a point each for privatization,
pension reform, unemployment insurance reform, and revenue sharing reform. It should then authorize the
Commission to grade countries accordingly. Those receiving four points would be exempt from the
Stability Pact’s guidelines, since there is no reason to expect that they will be prone to chronic deficits. The
others, in contrast, would still be subject to warnings, sanctions, and fines.


                                                      30
nationalities view themselves as members of a common polity, such that a majority of

members can impose fines and sanctions against a renegade minority – that does not exist

and is unlikely to exist for the foreseeable future. In the absence of deeper political

integration, in other words, a Stability Pact with anything resembling the current structure

is unlikely to be enforceable.41

         The same conclusion applies to proposals to strengthen the operation of the

monetary union by supplementing it with a European system of fiscal federalism. A

system of temporary transfers among member states or an expanded EU budget where

contributions and expenditures are keyed to a member state’s relative economic situation

could provide an alternative to a national monetary policy as a buffer during periods of

cyclical divergence.42 Economic activity would be more stable, since intra-country

transfers would render demand more stable. But making such transfers effective would

require significant expansion of the EU budget, especially insofar as the majority of that

budget is tied up in agricultural subsidies and ongoing transfers to relatively low-income

member states. And, again, significantly increasing the share of tax revenues that

member states pay to the EU and whose disposition is then decided by the member states

as a group would require a level of political solidarity that does not exist.

         Another way of thinking about this is that fiscal federalism is an insurance pool

through which members of the monetary union that are temporarily better off assist their

41
   This argument has a long lineage; see inter alia Kindleberger (1973) and Eichengreen (1997). As
DeGrauwe (2006) puts it, while the European Commission decides when a country’s deficit is excessive
and its government must therefore cut spending and raise taxes, it is the national government that must
implement those tax increases and spending cuts and will be rewarded or punished for doing so by its
constituents. In contrast, the Commission cannot be replaced except in the event of dereliction of duty. In
effect the Commission – and therefore the Stability and Growth Pact – lacks democratic legitimacy. It will
continue to lack such legitimacy until European political integration proceeds further and results in, inter
alia, direct election of the Commission.
42
   Early influential statements of this view were Inman and Rubinfeld (1992) and Sala-i-Martin and Sachs
(1992).


                                                    31
brethren who are temporarily worse off – that participants require a system of collective

self-help if they are going to willingly expose themselves to the vicissitudes of monetary

union. Rodrik (1996) has made an argument like this to explain why more open

economies have larger governments – that their citizens are willing to expose themselves

to the vicissitudes and uncertainties of trade openness only if they can count on help from

their stronger neighbors in the event of a temporary worsening of their economic

situation due to international competition. The analogy here is that countries suffering

temporary unexpected economic costs as a consequence of their participation in the

monetary union would accept the latter only if they can expect temporarily transfers from

their neighbors to buffer the effects. The difference is that Rodrik’s argument applies to

citizens of the same country, where the present argument concerns transfers between

sovereign states. One suspects that the citizens of different countries will be less

enthusiastic about giving money to one another; lacking a common national identity, they

lack the requisite political solidarity, absent significant steps toward political integration

at the European level.43

        A similar implication flows from the observation that the risk of a break-up could

be reduced by enhancing the democratic accountability of the ECB. The modern

literature on monetary policy distinguishes a central bank’s operational independence and

democratic accountability. A central bank should have the independence to select and

implement its tactics independent of political pressures, but in choosing the objectives at

which those tactics are directed it should be answerable to the polity. National central

banks ultimately answer to national legislatures, which have the power to alter their

43
  In addition, Rodrik’s premise and central result have been questioned by Alesina and Wacziarg (1998),
who argue that the actual association is between government spending and country size, with small
countries both spending more on public consumption and being more open to trade.


                                                   32
statutes in the event that those responsible for the formulation of monetary policy are

perceived as pursuing objectives inconsistent with their mandate – where the latter is

decided by the polity as a whole.44

         But in Europe there is no euro-area or EU government that can act as an effective

counterweight to the ECB.45 The powers of the European Parliament are limited relative

to those of national parliaments and legislatures. The Parliament holds hearings at which

the president of the ECB delivers a statement and answers questions but cannot threaten

to replace the president in the event of disagreement over objectives. The mandate of the

ECB is a matter of international treaty, signed by the governments of the member states,

and cannot be altered by the Parliament. Altering it requires the unanimous consent of

the member states, which would be a formidable obstacle in practice.46 This means that

the ECB is less democratically accountable than the typical national central bank. In turn

this leaves less cope for the European polity to influence its objectives. In the event of

serious disagreement, political groups that object to how the central bank chooses to




44
   Some authors, e.g. Alesina and Tabellini (2006a,b), argue that the need for democratic accountability of
independent agencies like the ECB can be overstated. They argue that EU member states have shown
themselves prepared to accept limited democratic accountability for such institutions as the price for policy
efficiency, pointing not just to the ECB but also the case of the European Commission. My own view is
that the effort to draft a European constitution (including the Nice Summit that preceded the constitutional
convention and the Brussels Summit that followed it) point to a deep and abiding desire in Europe for the
adequate democratic accountability of such institutions.
45
   Accountability can be defined and provided in different ways; see, in the context of the ECB, Bini-
Smaghi (1998), Buiter (1999), Issing (1999) and de Haan and Eijffinger (2000). By referring here to
democratic accountability, I attempt to distinguish accountability of policy makers to democratically
elected politicians from other mechanisms for accountability, for example accountability to the public
through the mechanism of public opinion, achieved through the release of voting records and board minutes.
46
   De Haan and Eijffinger (2000) observe that the power of the European Parliament to alter the ECB
statute is quite limited. They state that they “would prefer that, in the case of the statute of the ESCB, the
European Parliament should have the final say and thus could act as a real parliament” (p.402), but they
don’t explain how to bring this about.


                                                     33
operationalize its mandate are likely to choose exit over the relatively ineffective option

of voice.47

         Making voice more attractive would require giving the European Parliament more

power to refine the institution’s mandate and replace the president and perhaps other

members of the board in the event of serious disagreement over objectives.48 But there

was a reluctance to significantly enhance the powers of the European Parliament during

the constitutional convention process of 2003-4, reflecting majority sentiment against

creating anything resembling a European government. And even limited steps in that

direction were resisted by the French and Dutch electorates in their referenda on the draft

constitution. This is a reminder that monetary union without political union is

problematic.49 Since the latter is not likely to change anytime soon, collapse of the

former cannot be dismissed out of hand.



8. Conclusion

         The possibility that an incumbent member of the euro area might reintroduce its

national currency cannot be excluded. The EU is still an entity whose residents identify

themselves as citizens of nation states. Differences in national history and identity imply

differences in preferences over monetary policy. Monetary union by its nature entails

compromises and tradeoffs. Member states must agree on a common monetary policy




47
   In principle, there are alternatives to democratic accountability, as noted above. But given the difficulty
of modifying the central bank’s statute or ousting members of its board, reflecting the treaty-based nature
of its structure, it can be argued that these provide an inadequate substitute.
48
   Alternatively, and less desirably in my view, this power could be delegated to another political body such
as the Eurogroup (the group of finance ministers of the members of the euro area).
49
   As emphasized by De Grauwe (2006).


                                                     34
that in some cases is not any nation’s optimum. By choosing to remain members,

countries trade off the costs of a suboptimal monetary policy against other benefits.

        Where there are compromises and tradeoffs, it is possible that changes in

circumstances may lead to a change in commitments. A country that experiences an

asymmetric shock may find the costs of following policies determined by the majority of

participating member states, while tolerable previously, to be prohibitive now. A country

that sees its monetary-union partners appointing less inflation-averse central bankers to

the ECB board may similarly decide that the costs of accepting the common policy, while

previously tolerable, are now prohibitively high.

        How formidable are the obstacles to withdrawing? Economically, it is not clear

which way the arguments cut. A country contemplating exit in order to obtain the kind of

real depreciation needed to address problems of chronic slow growth and high

unemployment would be deterred if it thought that its efforts to engineer a real

depreciation would be frustrated by the inflationary response of domestic wages and

prices, or if it thought that leaving the monetary union would significantly raise its debt

servicing costs. But if the defector strengthens the independence of its central bank and

the efficiency of its fiscal institutions, then it is at least conceivable that these negative

economic effects would not obtain.

        In contrast to some other authors, I have argued that the technical and legal

difficulties of reintroducing the national currency, while surmountable, should not be

underestimated. But the political domain is where the most serious obstacles to

withdrawing reside. A country that withdraws from Europe’s monetary union would be

seen as disregarding its commitments to other euro area members. Such a country would




                                               35
not be welcomed in the meetings where the future architecture of the European Union is

discussed and policy priorities are decided. Insofar as member states value their

participation in these political discussions, they would incur significant costs. The

“insofar” is the preceding sentence is, of course, an important caveat. Be that as it may,

my own assessment is that the high value that member states attach to the larger

European project would prevent them from exiting from the monetary union except under

the most extreme circumstances.50

        Would defection by one country cause the general disintegration of the euro area?

The answer, as with many things economic, is “it depends.” For other countries

experiencing the same economic problem, there might be a strengthened incentive to

follow. If Italy left owing to inadequate competitiveness and slow growth and

depreciated its national currency against the euro, other euro area members suffering

from inadequate competitiveness and slow growth would feel greater discomfort and a

greater temptation to follow. If Germany left owing to high inflation and allowed its

national currency to appreciate against the euro, then other euro area members similarly

uncomfortable with the rate of inflation would experience still higher import prices and

again be more tempted to follow suit.

        But if economic problems in the defecting country were the converse of those of

its partners in the monetary union, then the opposite conclusion might obtain: the rump

union could be rendered more cohesive. Similarly, if the country exiting the union had

different preferences, independent of differences in national economic circumstances, its

departure might make it easier for the remaining members to agree on a policy more to


50
  This is a specific application of a general conclusion drawn by Cohen (2000), that monetary unions have
tended to be stable when there are interwoven into a fabric of related ties.


                                                   36
their liking and render the residual union more cohesive. The first set of effects is likely

to be of negligible importance if the departing country is small but of greater significance

if it is large. The second set of effects would be independent of country size insofar as

ECB policy is decided on the basis of one country, one vote.

         The analysis here has focused on scenarios for the next ten years. What about

longer horizons? The longer the euro survives, the less likely it would seem that a

participating country would see reintroducing its national currency as a logical treatment

for its economic ills. Markets adapt to the single currency, rendering attempts to tamper

with it correspondingly more costly. Expectations adapt to its existence: having no first-

hand experience with alternatives, residents take the existence of a European currency as

the normal state of affairs and come to regard the reintroduction of a national currency as

beyond the pale. Notwithstanding the fact that it experienced a very severe asymmetric

shock in the form of Hurricane Katrina and was disappointed by the assistance it then

received from its partners in the U.S. currency union, the State of Louisiana did not

contemplate abandoning the dollar and introducing its own currency, even though a sharp

depreciation might have been appropriate for addressing some of its economic

problems.51

         At the same time, other developments could make the break-up of the euro area

more likely. There could be a diplomatic and political falling out over, say, foreign

policy. In a world of dirty bombs and terrorist cells, a member state could experience an

asymmetric shock of sufficient magnitude that a dramatic real depreciation was seen as



51
  One can object that high labor mobility between Louisiana and neighboring states obviated the need for
such a response, but one can also argue that after nearly two centuries of currency union leaving the dollar
area was inconceivable in any case.


                                                     37
essential and the costs of abandoning the euro were trivial in comparison. The

possibilities are endless.




                                           38
                                       References

Alesina, Alberto and Vittorio Grilli (1993), “On the Feasibility of a One-Speed or Multi-
Speed European Monetary Union,” Economics and Politics 5, pp.145-166.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (2006a), “Bureaucrats or Politicians, Part I,”
unpublished manuscript, Harvard University (January).

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (2006b), “Bureaucrats or Politicians, Part II,”
unpublished manuscript, Harvard University (January).

Alesina, Alberto and Romain Wacziarg (1998), “Openness, Country Size and
Government,” Journal of Public Economics 69, pp.305-321.

Biais, Bruno, Fany Declerc, James Dow, Richard Portes and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden
(2006), European Corporate Bond Markets: Transparency, Liquidity, Efficiency,
London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Bini-Smaghi, Lorenzo (1998), “The Democratic Accountability of the European Central
Bank,” Banca Nationale del Lavoro Quarterly Review 205, pp.119-143.

Bishop, Graham (2000), “The Development of the Euro Bond Market: Developments and
Implications for Monetary Policy,” paper prepared for an ECB Seminar, 5/6 May.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (2003), “Borders Beyond Control,” Foreign Affairs 82, pp.98-104.

Blanchard, Olivier (2006), “Adjustment within the Euro: The Difficult Case of Portugal,”
unpublished manuscript, MIT (November).

Buiter, Willem (1999), “Alice in Euroland,” Journal of Common Market Studies 37,
pp.181-209.

Buiter, Willem and Anne Sibert (2005), “How the Eurosystem’s Treatment of Collateral
in its Open Market Operations Weakens Fiscal Discipline in the Eurozone (and What to
Do About It),” unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics and Birkbeck
College.

Cohen, Benjamin (2000), “Beyond EMU: The Problem of Sustainability,” in Barry
Eichengreen and Jeffry Frieden (eds), The Political Economy of European Monetary
Unification, Boulder: Westview, pp.179-204.

Cooper, Russell (1999), Coordination Games, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Christensen, Lars and Thomas Solomonsen (2007), “New Europe: Mind the Ratings,”
unpublished manuscript, Danske Bank (March).




                                            39
De Grauwe, Paul (2006), “On Monetary and Political Union,” unpublished manuscript,
Catholic University of Leuven.

De Haan, Jakob and Sylvester Eijffinger (2000), “The Democratic Accountability of the
European Central Bank: A Comment on Two Fairy-Tales,” Journal of Common Market
Studies 38, pp.393-407.

Eichengreen, Barry (1997), “On the Links Between Monetary and Political Integration,”
Swiss Political Science Review 3, pp.127-133.

Eichengreen, Barry (2003), “Institutions for Fiscal Stability,” PEIF Working Paper no. 14,
Institute for European Studies, University of California, Berkeley (October).

European Central Bank (2007), “Developments in the Structural Features of the Euro
Area Labour Markets Over the Last Decade,” Monthly Bulletin (January), pp.63-76.

Expatia (2005), “Euro Collapse Report ‘Absurd’: Bundesbank Chief,” Expatia (1 June),
www.expatia.com.

Fischer, Jonas, Lars Jonung and Martin Larch (2007), “101 Proposals to Reform the
Stability and Growth Pact: Why So Many? A Survey,” European Economy Economic
Papers no. 67, Brussels: European Commission (January).

Garber, Peter (1998), “Note on the Role of TARGET in a Stage III Crisis,” NBER
Working Paper no. 6619.

Gros, Daniel (2007), “Will EMU Survive 2010?” Brussels: Center for Economic Policy
Studies, 31 January.

Grossman, Herschel and John van Huyck (1988), “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent
Claim: Excusable Default, Repudiation and Reputation,” American Economic Review 78,
pp.1088-1097.

Haas, Ernst (1958), The Uniting of Europe, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Hallerberg, Mark and Guntram B. Wolff (2006), “Fiscal Institutions, Fiscal Policy and
Sovereign Risk Premia,” Discussion Paper no. 35/2006, Frankfurt: Deutsche Bundesbank.

Inman, Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld (1992), “Fiscal Federalism in Europe: Lessons from
the United States Experience,” European Economic Review 36, pp.654-660.

Issing, Otmar (1999), “The Eurosystem: Transparent and Accountable or ‘Willem in
Euroland’,” Journal of Common Market Studies 37, pp.503-519.

Kay, John (2006), “If Italy Thinks the Unthinkable About the Eurozone,” Financial
Times (12 September).



                                           40
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1973), International Economics, Homewood, Ill.: Richard D.
Irwin, 5th edition.

Levy Yeyati, Eudardo (2005), “Financial De-Dollarization: Is it for Real?” unpublished
manuscript, Interamerican Development Bank.

Levy Yeyati, Eduardo (2006), “Financial Dollarization: Evaluating the Consequences,”
Economic Policy 21, pp.61-118.

Lienert, Ian (2005), “Who Controls the Budget: The Legislature or the Executive?” IMF
Working Paper no.WP/05/115.

Mann, F.A. (1960), Money in International Public Law, Leyden: Hague Academy of
International Law.

Martha, Thomas (2003), “What to Expect of the Euro? Analyzing Price Differences of
Individual Products in Luxembourg and its Surrounding Regions,” paper presented to the
annual conference of the European Regional Science Association, Vienna.

Mongelli, Francesco Paolo and Juan Luis Vega (2006), “What Effects is EMU Having on
the Euro Area and its Member Countries?” Working Paper no. 599, Frankfurt: ECB
(March).

Prior-Wandesforde , Robert (2005), “European Meltdown? Europe Fiddles as Rome
Burns,” Macro: European Economics, HSBC Global Research, London: HSBC (July).

Rattso, Jorn (2003), “Fiscal Federalism or Confederation in the European Union: The
Challenge of the Common Pool Problem,” unpublished manuscript, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology (September).

Rodrik Dani (2002), “Feasible Globalizations,” NBER Working Paper no.9129.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Jeffrey Sachs (1992), “Fiscal Federalism and Optimum
Currency Areas: Evidence for Europe from the United States,” in Matthew Canzoneri,
Vittorio Grilli and Paul Masson (eds), Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in Europe and
Lessons from the US, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.195-227.

Scott, Hall (1998), “When the Euro Falls Apart,” International Finance 1, pp.207-228.

Von Hagen, Juergen (1992), “Budgeting Procedures and Fiscal Performance in the
European Communities,” Economic Papers 96, Brussels: European Commission.




                                           41
                         Table 1
 Determinants of Negative Opinions of the Euro, 2002-2006
            (standard errors in parentheses)


       Variable                  (1)        (2)          (3)

       Inflation                0.005     0.007*       0.004*
                               (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.002)

       Growth                  -0.005*    -0.007*       0.001
                               (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)

       2003                                0.003       0.006*
                                          (0.008)      (0.003)

       2004                                0.015       0.008*
                                          (0.008)      (0.003)

       2005                                0.015       0.012*
                                          (0.008)      (0.003)

       2006                               0.026*       0.013*
                                          (0.008)      (0.003)

       R2                       0.12      0.028          —

       Obs                       60         60           60

       Random
       effects                   N          N            Y



______________________________________
Note: Constant term estimated but not reported. * denotes significant at the 95 per cent level.

Source: See text.




                                                  42
            Table 2. Effect of EMU and Fiscal Institutions on Credit Ratings
               (Strong Finance Minister Measure of Fiscal Institutions)
                 (1)           (2)        (3)               (4)                (5)
StrongFM         2.5358        2.3411     2.6822            0.8813             0.1640
                 (0.474)***    (0.520)*** (0.187)***        (0.244)***         (0.079)**
Real GDP per                                                -0.00005           -0.00002
capita                                                      (0.00002)**        (7.97*10^-6)*
Trend                                                       1.50*10^-10        3.81*10^-10
deviation                                                   (1.09*10^-9)       (3.46*10^-10)
Debt (% of                                                  -0.0235            -0.0042
GDP)                                                        (0.0105)           (0.0034)
Inflation                                                   -0.3068            -0.0368
                                                            (0.0372)***        (0.0136)***
Unemployment                                                -0.0227            -0.0066
Rate                                                        (0.0156)           (0.0049)
Export Growth                                               -0.0215            -0.0017
(Year to Year)                                              (0.0064)***        (0.0020)
CA Def < 4%                                                 0.0379             0.0277
                                                            (0.127)            (0.040)
EMU                                                         -0.7083            -0.1579
                                                            (0.2598)***        (0.0833)*
Real GDP per                                                0.00004            0.00001
capita * EMU                                                (0.00003)*         (8.32*10^-6)*
Trend Dev *                                                 -1.50*10^-10       -3.96*10^-10
EMU                                                         (1.10*10^-9)       (3.49*10^-10)
Debt (% of                                                  -0.0148            -0.0006
GDP) * EMU                                                  (0.0053)***        (0.0017)
Inflation *                                                 0.4160             0.0379
EMU                                                         (0.048)***         (0.017)**
Unemployment                                                0.0340             0.0065
* EMU                                                       (0.013)***         (0.004)
Export Growth                                               0.0156             -0.0017
* EMU                                                       (0.0083)*          (0.0026)
CA Def *                                                    -0.2702            -0.0433
EMU                                                         (0.1222)           (0.0387)
Lagged                                                                         0.9181
Dependent                                                                      (0.015)***
Variable
Constant      17.964           17.941     17.871            20.813             1.8503
              (0.316)***       (0.504)*** (0.122)***        (0.378)***         (0.332)***
Year Fixed    No               Yes        No                No                 No
Effects
Country Fixed No               No            Yes***         Yes***             Yes**
Effects
N             462              462           462            462                451
R2            0.0587           0.0587        0.0587         0.4863             0.9949


                                          43
            Table 3. Effect of EMU and Fiscal Institutions on Credit Ratings
                              (IndexS2 of Fiscal Institutions)
                 (1)             (2)        (3)                  (4)            (5)
indexS2          2.5638          2.1848     3.3274               0.4829         0.1317
                 (0.619)***      (0.659)*** (0.272)***           (0.328)        (0.106)
Real GDP per                                                     -0.00006       -0.00002
capita                                                           (0.00003)**    (8.04*10^-6)**
Trend                                                            2.16*10^-10    3.99*10^-10
deviation                                                        (1.11*10^-9)   (3.48*10^-10)
Debt (% of                                                       -0.0231        -0.0040
GDP)                                                             (0.0107)**     (0.0033)
Inflation                                                        -0.3633        -0.0434
                                                                 (0.0364)***    (0.0137)***
Unemployment                                                     -0.0147        -0.0054
Rate                                                             (0.0156)       (0.0049)
Export Growth                                                    -0.0228        -0.0017
(Year to Year)                                                   (0.0065)***    (0.0021)
CA Def < 4%                                                      0.0786         0.0352
                                                                 (0.128)        (0.0398)
EMU                                                              -0.7523        -0.1577
                                                                 (0.2664)***    (0.0849)*
Real GDP per                                                     0.0001         0.00002
capita * EMU                                                     (0.00002)**    (8.38*10^-6)*
Trend Dev *                                                      -2.53*10^-10   -4.12*10^-10
EMU                                                              (1.12*10^-9)   (3.51*10^-8)
Debt (% of                                                       -0.0155        -0.0008
GDP) * EMU                                                       (0.0054)***    (0.0017)
Inflation *                                                      0.4668         0.0436
EMU                                                              (0.0480)***    (0.0171)**
Unemployment                                                     0.0318         0.0062
* EMU                                                            (0.013)**      (0.004)
Export Growth                                                    0.0175         -0.0015
* EMU                                                            (0.0084)**     (0.0026)
CA Def *                                                         -0.2826        -0.0455
EMU                                                              (0.1237)**     (0.0388)
Lagged                                                                          0.9213
Dependent                                                                       (0.015)***
Variable
Constant      18.071             18.028     17.622               21.120         1.8080
              (0.376)***         (0.546)*** (0.163)***           (0.419)***     (0.340)***
Year Fixed    No                 Yes        No                   No             No
Effects
Country Fixed No                 No            Yes***            Yes***         Yes*
Effects
N             462                462           462               424            414
  2
R             0.0360             0.0360        0.0360            0.4651         0.9950


                                            44
            Table 4. Effect of EMU and Fiscal Institutions on Credit Ratings
                        (Fiscgov Measure of Fiscal Institutions)
                 (1)           (2)        (3)               (4)                (5)
fiscgov          4.7004        4.5864     4.2989            2.2219             0.2477
                 (0.518)***    (0.531)*** (0.306)***        (0.340)***         (0.115)**
Real GDP per                                                -0.00004           -0.00002
capita                                                      (0.00002)          (7.92*10^-6)**
Trend                                                       -3.57*10^-10       3.50*10^-10
deviation                                                   (1.06*10^-9)       (3.47*10^-10)
Debt (% of                                                  -0.0183            -0.0038
GDP)                                                        (0.0102)           (0.0034)
Inflation                                                   -0.2533            -0.0400
                                                            (0.0345)***        (0.0126)***
Unemployment                                                -0.0327            -0.0070
Rate                                                        (0.0151)**         (0.0049)
Export Growth                                               -0.0213            -0.0019
(Year to Year)                                              (0.0062)***        (0.0020)
CA Def < 4%                                                 0.0219             0.0297
                                                            (0.122)            (0.0398)
EMU                                                         -0.6714            -0.1677
                                                            (0.2507)***        (0.0828)**
Real GDP per                                                0.00003            0.00001
capita * EMU                                                (0.00003)          (8.30*10^-6)*
Trend Dev *                                                 3.17*10^-10        -3.69*10^-10
EMU                                                         (1.07*10^-9)       (3.50*10^-10)
Debt (% of                                                  -0.0128            -0.0004
GDP) * EMU                                                  (0.0051)**         (0.0017)
Inflation *                                                 0.3691             0.0416
EMU                                                         (0.046)***         (0.017)***
Unemployment                                                0.0423             0.0071
* EMU                                                       (0.013)***         (0.0041)*
Export Growth                                               0.0142             -0.0015
* EMU                                                       (0.008)*           (0.0026)
CA Def *                                                    -0.2616*           -0.0445
EMU                                                         (0.1184)           (0.0387)
Lagged                                                                         0.9133
Dependent                                                                      (0.015)***
Variable
Constant      16.200           16.047     16.488            19.565             1.8667
              (0.3842)***      (0.540)*** (0.222)***        (0.434)***         (0.331)***
Year Fixed    No               Yes        No                No                 No
Effects
Country Fixed No               No            Yes***         Yes***             Yes**
Effects
N             462              462           462            462                451
  2
R             0.1517           0.1517        0.1517         0.5196             0.9949


                                          45
                    Figure 1. Public Opinion by Country
        Does the Eurozone Find the Euro Advantageous in 2006?

             100%

             90%

             80%

             70%

             60%                                          Do not know
                                                          Neither
Percentage   50%
                                                          Disadvantageous
             40%                                          Advantageous
             30%

             20%

             10%

              0%
                    he urg

                     A u ds
                     G ny




                              nd

                     m ly




                                d
                     Fi al
                  G ium



                       Sp e


                      Ir e e




                    Po ria
                     Fr i n




                            an
                            ec



                              c


                 xe Ita




                             g
                            a




                            n
                            a




                           la
                          an




                           st
                        rtu
               N bo
                       rla
                         m
                         lg




                        nl
                       re
              Be

                     er




                 et
               Lu




                                   Country




                                    46
Figure 2. Survey Responses in the Netherlands
Disadvantages of the Euro in The Netherlands, 2006




                                            Price increase
                                            Loss of sovereignty
                                            More unemployment, less growth
                                            Complicate everyday life
                                            Generates too low interest rates
                                            Too rigid for public spending
                                            Loss of competitiveness
                                            Other




                       47
