NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION AND RACE
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Erik Hurst
Nikolai Roussanov
Working Paper 13392
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13392

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We thank Mark Aguiar, Gary Becker, Matthew Gentzkow, Jonathan Guryan, Daniel Hamermesh,
Kevin Murphy, Karl Scholz, Jesse Shapiro, and Francesco Trebbi for very useful comments and conversations.
The paper has also benefited from comments from seminar participants at the University of Chicago,
The IRP Summer Workshop, UCLA, Washington University, the University of Minnesota, Dartmouth
College, the NBER Labor Studies Summer Program, the NBER Consumption Group Summer Program,
and the St Louis Federal Reserve. We absolve all of responsibility for errors or omissions which remain.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Nikolai Roussanov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Conspicuous Consumption and Race
Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Nikolai Roussanov
NBER Working Paper No. 13392
September 2007
JEL No. D12,D83,D91,J15
ABSTRACT
Using nationally representative data on consumption, we show that Blacks and Hispanics devote larger
shares of their expenditure bundles to visible goods (clothing, jewelry, and cars) than do comparable
Whites. We demonstrate that these differences exist among virtually all sub-populations, that they
are relatively constant over time, and that they are economically large. While racial differences in
utility preference parameters might account for a portion of these consumption differences, we emphasize
instead a model of status seeking in which conspicuous consumption is used to reflect a household's
economic position relative to a reference group. Using merged data on race and state level income,
we demonstrate that a key prediction of our model -- that visible consumption should be declining
in mean reference group income -- is strongly borne out in the data separately for each racial group.
Moreover, we show that accounting for differences in reference group income characteristics explains
most of the racial difference in visible consumption. We conclude with an assessment of the role of
conspicuous consumption in explaining lower spending by racial minorities on items likes health and
education, as well as their lower rates of wealth accumulation.
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL. 60637
and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu
Erik Hurst
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Hyde Park Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@gsb.uchicago.edu

Nikolai Roussanov
Department of Finance
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu

1.

Introduction
In his famous study of consumption during the Gilded Age, Veblen (1899) speculated

that, for the particular individuals he studied, “Consumption is evidence of wealth, and thus
becomes honorific, and …failure to consume a mark of demerit.”

This notion that an aim of

consumption was to demonstrate one’s economic position to observers Veblen dubbed
“conspicuous consumption”. Veblen’s focus was on the very wealthy, but nothing in the main
thrust of his argument requires that the phenomenon he identified apply to these households
exclusively.1

In this paper, we study households’ consumption of items which are readily

observable in social interactions, and which are portable across interactions. We call these goods
“visible consumption”. Prompted by Veblen’s insight that the consumption and display of these
items communicates information about economic status, and by the fact that few easily
observable variables are as strongly correlated with economic status as is an individual’s race, we
investigate a series of questions about visible consumption and race.
A large body of anecdotal evidence suggests that Blacks devote a larger share of their
overall expenditure to consumption items that are readily visible to outside observers than do
Whites. Automobiles, clothing, and jewelry are examples of these forms of "visible"
consumption. There has to date, however, been little formal analysis by economists of the degree
to which these racial differences in consumption patterns actually exist in the data, what accounts
for them if they do, and what the consequences of any such differential expenditure might be.2, 3
We address these questions in this paper.
The first part of our paper documents differences by race in expenditures devoted to
visible consumption items. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) from the
1
In fact, predating Veblen’s analysis by a hundred and forty years, Adam Smith argued that the desire for rank, and the
display of wealth associated with it, is nearly a universal feature of human behavior (Smith (1759)).
2
One exception is an early piece by Alexis (1970) who examined racial differences in consumption patterns between
1935 and 1960 using data from The Consumer Purchases Survey: 1935-36 and early waves of the Federal Reserve’s
Survey of Consumer Finances. Similar to the findings we present below, Alexis found that Blacks were much more
likely to spend on clothing (as a share of total expenditure) than similar Whites.
3
Outside of economics, there is also limited work on the consumption patterns of Blacks. Examples include Mullins
(1999), Lamont and Molnar (2001), and Chambers (2006).

1

period of 1986-2002, we show that although, unconditionally, racial minorities and Whites spend
approximately the same fraction of their resources on visible consumption, Blacks and Hispanics
spend about thirty percent more on visible goods, after accounting for differences in permanent
income. These expenditure differences are found within all sub-groups, except older households.
We find that these racial gaps have been relatively constant over the past seventeen years. And,
we show that spending on housing or differential treatment in the housing market cannot explain
these patterns. Finally, the gaps are economically large: the absolute level annual dollar
differential for visible consumption is on the order of $2300, which is a non-trivial quantity given
Black and Hispanic average income.
Because household spending must satisfy an inter-temporal budget constraint, spending
devoted to visible consumption must be diverted from some alternative use. Reduced spending
on specific types of current consumption on the one hand and lower savings (future consumption)
on the other are the two possibilities. We show that the higher visible spending of racial
minorities seems to come out of both future consumption and all other categories of current
consumption: Blacks consume less than Whites in essentially every other expenditure category
(aside from housing) to maintain higher visible consumption.4
What theoretical explanation accounts for these facts? One argument is that racial
differences in expenditure on visible items derives simply from racial differences in preferences that minorities spend more on jewelry, cars and apparel because they like these items more than
Whites.

This argument is consistent with the basic facts, but it essentially tautological.

Moreover, an argument centered on racial differences in preferences yields no prediction that is
falsifiable in the data. An alternative explanation presumes that utility functions are the same
across race, but that some external consideration makes people from different races place
4

As discussed below, housing may be considered a visible good. In fact, we do find that Blacks and Hispanics spend
more on housing than do comparable Whites. Our results (in terms of dollar magnitudes) get slightly stronger if we
include housing as a component of visible consumption. But, given the large literature on racial differences in housing
(which can explain the housing expenditure differences), we err on the side of caution by excluding housing from our
base measure of visible goods.

2

different marginal valuations on visible consumption items. Apart from the fact that it does not
simply assume that Blacks behave differently from Whites because they have different
preferences, an argument of this form yields additional predictions beyond the basic facts
described above which should hold within a racial group, and which can also be empirically
tested.
The alternative explanation we emphasize borrows from the extensive theoretical
literature on the demand for social status.

The key assumption of these models is that

individuals care about how their income, consumption or wealth compares (or is thought to
compare) to that of others in their reference group.

In a signaling version of the status model,

individuals’ incomes or wealth is not observed but costly indicators of income, in the form of
visible consumption, are. We show that under an intuitively appealing and simple formulation of
a status function, visible consumption in such a model should be rising in own income, and
decreasing in average reference group income.
Applying these insights, we argue that a status model of this form might predict racial
differences in visible consumption even if Blacks, Whites, and Hispanics all have the same utility
preference parameters. If otherwise identical racial minorities and Whites belong to communities
with different average income, their incentives to consume visibility to satisfy a conspicuous
status motive will be different. Interestingly, if the relative status model is correct, its predictions
about the negative relationship between visible expenditure and higher reference group income
should apply not only across races but among Whites who live in communities with lower
average incomes.
To assess empirical support for the status argument, we combine data about expenditures
from the CEX with income data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Given the high
levels of racial segregation in the data, we define an individual’s reference group as being persons

3

of the individual’s race, living in his state.5 The basic idea is that visible consumption should be
declining as the income of one’s reference group goes up – holding constant their own income.
Strikingly, we find that, consistent with the status argument, there is a strong negative association
between visible spending and the mean income of one’s reference group within all races. That is,
separate analysis performed on a sample of White households finds the same thing as separate
analyses done for racial minorities: increases in mean income of one’s own race in the state are
associated with reduced visible spending. As a falsification test of the status and reference group
notion, we related household visible spending to mean incomes of other groups in the state and
find either no effect or very modest positive effects. Additionally, we relate household nonvisible spending to reference average income and find no systematic relationship.
We then turn to the obvious next step: Do differences in reference group income explain
the racial expenditure gaps that are our main focus? In a series of regressions, we show that
accounting for the mean level of a household’s reference group in the state explains most of the
racial gap in visible spending. This conclusion is robust to a variety to sample modification and
specification tests. Importantly, it is also robust to the addition of state fixed effects, which
account for regional differences across all groups in the propensity to visibly consume.
In the last part of the paper, we discuss some potential implications of differential
spending on conspicuous goods between the races. Holding lifetime resources constant, an
increased propensity to spend on visible goods must necessarily mean lower consumption on
other goods.

We show that the Black-White gaps in education and health care spending

(conditional on permanent income and other demographics) decline by 25 and 8 percentage
points, respectively, after controlling for the share of spending allocated to visible goods. Given
that the racial gap in visible spending falls with age, there is reason to believe that wealth
accumulation could be affected by spending on visible goods. To this end, we show that wealth

5

As we discuss below, state is the lowest level of location available in the CEX and thus is the finest spatial level at
which we can test for the importance of reference group income.

4

gap between Blacks and Whites, conditional on permanent income, declines by 50 percent after
controlling for visible spending. Importantly, the decompositions in this final portion of the paper
are not contingent on any particular theoretical account of why conspicuous consumption
differences arise.

Irrespective of why Blacks spend more on visible goods than comparable

Whites there will be implications for other well-studied “racial gaps” in economic outcomes.
On the whole, the paper’s results point to an important role for consumption items, apart
from their direct consumption value. Although this exhibitionistic component has been long
talked about in economics, we are aware of very little formal evidence brought to bear on the
question, especially in terms of the racial differences that are our focus.6 Over the last decade,
economists and sociologists have provided considerable empirical support for the notion that
individuals care about their relative position in their community, often using evidence about
subjective well being.7 Our work complements this literature in that we are able to link
consumption patterns to social concerns by analyzing economic behavior directly. Perhaps more
importantly, our specific focus on racial differences in consumption, and our results about the
potential role played by the use and display of visible items, suggests that a deeper understanding
of the racial gaps in wealth, savings and consumption that have long bedeviled economists and
others will require further exploration of the issues raised in this paper.

2.

Data
To examine racial differences in consumption patterns, we use data from the 1986–2002

CEX, collected by the United States Department of Labor.

The CEX is an on-going rotating

panel dataset, in which participating households are interviewed up to five times at three month
intervals. In any given calendar quarter there are approximately 5,000 households in the survey,
with some households entering the survey and others exiting the survey.

The initial interview

6

Notable recent exceptions include Ravina (2005) and Kapteyn et al (2006).
Recent examples include Luttmer (2005), Clark and Oswald (1996), McBride (2001) and Dynan and Ravina (2007).
See also survey by Kahneman and Krueger (2006) and cites within.

7

5

collects household demographic information, which is updated during subsequent interviews to
reflect any changes in household composition.

Information on annual income (during the

previous twelve months) is collected during the second and fifth interviews. Additionally, the
second through fifth interviews each collects detailed household expenditure information for the
three calendar months immediately preceding the interview.

The detailed expenditure

information can be aggregated up to a broader set of consumption categories for the household.
Like previous users of CEX data, we aggregate to the consumption categories proposed
by Sabelhaus and Harris (2000). We use the CEX family level extracts made available from the
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). The Data Appendix discusses in detail the
NBER CEX family extracts, the details of our sample selection criteria, and the 47 specific
expenditure categories included in the Sabelhaus and Harris consumption classification.
Appendix Table A1 lists the 15 broad consumption categories we explore in this paper and how
they relate to the 47 categories in summarized in the Sabelhaus and Harris files. All data are
deflated to 2005 dollars using the June CPI-U.
To summarize the sample selection criteria described in the Data Appendix, our primary
analysis sample consists of Blacks, Whites, and Hispanics households, with heads between 18
and 49 years old. In some specifications, we explore the robustness of our results by examining
the consumption patterns of older households and the sensitivity of our results to excluding
younger households.

Also, below, we look at the spending patterns of Asians, but because of

small sample sizes Asians are not part of the main analysis sample.
To mitigate the effects of measurement error in the expenditure categories, the unit of
analysis is the average quarterly expenditure within a consumption category over the period that
the household is in the sample. In total, our primary analysis sample includes 48,758 households,
comprised of 36,706 White households, 6,760 Black households, and 5,292 Hispanic households.
Descriptive statistics for the sample by race are shown in Table 1.

There are two

noteworthy things in Table 1. First, 27 percent of the sample has missing total family annual

6

income where total annual income is defined to include labor, asset and transfer income. Over a
similarly defined sample, less than one percent of households in the March Current Population
Survey (CPS) (which is designed to measure labor market outcomes) have zero or negative
reported annual total family income. It is well documented that the CEX has many more missing
income observations compared to surveys designed to measure income like the CPS. The second
noteworthy point in the table is that among those reporting positive income, White households
have sixty-seven percent higher total income than Black households and sixty-one percent more
than Hispanic households. The comparable numbers from the CPS are fifty-one and thirty-seven
percent, respectively. The racial total expenditure differences from the CEX, however, line up
nearly exactly with the income numbers from the CPS. Specifically, as seen in Table 1, Whites
consume fifty percent more and thirty-eight percent more than Blacks and Hispanics,
respectively.8
Our focus in the paper is on visible consumption expenditures – items for which
expenditure is readily observable and which are highly portable, so that they are observed across
a variety of interactions. Also, we want to identify goods with the characteristic that individual
who consumer more of such goods are believed to be of better economic circumstances, on
average, than individuals who consumers less of such goods. Simple introspection suggests what
these items are likely to be, but rather than simply asserting what those items are, we conducted a
simple survey designed to assess people’s views about what expenditures are visible.9

8

As discussed below, concern about the quality of current income data in the CEX is mitigated by our use of total
expenditure as a permanent income proxy.
9
We are not the first to assess the visibility of different consumption goods using a survey. Heffetz (2007) sampled
480 individuals and asked them how long it would take them to observe whether an individual consumes an above
average amount of particular consumption goods. Our survey was very much inspired by Heffetz work, but we
conducted our own survey for three main reasons. First, given our focus on interactions with relatively unfamiliar
individuals, we were more interested in the familiarity an individual needs to determine someone’s above average
consumption rather than the length of time it would take him to observe this. Second, we needed to ask individuals
about the perceived income gradient associated with higher amounts of consumption for particular categories. In other
words, is above average spending on a particular good a signal of higher income or wealth. Finally, Heffetz’s survey,
like ours, included a relatively small number of respondents and we were unsure if the results would extend to a
broader population. It is encouraging, however, that our classification of visible goods is very similar to the
classification proposed by Heffetz.

7

We surveyed over 320 graduate students in the University of Chicago’s Harris School of
Public Policy and the University of Chicago’s Graduate School of Business via an anonymous
online survey. 213 students responded to the survey. The survey consisted of three parts. The
first part asked about background information including age, sex, race and marital status. In the
second part, respondents were asked the following question (Q2): “Consider a person who lives
in a household and community roughly similar to yours. How closely would you have to interact
with this person in order to observe that they consistently spend more than average on each of the
following categories?”

Their answers ranged from 1 (indicating that higher than average

spending could be observed if the respondent did not interact socially with the person at all) to 5
(indicating that spending would never be observed). Appendix Table A2 details the survey
questions and potential responses.

The consumption categories asked of survey respondents

were designed to approximate the CEX consumption categories outlined in Appendix Table A1.
In Q3 of the survey, we asked respondents the following: “Consider a randomly chosen
individual in society. Imagine that this person’s lifetime income suddenly increased by 20%. For
each item below, tell us how you would expect the person’s spending on each of the following
items to change”. The answers again ranged from 1 to 5 with 1 being spending would fall, 2
being spending would stay the same, and 3-5 being spending increased by less than, exactly, or
more than 20%, respectively.

The consumption categories for which this question was asked

were the same as those in Q2.
Appendix Table A3 presents the survey results. The first column shows the proportion
of survey respondents who thought they would be able to observe above-average spending on an
item even if relatively unfamiliar with the consumer (responses “1” or “2” to Q2). We call these
goods visible. The statistic in column 2 is the proportion of survey respondents who reported that
the consumption item has at least an income elasticity of at least 1.
Respondents thought that the type of spending they would most readily observe is that on
clothing, jewelry and vehicles (excluding maintenance).

For example, nearly two-thirds of

8

respondents reported that they would be able to ascertain above average spending on clothing and
jewelry for individuals they hardly know. Other spending thought to be highly observable
includes (in decreasing order) expenditures on tobacco products, shelter expenditures, alcohol and
personal care expenditures. Spending on all other goods was thought to be hard to observe
compared to these seven goods. The second column shows that only five items were thought to
be both highly observable and also thought to have income elasticities greater than 1. On one
hand, an item like entertainment durables, which includes such things as televisions, was thought
to have a high income elasticity but not to be especially observable. On the other hand, tobacco
and alcohol spending are thought to be easily observable but have quite low expected income
elasticities. Consistent with this survey evidence, in the cross-section CEX data, the combined
alcohol/tobacco category was the only consumption category with a negative cross sectional
income elasticity.
As will be made clear below, we wish to treat as “visible” goods which are easily
observable and which have the characteristic that higher consumption of the good is generally
associated with higher income. Given the results of the survey (and consistent with commonsense), we define visible consumption in our analysis as consisting of expenditures on apparel
(including accessories such as jewelry), expenditures on personal care, and outlays on vehicles
excluding maintenance.
One especially important item is housing. The survey evidence suggests that housing is
both reasonably observable and that it has a high expected income elasticity. Our concern is that
racial differences in housing expenditure might derive from differential treatment in the housing
market – a phenomenon that has been the focus of a large literature.10 Differential treatment in
the housing market could, by itself, cause minorities to have very different housing expenditures

10

There is evidence that minorities face significantly higher rejection rates for mortgages which serves to limit their
access to owner occupied housing (see Munnell et al. (1996) and Charles and Hurst (2002)). Moral hazard
considerations cause rental prices to exceed the flow cost from owning an otherwise identical unit, so households who
rent will pay more for housing services, all else equal, than those who own.

9

than Whites, even if there were no conspicuous or exhibitionistic consideration informed housing
expenditure. Previewing our later results, we find that minorities spend more for a unit of
housing than do Whites, implying that if housing were lumped together with other visible
spending, the overall difference in visible expenditure we estimate would be slightly larger.
However, given the concerns about differential treatment in this particular market, we adopt the
conservative policy of excluding housing from the measure of total spending in most of our main
results. For the most part, we always treat housing separately, except for some robustness
specifications in which we assess how the results are affected when housing expenditure is
lumped in with overall visible spending.
Appendix Tables A4 summarizes expenditures in our CEX sample on visible and other
goods. Overall, visible consumption expenditures comprise roughly 12 percent of household total
expenditures, while spending on food and shelter represent roughly 20 percent and 25 percent,
respectively, of total expenditures. The table shows that some CEX households spend nothing on
some expenditure categories over their time in the survey. Thus, whereas nearly all households
spend on food, housing, entertainment services, and visible goods, 57% of households spent
nothing on education, and around 20% spent nothing on alcohol and tobacco.11

3.

Racial Differences in Conspicuous Consumption
To document the basic facts about consumption patterns by race in the CEX, we estimate

the following specification on a pooled sample of Black, White, and Hispanic household heads:

ln(visiblei ) = β 0 + β1 Blacki + β 2 Hispanici + γ Incomei + ϕ Expenditurei + θ X i + ηi

(1)

where Blacki is a dummy variable if household head i is Black, Hispanici is a dummy variable if
household head i is Hispanic, and Incomei is a vector of income controls for household i including
the log of total family income, a cubic in the level of total family income, and a dummy variable
equal to one if total family income is zero or missing. Total family income includes the sum of
11

In later analysis, we use Tobit analysis to deal with the large prevalence of zeros in particular consumption
categories.

10

all labor and non-labor income earned by all members of the household. We set the log of total
family income equal to zero if total family income was zero.

Expenditurei is a vector of total

expenditure variables for household i including the log of total expenditures and a cubic in the
level of total expenditure.
permanent income.

We include expenditure controls to proxy for the household’s

According to the permanent income hypothesis, the level of current

consumption should depend on lifetime (permanent) income and not simply current income. In
essence, we are using total expenditures as our control for permanent income.12 Alternatively, by
controlling for total expenditure, we are estimating the share of expenditure allocated to visible
goods among people who spend the same amount in total. This approach yields exactly the
estimate we want since we are interested in explaining how expenditures are allocated across
consumption categories rather than the level of total expenditures.
Xi is a vector of demographic controls including a quadratic in age, education controls,
household wealth controls, year effects and indicator variables for the number of adults in the
household, the number of total family members in the household, marital status, whether the
household head is male, urbanicity, MSA residence, and Census region.13
Only 1 percent of the sample reports having no expenditures on visible goods over their
time in the survey. Given the small occurrence of zeros in visible expenditures in our sample, it
makes no difference if we estimate (1) via OLS setting the log visible expenditures to zero for
those with zero visible expenditure or via a Tobit estimator which explicitly accounts for the
censoring at zero. Table 2 presents the OLS estimates of (1).
If (1) is estimated including only the race dummies and excluding all of the other
controls, Blacks and Hispanics are found to spend less on visible items than comparable Whites

12

Implicit in this identification is that the mapping of permanent income to total expenditures is constant across races.
However, a large literature suggests that Blacks save less out of permanent income than do similar Whites (e.g., Hurst,
Luoh and Stafford 1998). If Blacks do save less than comparable Whites, the estimated Black effect in (1) is
downwards biased, making the estimate a lower bound on the racial difference in visible consumption.
13
For household wealth, we use the log of liquid assets if liquid assets are positive and a dummy for whether the
household has positive liquid assets as controls. Liquid assets are defined as checking, saving, stock, and bond
holdings.

11

by 38 and 24 percent, respectively (Row 1 of Table 2). This is not surprising, since spending on
visible goods increases with income as we show below, and since Blacks and Hispanics have
much lower incomes than Whites. As expected, Row 2 shows that including the CEX controls for
current income lowers both of the estimated minority race effects. However, as discussed above,
current income is measured very poorly in the CEX. Moreover, consumption theory predicts that
consumption decisions are based on permanent rather than current income. Row 3 shows that
when both controls for current income and total expenditure (which proxies for permanent
income) are added to the regression, the estimated effects indicate that Black and Hispanics
consume 29 percent and 25 percent more visible goods than Whites with similar permanent
income. The estimates in the fourth row show that it is the permanent income controls that drive
the entire change in coefficient between the specifications in first and third rows. Excluding the
current income controls from specification 3 leaves the racial dummies essentially unchanged.
Row 5-7 of the table show that including a full set of demographic controls does little to
change the racial difference in visible consumption patterns after controlling for income and
expenditure.14

For example, adding education controls in Row 5 leaves the race effects

essentially unchanged. With the full set of demographic controls in Row 7, the estimated racial
effects increase only slightly relative to the results with just the income and expenditure controls.
In summary, Blacks and Hispanics consume 32 percent and 31 percent more visible goods,
respectively, than comparable Whites.15
The racial difference in visible expenditures is large in absolute dollars. Appendix Table
A4 shows that, on average, Whites spend about $7,204 on visible items per year. The finding
that Blacks and Hispanics spend 32 percent more than comparable Whites on visible goods
therefore implies that Blacks and Hispanics spend on average roughly $2,300 per year more on
14
The results are nearly identical if instead of pooling Whites, Blacks and Hispanics together we estimate the Black
coefficient on a sample of only Whites and Blacks, and the Hispanic coefficient in a sample of only includes Whites
and Hispanics.
15
The coefficients on the Black and Hispanic dummies from a median regression (otherwise analogous to the
specification shown in row 7 of Table 2) were 0.36 and 0.38 respectively.

12

visible goods than their White counterparts. This estimate is likely a lower bound given that the
CEX has been found to under report total household consumption relative to data from the
National Income and Product Accounts. To put these magnitudes in perspective, data from the
March CPS shows that, for the 1990-2002 period, Black and Hispanic households had average
incomes, respectively, of $42,500 and $48,300 in 2005 dollars. Outlays on visible goods thus
represent a substantial fraction of the overall budget of minorities.16
Although to conserve space we do not report them in Table 2, we find some interesting
patterns between individual level demographics and visible spending, net of the effect of current
and permanent income. We find, first, that the propensity to purchase visible goods declines
sharply with age. For example, relative to households with heads between 18 and 30 years old,
households with heads between 26 and 29 are twenty-three percent less likely to spend on visible
goods. The comparable coefficients on the age dummies for 30-33 year olds, 34-37 year olds, 3841 year olds, 42 to 45 year olds, and 46-49 year olds are, respectively, -37 percent, -44 percent, 55 percent, -56 percent and -62 percent. Second, we find that female-headed households are 15
percent more likely to spend on visible goods than their male headed counterparts.

Lastly, the

college educated, spend about 13 percent less on visible expenditures than their high school
educated counterparts.
Figure 1 plots the visible expenditure Engel curves for Black and White households. To
estimate these equations we regress, separately for Blacks and Whites, the log of visible
expenditures on the log of current household income, instrumenting current household income
with the total expenditure controls discussed above. This regression relates the log of visible
expenditure to the portion of current income that is systematically related to total expenditure –

16
We present results for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites. We also explored but do not present because of sample size
concerns differences in spending patterns between Asians and Whites. Asians, on average, spend 9 percent less on
visible goods than Whites with similar permanent income and demographics.

13

what theory suggests is permanent income.17 The figure shows that, for both Blacks and Whites,
visible expenditures are luxury goods. The coefficient on log income in the IV regressions for
Blacks and Whites, respectively, were 1.4 and 1.6. Second, Blacks, at every level of permanent
income, spend more on visible goods then their White counterparts, with a 30% difference at the
median income for the sample.18 Third, notice that the two Engle curves are essentially parallel,
mitigating concerns that the main results derive in some way from a fundamental difference in the
shapes of these relationships across race.
The finding that racial minorities exhibit a greater propensity to consume visible goods is
robust to a variety of alternative specifications and restrictions, including restricting the sample to
households with positive current income, excluding households with less than $23,200 a year in
total expenditures (which was the 25th percentile of the expenditure distribution), excluding
households under the age of 24, including log expenditures on housing shelter as an additional
control, restricting the sample to include only those who completed all four CEX surveys,
including occupation dummies, and including city size controls. The results of these alternative
specifications are shown in Appendix Table A5.
Table 3 reports the race coefficient from (1) for a variety of different population subsamples. These results include the same set of controls as used in row 7 of Table 2. The results
indicate that the racial difference in visible consumption remains large among the sub samples of
single men, single women, and married households. For example, Black (Hispanic) single men
consume 32 percent (40 percent) more visible goods than similar White single men.

The

17
When estimating this equation, we restrict the sample to those with positive current household income. We then
truncated current income for both samples at 99th percentile of black distribution (which was roughly $100,000). Engel
curves for both Blacks and Whites in Figure 1 are thus up through $100,000.
18
One question that we will continue to address throughout the paper is whether there are differences in “price” effects
which cause Blacks to spend more on visible goods than comparable Whites. For example, if Blacks were
discriminated against in the market for visible goods, Blacks with a given income would pay more for those items than
comparable Whites. General discrimination cannot explain the results in Table 2 which control for total expenditures
directly. As a result, the correct interpretation of our results should be why Blacks and Hispanics allocate a greater
share of their expenditures to visible goods. There is no evidence that, relative to other goods, Blacks and Hispanics
pay higher prices for clothing, jewelry, and personal care items than similar Whites.

14

comparable differences for Black and Hispanic single women, relative to White single women,
were 29 percent and 24 percent, respectively.
Rows 4-7 of Table 3 show the racial gap in visible consumption within different
educational groups.

We find racial differences in visible consumption within all educational

groups, although the magnitudes of the differences vary slightly for different education levels.
Black households headed by someone with only a high school degree consume 38 percent more
visible goods than a comparable White household, conditional on income, total expenditure and
demographics. The comparable Black-White gap in visible expenditures for households headed
by someone with at least a college degree is 28 percent. The gradient in the racial gap in visible
consumption with respect to education is steeper between Whites and Hispanics.

Among

households headed by a person with only a high school degree, Hispanics consume 32 percent
more visible goods than comparable Whites.

Among college graduates, the gap falls to 12

percent.
In Rows 8–10 of Table 3, we explore how the racial gap in visible expenditures changes
with age.

On average, the gap in visible expenditures found among 18-34 years is nearly

identical – for both Blacks and Hispanics – to the racial gap found among 35–49 year olds.
Using fine age ranges up through the age of 49, the same patterns hold.

However, as seen in

Row 10, for Black households older than 49, the racial gap starts to diminish sharply.
Specifically, for households between 50 and 69, Blacks consume only 22 percent more visible
goods than comparable Whites. As noted earlier, all households spend less on visible goods as
they age.

The racial gap in visible consumption in absolute dollars therefore declines

monotonically with age.
Although we do not present the results in Table 3, we find that the racial gap in visible
consumption has been consistently present during the period between 1986 and 2002. For
example, the racial gap in visible consumption between Blacks and Whites for our main analysis
sample, conditional on income, expenditure, and demographics, was 31 percent for the sub-period

15

of 1990-1993 and was 29 percent for the sub-period of 1999-2002.19 Additionally, we found no
difference in the estimated race coefficients within a sample of renters and a sample of home
owners. Black renters (home owners) consumed roughly 30 percent more visible goods than
White renters (home owners), all else equal.

Lastly, the racial differences were robust to

splitting the sample on the head’s current employment status.
Table 4 shows that Blacks and Hispanics spend much more than their White counterparts
on each of the visible consumption categories – vehicles, clothing, and personal care. Panel A
shows results for the full sample, while Panel B is for a sample of households who own a vehicle.
In both of the samples, Blacks and Hispanics spend significantly more on both personal care and
clothing and jewelry than comparable Whites. Vehicle spending differences, however, only
occur among vehicle owners. Moreover, the vehicle differences are only statistically significant
with the expanded measure of vehicle spending which includes both only spending on the vehicle
itself at the time of purchase (the limited vehicle measure), and also spending on customization
and monthly principle payments on the vehicle loan. The data appendix outlines the categories
in the limited and expanded vehicle measures.
The fact that Blacks and Hispanics, all else equal, have a lower probably of vehicle
ownership explains why the racial difference in vehicle spending is not found for the full sample.
The lower vehicle ownership among Blacks and Hispanics is likely the result of two factors.
First, Blacks and Hispanics are more likely to live in city centers and, as a result, have lower
vehicle needs. Second, liquidity constraints may prevent Blacks and Hispanics from making a
sufficient down payment to purchase a vehicle. Among, vehicle owners, however, Blacks spend
15 percent more on vehicles (including customization) than comparable Whites.20

19

Also, while our analysis focuses on the period since 1990, we used the 1960-61 CEX survey to examine historical
racial differences in visible expenditure. Our results cannot reject the hypothesis that the Black/White difference in that
earlier period is identical to the gap in the period we study.
20
We have also conducted a similar analysis using PSID data to explore differences in vehicle wealth holdings
between Blacks and Whites. The PSID tracks the value of the household vehicle wealth (cars, trucks, motorcycles,
etc.) at their re-sale value. This measure includes the value of all car accessories (tires, rims, etc.). Blacks, conditional

16

If minority households spend more on visible goods relative to White households with
similar income, total expenditures, and demographics, on what expenditures are they spending
less? The inter-temporal budget constraint implies that this higher spending must come either
from another component of current consumption or from future consumption (i.e. current
savings).

Table 5 looks at the conditional differences in spending on other consumption

categories. These consumption categories – along with visible consumption – comprise the
universe of consumption expenditures in the CEX and are described in Appendix Table A1. The
coefficients in Table 5 come from a regression similar to (1) where the dependent variable of log
visible expenditures is replaced by the log of other different consumption categories. Otherwise,
the regression is exactly the same as the one reported in row 7 of Table 2. As indicated in the
notes to Table 5, for expenditure categories for which there was a high incidence of zero
expenditure, we estimate Tobit regressions.
The first striking fact from Table 5 is that there is no evidence that Blacks and Hispanic
consume a higher percentage of their spending than Whites on any other consumption category
except for visible goods and housing. In fact, aside from housing, Blacks spend less than similar
Whites on all other consumption categories. Some of the differences are small. For example,
there only appears to be very small differences between Blacks and Whites in food expenditures.
However, Blacks spend 17 percent less on education, approximately 50 percent less on
entertainment, and 56 percent less on health spending. Similar patterns emerge for Hispanics.
Both Blacks and Hispanics spend slightly more on housing expenditures for shelter and
utilities than their White counterparts, while at the same time spending much less on home
furnishings.21 As we have noted, housing may itself be a visible good which would explain why
it is associated with similar expenditure patterns to those for jewelry, clothing and vehicles.

on five year average income, demographics, and total wealth, have roughly 15 percent more vehicle wealth than
Whites. These results are consistent with the results shown in Table 5.
21
The utility category is driven to a large extent by differences in telephone expenditures (including cell phones and
pagers).

17

However, as discussed above, it is also possible that there is differential treatment by race in the
housing market. To provide conservative estimates of conspicuous spending differences, we
exclude housing from our measure of visible goods.
The results presented thus far are from the CEX, the primary source of information on
consumption expenditure. Despite its excellent coverage of consumption behavior over a long
time, it is not designed to measure household income. To confirm the basic patterns presented
above, we have also examined racial consumption expenditure differences using data from the
PSID. This finding increased our confidence that total expenditure in the CEX is a good proxy
for permanent income. Although the PSID is not designed to measure consumption and has
historically had information on only a limited set of consumption measures, the survey has
recently (in 2005) added an expanded set of expenditure questions, including questions about the
visible items we study. The PSID expenditure measures are available for only one or two years,
and are obviously not as complete as the CEX measures. On the other hand, the PSID does have
much more detailed information on income than the CEX.

We do not present the results here,

but the basic patterns about racial differences in visible expenditure documented above are also
found in the PSID.
In summary, we show in this section that Blacks and Hispanics spend roughly 30 percent
more on visible expenditures (cars, clothing, jewelry, and personal care items) than otherwise
similar Whites. These patterns are similar across all sub groups of the population, with the
notable exception that the differential racial propensity to consume visibly declines sharply with
age. Finally, while minority households consume much more visible goods than comparable
Whites, they consume less than or the same amount as Whites of all other consumption categories
aside from housing.
4.

Theories of Conspicuous Consumption
What explains the differences in visible spending between races presented above? One

possible answer is that Blacks and Hispanics simply like to consume the kinds of goods we

18

classify as visible more than their White counterparts. Given the fact that racial groups exhibit
such different tastes with respect to matters as diverse as cuisine, music, and even popular
entertainment, it is likely that the conspicuous consumption differences documented above
reflect, in part, differences across cultures in the their tastes for these different types of goods.
Unfortunately, a “cultural difference” explanation has the drawbacks that it is essentially
tautological and that it does not provide additional predictions that can be tested in the data.
We believe that existing theory points to an alternative explanation for observed
consumption which does not rely on Blacks and Hispanics having stronger preferences for visible
goods. Following Veblen (1899) and Smith (1759), a large theoretical literature in the social
sciences has focused on the idea that individuals care about their status in society. Conspicuous
consumption in these models affects status by communicating information about unobserved
economic position within the particular group. Different types of status models have been
proposed in the literature, but we focus here on a signaling framework.22 This type of model is
straightforward and familiar, and its key predictions are, in most cases, very similar to other status
models such as those that focus on relative consumption. 23
To see the main insights from a signaling representation of status, consider a relatively
general and simple static framework of a social group G consisting of households with incomes

y i distributed continuously over some range with mean μG . Suppose that all individuals in group
G have identical preferences defined over two consumption goods and over status, given by

(

)

( )

u y i − c + α u c i + s,

(2)

where u is an increasing and concave function; c is conspicuous (visible) consumption; y-c
represents consumption which is not (easily) visible or conspicuous to outsiders such as food,

22
Signaling formulations of status have been presented by, among others, Ireland (1994), Cole et al (1995), Bagwell
and Bernheim (1996), Glazer and Konrad (1996), and Corneo and Jeanne (1998).
23
Duesenberry (1949), Pollack (1976) and Frank (1985) developed early models of the relative consumption class.
Most recently Hopkins and Kornienko (2004) and Becker and Rayo (2006) analyze the welfare implications of this
type of preference specifications.

19

health, or saving; and s represents status.
In a signaling framework, it is natural to represent individual i ' s status as reflecting how
a given trait of his compares to some standard. Assume that this unobserved trait is income. In
assigning status to an individual, outsiders have two bits of information: the person’s visible
consumption, and what is known about the income of the group from which the person is drawn –
in the most simple case, the mean of group income μG . In equilibrium, the inferences made
about a person’s income are correct, so that observed levels of visible consumption are associated
with particular income levels.

The status a person receives in equilibrium is, in general, given

by24

s i = s ( c i , μG ) .
Since, in equilibrium, more visible consumption is associated with higher levels of inferred
income and thus with higher status, the partial derivative of status with respect to visible
consumption expenditure c is positive, or sc > 0. The partial derivative of status with respect to
mean group income, sμ , is less clear, and depends on the specific formulation of status assumed
and the nature of the equilibrium status assignment. 25

(

)

Let c * y i , μG be person i 's equilibrium level of visible consumption, where y i is his
income. Equilibrium consumption is determined by maximizing (2) subject to a budget set and
thus is the solution to the first order condition:

sc ( c* , μG ) = u ' ( y i − c* ) − α u ' ( c* ) .

(3)

24
In general, equilibrium status can also depend on higher moments of the income distribution, such as the variance.
For example, this will be the case when status is proportional to income or consumption rank. In addition, variance of
group income will matter in a pure signaling model, but its contribution is hard to disentangle from that of the mean.
25
In general, the relationship between status and average group income hinges on the specific assumption made about
status formation in the model. It is most often assumed that individuals care about how their income is thought to
compare to others in their group, implying that sμ < 0. However, Ireland (1994)) presents a model in which simply

belonging to a richer reference group confers higher status, so that

sμ > 0.

20

Two implications are immediately forthcoming from this condition. First, conspicuous
consumption is greater than would be true if there were no status concerns. Second, and of
important predictive value, is that conspicuous consumption should be increasing in own
income.26
Differentiating both sides of the first order condition (3) with respect to μG yields

(

)

(

) (

)

( )

(

)

scμ c∗ , μG = −cμ∗ G y i , μG ⎡u′′ y i − c∗ + α u′′ c∗ + scc c∗ , μ ⎤
⎣
⎦

(4)

The second order condition for c * implies that the expression in the square brackets is negative
in (4). Thus, the partial effect of mean group income on equilibrium visible consumption, cμ∗ ,
G

is of the same sign as the second derivative of status function, scμ : holding own income
constant, conspicuous consumption is decreasing in mean group income if

scμ < 0 , and is

increasing if the inequality is reversed.
What, intuitively, does the second derivative scμ mean and what is its likely sign?
Technically, scμ measures whether the positive increment to his status that an individual receives
by engaging in marginally more visible expenditure is bigger or smaller when his group has
slightly higher average income. It should be clear that the sign of scμ will depend on how
specifically status is modeled. Notice, however, that in perhaps the most simple type of status
representation possible, in which the status conferred upon an individual is simply how his
income compares (or is thought to compare) to the average income of the group, then scμ < 0 ,
and equilibrium consumption will be decreasing in average group income. Intuitively, in this
most simple case, the richer the group is on average, the less an individual gains relative to the

26

These are standard predictions of signaling models. See Ireland (!994) or Cole et. al. (1995) for a formal discussion.

21

mean from a one dollar increase in visible consumption. The marginal return to status “spending”
in the form of higher visible spending falls as the average group income rises.
The condition that scμ < 0 holds for many representations of relative status and concave
utility functions, u. Indeed, some empirical tests in the literature find that subjective well being,
which is presumably positively related to status, falls when average reference group income rises.
Conspicuous consumption is not directly the focus of these papers, but if their results were put
into a conspicuous consumption context, their findings would imply that scμ < 0 .27 In the Theory
Appendix, we briefly work through a specific parametric example of log linear utility with status
defined as the ratio of expected income (given consumption) to average reference group income.
Although we have focused on the signaling version of the relative status model, the
results above are consistent with a model where status is explicitly based on conspicuous
consumption. For example, Becker and Rayo (2006) study a model in which status is given by the
individual’s position in the distribution of durable good expenditures and show that in
equilibrium this position corresponds to the position in the income distribution. As with the
signaling model, equilibrium status depends on the moments of the reference group income
distribution (especially the mean), and on the individual choice of conspicuous consumption.
We do not attempt to distinguish between these theoretical formulations of status in this paper,
especially in light of their similar predictions.
If a relative status consideration of the sort outlined above partly determines consumption
decisions, it follows that persons with exactly the same preferences and with the same income but
who belong to different social groups will consume different amounts of visible goods if the
mean incomes of their groups are different. In particular, visible spending should be lower for
individuals in the group with higher mean income.

27

Can a simple model of conspicuous

Recent examples on relative status and subjective well being include McBride (2001) and Dynan and Ravina (2007)

22

consumption where status depends on expected income relative to the mean income of a reference
group reconcile the results presented above? We turn to this in the next section.

5:

Empirical Tests of Conspicuous Consumption Model

Explaining Within Race Conspicuous Consumption Differences
The foregoing discussion said nothing about race specifically, but we argue that the longstanding cultural separation of races in the U.S, combined with high levels of residential
segregation, suggest that race partly determines a person’s reference group, G . In addition, there
is likely a spatial dimension to reference groups: it seems quite unlikely that the consumption
patterns of individuals on one coast of the country should be informed by considerations about
persons living on the opposite coast, even if those others are of the same race. In all that follows,
we therefore suppose that reference groups are the interaction of race and space: persons of an
individual’s own race, living is his own state. We define reference groups with respect to state
because the state is lowest level of spatial aggregation available in our data.
One interesting implication of acknowledging the likely spatial component of reference
groups is that we can assess the validity of the status model’s main predictions not only across
different races, but also with data on individuals of the same race. That is, we ask: Among
persons of a given race, are those from areas with higher average income less likely to engage in
conspicuous consumption, as the simple relative status model would suggest?
We focus first on visible consumption among White households. On a sample of Whites
we estimate the regression:

ln(visiblei ) = β 0 + Γ j State j + γ Incomei + ϕ Expenditurei + θ X i + ηi

(5)

where Statej is a vector of state dummies and Γ j is the vector of coefficients on those state
dummies. Otherwise, the controls are identical to those used in Row 7 of Table 2, and the sample
restrictions are the same as discussed above.

23

( )

Figure 2a plots the coefficients on the state dummies Γ j from a regression such as (5)
against the mean income of White males from state j. We use data from the 1990 through the
2002 March Current Population Surveys (CPS) to compute the mean labor income of White
males by state. 28 We use the CPS to compute our measure of the mean income of the reference
group within each state as opposed to the CEX data because of both the large sample sizes
available in the CPS and the better quality income data.
Figure 2a shows that there is a strong negative relationship between the propensity of
White households to consume visible goods and the mean income of White men in the state.
Alabama was the omitted state in the estimation of (5).

Figure 2a shows that, holding own

income, total expenditure, and demographics constant, White Texans consume 20 percentage
points less visible goods than White Alabamans. The mean income of households headed by
White men in Texas is nearly $10,000 a year higher than the mean income of households headed
by White men in Alabama.

The regression line in the figure is from a regression which is

weighted by the number of CPS observations from the state.

The negative and strongly

statistically significant regression coefficient implies that, on average, increasing mean state
income by $10,000 reduces the amount of visible consumption by 17 percentage points, all else
equal. Lastly, the R-squared of the regression of the state visible expenditure fixed effect against
mean state income among Whites is 0.35.
One concern about the results in the Figure 2a is that there may be some factor which is
correlated with average state income, which mechanically causes reduced spending on visible
goods. Differences across states in housing prices represent one main concern here. Consider a
state where the price of housing is high, all else equal. Individuals with a given level of income
in that state will spend more for the same amount of housing, and less on other consumption
28

The labor income of adult men of a person’s state*race cell is our main measure of average reference group income.
However, we tried several alternative measures for reference group income, including total family income and total
family labor of all persons of the individual’s race*state cell. In all that follows, the results are essentially unchanged
under these alternative income specifications.

24

items including perhaps visible items. To examine the relationship between housing expenditures
and mean state income, we re-estimate (5) with the household’s housing outlays as the dependent
variable. Figure 2b, which plots the estimated state effects from this regression, shows that
household housing outlays are indeed much higher in states with high mean state income.
Are the results in Figure 2a driven by differences in housing expenditures across states?
We re-estimated (5) for visible spending but add the household’s housing expenditures as an
additional regressor. The estimated state fixed effects are then plotted against state income in
Figure 2c. The figure shows that housing expenditure differences explain no more than twenty
percent of the negative relationship between visible expenditures and mean state income
documented in Figure 2a. We find that a $10,000 increase in mean state income reduces visible
expenditure purchases by a strongly statistically significant 13 percent. There is thus a strong
negative relationship between visible spending and mean state income among Whites even after
controlling for differences in housing expenditures.
Apart from the concern that state level differences in housing cost could account for the
patterns we observe for visible goods, there is still the possibility that a state’s level of income
might be related to the menu of prices its residents pay for different consumption items.

For

example, the presence or generosity of transfer programs or of other consumption insurance
schemes might vary with a state’s average level of income. If this were so, persons with the same
level of income in different states would effectively pay different prices for and consume
different amounts of various consumption items in the different states. In particular, we would
expect to find a negative pattern between state income and levels of expenditures for other items.
Figures 2d-2f depict patterns analogous to those in Figure 2c for expenditures on food,
entertainment and all non-housing/non-visible expenditures, respectively, after controlling for
differences in housing expenses. In stark contrast to the results for visible goods, we find no
evidence of a negative relationship between state income and these expenditures among Whites.

25

Indeed, food expenditures increase slightly with state income for Whites. For entertainment
service and all non-housing/non-visible expenditures there is no difference in Whites’ propensity
to spend on these items across states with different levels of income. Overall, for Whites, the
negative relationship between visible expenditures and mean state income does not exist for any
other category of expenditures. These results provide strong support for our model’s conjecture
that visible spending is negatively related to the economic status of one’s peers, holding
individual characteristics constant.
The regression analog of (5) is:

ln(visiblei ) = β 0 + δ ln( μG ) + γ Incomei + ϕ Expenditurei + θ X i + ηi

(6)

where the state dummies are replaced by the mean labor income of White men in the state, μG .
Table 6 shows the results from this regression. Column 1 of Table 6 shows that the base estimate
of δ is a strongly statistically significant -0.94. This implies that doubling mean state income of
White men reduces visible expenditures of Whites by 94 percent, all else equal. This coefficient
roughly translates to the relationship between the state fixed effect and mean state income
estimated in Figure 2a.
In column 2 of Table 6, we include housing expenditures as an additional control and the
coefficient still remains large and statistically different from zero. In column 3, we include the
mean income of all men in the state (not just Whites) as an additional control. The discussion in
the preceding section suggests that households’ visible spending should respond negatively to the
mean income level of their reference group. If reference groups are defined along racial lines,
households’ visible consumption should not be related to the mean income of other racial groups
within their state. The evidence in column 3 weakly supports this. White men do respond
statistically to the mean income of White men, but there is no statistical relationship between their
consumption and the mean income of other racial groups in the state. The standard errors are
such that we cannot rule out that the coefficient on the income of White men (row 1) is

26

statistically different from the coefficient on the income of all men (row 3) – an unsurprising
result since white Men constitute the over-whelming majority of men in all states.
In column 4 of Table 6 we also include measures of the log of the standard deviation of
the income of White men in state j relative to the mean income of White men in state j as an
additional control. In this specification, the estimate on the variance is negative, which implies
that a more disperse population weakens the propensity to consume visibly, all else equal.29
Notice, all the other coefficients remain constant between the specifications shown in columns 2
and 4.
Table 7 shows that the same patterns hold within samples of Blacks and Hispanics.
Specifically, we re-estimate an equation similar to (6), in turn, on samples of only Blacks
(column 1 of Table 7); only Hispanics (column 2 of Table 7); and a a pooled sample of Blacks
and Hispanics (column 3-6 of Table 7). In column 1 (2), our measure of μG is the mean income
of Black (Hispanic) males in state j.

In the pooled regression in column 3, μG is the mean

income of either Black men in state j if the household head is Black or the mean income of
Hispanic men in state j if the household head is Hispanic. The results show that for both the
Black and the Hispanic samples, the estimated effect of μG is negative and large.

The

coefficients on μG for Blacks (Hispanics) imply that a doubling of mean state income of the race
based reference group leads to a 48 (76) percent decline in the propensity to spend on visible
goods, all else equal.

The results are nearly identical in the pooled regression, although the

coefficients are much more precisely estimated. A doubling of the mean income of a person’s
reference group within their state results in a 56 percent reduction in visible spending (p-value <
0.01).
In column 4, we include log housing expenditures as an additional control. The results
are robust to this inclusion. A doubling of mean income of the reference group within the state
29

This is consistent with some versions of the status signaling model (e.g. Cole et. al. (1995)).

27

results in a 37 percent reduction in visible spending. Notice, that this number is not too different
from the corresponding estimate among White men (Table 6 column 3). In column 5 of Table 7,
we also include the mean income of all men in the state as an additional regressor. We find that
Blacks and Hispanics have lower visible expenditures when the mean income of their race-based
reference group is higher. However, if the mean income of all men in the state increases holding
the mean income of men from the person’s own race constant, visible expenditures increase.
In column 6, we also add a measure of the standard deviation of income within the state
relative to mean income within the state (by race). The relative standard deviation measure is
positive, but not statistically different from zero.

Although not shown, we also find no

relationship between food and entertainment spending and mean own group state income among
Blacks and Hispanics.30
Overall, the within-race results are strongly consistent with the status model of
conspicuous consumption outlined above.

If the mean income of those of a person’s own race

within their state increases, the person’s spends less on visible expenditures, all else equal. This
fact is found among Whites, among Blacks and among Hispanics and persists even after
controlling for differences in housing expenditures across states.

5B.

Explaining Racial Differences in Visible Expenditures
We analyze next whether the racial differences in visible consumption presented earlier

in the paper can be reconciled by a status model with the key features described in the previous
section. We estimate:
30

One implementation of our notion of reference groups is that it is defined as one’s neighborhood. The use of mean
Black income within the state as a reference group for Blacks and mean White income within the state a reference
group for Whites, under this interpretation, assumes that Blacks live around Blacks and Whites live around Whites.
While it is has been shown that there is substantial segregation by race in residential living patterns (see, for example,
Cutler et al. (1999)), residential sorting by race is far from perfect. As a result, actual sorting patterns pose another
interesting question: Do Blacks who live in “blacker” communities respond more to mean Black income than Blacks
who live in “whiter” communities? We tested this prediction by aggregating up to the state level the metropolitan
measures of segregation compiled by Culter et al. (1999) and interacting measures of segregation with mean state
income of Blacks in the estimation shown in Table 7 (for a sample that only included Blacks and Whites). The
segregation interactions came with the predicted sign (Blacks in more segregated states responded more to mean Black
income), but the standard errors were much too large to say anything definitive.

28

ln(visiblei ) = β 0 + β1 Blacki + β 2 Hispanici + δ ln( μG )

γ Incomei + ϕ Expenditurei + θ X i + ηi

(7)

Equation (7) is identical to (1) except for the inclusion of ln(μG) as an additional regressor where
μG is the mean level of the individual’s racial group in state j. This regression assesses whether
Blacks or Hispanics, holding their own income and the mean income of the racial peer group
constant, have the same visible expenditures as Whites, all else equal. The results are shown in
Table 8. Column 1 re-displays the results from row 7 of Table 2 (without including ln(μ) as a
control). As shown earlier, without reference group income controls, observationally equivalent
Blacks and Hispanics male-headed households consume 32 and 31 percent more on visible goods,
respectively, than Whites.
The regression presented in column 2 continues to exclude reference group income but
now adds state fixed effects. The estimated effects of around 0.35 show that the state fixed effects
have essentially no influence on the estimated racial gaps in visible expenditures. In the third
column we add the measure of average reference group income and exclude the state fixed
effects. Recall, μG measures the average income of the household’s race/state group. This
regression shows dramatically that our control for reference group income explains nearly the
entire gap in spending across races. The estimated Black coefficient falls from a strongly
significant 0.32 to a statistically insignificant -0.09, once reference group mean income is
accounted for. Similarly the Hispanic dummy, which was originally from 0.31, essentially
vanishes statistically. Column 4 adds state fixed effects to the regression in the third column, and
the fifth column adds both state fixed effects and the standard deviation of the income of the
reference group. In both of these regressions, the results are qualitatively the same as the results
in column 3. In summary, these results show dramatically that the visible expenditure between
Blacks and Hispanics versus Whites vanishes once we account for reference group
characteristics. Importantly, the results also indicate that it is not some generic trait of the state

29

that explains the conspicuous consumption gap, but rather the incomes of individuals’ racial
reference groups specifically.
On the whole, these results are strongly consistent with the predictions of the class of
models of status and conspicuous consumption discussed in section 4. The key point is that a
very simple status model appears to explain differences in individual visible consumption within
and across races, and does so without requiring that there be systematic differences in preferences
by race. The only role plaid by race is in determining one’s reference group.

6.

Conspicuous Consumption Implications

In this section, we empirically explore the implications of conspicuous consumption for
explaining racial differences in educational spending, health care spending, and savings. By the
definition of the inter-temporal budget constraints, higher current spending on conspicuous items
must be associated with lower current spending on other consumption items and/or in lower
savings and, consequently, lower consumption in the future.
To begin, we explore how much of the racial differences in other consumption categories
can be explained by racial differences in spending on visible goods. To do this, we re-estimate
the regressions in Table 5 with two additional controls: the share of total spending allocated to
housing and the share of spending allocated to visible goods. We use the share variables so as
not to confound the fact that the levels of spending within almost all broad consumption
categories increase with income. Given that income and total expenditure controls were already
included in our estimation of the results in Table 5, adding the share variables answers the
thought experiment: holding income and total expenditure constant, what happens to spending on
other consumption categories if the share of expenditure to either housing or visible goods
increases?
These regression results are shown in Table 9. Panels A, B, and C present results for
spending on education spending, health care, and food, respectively. Our baselines specifications

30

are regressions of the log of spending within the consumption category (e.g., education, health,
food) on the full set of income, expenditure, and demographic controls used in the estimate
presented in Table 5, along with a Black and Hispanic dummy variable. The table presents only
the coefficients on the Black and Hispanic dummies. For ease of comparison, we re-display our
baseline results in Rows “1” of Table 9.
Rows 2 of Table 9 include the housing share of expenditures as an additional control.
We include the housing share of expenditure to account for potential differences in housing costs
between races of similar income and demographics because of potential discrimination in housing
markets.

For the most part, including differences in housing expenditures explains little of the

racial gaps in education, health care, and food spending. Specifically, after controlling for
housing expenditures, Blacks still spend 20 percent less on education and 56 percent less on
health care than comparable Whites. And as in Table 5, there still remains a 7 percent difference
in food spending between similar Blacks and Whites once conditioning on housing expenditures.
By contrast, including controls for the share of spending on visible goods explains a
significant amount of the racial spending gap in health care and education for both Blacks and
Hispanics. The Black-White gap in education gap falls to zero (nearly 25 percentage points) and
the Black-White gap in health care falls by 14 percent (nearly 8 percentage points) after
controlling for differences in spending on conspicuous goods.
We also explore racial differences in food and housing spending after controlling for
differences in spending on visible goods. Controlling for differences in the share of expenditures
allocated to visible goods, we find that the Black propensity to consume food and housing,
relative to similar Whites, increases by 4 and 6 percentage points respectively. The comparable
increases for Hispanics were 3 and 5 percentage points.
Appendix Table A4 shows that the average quarterly spending on education, health care,
food and housing for Whites in our sample were, respectively, $288, $464, $1,733, and $2,670.
The estimates in Table 9 imply that the increased spending on visible consumption results in

31

about $72 less spending per quarter on education by Blacks (0.25 * 288), about $37 less spending
per quarter on health care by Blacks (0.08 * $464), about $69 less spending per quarter on food
by Blacks (0.04 * $1,733), and about $160 less spending per quarter on housing by Blacks (0.06 *
$2,670), compared to otherwise similar Whites.
In total, our estimates imply that minorities spend about $1,350 less per year on these
four consumption categories. In the previous section, we found that Blacks spent an additional
$2,300 on visible goods compared to similar Whites. The results in Table 9 suggest that nearly
sixty percent of this increased spending on visible goods represents resources diverted from
spending on education, health care, food and housing compared to similar Whites. This implies
that policies that try to eradicate the racial gaps in spending on these categories must recognize
that the differences exist partly because of households’ (potentially optimal) decision to consume
conspicuously.
Finally, we examine how conspicuous consumption affects differences in savings
behaviors across races. It is not obvious that there should be an effect of conspicuous spending
on savings. For there to be such an effect it would have to be the case that the importance of
status considerations diminishes with age, so that households would want to borrow against their
future income to engage in more of it when young.31

Recall our earlier results indicated that, for

all households, visible goods consumption does indeed fall with age. To explore the effect on
savings, we use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) – a survey with detailed
information on household wealth holdings, very accurate information about household income
over multiple periods, and easily accessible identifiers for the households’ state of residence.
Row 1 of Table 10 shows the raw mean difference in wealth holdings between Blacks
and Whites in the 1999 wave of the PSID. This wealth measure is total net worth which includes

31

Corneo and Jeanne (1998) and Becker and Rayo (2006) discuss the conditions under which conspicuous
consumption lowers saving.

32

housing wealth but not private or public pension wealth.32 The unconditional wealth gap of
nearly $100,000 is in line with previous estimates.

Controlling for permanent income using a

cubic in five year average income, education and a rich set of demographics explains roughly 60
percent of the unconditional racial gap in wealth holdings. This estimate of how much of the gap
permanent income and demographics explain is consistent with results in the literature (Bound et
al. (2002)).
The regression in the third row adds state fixed effects. Adding these controls leaves the
measured wealth gap essentially unchanged. In row 4, we add the log of reference group income

μG .

Controlling for the mean income of one’s reference group at the state/race level

dramatically reduces the measured difference in wealth holdings between similar Blacks and
Whites.

Specifically, roughly 60% of the unexplained racial gap in wealth holdings after

controlling for permanent income and demographics is accounted for by average differences in
reference group income. We do not wish to make a strong causal claim about the results in Table
10, however it does appear that the mechanism that leads Blacks to consume more conspicuous
goods than their White counter parts could also explain some of the well documented BlackWhite wealth gap.

7.

Conclusion

This paper contributes to the study of household consumption on several levels. We have
documented the divergent patterns of expenditure on visible consumption goods across races.
Consistent with popular perception, we find that minorities spend more on conspicuous items
than Whites, controlling for differences in income. A variety of estimates show that these visible
expenditure differences are relatively large and are associated with substantial diversion of

32

See Hurst et al 1996 for a full description of the PSID net worth measure

33

resources from other uses, including savings and expenditures on things like health care and
education.
We argue that one does not need to appeal to cultural differences or racial differences in
preferences to understand this evidence. We present a theoretical treatment of status-seeking and
conspicuous consumption. A large subset of such models shares the prediction that visible
consumption should vary negatively with the mean income of the individual’s reference group.
We show that visible consumption patterns both within and across races are consistent with this
prediction. It is important to note, however, that there may yet be racial differences in utility
parameters which act in combination with the effects we have identified.
The visible consumption items we study are almost surely not the only mechanism that
individuals use to signal their economic position or which they like to consume as much others in
their reference group. The items we study are probably most important for random, anonymous
interactions in society and not for status forthcoming from interaction with friends, family
members or colleagues. If consumption communicates information to these intimates it is likely
to be consumption in the form of things like home furnishings, gas grills and entertainment
durables, or spending on children’s education which only intimates have the opportunity to
observe. If would be interesting in future work to study which specific types of conspicuous
consumption matter in which contexts.
Our analysis treats reference groups as being the interaction of race and state cells. This
is partially justified on the grounds that there remains significant residential segregation in the
U.S. At the same time, the presence of that segregation may mean that, contrary to our implicit
assumption throughout, people’s reference groups consist merely of those of who live around
them, and that social networks are truly color blind. This is an interesting question for future
work. Also interesting is the issue of the degree to which people choose their neighbors with an
eye to satisfying the status considerations that we have identified.

34

We believe that there are many implications of our results. For one thing, we show in the
theoretical discussion that the prediction that conspicuous spending varies negatively with
reference group income depends on a specific assumption about how the marginal status return
varies with group income. Our results lend support for this way of representing status in future
analyses. In addition, the finding that reference-group considerations matter for consumption
behavior suggests that other aspects of household financial behavior beyond consumption and
saving decisions may be similarly affected. For example, there may be different attitudes towards
idiosyncratic risks and risks that are common to the individual’s reference group, with
implications for gambling behavior and under-diversification of investment portfolios, as
explored in Roussanov (2007).
Also, the support that our results yield to the status-based view of conspicuous
consumption has implication for welfare and policy design. Status-signaling models imply
equilibrium over-consumption of visible goods at the expense of possibly inefficient reduction in
other outlays, such as those financing education, health, and saving. One consequence is that the
provision of certain benefits in kind (such as those associated with health care and education
expenditures) might lead to a superior outcome than that attained through monetary transfers. At
the same time, participation in means-tested social programs, if observable, is a signal associated
with being a poor type, giving rise to a stigma attached to such programs. Ireland (1994) provides
a careful analysis of these issues. Combining these theoretical insights with the empirical
understanding of status seeking is a promising area of future research that should help to provide
quantitative evaluation of various social programs.
Finally, the hypothesis that the desire for social status can explain various economic
behaviors is found frequently within the social sciences. For example, Bloch et al. (2003) argue
that the desire to signal social status can explain differences across households in their spending
on wedding celebrations in rural India. Chung and Fisher (2001) explore the conspicuous
spending patterns of recent immigrants into Canada. Frank (2000) makes a forceful argument that

35

conspicuous consumption is a key driver of household expenditures and (under-) saving in the
U.S. We believe that the mechanism we have highlighted may yield valuable insights about
behavior of individuals within a variety of social and economic settings.

36

References

Alexis, Marcus 1970, Patterns of Black Consumption: 1935-1960, Journal of Black Studies 1, 5574.
Bagwell, Laurie Simon, and B. Douglas Bernheim, 1996, Veblen effects in a theory of
conspicuous consumption, American Economic Review 86, 349–73.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Ivan Werning, 2005, The equilibrium distribution of
income and the market for status, Journal of Political Economy 113, 282–310.
Becker, Gary S., and Luis Rayo, 2006, Peer Comparisons and Consumer Debt, The University of
Chicago Law Review, 73, 231-248.
Bloch, Francis, Vijayendra Rao, and Sonalde Desai, 2004, Wedding Celebrations as conspicuous
consumption: Signaling social status in rural India, Journal of Human Resources, 39(3), 675-95.
Bound, John, Robert Barsky, Kerwin Charles, Joseph Lupton, 2002, Accounting for the BlackWhite Wealth Gap: A Non-Parametric Approach, The Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 97, September, 663-673
Chambers, Jason, 2006. Equal in Every Way: African Americans, Consumption and Materialism
from Reconstruction to the Civil Rights Movement, Advertising & Soceity Review 7(1), online.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Erik Hurst, 2002, The Transition to Home Ownership and the BlackWhite Wealth Gap, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2), 281-297.
Chung, Ed and Eileen Fischer 2001, When Conspicuous Consumption Becomes Inconspicuous:
The Case of Migrant Hong Kong Consumers, Journal of Consumer Marketing, 18(6), 474-87.
Clark, Andrew E., and Andrew J. Oswald, 1996, Satisfaction and Comparison Income, Journal of
Public Economics56, 359–381.
Cole, Harold, George Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1992, Social norms, savings behavior
and growth, Journal of Political Economy 100, 1092–1126.
Cole, Harold, George Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1995, Incorporating concern for relative
wealth into economic models, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 13(9), 12–
21.
Corneo, Giacomo, and Olivier Jeanne, 1998, Social organization, status, and savings behavior,
Journal of Public Economics 70, 37–51.
Cutler, David & Edward L. Glaeser & Jacob L. Vigdor, 1999. "The Rise and Decline of the
American Ghetto," Journal of Political Economy 107(3), 455-506.
Duesenberry, James S., 1949, Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior (Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, MA).

Dynan, Karen E. and Enrichetta Ravina, 2007, Increasing Income Inequality, External Habits, and
Self-Reported Happiness, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97(2): 226-231.
Frank, Robert H., 1985, The demand for unobservable and other nonpositional goods, American
Economic Review 75, l0l-116.
Glazer, Amihai and Kai Konrad, 1996, A signaling explanation for private charity, American
Economic Review 86(4), 1019-1028.
Heffetz, Ori, 2007, Conspicuous Consumption and Expenditure Visibility: Measurement and
Application, unpublished paper.
Hurst, Erik, Ming Ching Luoh, and Frank Stafford . 1998. “The Wealth Dynamics of American
Families: 1984 - 1994”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 98:1.
Hopkins, Ed, and Tatiana Kornienko, 2004, Running to Keep in the Same Place: Consumer
Choice as a Game of Status, American Economic Review 94(4), 1085-1107.
Ireland, Norman, 1994, On Limiting the Market for Status Signals, Journal of Public Economics,
53, 91-110.
Kahneman, Daniel and Alan Krueger,2006, Developments in the Measurement of Subjective
Well-Being, Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1), 3-24.
Kapteyn, Arie, Peter Kooreman, Peter Kuhn, and Adriaan Soetevent, 2006, Measuring Social
Interactions by Observing Neighbors of Lottery Prize Winners, Working Paper.
Lamont, Michele and Virag Molnar, 2001, How Blacks use consumption to shape their collective
identity: Evidence from marketing specialists, Journal of Consumer Culture 1, 31-45.
Luttmer, Erzo. F. P., 2005, Neighbors as negatives: Relative earnings and well-being, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, 963–1002.
McBride, Michael, 2001, Relative-income effects on subjective well-being in the cross-section,
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 45, 251–278.
Mullins, Paul 1999, Race and Genteel Consumer: Class and African-American Consumption,
1850-1930, Historical Archaeology 33(1), 22-38.
Munnell, Alicia H. & Geoffrey M. B. Tootell & Lynn E. Browne & James McEneaney,
1996,Mortgage Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data, American Economic Review 86(1),
25-53.
Pollack, Robert A, 1976, Interdependent preferences, American Economic Review 66, 309–20.
Ravina, Enrichetta, 2005, Habit Persistence and Keeping Up with the Joneses: Evidence from
Micro Data, unpublished paper.
Roussanov, Nikolai, 2007, Diversification and its discontents: idiosyncratic and entrepreneurial
risk in the quest for social status, unpublished paper.

Sabelhaus, John and Ed Harris (2000). Consumer Expenditure Survey, Family-Level Extracts,
1980:1-1998:2, http://www.nber.org/ces_cbo/Cexfam.doc
Smith, Adam, 1759, The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Repr., New Rochelle, NY: Arlington
House, 1969.
Spence, Micheal. 1973. Job Market Signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 87(3) ,
355-374
Veblen, Thorstein, 1899, The theory of the leisure class: an economic study of institutions. Repr.,
Kila, MT: Kessinger, 2004.

Data Appendix

For our primary analysis, we use the extracts of the Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CEX), compiled by Harris and Sabelhaus and posted online by the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER).33 The NBER CEX files are available from 1980Q1 – 2003Q1, and we use
data from 1986 to 2002. 1986 is the first year that the CEX data included unique family
identifiers, which we need to merge key additional information from the BLS’s raw CEX data
files. The NBER CEX extracts were intended to provide a condensed version of original data
which was consistent over time. The extracts include information from the CEX family files,
member files, the detailed expenditure files, and the detailed income files. The extracts aggregate
spending over 500 detailed items in the raw data into 47 spending categories. Our analysis
further aggregates spending into 15 categories, summarized in Appendix Table A1. The 15
categories we use in this paper is the universe of all expenditure categories in the NBER CEX
files. We restricted the NBER-CEX data to include only household heads (ensuring that there
was only one observation per household in our data). After deletions, our analysis sample
included 48,758 households, comprised of 36,706 White households, 6,760 Black households,
and 5,292 Hispanic households.
We briefly summarize any modification and restrictions we imposed on the data.
• The NBER CEX files do not include state of residence, Hispanic origin, city size, the number
of adults in the household, and the number of quarters that the household participated in the
survey. We downloaded these key variables from the CEX raw files and merged them in
manually to the analysis sample.
• As is standard in the literature, we compute a measure of housing service flows. For renters,
this is the rent for their home/apartment; for homeowners it is home owner’s report of the
rental equivalence of their home. In the analysis, we experimented with other measures of
housing flow services, such as setting it to 6% of homeowner’s housing value. The results
were unaffected.
• The analysis uses two measures of vehicle spending: a “limited” measure which includes only
net outlays (mostly down-payments) associated with the initial purchase of vehicle; and an
“expanded” measure which includes the repayment of principle on vehicle loans, spending on
maintenance, leasing, repairs, storage and rental, and spending on spending on tires, tubes,
accessories and other parts.
• Our measure of housing services spending includes spending on the rental of household
furniture and spending on home maintenance (such as paint, roof repair and replacement),
home remodeling (adding an addition) and home decorating (wall to wall carpeting,
replacement of hard wood floors). The inclusion of these categories is an artifact of the NBER
CEX files. The measure of rent paid for tenant-occupied dwellings in the NBER CEX files
combines a broad set of housing expenditures aside from rent paid and as a result, it is
impossible to disaggregate the data at a finer level.

33

See http://www.nber.org/data/ces_cbo.html for the data files. See http://www.nber.org/ces_cbo/Cexfam.doc for
corresponding documentation.

• The NBER CEX files report the sum of spending in a variety of categories across all quarters
that the household participated in the survey. Households surveyed for two quarters will
therefore have only half the total expenditure of otherwise identical households participating
for all four quarters. The NBER CEX files do not include an indicator variable for the
number of quarters that the household participated in the survey, although a summary variable
indicates that less than 50% of the sample completes all fours surveys. After manually
merging in the exact number of quarters that the household participated in the survey, we reexpressed the spending data on a per-quarter basis where per-quarter spending in a given
category was computed as the NBER-CEX data spending in a given category divided by the
number of quarters that the household participated in the survey.

We made the following restrictions to the CEX sample:
• We included only households reporting themselves as Black, White or Hispanic. We treat
mixed race heads as Hispanics in our analysis. This has no effect on results, as results are the
same if we exclude these households.
• We excluded households with total expenditures of over $400,000 per year (in $2005). These
98 households are the top 0.1% percent of the total expenditure distribution.
• We excluded households that changed their state of residence during the year; in which the
head’s education was missing (4,134 households); where the household’s region was missing
(617 households); and from states with fewer than 30 minorities in the CEX over the entire
sample period. Excluded states were: ID, MT, NH, ND, RI, SD, VT, WV, WY. The reason
for this restriction is that in the second half of the paper we compare racial consumption
patterns conditional on the mean income of Blacks, Whites and Hispanics in their state
residence.

Theory Appendix
We provide the solution to a particular parametric utility specification, and a formulation
of

status

given

as

own

income,

relative

to

average

community

group

income.

We study a signaling equilibrium, similar in spirit the models of labor market signaling of Spence
(1973).
Consider a situation where individuals belong to a group with mean income μG . Let
consumers’ preferences be given by:

log ( y i − c ) + α log ( c ) + s i ,
Following Duesenberry (1949), suppose that if personal income were known, status would simply
be “relative income” and given by y i μG . 34 However, because income is not observed, status
will depend not on own income but on society’s inference about income, given the person’s

( )

observable consumption. Let this inference function be g c i . An individual’s status is thus:

s =
i

g ( ci )

μG

.

A utility maximizing agent chooses consumption to satisfy the first order condition:

g ' ( ci )
1
−
+
= 0.
ci y i − ci
μG

α

( )

Since inferences about income are correct in equilibrium, g c i = y i and equilibrium35
conspicuous consumption satisfies the ordinary differential equation:

⎛
1
α⎞
⎟
−
g ' ( ci ) = μ ⎜
⎜ g ( ci ) − ci ci ⎟
⎝
⎠
34

The relationship between status and relative income (or wealth) has long been explored in economic theory. See Cole
et al (1992) and Becker et al (2005) for examples.
35
Following Ireland (1994), it can be shown that given the preferences both the monotonicity and the initial value
condition are satisfied. The monotonicity (single crossing condition) states that conspicuous consumption is increasing
in income. The initial value condition is that the poorest individuals do not signal, i.e. their consumption of visible
goods is the same as it would be without signaling.

Via a change of variables ci = xi y i where xi is the expenditure share of conspicuous goods and

( )

( ( )) = y

redefining w x i = y i c i x i

i

we have

α⎞
⎛ 1
w ' x i = μG ⎜
− i⎟
i
⎝ 1− x x ⎠

( )

Solving this by integration yields

α⎞
⎛ 1
wi ( x ) = μ ∫ ⎜
− i ⎟ dx + K = − μG ln 1 − x i − μGα lnx i + K ,
i
⎝ 1− x x ⎠

(

)

where the integration constant K is pinned down by the initial condition:

w−1 ( ymin ) = xmin =

α
.
1+ α

In summary, in this signaling model where status depends on relative income, the share of
expenditure devoted to conspicuous consumption, or xi , is increasing in individual income and
decreasing in the mean income of the social group, μG (holding the minimum income in the
community constant).

Table 1:
Descriptive Statistics of CEX Full Sample

All

White

Black

Hispanic

Age

35.7

35.8

35.8

34.5

Education < 12

0.11

0.06

0.14

0.38

Education = 12

0.30

0.28

0.38

0.29

Education: Some College

0.29

0.30

0.31

0.21

Education: College or More

0.30

0.36

0.16

0.11

Married

0.55

0.58

0.35

0.61

Family Size

2.9

2.8

3.0

3.7

Number of Adults

1.9

1.9

1.8

2.2

Fraction with Zero Income

0.27

0.26

0.31

0.25

Total Family Income | Income > 0

$57,858

$63,967

$38,364

$39,763

Total Avg. Quarterly Expenditure

$10,688

$11,585

$7,715

$8,420

Sample Size

48,758

36,706

6,760

5,292

Notes: Data from the 1986 – 2002 waves of the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). All expenditures
are average over all quarters that the household remained in the survey. Sample includes all individuals
between the ages of 18 and 49 (inclusive) where the head reported their race as being either White, Black
or Hispanic over all quarters in the sample. We also restricted the data to households that did not change
their state during their sample period and who had non-missing values for their educational attainment,
family size, and region. All dollar amounts are in 2005 dollars.

Table 2: Estimated Black-White Gap in Log Visible Expenditures
With and Without Income, Expenditure, and Demographic Controls
Regression Controls Included
Black Coefficient
Hispanic Coefficient

Adj. R-squared

1. No Additional Controls

-0.38
(0.04)

-0.24
(0.04)

0.01

2. Only Current Income Controls

-0.10
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)

0.14

3. Specification 2 Plus Expenditure Controls

0.29
(0.03)

0.25
(0.06)

0.53

4. Specification 3 Without Current Income Controls

0.31
(0.03)

0.29
(0.06)

0.52

5. Specification 3 Plus Education Controls

0.28
(0.03)

0.23
(0.06)

0.53

6. Specification 5 Plus Time Dummies

0.30
(0.03)

0.26
(0.06)

0.54

7. Specification 6 Plus Demographic and Wealth Controls

0.32
(0.02)

0.31
(0.05)

0.56

Notes: See note to Table 1 for sample description and relevant sample sizes. The table reports the coefficient on the race dummies from a regression of the log
of visible consumption on a race dummies and other controls. Specification 2 includes the log of current income, if income is positive, a cubic in the level of
current income, and a dummy for whether current income was positive. Specification 3 also includes the log of total expenditure, and a cubic in the level of total
expenditure. Specification 4 is the same as specification 3 without the income controls. Specification 5 is the same as specification 3 but also includes three
education dummies (exactly high school, some college, or college or more). Specification 6 includes year dummies. Specification 7 also includes a quadratic in
age, a male dummy, a married dummy, census regions dummies, a MSA dummy, an urban dummy, wealth controls, and a series of separate dummies for the
number of adults and children in the household. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are reported in parentheses.

Table 3: Differences in Visible Consumption between Blacks, Whites, and
Hispanics, Conditioned on Income, Expenditure and Demographic Controls

Black
Coefficient

Hispanic
Coefficient

1. Single Men (n = 10,258)

0.32
(0.03)

0.40
(0.05)

2. Single Women (n = 13,287)

0.29
(0.03)

0.24
(0.06)

3. Married Households (n = 25,213)

0.33
(0.03)

0.30
(0.05)

4. Education of Head < 12 (n = 5,221)

0.31
(0.06)

0.43
(0.05)

5. Education of Head = 12 (n = 14,425)

0.38
(0.03)

0.32
(0.08)

6. Education of Head >12 & < 16 (n = 18,169)

0.30
(0.03)

0.22
(0.06)

7. Education of Head >= 16 (n = 17,706)

0.28
(0.03)

0.12
(0.04)

8. Age of Head Between 18 and 34 (n = 29,995)

0.32
(0.03)

0.32
(0.06)

9. Age of Head Between 35 and 49 (n =30,544)

0.32
(0.03)

0.33
(0.06)

10. Age of Head Between 50 and 69 (n = 24,159)

0.22
(0.04)

0.29
(0.07)

Sample

Notes: Sample restrictions are the same as described in the note to Table 1. Additional sample restrictions
are described in each row of the table. The regressions in this table have the same controls as in row 7 of
Table 2. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are in parenthesis.

Table 4: Racial Differences in Log Spending on Specific Visible Items,
Controlling for Income, Expenditure and Demographic Controls

Visible Consumption Sub-Category

I. Full Sample
Black
Hispanic
Dummy
Dummy

II. Automobile Owners (n = 36,986)
Black
Hispanic
Dummy
Dummy

Clothing/Jewelry

0.29
(0.03)

0.34
(0.04)

0.28
(0.04)

0.33
(0.03)

Personal Care

0.56
(0.05)

0.32
(0.04)

0.59
(0.05)

0.27
(0.03)

Cars (Limited)

0.01
(0.07)

0.12
(0.13)

0.09
(0.08)

0.16
(0.13)

Cars (Including maintenance)

-0.33
(0.10)

-0.18
(0.17)

0.19
(0.04)

0.04
(0.09)

Note: For panel I, sample and specification are the same sample and specification used in Row 7 of Table 2 except for the fact that the dependent variable is a
sub component of visible consumption (cars, clothing and jewelry, or personal care). The sample for panel II are the same for panel I except for the further
restriction that the household must report owning at least one automobile. The limited measure of car spending includes only initial outlays for new or used cars.
The expanded car spending measure includes the initial outlays plus car services and the principal component of the vehicle loan payment. See the Data
Appendix for the complete discussion of the two car measures. Our primary measure of visible consumption only includes the limited measure of car spending.
Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are in parentheses.

Table 5: Differences in Log Expenditures by Category
Between Blacks, Hispanics and Whites

Black
Coefficient

Hispanic
Coefficient

Housing

0.02
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)

Utilities

0.12
(0.03)

-0.04
(0.02)

Food

-0.07
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)

Other Transportation

-0.15
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.04)

Home Furnishings a

-0.21
(0.03)

0.04
(0.04)

Education a

-0.17
(0.09)

-0.86
(0.10)

Entertainment Services

-0.40
(0.03)

-0.39
(0.04)

Entertainment Durables a

-0.50
(0.03)

-0.23
(0.04)

Health a

-0.56
(0.05)

-0.48
(0.04)

Alcohol and Tobacco a

-0.91
(0.04)

-1.08
(0.04)

Other

-0.04
(0.03)

-0.38
(0.03)

Log Expenditure Category

a

Indicates that the specification was estimated via a Tobit estimator given the non-trivial fraction of
respondents who report zero spending on the category within a given year (see Table A4). Otherwise,
specification was estimated via OLS.
Notes: Sample and specification for the results in this table are the same as the sample and specification
shown in Row 7 of Table 2 except that the dependent variable of log visible consumption is replaced with
the log of another expenditure category. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are in
parentheses for the OLS regressions. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parenthesis for the Tobit
regressions.

Table 6: Differences Among White Male-Headed Households in Log Visible Expenditures,
Controlling for Own Income, Average Income of Own Race in State, Average Income of Other Races in State, Expenditure
and Demographics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Log of Mean Income of White Men in State

-0.94
(0.18)

-0.70
(0.15)

Log of Mean Income of All Men in State
Log of Housing Expenditures

-0.55
(0.23)
-0.27
(0.29)

-0.26
(0.02)

-0.26
(0.02)

Log Relative Standard Deviation of White Men
p-value difference of Log of Mean Income of White
Men vs. Log of Mean Income of All Men in State

-0.78
(0.15)

-0.26
(0.02)
-0.74
(0.29)

0.57

Notes: Sample in the table is the same as used in Tables 2 except for the additional restriction that it only includes White households (n = 36,706). For column
(1), the specification is the same as in row 7 of Table 2 except for the following two changes: the race dummies are dropped as regressors and the log of mean
total household labor income of White men in the household’s state of residence is included as a regressor. In column (2), we add in log housing shelter
expenditures as an additional control. In Column (3), we add both log housing shelter expenditures and log mean income of all men in the household’s state of
residence as an additional control. The p-value indicating whether the coefficient on log of mean White male income within the state and the coefficient on log
mean income for all males within the state is shown in the fifth row of the table. In column (4), we add the log relative standard deviation of White male total
household labor income to the specification in Column (2). Log relative standard deviation is computed as the log standard deviation of income for White men in
a state divided by the log of mean income of White men in a state. See the text for a discussion of how we used CPS data to compute the mean income statistics
by state of residence. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are shown in parentheses.

Table 7: Differences Among Black and Hispanic Male-Headed Households in Log Visible Expenditures,
Controlling for Own Income, Average Income of Own Race in State, Average Income of Other Races in State, Expenditure
and Demographics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Log of Mean Income of Black Men in State
Log of Mean Income of Hispanic Men in State
Log of Mean Own Group Income in State

-0.48
(0.25)
-0.76
(0.39)
-0.56
(0.13)

-0.37
(0.10)

Log Mean Income of All Men
Log of Housing Expenditures

-0.63
(0.15)
0.64
(0.33)

-0.28
(0.02)

-0.28
(0.02)

Log Relative Standard Deviation of Own Group
Income in State
p-value difference of Log of Mean Income of White
Men vs. Log of Mean Income of All Men in State

-0.51
(0.13)

-0.28
(0.02)
0.42
(0.23)

<0.01

Notes: This table shows the coefficients from regressions similar to those estimated in Table 6. However, unlike Table 6, this table includes only Black men in
the sample (column 1; n = 6,760), hispanic men in the sample (column 2; n = 5,292), or pooled Black and hispanic men in the sample (columns 3 – 6; n =
12,052). The log of mean household labor income of Black men or hispanic men are computed using data from the CPS and then matched to households in the
CEX using state identifiers. Log of mean own group income in the state is the Black mean if the respondent is Black and is the hispanic mean if the household is
hispanic. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are in parentheses.

Table 8: Racial Differences Log Visible Expenditures After Controlling for Mean Group State Income,
Including Own Income, Expenditure and Demographic Controls

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Black Coefficient

0.32
(0.02)

0.35
(0.02)

-0.09
(0.08)

0.03
(0.07)

0.02
(0.08)

Hispanic Coefficient

0.31
(0.05)

0.34
(0.04)

-0.07
(0.09)

0.04
(0.07)

0.02
(0.08)

-0.52
(0.14)

-0.52
(0.14)

Log of Mean Own Group Income in State
Log of Relative Standard Deviation of Own
Group Income in State

0.23
(0.14)

Adjusted R-Squared
State Fixed Effects Included

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Notes: Table shows the results of the regression of log visible consumption on race dummies and a full set of income, total expenditures, demographic, and year
controls. These controls are the same as those used in the regression displayed in Row 7 of Table 2 (see the note to Table 2 for details). The first column of this
table replicates the results shown in Row 7 of Table 2. In the second column, we include state fixed effects. In the third column, we add the log of mean own
group income as an additional control (but exclude state fixed effects). In the fourth column, we include both state fixed effects and the log of mean own group
income within the state of residence. The log of mean own group income in the state is defined in the note to Table 6. In column 5, we include the log of relative
standard deviation of income for one’s own group within their state of residence. This variable is also defined in the not to Table 6. Robust standard errors
(clustered at the state level) are in parentheses.

Table 9: Racial Differences in Education, Health Care, Food Expenditures, and Housing
Expenditures, With and Without Controls for Visible Spending
Black
Hispanic
Controls
Coefficient
Coefficient

Panel A: Dependent Variable is Log Education Spending
1. Baseline

-0.17
(0.09)

-0.85
(0.10)

2. Baseline plus Housing Share of Total Expenditures

-0.20
(0.08)

-0.81
(0.10)

3. Baseline plus Housing Share of Total Expenditures and
Visible Expenditure Share of Total Expenditures

0.05
(0.08)

-0.57
(0.10)

Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log Health Care Spending
1. Baseline

-0.56
(0.03)

-0.48
(0.04)

2. Baseline plus Housing Share of Total Expenditures

-0.56
(0.03)

-0.46
(0.04)

3. Baseline plus Housing Share of Total Expenditures and
Visible Expenditure Share of Total Expenditures

-0.48
(0.03)

-0.37
(0.04)

Panel C: Dependent Variable is Log Food Spending
1. Baseline

-0.07
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)

2. Baseline plus Housing Share of Total Expenditures

-0.07
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)

3. Baseline plus Housing Share of Total Expenditures and
Visible Expenditure Share of Total Expenditures

-0.03
(0.02)

0.07
(0.02)

Panel D: Dependent Variable is Log Housing Spending
1. Baseline

0.02
(0.03)

0.04
(0.03)

2. Baseline plus Visible Expenditure Share of
Total Expenditures

0.08
(0.02)

0.09
(0.02)

Notes: Row 1 of this table estimates racial differences in spending on education (panel A), health care
(panel B), food (panel C) and housing (panel D) analogous to the regressions shown in Table 5. See notes
to Table 5 for details. In row 2 of Panels A-C, we add the share of expenditures allocated to housing as an
additional control. In the last row of each panel, we added the share of expenditure allocated to visible
goods as an additional control.

Table 10: Racial Differences Wealth Levels After Controlling for Mean Group State Income,
Including Own Permanent Income and Demographic Controls

Controls In Addition to the Black Dummy

Coefficient on Black Dummy

1. Only a Black Dummy

-97,046
(9,054)

2. Permanent Income and Demographic Controls

-40,138
(8,711)

3. Permanent Income and Demographic Controls, Plus State Fixed Effects

-34,289
(9,202)

4. Permanent Income and Demographic Controls, Plus Log of Mean Own
Group Income in State

-15,862
(15,365)

Dependent Variable
Sample Size

Total Net Worth Less Vehicle Net Worth
2,019

Notes: Data come from the 1994 – 1999 Waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Table reports the coefficient on a Black dummy from a
regression of total net worth less vehicle wealth in 1999 on a Black dummy and a series of additional controls. In Row 1, the only control in the regression is the
Black dummy. In Row 2, we also include permanent income and demographic controls. Our permanent income measure is total family labor income averaged
over all years the household was in the sample between 1994 and 1999. We include a quartic in permanent income in the regression. Our demographic controls
include a quadratic in age, education dummies, family size dummies, dummies for the number of children in the household, marital status dummies, and a male
dummy. The log of mean own group income in the state is the same as defined in the previous tables. The sample is restricted to all Black and White households
in the 1999 PSID between the ages of 18 and 49 (inclusive). The top/bottom five percent of the wealth distribution is truncated.

Appendix Table A1: Aggregation of the NBER CEX Files Analyzed in this Paper

Our Spending Categories

Corresponding NBER CEX Spending Categories

Visible Spending Components
Clothing/Jewelry
Personal Care
Vehicle (Limited)
Vehicle (Expanded)

Clothing and Shoes (029), Clothing Services (030), Jewelry
and Watches (031)
Toilet Articles and Preparations (032), Barbershops, Beauty
Parlors, and Health Clubs (033)
Net Outlay on New and Used Motor Vehicles (052)
Net Outlay on New and Used Motor Vehicles (052), Repair,
Leasing, Greasing, Washing, Parking, Storage, and Rental
(054), Reduction of Principal on Vehicle Loan (096), Tires,
Tubes, Accessories, and Other Parts (053)

Other Spending Components
Housing
Food
Utilities
Other Transportation

Entertainment Services
Entertainment Durables
Alcohol and Tobacco
Household Furnishings
Education
Health

Other

Tenant-Occupied Nonfarm Dwellings – Rent (including the
rental of furniture and appliances) (034), Rental Equivalence
of Owned Home (075)
Food Off-Premise (023), Food On-Premise (024), Food
Furnished Employees (025)
Electricity (038), Gas (039), Water and Other Sanitary
Services (040), Fuel Oil and Coal (040), Telephone (042)
Vehicle Gasoline and Oil (055), Bridge, Tunnel, Ferry, and
Toll Roads (056), Auto Insurance (057), Mass Transit
Systems (058), Taxicab, Railway, Bus, and Other Travel
(059)
Recreation Services (060), Books and Maps (061),
Magazines, Newspapers, Nondurable Toys (062)
Recreation and Sports Equipment (063)
Tobacco Products (026), Alcohol Off-Premise (027), Alcohol
On-Premise (028)
Furniture and Durable Household Equipment (036)
Higher Education (066), Nursery, Elementary and Secondary
Education (067), Other Education Services (068)
Prescription Drugs (044), Opthalmic Products and Orthopedic
Appliances (045), Physicians, Dentists, Other Medical
Professionals (046), Hospitals (047), Nursing Homes (048),
Health Insurance (049)
Nondurable Household Supplies and Equipment (037),
Domestic Service, Other Household Operation (043),
Business Services (050), Expense of Handling Life Insurance
(051), Pari-Mutuel Net Receipts (065), Religious and Welfare
Activities (069)

A full description of the NBER CEX categories can be found at:
http://www.nber.org/ces_cbo/Cexfam.doc

Appendix Table A2: Survey Questions
Q1:

Background Information

Sex (male or female) ; Age ; Race (White, Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, or other) ; Current
Marital Status (single ; married)
Q2:

Beliefs About the Visibility of Consumption Categories

In this set of questions, we are attempting to gauge how easy it is to observe the amount someone spends on
a broad set of consumption categories.
Consider a person who lives in a household and community roughly similar to yours. How closely would
you have to interact with this person in order to observe that they consistently spend more than average on
each of the following consumption categories?
Your answers should range from 1 to 5 with:
1=
2=
3=
4=
5=

Q3:

I would observe their above average spending even if I did not interact with them socially at all.
I would observe their above average spending if they were a casual acquaintance and I only
occasionally interacted with them socially.
I would observe their above average spending only if they were a friend.
I would observe their above average spending only if they were a close friend.
I would never observe their above average spending no matter how much I interacted with them
socially.
Response of Spending to Income Changes

In this set of questions, we are trying to understand one's perceptions about the relationship between
income and consumption for a variety of consumption categories.
Consider a randomly chosen individual in society. Imagine that this person's lifetime income suddenly
increased by 20%. For each item below, tell us how you would expect the person's spending on each of the
following items to change.
1=
2=
3=
4=
5=

Spending would fall
Spending would stay the same
Spending would increase by less than 20%
Spending would increase by exactly 20%
Spending would increase by more than 20%

Categories respondents asked about (exact wording): Grocery Expenditures (food purchased at grocery
stores excluding spending on tobacco products and alcohol); Non Grocery Food Expenditures (restaurants,
cafeterias, etc.); Alcohol; Tobacco Products (cigarettes, cigars, etc.); Clothing, Shoes, and Clothing
Accessories; Jewelry and Watches; Personal Care and Grooming Expenditures (including hair care, makeup, perfume, and gym memberships); Shelter Expenditures (monthly rent payment, house value, etc.),
Household Utilities (expenditures for telephone service, home heating, home electricity, etc.); Value of
Owned and Leased Vehicles (excluding expenditures on maintenance and repair); Vehicle Maintenance
and Repair (oil changes, car repairs, other car maintenance); Other Transportation Expenses (gasoline,
public transportation, parking fees, rental cars, etc.); Home Furnishings (furniture, linens, dishes, etc.);
Entertainment Durables (television sets, stereos, sports equipment, other entertainment equipment); Other
Entertainment Expenditures (DVDs, cads, movie tickets, golf fees, books, periodicals, cable television fees,
vacation travel); Children’s Education (tuition, books, other school related expenses); Health Expenses
(health insurance, out of pocket medical expenses, prescription drugs); and Charitable Giving (including
religious giving).

Appendix Table A3: Results of the Visible Goods Survey
Fraction of the Sample
Reporting Consumption Item
as Easily Observable

Fraction of the Sample
Reporting Consumption Item
as Having Income Elasticity of
1 or More

Clothing
Jewelry
Vehicles (Non Maintenance)
Personal Care

0.64
0.62
0.49
0.31

0.57
0.52
0.44
0.35

Tobacco
Alcohol

0.40
0.35

0.16
0.07

Shelter

0.37

0.47

Food Away From Home
Entertainment Durables
Other Entertainment
Children’s Education
Groceries
Utilities
Home Furnishings
Other Transportation
Charity
Health
Vehicle Maintenance

0.24
0.17
0.12
0.15
0.08
0.06
0.09
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.03

0.47
0.53
0.50
0.30
0.05
0.05
0.37
0.08
0.18
0.07
0.07

Category

Notes: This table summarizes the results of our survey of 213 graduate students about their beliefs about
what goods are visible. Appendix Table A2 outlines the exact wording of the survey questions. Column 1
reports the fraction of households who answered 1 or 2 to survey question Q2. Answers 1 or 2 indicated
that the survey respondents would be able to ascertain above average spending on the consumption
category for individuals with which the respondent was relatively unfamiliar. Column 2 reports the
fraction of households who answered 4 or 5 to survey question Q3. Answers of 4 and 5 indicate that the
survey respondent believed there was a unitary income elasticity or greater with respect to spending on the
consumption category.

Appendix Table A4:
Mean Quarterly Expenditure (in 2005 dollars), Percent with Positive Expenditures,
and Expenditure Shares by Consumption Category, by Race

All

White

Black

Hispanic

Visible Expenditures

1,671
0.99
0.12

1,801
0.99
0.12

1,256
0.99
0.12

1,317
0.99
0.12

Shelter Expenditures

2,492
0.99
0.25

2,670
0.98
0.25

1,826
0.99
0.26

2,145
0.99
0.28

Food Expenditures

1,659
1.00
0.18

1,733
1.00
0.17

1,294
1.00
0.21

1,630
1.00
0.22

Utility Expenditures

742
0.99
0.08

757
0.99
0.07

732
0.99
0.11

646
0.99
0.09

Vehicle Service Expenditures

796
0.88
0.07

874
0.93
0.07

576
0.71
0.06

542
0.80
0.05

Other Transportation Expenditures

669
0.98
0.07

715
0.99
0.07

498
0.96
0.06

575
0.97
0.07

Entertainment Service Expenditures

576
0.98
0.05

665
0.99
0.07

291
0.95
0.04

331
0.95
0.04

Health Expenditures

412
0.85
0.04

464
0.89
0.04

245
0.74
0.03

274
0.76
0.03

Notes: See notes to Table 1 for full sample description. See Appendix Table A1 for the definition of each
consumption categories. For each consumption category, the first row shows the average spending per
quarter in that category (in 2005 dollars), the second row shows the fraction of households with positive
spending in the consumption category, and the third row shows the share of expenditures in the
consumption category out of total expenditures. Columns 1-4, respectively, show the relevant statistics for
the total population, a sample with White heads, a sample with Black heads, and a sample of Hispanic
heads.

Appendix Table A4 (continued):
Mean Expenditure (in 2005 dollars), Percent with Positive Expenditures, and
Expenditure Shares by Consumption Category, by Race

All

White

Black

Hispanic

Home Furnishing Expenditures

311
0.83
0.03

348
0.86
0.03

186
0.71
0.02

221
0.79
0.02

Education Expenditures

253
0.43
0.02

288
0.46
0.02

170
0.34
0.02

121
0.30
0.01

Entertainment Durable Expenditures

248
0.80
0.02

290
0.85
0.02

110
0.64
0.01

140
0.72
0.02

Alcohol/Tobacco Expenditures

213
0.82
0.02

243
0.86
0.03

123
0.68
0.02

124
0.70
0.02

Other Expenditures

647
0.92
0.05

736
0.94
0.05

403
0.86
0.04

354
0.85
0.03

48,758

36,706

6,760

5,292

Sample Size

Table A5: Alternate Estimates of the Differences in Visible Consumption Between Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites,
Conditioned on Income and Demographic Controls
Black
Hispanic
Specification
Coefficient
Coefficient

1. Restrict Current Household Income > 0 (n = 30,306)

0.32
(0.03)

0.30
(0.05)

2. Restrict Total Expenditure > $5,800/quarter (n = 34,750)

0.35
(0.02)

0.24
(0.06)

3. Restrict Age to be between 24 and 49 (inclusive) (n = 43,278)

0.34
(0.02)

0.32
(0.05)

4. Restrict Sample to Only Those With 4 completed CEX surveys (n=26,932)

0.34
(0.02)

0.30
(0.05)

5. Include Log Housing Expenditure Control (n = 48,758)

0.33
(0.02)

0.32
(0.05)

6. Include Occupation Dummies (n = 34,782)

0.32
(0.03)

0.29
(0.05)

7. Restrict Years 1996 – 2003 (n = 23,875)

0.35
(0.04)

0.33
(0.05)

8. Restrict Years 1996 – 2003: With City Size Controls (n = 23,875)

0.40
(0.04)

0.38
(0.04)

Notes: This table examines the robustness of the results show in row 7 of Table 2. Aside from the changes noted, the regressions in this table are identical to the
ones presented in row 7 of Table 2. Robust standard errors (clustered at the state level) are shown in parentheses.

Figure 1:
Visible Good Engel Curves Separately for Blacks and Whites

Notes: Figure shows the Engle Curve estimates of log visible expenditures on log family income
separately for Blacks (solid line) and Whites (dotted line) using expenditure and income data from the
CEX. CEX family income was instrumented using log total expenditures and a cubic in the level of total
expenditures. The respective Black and White samples only included those households who reported
positive family income. The regressions were estimated over a similar range populated by both Black and
White households. Specifically, the regression was only estimated for households with annual total family
income less than $100,000 (in 2005 dollars). This income cutoff was approximately the 99th percentile of
the Black income distribution. The estimated coefficient from the White Engle curve and the Black Engel
curve, respectively, were 1.59 (standard error = 0.02) and 1.40 (standard error = 0.04). The corresponding
intercepts, respectively, were -10.20 (standard error = 0.24) and -7.76 (standard error = 0.39).

Figure 2a: Visible Expenditures
State Fixed Effect = 0.56 - 0.017 Mean State Income($1000)
State Fixed Effect For Ln(Visible Consumption)
-.6
-.4
-.2
0
.2

t-stat for Mean State Income = -4.60 and Adjusted R-squared = 0.353
Alabama is omitted state (sample size = 38)
IA

AZ

AL
PA

KY

IN

UT
SC KS WIOH
NC
NE
MO LA
OR

TN
AR

MI
TX
MA
IL
WA
MN
GA

OK

FL

CO

CT

NV
HI

35000

NJ

NY
VA

40000
45000
50000
Mean State Income For Whites

Figure 2b: Housing Expenditures

CA
AK

MD

55000

Figure 2c: Visible Expenditure Controlling for Housing Expenditures
State Fixed Effect = 0.39 - 0.013 Mean State Income($1000)
State Fixed Effect For Ln(Visible Consumption)
-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1
0

t-stat for Mean State Income = -3.69 and Adjusted R-squared = 0.271
Alabama is omitted state (sample size = 38)
AL

UT
PA

KY

AZ

IN

KS
OH
SCNC WI
LA
OR
MO
NE

TN
AR

MI

WA
MN

MA
IL
TX
CT

GA
CO

FL

OK

NY

NJ

CA

VA
AK
MD
HI

35000

40000
45000
50000
Mean State Income For Whites

55000

Figure 2d: Food Expenditures Adjusted For Housing Expenditures

State Fixed Effect = -0.30 + 0.006 Mean State Income($1000)
t-stat for Mean State Income = 3.32 and Adjusted R-squared = 0.213

NY

HI

KY

NV

AR
TNOK

IA

KS
AL
FL
MO LANC
OH
IN
SC OR PA
WI
AZ

WA
GA
MI
CO
MN

MAIL

AK

NJ

CA
CT

TX VA
MD

NE UT

-.4

State Fixed Effect For Ln(Food)
-.3
-.2
-.1
0
.1

.2

Alabama is omitted state (sample size = 38)

35000

40000
45000
50000
Mean State Income For Whites

55000

Figure 2e: Entertainment Expenditures Adjusted For Housing Expenditures

Figure 2f: All Non-Visible, Non-Housing Expenditures Adjusted For Housing
Expenditures
State Fixed Effect For Ln(Non Visible/Non Housing)
-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2

State Fixed Effect = 0.063 - 0.003 Mean State Income($1000)
t-stat for Mean State Income = 2.94 and Adjusted R-squared = 0.17
Alabama is omitted state (sample size = 38)

AR

35000

TN
OK
KYIA

AL
NE UT
MO LAKS
OH
FL
PAAZ
IN SC
HINC
OR WI

NV

GA
CO
MI
MN
WA

TX VA AK
MD
IL
CA
MA NY

40000
45000
50000
Mean State Income For Whites

CT

NJ

55000

Note: This figure plots the coefficients on state fixed effect from a regression of log total expenditure in a
given expenditure category on state fixed effects and income, expenditure, demographic controls, and log
housing shelter expenditures for White households against mean total family labor income of White males
in the corresponding state. The sample and controls used in the regression to estimate the state fixed effects
are otherwise identical to the one used in Row 7 of Table 2. Alabama was the omitted state fixed effect.
All state fixed effect coefficients (vertical axis) are percentage differences from an otherwise identical
household from Alabama. A regression line is fitted through the data weighting each point by the number
of observations from each state from the regression sample. Only 38 states were included in the regression
due to the fact that some states are not sample in the CEX. See text for a complete discussion. The only
differences between figures 2a-2f are 1) the dependent variable in the regression to get the state fixed
effects and 2) whether or not log housing expenditures were included as a control. The title to the figures
identifies the dependent variable and whether or not housing expenditures were included as a control.

