NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSEQUENCES OF ELIMINATING FEDERAL DISABILITY BENEFITS FOR
SUBSTANCE ABUSERS
Pinka Chatterji
Ellen Meara
Working Paper 13407
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13407

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We thank Max Kates for outstanding research assistance. We received helpful comments from seminar
participants at the BU/Harvard/MIT Health Economics Seminar, the Davis Seminar at the University
of Chicago, the University at Albany, and the 2007 International Health Economics Association Meetings.
Meara gratefully acknowledges funding from NIDA to support this work. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Pinka Chatterji and Ellen Meara. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Consequences of Eliminating Federal Disability Benefits for Substance Abusers
Pinka Chatterji and Ellen Meara
NBER Working Paper No. 13407
September 2007, Revised October 2008
JEL No. I1,I28
ABSTRACT
Using annual, repeated cross-sections from national household survey data, we estimate how the January
1997 termination of federal disability insurance, Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Disability
Insurance (DI), for those with Drug Addiction and Alcoholism affected labor market outcomes among
individuals targeted by the legislation. We also examine whether the policy change affected health
insurance, health care utilization, and arrests. We employ propensity score methods to address differences
in observed characteristics between substance users and others, and we used a difference-in-difference-in-difference
approach to mitigate potential omitted variables bias. In the short-run (1997-1999), declines in SSI
receipt accompanied appreciable increases in labor force participation and current employment. There
was little measurable effect of the policy change on insurance and utilization, but we have limited
power to detect effects on these outcomes. In the long-run (1999-2002), the rate of SSI receipt returned
to earlier levels, and short-run gains in labor market outcomes waned.

Pinka Chatterji
University at Albany
Economics Department
Business Administration 111A
1400 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12222
and NBER
pchatterji@albany.edu
Ellen Meara
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu

I.

Introduction
At the heart of the debate about the government’s role in providing economic support to

individuals with substance disorders are opposing views about the relationship between
substance use disorders (SUDs) and economic dependency. Some regard SUDs as any other
disabling illness; by this view, afflicted persons may require government support in order to meet
their basic needs (Rosenheck, Frisman, & Gallup, 1995; Rossi, 1989; Sosin & Grossman, 1991).
An influential analysis documented striking similarities in the heritability and influence of
environmental factors, the rate of adherence to recommended treatment, and relapse rates among
those with drug dependence compared to patients with type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
and asthma (McClellan et al. 2000). Others focus on the behavioral aspect of SUDs, and imply
that public programs may foster economic dependency and even encourage substance use by
providing resources that can be used to purchase substances and by reducing incentives to work
(Cohen, 1994; Phillips, Christenfeld, & Ryan, 1999; Shaner et al., 1995). Athough recent studies
do not support this latter claim (Rosen, McMahon, Lin, & Rosenheck, 2006; Swartz, Hsieh, &
Baumohi, 2003), the idea already has affected public policy. Most dramatically, in March 1996,
the US Congress passed legislation barring persons with disabling substance disorders from
receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Disability Insurance (DI) benefits. Prior to
this change, which took effect in January 1997, about 209,000 individuals with substance
disorders had been receiving SSI, DI, or both (Gresenz, Watkins, & Podus, 1998).
Whether terminating public assistance benefits to individuals with substance disorders
encourages economic independence, and whether loss of these benefits causes harm, remains a
key concern among policymakers. Surprisingly, this fundamental question has not been
answered by research, despite recent, major policy shifts in federal disability programs targeting
individuals with substance disorders, and despite the backdrop of growing emphasis on personal
responsibility towards all potential public assistance recipients (Davies et al., 2000). The goal of
this paper is to estimate the effects of terminating federal disability benefits for individuals likely
to have SUDs on labor market outcomes. We also examine effects of the policy change on
health and criminal justice outcomes.
To estimate these effects, we pooled annual cross-sectional data from 1994-2002 in the

1

National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA) and the National Survey on Drug Use and
Health (NSDUH). We define two alternative treatment groups, or likely substance abusers, based
on substance use, symptoms of substance abuse or dependence, or recent use of substance abuse
treatment. We use a modified difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD) approach,
comparing outcomes of substance abusers with a high probability of SSI use – to outcomes
among non-substance-abusers with a high probability of SSI use, both before and after the policy
change, netting out trends in outcomes during this time period that may have affected substance
abusers and non-substance abusers with a low probability of SSI use.1 To make non-substance
abusers more comparable to likely substance abusers in our sample, we used propensity scorebased weighting to balance the distribution of observable characteristics across these two groups.
Our approach and data source allow us to augment and improve existing evidence on this policy
change in several ways. Unlike prior studies of this policy change, we considered both short-run
(1997-1998) and longer run (1999-2002) effects of the policy, we incorporate a comparison
group for the group targeted by the policy change, and we assess a range of health, labor market,
and social outcomes in a nationally representative sample of individuals.
Using this DDD approach combined with propensity score-based weighting, overall, our
results show that individuals with substance problems did increase their economic selfsufficiency after the loss of public support benefits during the mid 1990’s. This increase in selfsufficiency took place without measurable impact on insurance coverage and health services
utilization, although we have limited power to detect effects for these outcomes. The gains were
relatively short-lived among individuals reporting symptoms of substance abuse or dependence,
among whom SSI receipt, employment, and labor force participation returned to levels closer to
the pre-period rates after 1998.
In the short-run, 1997-98, the policy change accompanied higher participation in the
labor force and current employment, and lower use of SSI among individuals likely to use SSI
and likely to have substance abuse or dependence. In contrast to prior studies reporting a drop in
Medicaid use, we found no significant changes in rates of health insurance coverage from any
source or health services utilization. Welfare receipt changed little in the short-run. In the longrun, 1999-2002, rates of SSI receipt rebounded somewhat, but welfare use fell, and effects on
1

In our empirical estimation described in section 3, we use a triple interaction between the continuous probability of
SSI use, presence in the substance abuser group, and an indicator for post-policy change, rather than a strict DDD
estimate using a discrete variable for high probability of SSI use.

2

employment and labor force participation persisted among a broad group of likely substance
abusers. Not surprisingly, labor force participation among individuals reporting symptoms of
substance abuse or dependence fell in the long-run after increasing in 1997-98. We find no long
run differential trend in health insurance status and utilization. Finally, we find suggestive
evidence that arrest rates rose within the targeted groups following the policy change,
particularly during the longer term period (1999-2002).
Section II of the paper describes changes in public support programs affecting
individuals with SUDs and the evidence to date on the consequences of the elimination of SSI/DI
for drug abuse and alcoholism. Section III describes our empirical strategy. Section IV describes
the data used, Section V presents the results of our analyses, and Section VI discusses
conclusions and implications from our results.

II.

Changes in public programs affecting individuals with SUDs

A.

Elimination of Federal Disability Benefits for Substance Abusers
The federal SSI and DI programs are public income assistance programs for the disabled.

Low income elderly, blind, and disabled persons can qualify for SSI payments, while DI
provides federal disability insurance, and more generous cash payments to covered workers.
Disabled workers must have a sufficient earnings history to qualify for DI benefits, which are
more generous than SSI benefits. However, low-income disabled workers with very limited DI
benefits can supplement low benefits with SSI to reach SSI benefit levels. Participation in the DI
program for at least 24 months entitles beneficiaries to Medicare, and SSI recipients in most
states automatically qualify for Medicaid (Gresenz et al., 1998). From the inception of the
SSI/DI programs in the early 1970s, substance disorders were considered potentially disabling
conditions. Initially, however, the number of beneficiaries in this impairment category was very
small (Guydish, Ponath, Bostrom, Campbell, & Barron, 2003). During the late 1980s and early
1990s, the number of SSI recipients with substance disorders began to grow rapidly – between
1989 and 1994, the number of SSI recipients in the substance disorder disability category
increased from 16,100 to 101,685 (Barber, 1996). Figure 1 demonstrates the rapid growth and
adjustment of the DA&A caseload in the SSI program over time. In response to rapid growth in
disability due to DA&A, the federal government in 1994 imposed a three year time limit on
receipt of disability benefits for those with disabling substance conditions (Guydish et al., 2003).
3

In addition, SSA required DA&A beneficiaries to obtain substance abuse treatment, to be
enforced by referral and monitoring agencies.
Despite these changes in 1994, the number of DA&A beneficiaries continued to rise
during the 1990s, although as a group, they comprised less than 3 percent of the total SSI/DI
adult population (Stapleton, Wittenburg, & Tucker, 1998). The federal government became
increasingly concerned that recipients were not engaging in treatment and returning to work, as
intended by the program (Gresenz et al., 1998). Moreover, despite the requirement that SSI/DI
payments to addicted persons be managed by individuals called representative payees, there was
concern that disability payments were being used to purchase drugs. There was at that time and
continues to be mixed empirical support for this claim (Catalano & McConnell, 1999; Frisman &
Rosenheck, 1997; Rosen et al., 2006; Shaner et al., 1995; Swartz et al., 2003). Nevertheless,
these perceptions contributed to a major policy change.
In March 1996, the US Congress passed P.L. 104-121, legislation terminating eligibility
for SSI/DI programs on the basis of disabling drug addiction and/or alcoholism (DA&A); new
and pending applications for cases in which a SUD was material to the disability determination
would no longer be considered (Davies et al., 2000). The legislation also mandated that existing
DA&A recipients be terminated from the program as of January 1, 1997 (Davies et al., 2000).
Individuals with SUDs were given the opportunity to be re-assessed for SSI/DI eligibility
based on any co-occurring mental or physical disability. If re-assessed successfully, these
recipients regained their cash benefits through the SSI/DI programs along with any related public
health insurance benefits, but without required treatment activity or a representative payee
(Watkins & Podus, 2000). Of the 209,000 beneficiaries targeted by the January 1997 policy
change, 80% were SSI beneficiaries and only 11% were DI beneficiaries who had never received
SSI.2 One year after the policy change, about 71,000 of the 209,000 targeted beneficiaries had regained SSI/DI eligibility (Stapleton et al., 1998). In other words, receipt of disability insurance
among individuals disabled by SUDs fell by two thirds. As individuals with little work history
who do not qualify for the more generous DI benefits, and given that the vast majority of DA&A
recipients received SSI payments, we expect that potential SSI recipients were those most
vulnerable to any adverse consequences of the program change. Thus, for this reason and due to

2

DI recipients whose benefits are below SSI levels can qualify for SSI to increase benefit levels. Thus, about
120,000 DA&A beneficiaries qualified for both programs simultaneously (Campbell, Baumhol, and Hunt 2003).

4

data limitations regarding DI receipt, we focus on SSI recipients in this analysis. Figure 1 shows
administrative estimates of the overall SSI caseload, those collecting benefits for DA&A, and for
SSI recipients qualifying due to a mental health disorder (which would include the DA&A
population) over the 1990s and after 2000. The drop in SSI receipt from 1996 to 1997 is sudden,
dramatic, and largely offset by later gains in the mental health caseload.
B.

Evidence on the Effects of Losing Disability Benefits on Individual Outcomes
Individuals that received SSI/DI payments for DA&A are an extremely disadvantaged

group. DA&A clients were mostly male (about 73 percent) and middle-aged (about 40 percent
were between 40 and 49 years old) with high levels of psychiatric impairment, medical comorbidities, limited work experience, and low levels of education (Davies, Iams, & Rupp, 2000;
McKay, McLellan, Durell, Ruetsch, & Alterman, 1998; Stapleton et al., 1998). Disability
recipients targeted by the program changes had extensive criminal histories; a study of one large
referral and monitoring agency suggests that about 84% of this population had been charged with
a criminal offense, and nearly one third of males had a history of charges for a violent crime
(Stapleton et al., 1998). As of 1995, about 53% of substance abusers receiving SSI benefits were
classified as alcohol dependent, 18% were classified as drug dependent, and the remaining 29%
had both alcohol and drug dependence (Barber, 1996). The average monthly SSI payment to
disabled substance abusers was $425 in 1995, and 69% of substance abusers receiving SSI in
1995 had no other source of income (Barber, 1996).
Given these characteristics, there has been concern that former DA&A recipients may
have faced significant barriers in entering the labor market and finding jobs after the policy
change took place. Moreover, losing SSI/DI cash benefits, as well as losing the oversight of
treatment and access to Medicare or Medicaid, may have adversely affected these individuals’
mental and physical wellbeing, utilization of health services, and criminal involvement. The few
studies available on this topic, however, offer mixed support for this idea.
Watkins, Podus, Lombardi, & Burnam (2001), for example, follow 253 SSI
beneficiaries in Los Angeles, interviewing them for the first time around the time the 1997 policy
change went into effect and then again at 12 month, 18 month and 24 month follow-up
interviews. Surprisingly, they find no evidence that the mental health status of respondents
declined during this period, even though only 106 of the 253 respondents were still receiving SSI
benefits at the 24 month follow-up interview. There also was no increase in emergency

5

department visits and hospitalizations among respondents who lost SSI benefits (Watkins et al.,
2001). The authors suggest that the lack of adverse consequences can be traced to other countybased programs such as General Assistance which may have replaced SSI benefits. Despite this
type of speculation that state and local assistance programs may have provided resources for
substance abusers who lost federal disability benefits, there is little if any systematic research on
this topic.
Guydish et al. (2003) report similar null findings in a multi-site study of 1,670 individuals
who at baseline were receiving SSI benefits for a disabling substance use condition. Most
baseline interviews were conducted between November 1996 and March 1997. Respondents
were then interviewed and administered the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) every six months
over a two year follow-up period. Over time, they find either no change or improvement in ASI
score, and no apparent association between ASI score and SSI receipt status. In the same multisite study, and the only evidence of labor market outcomes to date, Campbell et al. (2003)
assessed employment and earnings among 661 study subjects who were not collecting SSI,
welfare, or general assistance in the 24 months following the policy change. They found twofold to three-fold increases in employment rates six months after baseline, but earnings were
very low. After 24 months, less than 25 percent of respondents earned more than $500 per
month (equivalent to the level of Substantial Gainful Activity, or the earnings level above which
SSA considers individuals to be non-disabled) in six out of nine cities studied.
Finally, a recent study based on data from Chicago indicates that termination of SSI
benefits may have led to reduced access to Medicaid. Hanrahan et al. (2004) used longitudinal
data on 11,740 individuals who had been receiving SSI benefits for a substance disorder in
Chicago in 1995, and showed that by 1998, almost half of these individuals had lost their
Medicaid coverage (Hanrahan et al., 2004). The limited geography of this study makes it
difficult to infer results in other parts of the country.
Because of the tremendous economic expansion of the late 1990s, our understanding of
the effects of the policy change would be enhanced by comparing individuals targeted by the
change to a control group of individuals unlikely to be affected by the termination of disability
benefits. Furthermore, while results such as those found in Chicago regarding Medicaid declines
are provocative, further information from a more geographically diverse sample would augment
the evidence available regarding the elimination of cash benefits to individuals with disabling

6

SUDs. Finally, with the passage of time, it is now possible to assess longer term effects of
terminating disability benefits for SUDs, something that wasn’t possible in prior studies.
The key question of interest to policymakers is the following: has the elimination of
federal disability payments, as well as the health insurance and monitoring of treatment and
finances that the disability programs previously provided, had long-term effects on economic
self-sufficiency in the national population of individuals with disabling substance problems?
Prior studies on this topic were based on data from geographically limited, narrowly defined
populations and followed respondents for only about one to two years after the policy change
took effect in 1997. Moreover, an important methodological limitation of prior studies is the lack
of comparison groups; in these studies, outcomes are compared pre and post policy change in a
group that was likely to be affected by the policy. These policies can affect not just those
receiving benefits at the time of the legislation, but potential new applicants, as well as those
individuals diverted from the welfare caseload, who might otherwise have qualified for SSI
benefits. Even among those who maintained benefits because of co-occurring disorders, the new
policy eliminated the requirement that individuals obtain treatment for their substance disorder,
which might reduce the amount of treatment sought and obtained by those on SSI. Studies of
individuals exiting SSI cannot capture any of these effects.
The present study uses repeated, nationally representative cross-sectional samples of
individuals from the 1994-2002 NHSDA/NSDUH to examine the long-term, national effects of
this important policy change. A second advantage of our paper is the utilization of a comparison
group as well as several other methods to help control for or mitigate other, potential omitted
variables and trends that may be related to the outcomes of interest.

III.

Data from National Household Surveys on Drug Use and Health
We use pooled, annual, cross-sectional 1994–2002 data from the National Survey on

Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), known as the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse
(NHSDA) through 2001. The NHSDA/NSDUH is apt for this study because it is designed to
produce substance use incidence and prevalence estimates for the general U.S. civilian, noninstitutionalized population aged 12 and older, including residents of non-institutional group
quarters such as group homes, shelters, and rooming houses. The survey includes questions from
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) of Mental Disorders that allow diagnostic criteria

7

to be applied to identify symptoms of dependence or abuse of alcohol and various illegal and
prescription drugs. Respondents are also asked about substance abuse treatment history, personal
and family income sources and amounts, employment, health care access and coverage, and
criminal record. The public use NHSDA/NSDUH does not include state identifiers, or any other
potentially identifying information for respondents. Overall interview response rates are
consistently close to 80 percent.
There were few important survey methodology changes prior to 1999 (Gfroerer et al.,
2002). The 1994–1998 surveys used a multistage area probability sample design involving five
selection stages: primary sampling units (PSUs; e.g. metropolitan areas, counties, groups of
counties, and independent cities) selected to represent the total U.S. population, blocks or block
groups, housing units or group quarters, age-group-smoking classes within sampled listing units,
and eligible individuals within sampled age-group-smoking classes. Blacks, Hispanics and
cigarette smokers were over-sampled, the latter to increase the precision of drug use estimates.
Information was collected using confidential, anonymous, face-to-face interviews conducted in
the household and self-administered answer sheets for sensitive topics such as drug use (Gfroerer
et al., 2002). Annual samples for 1994 to 1998 averaged about 24,000 respondents.
Beginning in 1999, the national, stratified, multistage, area probability sampling design
was changed to a larger, state-based design, which involved selecting independent, stratified,
multistage, area probability samples from 50 states and the District of Columbia (Gfroerer et al.,
2002). In the eight most populous states, over-sampling was used to select about 3,600 to 4,630
respondents from each of these states (CA, NY, TX, FL, PA, IL, MI and OH). In the remaining
states and the District of Columbia, the target number of respondents was about 900 to 1,030.
About a third of the initial sample was allocated to the 12 to 17, 18 to 25, and 26 or older age
groups respectively so that separate state-level estimates could be generated for each of these age
groups (Gfroerer et al., 2002).
The second change in the survey that took place in 1999 was a switch to computerassisted personal interviewing (CAPI) and audio computer-assisted self-interviewing.
Computer-assisted interviewing yielded more internally consistent and complete data, and
somewhat higher levels of reporting for some sensitive behaviors (Gfroerer et al., 2002).
As described above, implementation of the DDD method requires that we identify
individuals who show evidence of having a recent, disabling substance problem. We consider

8

two alternate ways of defining such a group. Our primary group of substance abusers – which
we call the “broad” substance abuser group - includes individuals with at least one of the
following: (1) heavy current use of alcohol and/or illicit drugs; or (2) 3 or more symptoms of an
SUD for at least one single substance; or (3) receipt of any substance abuse treatment, including
participation in a self-help group (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous), in the past year. Heavy current
use is defined as 3 or more alcohol binges (5+ drinks in one occasion) in the past 30 days; and/or
6 or more occasions of marijuana use in the past 12 months; and/or 3 or more occasions of other
illicit drug use in the past 12 months. The substance disorder symptoms included in the
NHSDA/NSDUH surveys are based on DSM criteria and are applied to alcohol, illegal drugs
(including marijuana, hallucinogens, inhalants, cocaine/crack and heroin) and non-prescribed use
of prescription drugs (including pain killers, tranquilizers, stimulants and sedatives).3
The advantage of using the broad substance abuser group is that it is inclusive enough to
capture many different forms and stages of substance problems (e.g., alcohol abuse), but it is still
stringent enough to be limited to individuals who are likely to have a recent disabling problem.
Notably, this measure includes individuals with recent heavy use of substances, as well as those
experiencing symptoms of disorder. Estimates generated from 2002 NSDUH data set indicate
that the correlation coefficient between this heavy substance use measure and substance
dependence is about 0.38 for women and about 0.41 for men, and these correlations are
significant at the .001 level.
A possible disadvantage of the broad group, however, is that it may include some
respondents who use substances heavily, but are not experiencing disabling problems associated
with use. For this reason, we also consider an alternate, more stringently defined substance
abuser group. Our “narrow” group is limited to individuals reporting either (1) 3 or more
symptoms of substance disorder for at least one single substance; (2) receipt of any substance
abuse treatment, including self-help groups, in the past year, or both (1) and (2). The narrow
group includes only respondents who appear to meet DSM criteria for substance dependence. In
our sample, as in reports on the pre-legislation DA&A recipients, the majority qualify due to
abuse of alcohol, as opposed to illicit drugs. When we categorize individuals into those suffering
from at least 3 symptoms of an SUD or recipients of substance abuse treatment in the last year,
3

The Appendix includes details regarding symptoms of substance abuse.
9

62% qualify due to alcohol only, versus 21% who qualify due to symptoms relating to an illicit
drug only, and 18% relating to abuse or dependence of more than one substance. We note that
our rate of symptoms relating to alcohol-only is higher than the rate of DA&A recipients for
alcohol only, but this could relate to the fact that individuals were more likely to report alcohol
use and symptoms v. illicit drug abuse and symptoms in the NHSDA/NSDUH.
To maximize statistical power, our primary approach is to estimate models using a
combined gender sample. To reflect the disadvantaged nature of the SSI eligible population, we
limit the entire analysis sample to respondents with fewer than 16 years of education. We also
confirmed that our results are robust to limiting the sample to respondents with 12 years of
education or fewer, although limiting the sample in this way leads to a substantial loss of
statistical precision. Together, including all surveys from the 1994B NHSDA through the 2002
NSDUH, 325,710 individuals were sampled, including 232,490 individuals aged 18-64. Of these
respondents, 156,041 had less than 16 years of education and available information on all
dependent variables and covariates.
We consider four types of outcomes: (1) receipt of public assistance; (2) labor market
outcomes; (3) health insurance and health services utilization; and (4) arrests. NHSDA/NSDUH
respondents were asked whether they had received any SSI payments in the last calendar year.
To ensure that respondents understood that they were being questioned about payments from SSI
versus another public support program, the interviewer specified that “…federal SSI checks are
either automatically deposited in the bank or mailed to arrive on the first of every month. If
mailed, they are sent in a blue envelope." Similarly, respondents were asked about welfare
payments in the last calendar year, and respondents were instructed to exclude SSI. From these
questions, we create binary indicators of SSI receipt and welfare receipt. Note that the
NHSDA/NSDUH question regarding receipt of federal disability benefits specifically mentions
SSI, and does not include payments from the DI program.
We also create binary variables indicating whether the respondent is 1) employed now; 2)
in the labor force; and 3) currently disabled.4 To measure health insurance coverage, we create
three variables that indicate whether the respondent is currently covered by: (1) any type of

4

From 1994-1998, the employment and labor force variables are based on questions about the respondent’s “present
work status.” In 1999-2002, these variables are based on a question regarding work status “in the past week.”

10

health insurance; (2) Medicaid; and (3) any type of private insurance.5 The interviewers
specified that Medicaid is a public assistance program that pays for medical care, and also
provided the name of the Medicaid program in the respondent’s state. To measure utilization of
health services, we create indicators of any visit to the emergency department in the past 12
months, and any inpatient hospital stay in the past 12 months. We also create two indicators
specific to mental health services, given the likely high level of co-morbidity between mental
and substance conditions in our sample. These indicators include: any psychiatric outpatient
services in the past 12 months, and any psychiatric inpatient services in the past 12 months. The
psychiatric inpatient question changed substantially after 1998, so we include only the first postperiod (1997-98) in these models. Finally, our measure of involvement with the criminal justice
system is a binary indicator of whether or not the respondent reports being arrested and booked
for any crime in the past 12 months. Arrest questions began in the 1995 survey; thus, we exclude
1994 in arrest models.
The public-use NSDUH/NHSDA does not include state identifiers, or time-invariant PSU
identifiers that would allow identification of PSUs that remain in the sample over multiple years
of the survey. As a result, using the public-use data, we cannot account for the possibility that
fixed state-level characteristics and/or co-occurring state-level trends (e.g., trends in welfare and
Medicaid) may confound an observed association between the SSI policy change and outcomes.
Using the public use data, we also cannot control for autocorrelation within geographic units.
To address these limitations of the public-use data, we conducted a set of specification
checks through a special, one-time arrangement with the Office of Applied Studies at SAMSHA.
In these analyses, researchers at SAMSHA merged geographic identifiers into our analytic files
and estimated alternative versions of short-run models (our model restricted to years 1994-1998)
which included: state-level fixed effects; a set of time-varying state controls; and Huber/White
standard errors adjusted for clustering on state. Appendix Table 1 describes our time-varying
state covariates in detail. These covariates included: (1) whether the state had a major ADFC
waiver approved; (2) whether Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) was officially
implemented in the state; (3) the state unemployment rate; (4) the percent of all persons under
age 65 in the state not covered by public or private insurance; (5) the percent of persons under
5

The wording of the health insurance shifted slightly in the 1999 survey. In 1994 to 1998, respondents were asked
whether they were covered by health insurance in the “current month.” In later surveys, respondents were asked
whether they had “current” health insurance.

11

age 65 in the state covered by Medicaid; and (6) the state incarceration rate (number of prisoners
sentenced to at least one year per 100,000 state residents).

IV.

Empirical Approach

A.

Identification Strategy
As in any non-experimental setting, the central challenge in estimating the effects of this

policy change on individual-level outcomes is determining whether or not an observed
association represents a causal relationship. When analyzing the effects of the termination of
disability benefits on economic and health care outcomes, results may arise from a causal
relationship or from unmeasured factors affecting the outcome variable of interest at the same
time as a major policy change. In this case, the association between the policy change and the
outcome would not necessarily be causal.
In this paper, we combine several methods to attempt to circumvent this problem. Our
general strategy is to compare changes in mean outcomes before and after the policy change for
individuals most likely to have been targeted by the change and for otherwise similar individuals
who were unlikely to have been affected. Our potentially targeted group consists of individuals
who have both elevated probability of SSI use for a drug or alcohol-related disability based on
their observed characteristics as well as recent heavy substance use and/or symptoms of
substance dependence or receipt of substance abuse treatment. We compare changes pre- and
post- policy change, among individuals who are and are not likely to have SUDs, interacting
these characteristics (time period and treatment group) with an individual’s predicted probability
of SSI use. We predict SSI use based on coefficients from a model based on 1994-1996 data,
before the legislation terminating SSI eligibility for DA&A was passed. This difference-indifference-in-difference (DDD) approach mitigates the problem of unobserved heterogeneity, or
the possibility that substance abusers likely to use SSI have fixed, unmeasured characteristics
that differ from other individuals likely to use SSI (e.g., greater likelihood of co-morbid mental
disorders) and affect the outcomes of interest.
Figure 2 demonstrates the intuition behind our strategy, although the details underlying
the figure are explained in sections IV.B-IV.D. The figure shows the rate of SSI receipt and
employment separately for our broad treatment group (likely substance abusers) and control

12

group (non-substance abusers) among individuals with low and elevated predicted SSI receipt (in
this figure, “elevated” indicates predicted SSI receipt ≥ .05, or twice the population rate of SSI
receipt), weighted by to balance the treatment and control groups. During the pre-period, within
the elevated Pr(SSI) group, use of SSI is higher and employment is lower among the treatment
groups. By 1997-98, the pattern was largely reversed.
We opt for this modified DDD approach to account for potentially confounding trends in
outcomes between substance abusers and non-abusers that are not causally related to the policy
change. Thus, by differencing out changes in outcomes between substance abusers and nonabusers, we address the possibility that an economy-wide trend that affected all substance
abusers relative to non-abusers during this time period confounds the effects of the policy change
(e.g. that substance abusers respond last to economic expansions). Similarly, by controlling for
predicted SSI use, we net out trends affecting likely SSI users during the period surrounding the
policy change. The basic econometric specification, ignoring covariates for the moment, is as
follows.

E [Yit ] = α + β1 SAit + β 2 Pr (SSI )i Pr e− + β 3 SAit * Pr (SSI )i Pr e− + β 4 After1996 t +

β 5 After1998 t + β 6 SAit * After1996 t + β 7 SAit * After1998 t +
β 8 * After1996 t * Pr (SSI )i Pr e − + β 9 * After1998 t * Pr (SSI )i Pr e− +
β10 * SAit * After1996 t * Pr (SSI )t Pr e− + β11 * SAit * After1998 t * Pr (SSI )i Pr e −

(1)

In this equation, SAit = Substance Abuser (targeted group); Pr(SSI)iPre- = predicted probability of
using SSI during 1994-96 period; “After1996t” = indicator for observations in 1997-2002; and
“After1998t” = indicator for observations in 1999-2002.
In this set up, Yit is an outcome variable for individual i in year t. The key independent
variables are the two triple interaction terms between substance abuser, the probability of SSI use
based on pre-period program rules, and each of the two binary variables representing time
periods after the federal government terminated DA&A benefits (“After 1996” and “After
1998”). These coefficients represent the changes in outcomes pre- and post- policy change for
substance abusers versus non-abusers allowing the effect to vary by individuals’ probability of
SSI use, based on pre-period relationships between observed characteristics and SSI receipt.
The “After 1996” and “After 1998” variables are determined only by time. The variables

13

both take on a value of zero before the policy change (1993–1995 calendar years which
correspond to the 1994-1996 survey years). After the policy change, the “After 1996” variable
takes on a value of one for the rest of the study period (1996-2001 calendar years which
correspond to the 1997-2002 survey years). Throughout the paper we will refer to survey years,
rather than calendar years. The “After 1998” variable takes on a value of one for the 1999 to
2002 survey years. We view the policy change as occurring in calendar year 1996, since it was
in March of this year that the legislation was enacted and individuals could no longer apply for
SSI benefits if they had a substance-related disability. Note that this set-up allows the “After
1998*SA” indicator and the interaction terms that include this indicator to capture the marginal
effects of the policy change in the long-run (1999-2002), relative to effects during 1997-98.
In this model, the DDD coefficients (β10 and β11) are unbiased estimates of the policy
effects in the short-run and the long-run effects relative to short-run effects. This interpretation
will be correct as long as our identifying assumption, that no unmeasured event or policy change
occurred at the same time as the SSI policy change that affected trends in outcomes over time
differentially for substance abusers with a high probability of SSI use, holds. For example, a
crucial policy change occurring during our study period was welfare reform, which was
implemented in the mid- to late 1990s depending on the state. After passage of the 1996
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA), welfare benefits
were subject to 60-month lifetime limits with shorter limits (12-36 months) for continuous
benefit receipt in many states, and welfare recipients were subject to work requirements in
exchange for cash payments. Welfare recipients who did not comply with requirements under
PRWORA could have benefits sanctioned (either reduced or terminated). As 90 percent of
welfare recipients are female, this would affect females disproportionately. Because our method
differences out pre- and post- trends for individuals likely to use SSI benefits (presumably a
group that also has an elevated rate of receiving welfare benefits), our approach may be
contaminated by welfare reform only to the extent that its provisions differentially affected likely
welfare users who were substance abusers.6 As described in the prior section, through an
6

Some provisions of PRWORA could plausibly affect substance abusers more than others. Convicted felons can be
denied welfare benefits under PRWORA, and the legislation allowed drug testing of welfare recipients so that states
could deny benefits to individuals testing positive for illicit drug use. In practice no state has used suspicionless
drug testing, but this could create an environment in which drug using women are less likely to apply for welfare
benefits. Evidence on how PRWORA affects drug using women offers mixed results. Women reporting symptoms
of substance dependence were more likely to be on welfare in the mid- to late 1990s (Danziger et al. 2000; Meara

14

agreement with SAMSHA, as a specification check we estimated all of our short-run models
with time-varying state characteristics that account for state-specific changes related to welfare
reform, as well as changes in states’ insurance coverage, unemployment, and incarceration rates,
in order to address this potential problem. These models also included state-level fixed effects
and Huber/White standard errors adjusted for clustering on state.

B. Generating the Predicted Probability of SSI Use Based on 1994-96 Policies
To create the probability of SSI use, we first estimate logit models to predict the
probability of SSI use during the period before the legislative change (survey years 1994 through
1996) as a function of demographic characteristics.
Pr (SSI it = 1) = f (Χ ′it β )

(2)

In this set-up, Xit is a vector of characteristics for individual i, described below, and f(.) is the
logistic function, or f(.) = ex/(1+ex). Using the coefficients from these models, we predicted the
probability of SSI use for the entire sample of individuals (years 1994-2002). We then generate
a continuous variable, Pr(SSI)iPre-, indicating the respondent’s predicted probability of SSI use
during the pre-period. This variable and its interactions with other variables are then included in
Equation 1, as described above.7
C.

Using Propensity Score Models to Balance Treatment and Control Groups

As described above, the main methodological challenge to this study is forming an appropriate
treatment and control group to address the potential omitted variable bias that could affect our
interpretation of estimates as the effect of terminating disability benefits for substance abusers.
We use propensity score-based weights to balance observed characteristics between substance
abusers and others in our control group.
Using survey years 1994-1996, we estimate a logit model that predicts whether an
and Frank 2007; Montoya et al. 2003), but also more likely to be sanctioned following welfare reform (Meara and
Frank 2007; Morgenstern 2003). Over a longer period, women with a history of illicit drug use were less likely to
be on welfare (Pollack and Reuter 2006), but this disproportionate exit from welfare occurred after 2000, so it is
likely to affect our long-run estimates only.
7
In practice, 99% of pre-period respondents had a predicted probability of SSI use below .25, and the propensity
distribution most closely resembles actual SSI use for these respondents. Predicted SSI use was higher than actual
SSI use among respondents in the top percentile of the Pr(SSI) distribution. To reduce the noise introduced by this
error in predicting Pr(SSI) at the top of the distribution, we ranked respondents on predicted SSI use, divided the
sample into 25 bins averaging 6,250 respondents each, and replaced the predicted Pr(SSI) with the average actual
SSI use within that bin during the pre-period (survey years 1994-1996). Thus, our SSI propensities range from near
zero to just under .25.

15

individual is a substance abuser as a function of observed characteristics.
Pr (SA it = 1) = f (Χ ′it β )

(3)

This model has the same covariates as in (2) and again, f(.) = ex/(1+ex). We use the estimated
coefficients from (3) to generate the predicted probability of being a substance abuser, p, and we
weight each observation in our sample by the probability of being in the opposite group. That is,
individuals in the substance abuser group receive a weight of (1 – p), and individuals not in the
substance abuser group receive a weight equal to p, a propensity score weighting approach
described in Li, Zaslavsky, and Landrum (2007). Like more commonly discussed inverse
probability weighting techniques (Hirano & Imbens, 2001), this balances observed
characteristics across treatment and control groups. However, in this case, characteristics are
balanced to resemble those among overlapping portions of the treatment and control distributions
of observed characteristics. This adapted technique obtains average treatment effects, averaged
over the distribution of covariates in the population where the treatment and control groups
overlap as opposed to the entire population. This approach also minimizes the variance of our
estimates, which can be excessively large in inverse probability weighting techniques when
individuals have a very low propensity score. By construction, this propensity score weighting
technique, used previously in the clinical and health services literature, forces the distribution of
observed characteristics in the propensity model to be identical across the two groups
(McWilliams et al. 2003). In the paper, all estimates presented weight each observation with the
propensity-score-based weight multiplied by the sample weight provided in the
NHSDA/NSDUH surveys, to make the data representative of the target population for the
surveys. This modified weight balances the distribution of observed characteristics during the
pre-period among substance abusers versus the comparison group.
In equations (2) and (3), we control for the following individual characteristics (X):
gender, race/ethnicity (Black non-Latino, Latino, and Other non-Latino race versus white nonLatino), an indicator for whether the interview was conducted in Spanish, age categories (22-23,
24-25, 26-29, 30-34, 35-49, 50-65 versus 18-21), marital status (widowed, divorced, never
married versus married), education (5 or fewer years, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, and 14-15, versus 12
years), veteran status, number of household inhabitants (dummies for 2 through 6+ versus living
alone), population density category (MSA > 1 million, MSA < 1 million versus not in an MSA),
self-reported health status (poor, fair, good, very good versus excellent), ever used illicit drugs,

16

used alcohol before age 15, used marijuana before age 17, and whether the respondent ever
smoked daily.8 In the additional sensitivity analyses conducted by SAMSHA, we included state
fixed effects in both models (Equations 2 and 3).
D.

Estimation
Once we have obtained propensity-score based weights for each observation, we estimate

models of our main labor market, health insurance, health care and arrest related outcomes. To
aid interpretation of our coefficients of interest, we estimate these as linear probability models as
in equation 4.
Y it = α + β 1 SA it + β 2 Pr (SSI

)i Pr e −

+ β 3 SA it * Pr (SSI

)i Pr e −

+ β 4 After 1996

t

+ β 5 After 1998

β 6 SA it * After 1996 t + β 7 SA it * After 1998 t + β 8 * After 1996 t * Pr (SSI )i Pr e − +
β 9 * After 1998 t * Pr (SSI )i Pr e − + β 10 * SA it * After 1996 t * Pr (SSI )i Pr e − +
β 11 * SA it * After 1998 t * Pr (SSI

)i Pr e −

+

t

(4)

′
+ T tk Γ + ε it

In addition to the substance abuse indicator, the predicted probability of SSI use, the
“After 1996” and “After 1998” indicators, and interactions between these variables, we also
include as controls a set of measures, T, that vary across time t, and in some cases across group,
k. In the main analyses, these measures include the race/ethnicity-gender-specific national
unemployment rate, the national rate of arrests per 100,000, and the national rate of incarceration
per 100,000. In the additional sensitivity analyses conducted through SAMSHA, these national
time-varying variables are replaced by state fixed effects and state-level time varying measures
of AFDC waiver approval, TANF implementation, state unemployment rates, state rates of
insurance coverage, and state rates of incarceration. By controlling for these secular changes
(main analyses) and state fixed and time-varying characteristics (sensitivity analyses), we rule
out the possibility that measured effects resulted from policy changes related to welfare and
public insurance programs, rising incarceration rates, or employment cycles that were unrelated
to the termination of disability benefits for substance abusers.
Because of the binary nature of our outcome variables, we also estimate logit models of
the above equation, and present these results in the Appendix for comparison. In the logit
specification, one cannot interpret coefficients on the triple interaction terms as the DDD in the
8

We tested whether our results were sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of self-reported health status, given that
it could plausibly be affected by the policy of interest, discontinuing disability benefits, but our results were
unchanged, and precision was improved by the inclusion of health status in propensity models.

17

probability of a binary outcome, as discussed in detail by (Ai and Norton 2003). Instead, we
present results on the magnitude of effects based on predicted probabilities obtained from the
logit coefficients in the models in three ways. In each case, we compare results for a 10
percentage point increase in pr(SSI)Pre- from .05 to .15, which allows us to make estimates within
our range of data. First we present the DDD of effects in the early post-period, 1997-1998
versus 1994-1996 for substance abusers versus non- and for SSI propensities of .05 versus .15.
Second we present the similar estimates of effects, but comparing the later post-period, 19992002 versus 1994-1996. Finally, we present the DDD estimate of effects in 1999-2002 versus
1997-98. For each of these, we bootstrap the standard errors of the DDD estimates with 100
replications.
In the OLS and logit models based on the public-use data, we adjusted for the stratified
sampling design using Taylor Series Linearization methods and the information on Strata and
Primary Sampling Units provided in the survey data. As discussed previously, because of the
way the PSUs were reported in public use data, this method does not allow for correlation over
time within sampling units (many of which were constant across some survey years). In the
sensitivity analyses conducted through SAMSHA, we adjusted standard errors using
Huber/White estimators, clustering at the level of state of residence.

V. Results
A. Sample Characteristics
Table 1 presents the propensity score-weighted characteristics of the broad treatment
group, (heavy substance users, treatment in the past 12 months, or those with 3 or more
symptoms of substance abuse or dependence) compared to the control group by time period. By
construction, all of the observed demographic characteristics included in the propensity score
model are perfectly balanced during the pre-period, so we show the outcome variables only (see
Appendix Table 2 for the full set of covariates). It is notable that measures of public program
use and labor market outcomes are relatively similar between substance abusers and others
during the pre-period. SSI use is 4.1 percent among substance abusers compared with 3.2
percent in the comparison group. The percent employed is very similar among substance abusers
(74.5 percent) and the comparison group (73.3 percent). Reported rates of disability are also
similar, 3.9 v. 4.5 percent. Health care utilization is similar across groups with the exception of

18

psychiatric services, though substance abuse treatment would be an example of a psychiatric
service, so the substance use in the treatment group could affect that. Arrest rates are
considerably higher among substance abusers, 6.1 percent versus the comparison group, 1.7
percent. This is not surprising given high arrest rates estimated among the DA&A population.
Given our inability to control for pre-period trends in arrest rates, results on arrests should be
interpreted with caution. Otherwise, respondents in our broad treatment and comparison groups
are highly likely to report exactly 12 years of education (45 percent) most are unmarried (51
percent) and the plurality (36 percent) of respondents are aged 35-49 (Appendix Table 2).
B. Public Program Use
Table 2 shows the estimated effects of the SSI policy change on public program use. As
expected, SSI use drops disproportionately among individuals predicted to use SSI among both
our treatment groups in 1997-98. Among the broad treatment group, SSI use drops by 81 percent
in the short-run, an estimate that is similar to administrative estimates suggesting that at least two
thirds of former DA&A recipients had not re-qualified one year after the policy change took
effect (Stapleton et al. 1998). Among the narrow treatment group, the estimated drop is close to
1, suggesting that for each percentage point increase in the probability of SSI use, individuals
with symptoms of substance abuse are 1 percentage point less likely to use SSI after the policy
change took effect. The drop in SSI receipt attenuates in the long run, however. Comparing SSI
use in 1999-2002 relative to 1994-96, reductions in SSI use are no longer significant, and much
smaller in magnitude compared with the 1997-98 effects. The logit models presented in the
appendix document similar trends in the use of SSI following the policy change, and in fact, the
implied magnitude of these changes closely mirror the drop in SSI receipt reported based on
administrative data from SSA (Stapleton et al. 1998).
Table 2 confirms patterns documented elsewhere, that welfare use declined
disproportionately among substance abusers, but only after 1998 (Pollack and Reuter 2006). In
models predicting welfare use, the DDD estimates for 1997-98 were not statistically significant,
but by 1999-2002 compared with the pre-period, welfare use was 31 percent lower in the broad
treatment group, and 39 percent lower in the narrow treatment group relative to the comparison
group.
C. Labor Market Effects
Table 3 presents estimates of the labor market effects of terminating disability insurance

19

for substance abusers. The SSI policy change is associated with a substantial short-term increase
in employment for individuals regardless of the treatment group used. For both the broad and
narrow treatment groups, Table 3 suggests the policy change is associated with a one for one
increase in employment as the probability of SSI use under pre-period rules rises. Among the
broad treatment group, the employment effects persist, although they are smaller in magnitude
by 1999-2002. The estimates suggest that employment was about 40 percent higher in the
narrow treatment group in the long run compared to 1994-96. Consistent with these patterns,
both broad and narrow treatment groups showed a disproportionate rise in labor force
participation. The magnitude of these effects closely mirrors that of the employment effects,
implying that the elevated employment represents individuals moving into the labor force rather
than simply more successful job search during the booming economy of the late 1990s. Another
interesting and intuitive result in Table 3 is that the employment effects seem to be larger for
full-time work compared with part-time work. Logit models confirm that employment, in
particular full-time employment, and labor force participation rose substantially and
disproportionately among likely SSI users. Estimates of these effects are significant at
conventional levels based on the bootstrapped variance estimates associated with the logit
models.
The large magnitude and persistence of the employment effects among the broad
treatment group are somewhat surprising given more moderate effects on SSI receipt in the long
run. As discussed before, the policy change affected both SSI and DI programs, and we are
unable to directly observe DI receipt. It is possible that the employment effects reflect changes
in the population of substance abusers likely to use DI (which one would expect to be correlated
with the propensity to use SSI). This could potentially explain the large employment effects in
the face of a more moderate effect on SSI. An alternative explanation is that other time varying
factors disproportionately affected the target group, high propensity SSI users who also report
heavy substance use. Although multiple factors could create the pattern of work and SSI receipt
we observe, it seems likely that individuals were influenced by the termination of disability,
since these policies signaled a change in attitude towards individuals with SUDs.
D. Specification check: state-level factors
Our main results, demonstrating less reliance on public programs in the short-run and
increased employment in the face of the termination of SSI benefits, are based on specifications

20

that do not have controls for underlying trends in a respondent’s state. Table 4 shows the results
of a specification check using restricted data with state identifiers (analyzed by SAMHSA) from
1994-98. In these models, we control for fixed state effects and time varying state trends
including welfare waivers, TANF implementation, incarceration rates, unemployment rates, rates
of uninsurance, and state Medicaid participation rates. The pattern in Table 4 mirrors what we
found in our main analyses in Tables 2 and 3. SSI use falls substantially, and both labor force
participation and employment rise in the first two years following the policy change. We take
this as evidence that our results do not reflect state-specific trends that disproportionately affect
likely users of SSI with SUDs.
E. Health Insurance
One aspect of welfare reform and reforms to SSI/DI that has received much attention is
the potential loss of health insurance benefits as individuals exit public programs for work. This
could happen explicitly, as in the case of terminating SSI benefits and linked eligibility for
Medicaid, or indirectly, as a result of exceeding income limits for Medicaid eligibility once
employed, but with no alternative source of coverage through an employer or privately. Indeed,
in the late 1990s, there is evidence that low-income female caregivers who reduced rates of drug
and alcohol use simultaneously reduced use of public programs, increased rates of employment,
and were more likely than other low-income women to become uninsured (Meara and Greenfield
2008). The rate of health insurance, and the form of insurance among those covered did not
change disproportionately for individuals who were heavy substance users or those with
symptoms of dependence. Medicaid coverage did not fall significantly for this group, although
the sign of the effect was negative and the magnitude was large. In the longer run, Medicaid
receipt differed little for likely substance abusers with a high propensity to use SSI compared
with others, and there were no long-run changes in the share of individuals reporting any health
insurance coverage. Logit models on health insurance yield similar results, suggesting that
among substance abusers likely to use SSI, health insurance status did not change significantly.
F. Other Outcomes - Health care utilization and Arrests
Because we documented no disproportionate change in health insurance status or source
of coverage, it is unclear whether one should expect large changes in health care utilization. In
Table 6, the likelihood of reporting an ER visit, a hospital or psychiatric admission all increased
in 1997-2002, but these differences were not statistically significant in the linear probability

21

models. The logit models (Appendix Table 5) suggest that hospitalizations increased among the
broad treatment group. On balance, given little power to detect differences in these relatively
rare events, we have no evidence to suggest systematic change in utilization after termination of
SSI benefits for substance abuse.
The final two columns in Table 6 display results from models of arrests. This analysis
must be interpreted with caution because the assumption that arrests should move together in the
treatment and control groups is strong given the difference in levels of arrest rates before the
policy change between these groups. Because we lack arrest data before 1995, we were unable
to compare trends in arrests during the pre-period. With this caveat in mind, however, the results
suggest a disproportionate rise in arrests in both treatment groups in the longer term, with the
effect being most immediate and largest among the narrow treatment group. These arrest effects
are statistically significant only in the logit-based long run estimates presented in Appendix
Table 5. We view these results as suggestive evidence that termination of SSI benefits for may
increase criminal activity among individuals with symptoms of substance abuse or dependence.
G. Compositional Changes in the Sample
One threat to our empirical approach is the fact that we do not follow the same
individuals over time. Thus, if the termination of SSI benefits either increased or decreased
substance abuse in the population, our results could be driven by compositional changes in the
treatment and control groups rather than by changes in the outcomes of interest. We tested for
changes in the composition of our sample by estimating models where presence in a treatment
group was the dependent variable. The explanatory variables of interest were the same as in
equation 3. We also tested for changes in household composition (the likelihood that individuals
live alone, for example) since household composition might be another channel through which
the policy could change other outcomes. In all cases, there were no significant changes in the
composition of our sample compared with the baseline period of 1994-96 (Results available
upon request). This evidence offers further support for our research design despite the
limitations posed by the lack of longitudinal data.

VI. Conclusions
In the mid-1990s, multiple reforms aimed to increase self-sufficiency among potential
recipients of public income support. In this spirit, the 1997 termination of federal disability

22

benefits for individuals with disabling substance disorders was no different in that it eliminated
potential disincentives to work related to the availability of disability benefits. There has been
concern, however, that these benefits are the only legal means by which addicted persons can
obtain income to satisfy their basic needs and access health and treatment services. Recent
studies have failed to uncover changes in substance abusers’ outcomes in response to the policy
shift, but these studies primarily analyze small, geographically constrained samples, and
available evidence to date lacks a control group against which to compare outcomes for
individuals affected by the termination of benefits. Furthermore, former literature in this area
offers limited evidence on variables measuring self-sufficiency such as labor market
participation and employment, and no existing study attempted to assess effects of the policy
change beyond 24 months. In this paper, we examined trends in labor market outcomes, public
program participation, health care access and utilization, and self-reported arrests among
substance dependent individuals using a much larger national sample over a period that began
three years before the policy change and extends until 2001 (survey year 2002), allowing for the
estimation of both short-run and longer term effects.
Our findings confirm earlier work showing few measurable negative consequences of the
policy change, though with one possible, and potentially important exception. The use of SSI
fell disproportionately for the targeted groups, and there appears to have been no replacement of
SSI benefits with welfare benefits, which is not surprising given coincident reforms to welfare.
Labor force participation and employment rose substantially faster for our treatment groups
compared with others. The persistent rise in employment among heavy substance users was
fueled by increases in full-time work. Among individuals with three or more symptoms of
substance abuse or dependence, the labor market effects differed. Individuals with symptoms of
abuse or dependence increased employment in 1996 and 1997, but they were less likely to hold
onto employment gains. Health insurance status and source of coverage did not change
measurably. Consistent with this, the analyses of health care utilization yield few, if any,
systematic effects related to the policy change, although the pattern of results suggest that
psychiatric outpatient visits fell following the change while ER visits and hospital admissions
rose. Most disturbingly, arrests rose disproportionately among likely SSI users with symptoms
of drug dependence.
During the 1990s, the labor market reached unprecedented levels of employment,

23

especially among those with relatively few skills or labor market experience. In such an era, we
document that employment rose, and remained elevated among a group of individuals likely to
use SSI and with moderate to heavy substance use. Among our narrow treatment group,
individuals with symptoms of dependence or in substance abuse treatment, there was a relatively
short-lived employment response. That is, employment increased in the months following the
policy change, but by 1999-2002, employment fell for these individuals. This mirrors the
finding that most employment among former DA&A recipients failed to meet levels of
Substantial Gainful Activity established for federal disability programs (Campbell et al. 2003).
Our results suggest that disability programs have provided income support to individuals
unable to maintain attachment to the labor force even during a period of strong economic
conditions. Fortunately, the expected disastrous consequences of lost of health insurance, and
heavier utilization of inpatient or emergency medical services did not occur or were too small to
observe. Of course, we were unable to assess other important indicators of well-being, like
income, changes in drug use, changes in the rate or severity of mental health disorders, or
changes in eviction and/or homelessness, among this population. Aside from productivity losses,
the largest cost of substance abuse stems from crime. We find that arrests increased following
termination of disability for individuals with heavy substance use or symptoms of SUDs.
Because many individuals with a history of substance use did increase self-sufficiency
through increased employment and a reduction in the use of public programs, the results shown
here suggest, on balance, that the individuals targeted by the termination of SSI/DI benefits for
substance abuse, had relatively few disasters. The short term responses, however, suggest an
interesting set of new questions. In particular, with these data we do not know how individuals
entered the labor market, and what services, if any, aided them in their search for employment.
Additional information on the nature of jobs held by individuals during this unique period, and
the circumstances under which individuals left, are crucial for understanding the complete
ramifications of policy changes aiming to increase self-sufficiency entirely through incentives.
Questions regarding the employment histories of individuals with SUDs are increasing in
importance as the recent reauthorization of TANF has further limited states’ ability to address the
needs of welfare recipients with substance abuse issues. States are no longer at liberty to exempt
women from work requirements while they obtain treatment for substance use or mental health
disorders. Furthermore, the new regulations require more hours of work, and higher

24

participation requirements. It is difficult to forecast the effects of these limitations, but they
signal a new era under which vulnerable, low-skilled individuals with SUDs increasingly have
fewer sources of support as they seek the very self-sufficiency that reforms of the mid-1990s
aimed to achieve.

References
Ai, Chunrong. and Edward C. Norton. 2003. Economic Letters. “Interaction Terms in Logit and
Probit Models.” 80(1), 123-129.
Barber, Sherry L. 1996. “Supplemental Security Income Recipients for Whom the Alcoholism
and Drug Addiction Provisions Apply (DA&A Recipients).” Washington DC: Office of
Program Benefits Policy, Social Security Administration.
Campbell, Kevin., Jim Baumohl, and Sharon R. Hunt. 2003) “The Bottom Line: Employment
and Barriers to Work Among Former SSI DA&A Beneficiaries.” Contemporary Drug
Problems, 30(Spring-Summer): 195-240.
Catalano, Ralph, and William McConnell. 1999. “Psychiatric Emergencies: The Check Effect
Revisited.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 40(March), 79-86.
Cohen, William S.. 1994. Tax Dollars Aiding and Abetting Addiction: Social Security Disability
and SSI Cash Benefits to Drug Addicts and Alcoholics. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Danziger, Sandra, Mary Corcoran, & Danziger, Sheldon. 2000. “Barriers to the Employment of
Welfare Recipients.” In R. Cherry & W. Rodgers (Eds.), Prosperity for All? The
Economic Boom and African Americans. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 245-278.
Davies, Paul, Howard Iams, and Kalman Rupp. 2000. “The Effect of Welfare Reform on SSA's
Disability Programs: Design of Policy Evaluation and Early Evidence.” Social Security
Bulletin, 63(1), 3-11.
Frisman, Linda and Robert A. Rosenheck. 1997. “The Relationship of Public Support Payments
to Substance Abuse Among Homeless Veterns with Mental Illness.” Psychiatric Services,
48(6), 792-795.
Gfroerer, J., Eyerman, J., and Chromy, J., Eds. (2002). Redesigning an ongoing national
household survey: Methodological issues. DHHS Publication No. SMA 03-3768.

25

Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Office of
Applied Studies.
Gresenz, Carole, Katherine E. Watkins, and Deborah Podus. 1998. “Supplemental Security
Income (SSI), Disability Insurance (DI), and Substance Abusers.” Community Mental
Health Journal, 34(4), 337-350.
Guydish, Joseph R.. et al. 2003. Effects of losing SSI benefits on standard drug and alcohol
outcome measures. Contemporary Drug Problems, 30(Spring/Summer), 169-193.
Hanrahan, Patricia., Daniel J. Luchins, Lea Cloninger, and James Swartz. 2004. Medicaid
Eligibility of Former Supplemental Security Income Recipients With Drug Abuse or
Alcoholism, American Journal of Public Health, (941), 46-47
Hirano, Keisuke, Imbens, Guido W. and Ridder, Geert, 2000, "Efficient Estimation of Average
Treatment Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score" (2000-03-01). Cambridge, MA:
NBER Working Paper No. T0251.
Li, Fan, Alan M. Zaslavsky, Mary Beth Landrum, 2007, “Propensity Score Analysis with
Hierarchical Data,” Boston, MA, Manuscript.
McClellan, A.Thomas et al.. 2000. “Drug Dependence, a Chronic Medical Illness: Implications
for Treatment, Insurance, and Outcomes Evaluation.” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 284(13), 1689-1695.
McKay, James R., et al. 1998. “Characteristics of Recipients of Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) Benefits for Drug Addicts and Alcoholics.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 186(5), 290-298.
McWilliams, J. Michael et al. 2004. “Health Insurance Coverage and Mortality among Nearelderly Adults.” Health Affairs, 23(4), 223-233.
Meara, Ellen. 2006. "Welfare Reform, Employment, and Drug and Alcohol Use among LowIncome Women." Harvard Review of Psychiatry 14(4): 223-232.
Meara, Ellen and Richard G. Frank. 2006. “Welfare Reform, Work Requirements, and
Employment Barriers.” NBER Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA.
Meara, Ellen and Shelly F. Greenfield. 2008 “The Relationship Between Substance Use Patterns
and Economic and Health Outcomes Among Low-Income Caregivers and Children.”
Psychiatric Services, 59(9): 974-981.
Metsch, Lisa. R. and Harold. A. Pollack. 2005. "Welfare Reform and Substance Abuse." The

26

Milbank Quarterly 83(1): 65-99.
Montoya, Isaac. D. et al. 2002. “Mental Health, Drug Use, and the Transition from Welfare to
Work.” Journal of Behavioral health Services and Research, 29(2), 144-156.
Morgenstern, Jon et al. 2001. “Specialized Screening Approaches can Substantially Increase the
Identification of Substance Abuse Problems among Welfare Recipients.” Available at:
http://humanservices.ucdavis.edu/resource/uploadfiles/Specialized%20Screening.pdf
NHSDA. 2002. The NHSDA report: Serious mental illness among adults. Retrieved 6 December
2002, from http://www.samhsa.gov/oas/2k2/SMI/SMI.cfm
Phillips, David, Nichaolas Christenfeld and Natalie Ryan. 1999. “An increase in the number of
deaths in the United States in the first week of the month: an association with substance
abuse and other causes of death.” New England Journal of Medicine, 341, 93-98.
Pollack, Harold. A. et al. 2002. "Drug Testing Welfare Recipients--False Positives, False
Negatives, Unanticipated Opportunities." Women's Health Issues 12(1): 23-31.
Pollack, Harold A., and Peter Reuter. 2006. “Welfare Receipt and Substance-Abuse Treatment
Among Low-Income Mothers: the Impact of Welfare Reform.” American Journal of
Public Health, 96(11), 2024-2031.
Rosen, Marc, Thomas J. McMahon, HaiQun Lin, and Robert A. Rosenheck. 2006. “Effect of
Social Security Payments on Substance Abuse in a Homeless Mentally Ill Cohort”.
Health Services Research, 41(1), 173-191.
Rosenheck, Robert, Linda Frisman., and Gallup. 1995. “Effectiveness and Cost of Specific
Treatment Elements in a Program for Homeless Mentally Ill Veterens.” Psychiatric
Services, 46(1131-1139).
Rossi, P. 1989. Down and Out in America: The Causes of Homelessness. Chicago: University if
Chicago Press.
Schmidt Laura A, and Dennis McCarty.2000. “Welfare Reform and the Changing landscape of
Substance Abuse Services for Low-income Women.” Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research. ;24:1298-311.
Shaner, Andrew., et al. 1995. “Disability Income, Cocaine Use, and Repeated Hospitalization
Among Schizophrenic Cocaine Abusers.” New England Journal of Medicine, 333(12),
777-783.
Sosin, Michael and Susan Grossman. 1991. “The mental health system and the etiology of

27

homelessness: a comparison study.” Journal of Community Psychology, 19, 337-350.
Stapleton, David C., David Wittenburg, and Adam Tucker. 1998. Policy Evaluation of the Effect
of Legislation Prohibiting the Payment of Disability Benefits to Individuals Whose
Disability is Based on Drug Addiction and Alcoholism. Interim Report Submitted by the
Lewin Group, Inc. to the Social Security Administration, Contract No. 660-96-27331.
Swartz, James., Hsieh, C.M., and Jim Baumohl, 2003. “Disability payments, drug use and
representative payees: an analysis of the relationships.” Addiction, 98, 965-975.
Watkins, Katherine and Deborah Podus. 2000. “The Impact of Terminating Disability Benefits
for Substance Abusers on Substance Use and Treatment Participation.” Psychiatric
Services, 51(11), 1371-1381.
Watkins, Katherine., Deborah Podus, Elizabeth Lombardi, and Audrey Burnham.
2001. "Changes in Mental Health and Service Use After Termination of SSI Benefits.”
Psychiatric Services, 52(9), 1210-1215.
White, Halbert. 1980. “A Heteroskedasticity-consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity.” Econometrica, 48, 817-83.

28

Table 1: Weighted Outcomes by Treatment Group and Time Period
Pre-Period: 1994-1996
Substance
Not a
Abuser
substance
abuser
Dependent variables:
Labor market & program participation:
SSI
Welfare
Employed
Full-time
Part-time
In Labor Force
Disabled
Health Insurance:
Any health insurance
Private health insurance
Medicaid
Health care utilization:
ER visit
Inpatient stay
Inpatient psychiatric stay
Psychiatric outpatient services
Arrested: past year
A

1997-1998
Not a
Substance
substance
Abuser
abuser
n =20,140

1999-2002
Substance
Not a
Abuser
substance
abuser

n =5,756

n =21,950

n =4,517

n =20,123

n =83,555

0.041
0.050
0.745
0.596
0.145
0.816
0.039

0.032
0.051
0.733
0.596
0.128
0.785
0.044

0.025
0.045
0.743
0.617
0.118
0.813
0.034

0.039
0.034
0.757
0.633
0.117
0.806
0.051

0.042
0.030
0.762
0.588
0.131
0.815
0.050

0.035
0.028
0.796
0.643
0.115
0.830
0.047

0.739
0.641
0.075

0.766
0.655
0.083

0.745
0.652
0.070

0.788
0.693
0.071

0.752
0.638
0.087

0.795
0.691
0.076

0.211
0.079
0.010
0.069
0.061

0.200
0.091
0.005
0.052
0.017

0.225
0.086
0.013
0.080
0.069

0.198
0.086
0.005
0.051
0.016

0.351
0.105
-0.116
0.128

0.299
0.088
-0.059
0.045

Sample limited to respondents with <16 years of education weighted by both sampling and propensity-score based weights. B Substance Abuser =
respondents reporting moderate/heavy substance use, and/or 3+ symptoms of disorder, and/or substance treatment (including self-help groups) in last
year. See text for details.C Information on mental health inpatient stays is not comparable during 1999-2002 period. D Employment is based on “present
work status.” E Health insurance refers to coverage at survey (or in survey month).

29

Table 2: Public Program Participation
SSI
Welfare
Broad
Narrow Broad
Narrow
Pr(SSI)
1.27**
1.21***
.314***
.329***
(1994-1996)
(.136)
(.151)
(.066)
(.077)
After 1996
.016*
.021
-.014**
-.018**
(.009)
(.015)
(.006)
(.009)
After 1998
.022***
.027**
.009
.008
(.007)
(.011)
(.006)
(.009)
Pr(SSI)*
.200
.201
-.194**
-.197**
After 1996
(.221)
(.276)
(.082)
(.100)
Pr(SSI)*
-.435**
-.440*
.084
.076
After 1998
(.202)
(.247)
(.058)
(.072)
Treatment Group
-.004
-.007
-.008
-.003
(.007)
(.013)
(.005)
(.007)
Tx*After 1996
.004
.007
.013
.015
(.009)
(.017)
(.008)
(.012)
Tx*After 1998
.003
.010
-.0003
-.0006
(.007)
(.012)
(.007)
(.010)
Pr(SSI) * Tx
.352
.753*
.239
.159
(.318)
(.430)
(.159)
(.179)
Pr(SSI) * Tx*After -.806**
-.995**
-.017
.047
1996
(.349)
(.507)
(.220)
(.272)
Pr(SSI) * Tx*After
.479*
.299
-.309**
-.393*
1998
(.280)
(.381)
(.155)
(.229)
NOTES: Based on linear probability models that account for the complex
survey sample design. Propensity score-based weights are used to match
observed characteristics between treatment and control groups. Robust,
Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( ) correct for correlation within
sampling units. *=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Models also include
controls for race-gender specific national unemployment rate, national
arrest rate per 100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000
(coefficients not shown). Analyses are based on a sample size of 156,041.

30

Table 3: Labor Market Outcomes
Outcome:
Employed
Full-time
Part-time
Disabled
In labor force
Broad
Narrow
Broad
Narrow
Broad
Narrow Broad
Narrow Broad
Narrow
Pr(SSI)
-1.93***
-1.81***
-1.65*** -1.46***
-.316*** -.373*** 1.71*** 1.57*** -1.82*** -1.63***
(1994-1996)
(.153)
(.169)
(.160)
(.176)
(.072)
(.075)
(.129)
(.133)
(.155)
(.169)
After 1996
.030*
.043*
.031
.050*
-.005
-.005
.0001
.0004
.017
.019
(.018)
(.025)
(.021)
(.027)
(.013)
(.014)
(.008)
(.011)
(.018)
(.024)
After 1998
.020
.018
.007
.006
-.023*
-.016
.019**
.029**
.009
-.005
(.015)
(.019)
(.019)
(.025)
(.010)
(.015)
(.008)
(.012)
(.013)
(.017)
Pr(SSI)*
-.450**
-.448
-.371*
-.337
-.050
-.111
.610*** .707***
-.423*
-.518*
After 1996
(.219)
(.287)
(.226)
(.282)
(.119)
(.111)
(.213)
(.278)
(.226)
(.290)
Pr(SSI)*
.537***
.715***
.575***
.653***
-.079
.061
-.446** -.605**
.478**
.632**
After 1998
(.198)
(.250)
(.201)
(.249)
(.099)
(.101)
(.208)
(.254)
(.211)
(.263)
Treatment Group
.038***
.012
.016
-.012
.025**
.025*
-.011* -.010
.051***
.024
(.020)
(.013)
(.021)
(.015)
(.022)
(.011)
(.014)
(.006)
(.008)
(.013)
Tx*After 1996
-.066***
-.077***
-.048*
-.061*
-.021
-.023
.008
.005
-.065*** -.086***
(.022)
(.031)
(.025)
(.036)
(.014)
(.022)
(.009)
(.013)
(.020)
(.029)
Tx*After 1998
-.007
.024
-.023
.019
.011
.002
.008
.020
-.005
.038
(.020)
(.026)
(.023)
(.030)
(.011)
(.017)
(.009)
(.013)
(.017)
(.025)
Pr(SSI) * Tx
-.749***
-.816**
-.360
-.350
-.343** -.413***
.152
.241
-.551*
-.776*
(.289)
(.403)
(.299)
(.404)
(.151)
(.149)
(.325)
(.392)
(.307)
(.408)
Pr(SSI) *
1.14***
1.16*
.835*
.772
.253
.373
-.610
-.631
1.21*** 1.75***
Tx*After 1996
(.443)
(.619)
(.465)
(.620)
(.201)
(.241)
(.424)
(.606)
(.436)
(.614)
-1.13**
Pr(SSI) *
-.202
-.695
-.300
-.762
.121
.074
.206
.356
-.368
Tx*After 1998
(.397)
(.505)
(.408)
(.500)
(.174)
(.237)
(.384)
(.494)
(.392)
(.493)
NOTES: Based on linear probability models that account for the complex survey design. Propensity score-based weights are used to match the
distribution of observed characteristics of treatment and control groups. Robust, Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( ) correct for correlation within
sampling units. *=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Models also include controls for race-gender specific national unemployment rate, national arrest
rate per 100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000 (coefficients not shown). Analyses are based on a sample size of 156,041.

31

Table 4: Specification Check: Short-Run Results from Models with State Fixed Effects and State Time Trends
Broad Substance Abuser Group, Time Period 1997-1998
Pr(SSI)
(1994-1996)
After 1996
Pr(SSI)*
After 1996
Treatment Group
Tx*After 1996
Pr(SSI) * Tx
Pr(SSI) *
Tx*After 1996

SSI
2.47***
(.197)
.017*
(.009)
.233
(.282)
-.013
(.007)
-.014
(.011)
.893*
(.490)
-1.53***
(.526)

Welfare Employed
1.06*** -3.84***
(.125)
(.221)
-.005
.019
(.008)
(.018)
-.134
-.464
(.188)
(.310)
-.013
.035***
(.008)
(.014)
.014
-.067***
(.012)
(.023)
.777*
-.930**
(.402)
(.444)
-.499
1.60***
(.512)
(.608)

Full-time
-3.12***
(.243)
.019
(.021)
-.417
(.344)
.009
(.016)
-.045*
(.026)
-.284
(.454)
1.03
(.646)

Part-time
-.828***
(.124)
-.007
(.013)
.064
(.166)
.027**
(.012)
-.023*
(.014)
-.534**
(.226)
.375
(.278)

Disabled
3.37***
(.201)
-.0003
(.009)
.561*
(.341)
.0001
(.008)
-.005
(.011)
-.122
(.471)
-.332
(.595)

In Labor Force
-3.41***
(.230)
.019
(.018)
-.483
(.339)
.050***
(.013)
-.064***
(.022)
-.737
(.470)
1.54**
(.642)

NOTES: Based on linear probability models that account for the complex survey design. Propensity score-based weights are used to match the
distribution of observed characteristics of treatment and control groups. Robust, Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( ) correct for correlation
within sampling units. *=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Models also include state fixed effects and the following time-varying state
characteristics: (1) whether the state had a major ADFC waiver approved; (2) whether TANF was officially implemented in the state; (3) the state
unemployment rate; (4) the percent of all persons under age 65 in the state not covered by public or private insurance; (5) the percent of persons
under age 65 in the state covered by Medicaid; and (6) the state incarceration rate. Analyses are based on a sample size of 52,363; only data from
1994-1998 are included in these analyses.

32

Table 5: Health Insurance Coverage
Medicaid
Broad
Narrow
Pr(SSI)
1.26*** 1.25***
(1994-1996)
(.115)
(.125)
After 1996
-.030*** -.038***
(.009)
(.012)
After 1998
.012
.014
(.009)
(.014)
Pr(SSI)*
.209
.346
After 1996
(.214)
(.264)
Pr(SSI)*
-.203
-.437
After 1998
(.219)
(.269)
Treatment Group
-.023*** -.020**
(.007)
(.009)
Tx*After 1996
.025**
.032**
(.011)
(.014)
Tx*After 1998
-.002
.0002
(.009)
(.014)
Pr(SSI) * Tx
.504*
.509
(.270)
(.352)
Pr(SSI) * Tx*After -.562
-.678
1996
(.405)
(.510)
Pr(SSI) * Tx*After .236
.495
1998
(.354)
(.489)

Private Insurance
Broad
Narrow
-2.28*** -2.19***
(.143)
(.148)
.089*** .070***
(.018)
(.024)
-.012
-.008
(.017)
(.023)
-.040
.045
(.243)
(.265)
.215
.114
(.232)
(.251)
-.006
-.019
(.013)
(.018)
-.042** -.032
(.021)
(.033)
.005
-.011
(.019)
(.029)
-.440
-.424
(.291)
(.388)
.537
.074
(.480)
(.546)
-.183
.286
(.453)
(.481)

Any HI
Broad
Narrow
-.539*** -.493***
(.117)
(.138)
.052***
.035
(.016)
(.022)
.004
.015
(.014)
(.018)
.240
.375*
(.195)
(.223)
-.102
-.356*
(.169)
(.191)
-.030*** -.041**
(.011)
(.017)
-.010
.012
(.020)
(.028)
.0004
-.013
(.018)
(.025)
-.031
.107
(.242)
(.306)
-.133
-.580
(.402)
(.530)
.089
.644
(.353)
(.468)

NOTES: Based on linear probability models that account for the complex survey design. Propensity scorebased weights are used to match observed characteristics between treatment and control groups. Robust,
Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( ) correct for correlation within sampling units. *=p-value<=.10,
**<=.05, ***<=.01. Models also include controls for race-gender specific national unemployment rate,
national arrest rate per 100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000 (coefficients not shown). Analyses
are based on a sample size of 156,041.

33

Table 6: Health Care Utilization and Arrests in Last Year
Hospital
Outcome:
ER visit
admission
Broad
Narrow Broad
Narrow
Pr(SSI)
1.01*** .868*** .842*** .748***
(1994-1996)
(.129)
(.152)
(.120)
(.123)
After 1996
-.048*** -.040**
.0006
.007
(.014)
(.018)
(.010)
(.014)
After 1998
.034**
.031
.027*** .032**
(.014)
(.019)
(.009)
(.013)
Pr(SSI)*
.015
-.130
.027
.145
After 1996
(.207)
(.224)
(.178)
(.187)
Pr(SSI)*
.138
.229
-.077
-.223
After 1998
(.173)
(.196)
(.151)
(.165)
Treatment Group .024**
.042*** -.013
-.008
(.012)
(.016)
(.009)
(.011)
Tx*After 1996
.001
-.015
.006
.012
(.021)
(.027)
(.012)
(.016)
Tx*After 1998
.026
.027
.008
.026*
(.018)
(.024)
(.012)
(.015)
Pr(SSI) *
-.319
-.239
.078
.317
Tx
(.262)
(.332)
(.256)
(.369)
Pr(SSI) *
.367
.573
.181
-.094
Tx*After 1996
(.450)
(.577)
(.335)
(.509)
Pr(SSI)*
-.188
-.211
.162
.326
Tx*After 1998
(.429)
(.505)
(.327)
(.410)

Psychiatric visit
Broad
Narrow
.549*** .656***
(.100)
(.135)
-.019** -.027*
(.010)
(.014)
-.013
-.014
(.011)
(.015)
.207
.167
(.158)
(.203)
-.185
-.285*
(.138)
(.153)
.008
.027**
(.008)
(.012)
.020
.018
(.014)
(.022)
.018
.039*
(.013)
(.021)
.291
.434
(.198)
(.303)
-.285
-.402
(.320)
(.427)
.211
.271
(.276)
(.356)

Psych. admissionA
Broad
Narrow
.096***
.108***
(.025)
(.034)
-.0003
-.0002
(.003)
(.006)
.036
(.067)

.121
(.093)

.001
(.003)
-.005
(.005)

.005
(.005)
-.004
(.008)

.135
(.109)
.258
(.216)

.197
(.188)
.164
(.314)

Arrested/booked
Broad
Narrow
.014
.027
(.051)
(.069)
-.004
-.004
(.008)
(.018)
.048*** .062***
(.008)
(.015)
.020
-.071
(.070)
(.087)
.202***
.271***
(.077)
(.086)
.041*** .085***
(.006)
(.015)
.007
-.002
(.011)
(.020)
.020*
.022
(.010)
(.018)
.102
-.120
(.111)
(.159)
.045
.344
(.186)
(.288)
.279
.130
(.201)
(.316)

NOTES: Based on linear probability models that account for the complex survey design. Propensity score-based weights are used to match observed
characteristics between treatment and control groups. Robust, Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( ) correct for correlation within sampling units.
*=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Models also include controls for race-gender specific national unemployment rate, national arrest rate per
100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000 (coefficients not shown). Analyses are based on a sample size of 156,041.

34

Figure 1: Trends in SSA caseload among Mental Health and DA&A Population
1,600,000

4,500,000

4,000,000

1,400,000

3,500,000

3,000,000
Total caseload

1,000,000

MH caseload
(right axis)

2,500,000

800,000

`
1997

2,000,000

600,000
1,500,000

Mental Health and DA&A caseload

1,200,000

Total Caseload (left axis)

400,000
1,000,000

DA&A
(right axis)

500,000

0
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

200,000

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

0
2002

Sources for Figure 1: for Total and Mental Health Caseload: Social Security Administration,
Social Security Bulletin, Annual Statistical Supplement, 1991-2004 (Washington: Government
Printing Office, 1991-2004). For DA&A population: Barber, S.L. Supplemental Security
Income for whom Alcoholism and Drug Addiction Provisions Apply (DA&A Recipients).
(Washington: Office of Program Benefits Policy, 1996) and for 1996, 1997 DA&A figures
:Schmidt, Lucie. 2004. Effects of Welfare Reform on the Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
Program, Policy Brief #4, National Poverty Center (available at
http://www.npc.umich.edu/publications/policy_briefs/brief4/brief4.pdf)

35

Figure 2: Trends in SSI and Employment, by Year
Rate of SSI Use in Broad Treatment v. Control Groups, 1994-2002
20%
17.7%

18%

17.7%

16%
13.5%

14%

12.6%

12%

12.9%
11.8%

10%
8%
6%
4%
2%

1.3%1.7%

1.6%
1.0%

1994-96

1997-98

1.9%2.3%

0%
1999-2002

1994-96

Low SSI propensity

1997-98

1999-2002

High SSI propensity

Others

Substance users or in Tx

Rate of Employment in Broad Treatment v. Control Groups, 1994-2002
90%
83%

85%
80%

79%
76%

80%

79%

77%

75%
70%
64%

65%
60%

63%

57%
54% 54%

55%

50%

50%
45%
40%
1994-96

1997-98

1999-2002

Low SSI propensity
Others

1994-96

1997-98

1999-2002

High SSI propensity
Substance users or in Tx

36

Appendix
Symptoms of Substance Abuse
Starting in 1999, the survey includes the following six criteria, pertaining to the previous
12 month period: 1) having a period of at least a month during which a great deal of time was
spent getting the drug, using the drug, or getting over its effects; 2) building up a tolerance for
the drug so that the same amount of the drug had less effect than before; 3) using the drug much
more often or in larger amounts than intended; 4) use of the drug often preventing going to work
or school, taking care of children, or engaging in recreational activities; 5) the drug causing
emotional or psychological problems (such as feeling uninterested, depressed, suspicious or
paranoid, or having strange ideas) or health problems (such as liver or stomach disease,
pancreatitis, feet tingling, numbness, memory problems, an accidental overdose, a persistent
cough, a seizure or fit, hepatitis, or abscesses); and 6) wanting or trying to stop or cut down use
of the drug but being unable to do so. The survey items used to capture symptoms of substance
disorder changed somewhat. We dealt with this issue by using the six symptoms listed above
which are fairly consistent across all years.
Appendix Table 1: Sources for state policies, insurance coverage, and incarceration rates.
Variable
Definition of variable Source
Welfare
Ranges from 0 to 1.
Crouse, Gil. (1999). “State Implementation of Major
waiver
Share of year in which Changes to Welfare Policies, 1992 – 1998.” Office of
state had welfare
Human Services Policy, Assistant Secretary for Planning
waiver in effect.
and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Accessed on 9/18/2008 at
http://aspe.hhs.gov/HSP/Waiver-Policies99/Table_A.htm.
Insurance
Share of population
U.S. Census Bureau. “Table HI-6. Health Insurance
coverage
under age 65 with
Coverage Status and Type of Coverage by State-- People
health insurance for
Under 65: 1987 to 2005.” Compiled by US Census Bureau
part of the year.
based on data from the Current Population Survey, 19882006 Annual Social and Economic Supplements. Accessed
on 9/19/2008 at http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/hlthins/
historic/hlthin05/hihistt6.html.
Incarceration Prisoners sentenced to U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,
rates
more than a year, per
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2004. “Prisoners under State or
100,000 population
Federal jurisdiction, Federal and State-by-State, 19772004.” Crime & Justice Electronic Data Abstracts.
Accessed on 9/19/2008 at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dtdata.htm#corrections

37

Information regarding welfare reform comes from the Office of Human Services Policy
at the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS, 2007). States that implemented a
waiver or TANF on the first of the year, and states that did not implement a waiver of TANF
policy at all in that year, were assigned a dummy variable (1 if yes, 0 if no) indicating the policy
was in effect, or was not in effect during the entire year. In cases where a state implemented a
policy change mid-year, the state was assigned a value corresponding to the portion of the year
in which the policy was in effect – for example, a state that implemented a waiver on July 1 was
assigned a .5 for that year.9 Insurance coverage rates come from the Housing and Household
Economic Statistics Division of the US Census Bureau. Incarceration rates come from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics.

9

States that implemented policies prior to the 15th of the month were treated as if the policy were not in effect
during that month, while states that implemented policies on the 15th or later were treated as if the policy were in
effect during the entire month.

38

Appendix Table 2: Weighted Summary Statistics
Pre-Period: 1994-1996

Covariates:
Covariates:
Sex
Age

Education

Marital Status

Race/Ethnicity

Language
Military Veteran
Health

Female
18-21
22-23
24-25
26-29
30-34
35-49
50-64
5 or fewer
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14-15
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Never Married
White
Black
Latino
Other
Spanish speaker
Poor

Substance
abuser
n =5,756
0.415
0.152
0.061
0.056
0.104
0.142
0.360
0.125
0.011
0.009
0.011
0.017
0.033
0.055
0.078
0.452
0.097
0.236
0.486
0.015
0.159
0.340
0.723
0.134
0.114
0.029
0.036
0.155
0.024

1997-1998

n =21,950

Substance
abuser
n =4,517

0.415
0.152
0.061
0.056
0.104
0.142
0.360
0.125
0.011
0.009
0.011
0.017
0.033
0.055
0.078
0.452
0.097
0.236
0.486
0.015
0.159
0.340
0.723
0.134
0.114
0.029
0.036
0.155
0.024

0.397
0.178
0.066
0.050
0.103
0.135
0.337
0.131
0.017
0.010
0.007
0.013
0.026
0.046
0.090
0.457
0.118
0.216
0.459
0.016
0.137
0.388
0.728
0.125
0.115
0.032
0.034
0.152
0.017

Others

Others

1999-2002
Others

n =20,140

Substance
abuser
n =20,123

n =83,555

0.394
0.154
0.063
0.054
0.101
0.130
0.361
0.136
0.009
0.009
0.008
0.014
0.028
0.048
0.081
0.432
0.111
0.257
0.475
0.019
0.145
0.361
0.709
0.133
0.121
0.037
0.039
0.150
0.022

0.403
0.199
0.068
0.050
0.097
0.114
0.339
0.133
0.015
0.012
0.007
0.020
0.037
0.050
0.088
0.406
0.131
0.234
0.386
0.018
0.161
0.435
0.694
0.134
0.134
0.038
0.044
0.108
0.024

0.405
0.159
0.060
0.049
0.086
0.114
0.382
0.151
0.012
0.008
0.007
0.014
0.029
0.046
0.082
0.459
0.112
0.233
0.447
0.019
0.177
0.356
0.693
0.132
0.129
0.044
0.042
0.139
0.022

39

Prior substance use

Household Size

Urbanicity

Fair
Good
Very Good
Excellent
Lifetime use of illicit drugs
Alcohol before age 15
Marijuana before age 17
Smoke daily
1
2
3
4
5
6 or More
In MSA >1 million
In MSA <1 million
Not in MSA

0.081
0.275
0.340
0.278
0.604
0.254
0.271
0.641
0.086
0.291
0.223
0.219
0.111
0.071
0.421
0.344
0.235

0.081
0.275
0.340
0.278
0.604
0.254
0.271
0.641
0.086
0.291
0.223
0.219
0.111
0.071
0.421
0.344
0.235

0.082
0.245
0.364
0.292
0.668
0.253
0.308
0.673
0.102
0.292
0.228
0.192
0.093
0.079
0.390
0.367
0.243

0.085
0.271
0.345
0.276
0.628
0.248
0.290
0.637
0.092
0.295
0.210
0.215
0.105
0.071
0.402
0.377
0.222

0.100
0.288
0.363
0.225
0.781
0.342
0.406
0.587
0.115
0.257
0.229
0.215
0.102
0.082
0.446
0.339
0.214

0.083
0.303
0.365
0.226
0.687
0.279
0.319
0.633
0.087
0.287
0.224
0.220
0.110
0.071
0.418
0.355
0.227

NOTES: A Sample limited to respondents with <16 years of education & percentages reflect both sampling and propensity-score based weights to balance treatment
and control group in pre-period. B Broad Treatment = respondents reporting moderate/heavy substance use, 3+ symptoms of disorder, and/or substance treatment
(including self-help groups) in last year. “moderate to heavy use”= any of the following: a) an individual "binges" (5 or more alcoholic beverages are consumed at one
sitting) >=3 times/month; b) an individual uses marijuana >=6 times/ year; or c) an individual uses any illicit drug other than marijuana >=3 times/year. The “3 or more
symptoms” = person has >= 3 of 6 symptoms for at least one single substance, based on questions regarding 10 substances including alcohol. C Information on mental
health inpatient stays is not available in a usable format for the second post period.D Employment measure is based on “present work status.” E Health insurance
variables refer to coverage at time of the survey (or in the survey month).

40

Appendix Table 3: Public Program Participation and Health Insurance, Logit Models
SSI
Welfare
Broad
Narrow
Broad
Narrow
Pr(SSI) (1994-1996)
19.17***
18.38***
4.48***
4.53***
(1.04)
(1.22)
(0.78)
(0.87)
After 1996
0.73**
0.77*
-0.38***
-0.47***
(0.34)
(0.47)
(0.14)
(0.18)
After 1998
0.56***
0.59**
0.25
0.16
(0.21)
(0.30)
(0.18)
(0.24)
Pr(SSI)*After 1996
-0.53
-0.29
-1.38
-1.27
(1.61)
(2.19)
(1.30)
(1.52)
Pr(SSI)*After1998
-2.93**
-2.79
2.47**
2.13
(1.46)
(1.89)
(1.20)
(1.41)
Broad Substance Abuser Group
0.16
-0.14
(0.32)
(0.11)
Narrow Substance Abuser Group
0.41
-0.02
(0.45)
(0.14)
Broad Group*After 1996
-0.71
0.35*
(0.47)
(0.20)
Narrow Group*After 1996
-0.74
0.41
(0.71)
(0.26)
Broad Group*After 1998
0.74**
-0.05
(0.33)
(0.19)
Narrow Group*After1998
0.84
-0.02
(0.54)
(0.24)
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group
0.80
2.94*
(2.45)
(1.59)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group
1.46
1.74
(3.19)
(1.77)
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group*After 1996
-0.48
-0.50
(3.41)
(2.52)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group*After1996
-1.05
-0.23
(5.12)
(3.09)
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group*After 1998
-1.20
-4.53**

Medicaid
Broad
Narrow
10.39***
10.20***
(0.66)
(0.70)
-0.50***
-0.55***
(0.15)
(0.18)
0.21
0.20
(0.14)
(0.18)
2.61**
3.22**
(1.22)
(1.41)
-1.75
-3.05**
(1.23)
(1.45)
-0.35***
(0.11)
-0.24**
(0.12)
0.36**
(0.16)
0.42**
(0.20)
0.05
(0.14)
0.11
(0.19)
4.11***
(1.49)
3.56**
(1.80)
-4.48*
(2.33)
-5.13*
(2.84)
0.82

Private Insurance
Broad
Narrow
-9.95***
-9.44***
(0.70)
(0.74)
0.43***
0.31***
(0.09)
(0.11)
-0.06
-0.04
(0.08)
(0.10)
-0.20
0.32
(1.14)
(1.25)
1.07
0.56
(1.06)
(1.15)
-0.02
(0.07)
-0.07
(0.08)
-0.21**
(0.10)
-0.15
(0.15)
0.03
(0.09)
-0.05
(0.13)
-2.30
(1.60)
-2.37
(2.26)
2.92
(2.39)
0.46
(3.01)
-0.83

Any HI
Broad
Narrow
-2.74*** -2.34
(0.55)
(0.62)
0.29***
0.18
(0.09)
(0.11)
0.02
0.08
(0.08)
(0.09)
1.03
1.71
(0.99)
(1.07)
-0.60
-1.80*
(0.90)
(0.95)
-0.17***
(0.06)
-0.21***
(0.08)
-0.06
(0.11)
0.05
(0.14)
0.00
(0.10)
-0.07
(0.12)
0.05
(1.11)
0.62
(1.35)
-0.57
(1.89)
-2.65
(2.37)
0.47

41

(2.65)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group*After 1998

(2.35)
-2.60
(4.00)

(1.99)
-6.12*
(3.35)

(2.12)
1.82
(2.69)

(1.70)
1.59
(2.48)

3.02
(2.11)

DDD 1997-1998 v. 1994-1996B

-0.075**
-0.080*
-0.004
0.000
-0.069
-0.080
0.055
0.000
-0.012
-0.057
(0.036)
(0.049)
(0.016)
(0.023)
(0.050)
(0.066)
(0.054)
(0.062)
(0.045)
(0.053)
DDD 1999-2002 v. 1994-1996B
-0.024
-0.053
-0.031**
-0.037**
-0.047
-0.032
0.035
0.033
-0.003
0.006
(0.033)
(0.037)
(0.013)
(0.019)
(0.036)
(0.052)
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.035)
(0.044)
DDD 1999-2002 v. 1997-1998B
0.050*
0.031
-0.028*
-0.038**
0.022
0.047
-0.020
0.033
0.008
0.063
(0.031)
(0.040)
(0.015)
(0.018)
(0.038)
(0.052)
(0.051)
(0.058)
(0.037)
(0.046)
NOTES: Based on logit models using propensity score-weighted data to match characteristics in the pre-period. Robust, Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( ) correct for
correlation within sampling units. *=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Logit models also include controls for race-gender specific national unemployment rate, national
arrest rate per 100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000 (coefficients not shown). Analyses are based on a sample size of 156,041. B Because the coefficients in
the model are on a nonlinear scale, for ease of interpretation, we present the calculation of the triple differences in predicted probabilities obtained based on coefficients
from the logit models above: DDD = {(Post-Treatment rate– Pre-Treatment rate) – (Post-Control rate– Pre-Control rate)}Pr(SSI)=.15. - {(Post-Treatment rate– Pre-Treatment
rate) – (Post-Control rate– Pre-Control rate)}Pr(SSI)=.05. We chose .15 and .05 as cutoff points for calculating DDD estimates since these span values of the Pr(SSI) that we
observe in our data. Standard errors on DDD estimates are bootstrapped using 100 replications.

42

Appendix Table 4: Labor Market Outcomes, Logit Models
Employed
Broad
Narrow
Pr(SSI) (1994-1996)
-8.54***
-8.08***
(0.65)
(0.71)
After 1996
0.17*
0.25*
(0.10)
(0.13)
After 1998
0.16*
0.14
(0.09)
(0.11)
Pr(SSI)*After 1996
-2.27**
-2.28*
(0.93)
(1.21)
Pr(SSI)*After1998
1.69**
2.57**
(0.85)
(1.07)
Broad Substance Abuser Group
0.21***
(0.08)
Narrow Substance Abuser Group
0.05
(0.12)
Broad Group*After 1996
-0.36***
(0.13)
Narrow Group*After 1996
-0.42***
(0.17)
Broad Group*After 1998
-0.07
(0.11)
Narrow Group*After1998
0.09
(0.14)
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group
-3.48***
(1.30)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group
-3.45*
(1.85)
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group*After 1996
5.40***
(1.94)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group*After1996
5.53**
(2.74)
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group*After 1998
-0.57

Full-time
Broad
Narrow
-6.76*** -5.96***
(0.69)
(0.74)
0.14
0.22*
(0.09)
(0.12)
0.03
0.02
(0.08)
(0.11)
-1.65*
-1.48
(0.99)
(1.20)
2.43***
2.72***
(0.88)
(1.06)
0.07
(0.06)
-0.05
(0.09)
-0.21**
(0.11)
-0.26*
(0.15)
-0.10
(0.10)
0.08
(0.13)
-1.60
(1.35)
-1.54
(1.81)
3.68*
(2.03)
3.38
(2.70)
-1.25

Part-time
Broad
Narrow
-3.41*** -3.91***
(0.92)
(0.94)
-0.04
-0.03
(0.12)
(0.12)
-0.21**
-0.16
(0.10)
(0.14)
-1.07
-2.02
(1.72)
(1.61)
-1.28
1.18
(1.57)
(1.55)
0.23***
(0.09)
0.25**
(0.12)
-0.18
(0.12)
-0.22
(0.19)
0.07
(0.10)
0.01
(0.16)
-4.21*
(2.39)
-5.83**
(2.43)
2.72
(3.24)
5.18
(3.76)
2.75

Disabled
Broad
Narrow
19.82*** 18.79***
(0.93)
(1.01)
0.22
0.24
(0.32)
(0.37)
0.45*
0.50
(0.27)
(0.33)
3.02*
3.53*
(1.69)
(2.06)
-2.63*
-2.74
(1.52)
(1.85)
-0.53***
(0.19)
-0.31
(0.25)
-0.40
(0.39)
-1.13**
(0.52)
0.98***
(0.37)
2.04***
(0.51)
3.44*
(1.89)
2.78
(2.26)
-0.37
(2.88)
3.52
(3.89)
-4.62*

In Labor Force
Broad
Narrow
-8.89*** -8.40***
(0.68)
(0.75)
0.11
0.14
(0.12)
(0.16)
0.10
0.01
(0.09)
(0.12)
-2.26**
-2.75**
(0.98)
(1.25)
1.57*
2.48**
(0.91)
(1.14)
0.35***
(0.09)
0.13
(0.14)
-0.42***
(0.15)
-0.54***
(0.20)
-0.07
(0.12)
0.20
(0.16)
-3.14**
(1.34)
-3.40*
(1.82)
5.99***
(1.99)
8.44***
(2.71)
-1.23

43

(1.71)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group*After 1998

DDD 1997-1998 v. 1994-1996B
DDD 1999-2002 v. 1994-1996B
DDD 1999-2002 v. 1997-1998B

(1.73)
-2.79
(2.15)

0.130**
(0.055)
0.108***
(0.036)
-0.022
(0.043)

0.130**
(0.058)
0.053
(0.052)
-0.076
(0.055)

(2.82)
-3.19
(2.12)

0.088**
(0.044)
0.057
(0.035)
-0.031
(0.041)

0.080
(0.050)
-0.001
(0.048)
-0.081*
(0.049)

(2.81)
1.31
(3.62)

0.023
(0.034)
0.034**
(0.017)
0.011
(0.017)

0.033
(0.021)
0.039**
(0.018)
0.006
(0.020)

(1.77)
-9.62
(3.75)

-0.069
(0.046)
-0.041
(0.033)
0.029
(0.041)

-0.074
(0.054)
-0.023
(0.038)
0.052
(0.048)

-5.02**
(2.23)
0.136**
(0.060)
0.095**
(0.040)
-0.041
(0.048)

0.193***
(0.065)
0.070
(0.047)
-0.123**
(0.055)

NOTES: Based on logit models using propensity score-weighted data to match characteristics in the pre-period. Robust, Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( )
correct for correlation within sampling units. *=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Logit models also include controls for race-gender specific national
unemployment rate, national arrest rate per 100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000 (coefficients not shown). Analyses are based on a sample size of
156,041. B Because the coefficients in the model are on a nonlinear scale, for ease of interpretation, we present the calculation of the triple differences in
predicted probabilities obtained based on coefficients from the logit models above: DDD = {(Post-Treatment rate– Pre-Treatment rate) – (Post-Control rate– PreControl rate)}Pr(SSI)=.15. - {(Post-Treatment rate– Pre-Treatment rate) – (Post-Control rate– Pre-Control rate)}Pr(SSI)=.05. We chose .15 and .05 as cutoff points for
calculating DDD estimates since these span values of the Pr(SSI) that we observe in our data. Standard errors on DDD estimates are bootstrapped using 100
replications.

44

Appendix Table 5: Health Care Utilization and Arrests in Last Year, Logit Models
ER Visit
Hospital Adminission Psychiatric Visit
Pr(SSI) (1994-1996)
After 1996
After 1998
Pr(SSI)*After 1996
Pr(SSI)*After1998
Broad Substance Abuser Group

5.42***
(0.61)
-0.28***
(0.09)
0.24***
(0.08)
0.09
(0.98)
-0.39
(0.79)
0.15*
(0.08)

Narrow Substance Abuser Group
Broad Group*After 1996

0.02
(0.13)

Pr(SSI)*Broad Group*After 1996

-0.67

2.62
(4.08)

5.25
(3.83)

2.14
(2.27)
-0.11
(0.28)
1.41***
(0.18)
0.69
(3.08)
1.51
(2.32)
1.37***
(0.14)

0.69**
(0.34)
1.28***
(0.38)
-0.07
(0.55)

1.55***
(0.16)
0.15
(0.21)

-0.04
(0.55)

-0.09
(0.21)

0.28
(0.24)

-0.36*
(0.19)
1.37
(3.66)

0.77
(2.09)
-3.64
(2.77)

-1.25
(3.06)

-0.48
(2.69)
-0.74
(4.56)

3.19
(5.87)
-3.49
(3.04)

1.35

1.95
(1.95)
0.02
(0.33)
1.14***
(0.20)
-2.51
(2.71)
3.53*
(2.04)

-0.39**
(0.18)

1.44
(1.70)

0.47
(2.18)

0.33

11.78***
(2.35)
-0.03
(0.54)

0.26
(0.28)

2.07
(2.20)

2.59
(2.61)

11.57***
(1.88)
-0.13
(0.47)

0.16
(0.21)

1.23
(1.76)

1.56
(2.11)

Arrested/booked

0.54***
(0.15)

0.37**
(0.18)

-1.43
(1.55)

8.32***
(1.28)
-0.39*
(0.21)
-0.08
(0.21)
1.93
(1.80)
-3.42***
(1.29)

0.35
(0.24)

0.15
(0.16)

-1.70
(1.28)

8.00***
(1.10)
-0.30*
(0.18)
-0.12
(0.18)
2.15
(1.55)
-2.62**
(1.27)
0.24*
(0.14)

0.17
(0.21)

0.08
(0.13)

Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group*After1996
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group*After 1998

0.13
(0.17)

0.08
(0.10)

Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group

7.21***
(0.88)
0.07
(0.17)
0.36**
(0.15)
1.15
(1.29)
-1.60
(1.15)

-0.07
(0.15)

-0.07
(0.15)

Narrow Group*After1998
Pr(SSI)*Broad Group

7.55***
(0.80)
-0.01
(0.12)
0.34***
(0.11)
0.37
(1.17)
-0.62
(1.01)
-0.20*
(0.12)

0.25***
(0.09)

Narrow Group*After 1996
Broad Group*After 1998

4.54***
(0.71)
-0.21**
(0.10)
0.21**
(0.10)
-0.62
(1.06)
0.28
(0.91)

Psych. Admission

-3.03
(2.40)
-0.12
(3.68)

-0.36
(6.20)

4.98
(3.46)
0.84

45

(1.92)
Pr(SSI)*Narrow Group*After 1998

(2.02)
-0.87
(2.20)

(2.32)
0.59
(2.42)

(2.96)
1.69
(2.51)

-1.75
(3.10)

DDD 1997-1998 v. 1994-1996B

0.041
0.063
0.018
-0.006
-0.042
-0.051
0.021
0.017
0.003
0.029
(0.053)
(0.060)
(0.041)
(0.053)
(0.040)
(0.060)
(0.029)
(0.039)
(0.015)
(0.026)
DDD 1999-2002 v. 1994-1996B
0.025
0.043
0.042
0.033
-0.019
-0.021
0.036**
0.047*
(0.034)
(0.043)
(0.029)
(0.045)
(0.035)
(0.041)
(0.016)
(0.026)
DDD 1999-2002 v. 1997-1998B
-0.016
-0.202
0.024
0.040
0.023
0.029
0.033*
0.018
(0.045)
(0.048)
(0.039)
(0.047)
(0.034)
(0.043)
(0.019)
(0.025)
NOTES: Based on logit models using propensity score-weighted data to match characteristics in the pre-period. Robust, Huber-White corrected SEs shown in ( )
correct for correlation within sampling units. *=p-value<=.10, **<=.05, ***<=.01. Logit models also include controls for race-gender specific national
unemployment rate, national arrest rate per 100,000 and national incarceration rate per 100,000 (coefficients not shown). Analyses are based on a sample size of
156,041. B Because the coefficients in the model are on a nonlinear scale, for ease of interpretation, we present the calculation of the triple differences in
predicted probabilities obtained based on coefficients from the logit models above: DDD = {(Post-Treatment rate– Pre-Treatment rate) – (Post-Control rate– PreControl rate)}Pr(SSI)=.15. - {(Post-Treatment rate– Pre-Treatment rate) – (Post-Control rate– Pre-Control rate)}Pr(SSI)=.05. We chose .15 and .05 as cutoff points for
calculating DDD estimates since these span values of the Pr(SSI) that we observe in our data. Standard errors on DDD estimates are bootstrapped using 100
replications.

46

