                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             AGGREGATE DEMAND AND SUPPLY

                                         Roger E. A. Farmer

                                        Working Paper 13406
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13406


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




This project was supported by NSF grant SBR 0418174. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Roger E. A. Farmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Aggregate Demand and Supply
Roger E. A. Farmer
NBER Working Paper No. 13406
September 2007
JEL No. E12,E2,E24

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper is part of a broader project that provides a microfoundation to the General Theory of J.M.
Keynes. I call this project 'old Keynesian economics' to distinguish it from new-Keynesian economics,
a theory that is based on the idea that to make sense of Keynes we must assume that prices are sticky.
I describe a multi-good model in which I interpret the definitions of aggregate demand and supply
found in the General Theory through the lens of a search theory of the labor market. I argue that Keynes'
aggregate supply curve can be interpreted as the aggregate of a set of first order conditions for the
optimal choice of labor and, using this interpretation, I reintroduce a diagram that was central to the
textbook teaching of Keynesian economics in the immediate post-war period.

Roger E. A. Farmer
UC, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu
            Aggregate Demand and Supply
                         Roger E. A. Farmer
                       Department of Economics
                               UCLA
                             August 20, 2007

                                    Abstract
         This paper is part of a broader project that provides a microfoun-
     dation to the General Theory of J.M. Keynes. I call this project ‘old
     Keynesian economics’ to distinguish it from new-Keynesian economics,
     a theory that is based on the idea that to make sense of Keynes we
     must assume that prices are sticky. I describe a multi-good model
     in which I interpret the definitions of aggregate demand and supply
     found in the General Theory through the lens of a search theory of
     the labor market. I argue that Keynes’ aggregate supply curve can be
     interpreted as the aggregate of a set of first order conditions for the
     optimal choice of labor and, using this interpretation, I reintroduce
     a diagram that was central to the textbook teaching of Keynesian
     economics in the immediate post-war period.


1    Introduction
This paper is part of a broader project that provides a microfoundation to
the central ideas of the General Theory (1936). This foundation is distinct
from new-Keynesian economics and has diﬀerent implications for fiscal and
monetary policy and for the way that one should interpret low frequency
movements in the unemployment rate. The current paper focuses on Keynes’
use of the terms ‘aggregate demand’ and ‘aggregate supply’. I will argue that
the meaning of these concepts has become distorted and I will demonstrate,
by recovering their original usage, that the central ideas of Keynesian eco-
nomics can be given a consistent microfoundation. My main purpose in the

                                       1
sections that follow is to reintroduce a diagram that appeared for decades
as the central expository device in undergraduate textbooks and to provide
an interpretation of this diagram within the framework of a search theoretic
model of the labor market.
    The current dominant interpretation of the General Theory is that of
new-Keynesian economics which builds on Patinkin’s (1956) idea that the
unemployment equilibrium of the General Theory can be interpreted as a
Walrasian general equilibrium in which agents trade at ‘false prices’. My
main concern with this approach is that it distorts a central message of the
General Theory; that in an unregulated capitalist economy, ineﬃciently high
unemployment may exist as a feature of a steady state equilibrium.
    New-Keynesian models could theoretically display very high unemploy-
ment for very long periods of time, however, when they are calibrated to
sensible numbers for the rate of price adjustment they lead to the prediction
that the unemployment rate does not deviate for long from its natural rate.
The project, of which this paper is a part, provides an alternative micro-
foundation to Keynesian economics that does not rest on sticky prices. I
call the alternative models ‘old Keynesian’ to diﬀerentiate them from those
of the new Keynesians. In old Keynesian models there is no natural rate of
unemployment. Instead, the steady state of the economic system rests on
self-fulfilling beliefs of economic agents - a feature for which Keynes used the
term ‘animal spirits’. Unlike my previous work on this topic, (1999), animal
spirits determine the steady state itself and not just the path by which that
state is attained. As a consequence, the implications for steady state welfare
are large.
    In this, and in companion papers, I build a series of economic models
each of which displays an equilibrium with an unemployment rate that may
be higher or lower than the social planning optimum. Some of these models
are one or two period examples, some are embedded in a dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium environment. They all share a single common feature.
The labor market is modeled as a search equilibrium in which households
and firms take the wage as given. Since the search technology has two inputs
but a single price - the price taking assumption leads to a model with more
unknowns than equations. Rather than use a bargaining assumption or some
other game theoretic concept to close the model, I assume instead that supply
adjusts to meet demand and that demand, in turn, is determined by the self-
fulfilling beliefs of agents.
    In the equilibria of old-Keynesian models all prices adjust to a point

                                       2
where no individual has an incentive to change his behavior; nevertheless,
there remain unexploited gains to trade. The prevalence of the Walrasian
equilibrium concept has blunted us to the remarkable feature of a Walrasian
equilibrium; that the first and second welfare theorems hold as a feature of
the Walrasian decentralization. Economists as a group have become so used
to this formalization of Adam Smith’s doctrine of the invisible hand that we
have forgotten that the optimality of equilibrium is a remarkable feature of
a certain class of social organizations and not an inherent law of nature.


2    The Meaning of Aggregate Demand and
     Supply
The concepts of aggregate demand and supply are widely used by contem-
porary economists. They are typically explained in the context of a one
commodity model in which real gdp is unambiguously measured in units of
commodities per unit of time. In the General Theory there is no assump-
tion that the world can be described by a single commodity model; to the
contrary, Chapter 4 of the General Theory is devoted to a discussion of the
choice of units that is designed to provide a framework that can accommo-
date the rich complexity of a modern industrial economy in which there are
many produced commodities and many capital goods.
    In his discussion of units, Keynes describes his intent to base all measure-
ment on two homogenous units; money (I will call this a dollar) and a unit
of ordinary labor. The theory of index numbers as we understand it today
was not available in the early 1930’s and Keynes’ use of money and ordinary
labor to describe aggregate relationships was clever and new. The aggregate
demand and supply curves of the General Theory are relationships between
these two units and they are not the same relationships as those that hold
between a price index and a quantity index in modern textbook expositions
of aggregate demand and supply.
    Keynes chose ‘an hour’s unit of ordinary labor’ to represent the level of
economic activity because it is a relatively homogeneous unit. To get around
the fact that diﬀerent workers have diﬀerent skills he proposed to measure
labor of diﬀerent eﬃciencies by relative wages. Thus

      ...the quantity of employment can be suﬃciently defined for our
      purpose by taking an hour’s employment of ordinary labour as

                                       3
     our unit and weighting an hour’s employment of special labor
     in proportion to its remuneration; i.e. an hour of special labour
     remunerated at double ordinary rates will count as two units...
     [General Theory, Page 41]

    In the General Theory, aggregate demand is driven primarily by the ‘an-
imal spirits’ of investors. Animal spirits are a key component of autonomous
investment expenditure that, in turn, is the prime cause of fluctuations in ag-
gregate demand. To capture this idea one requires a dynamic model since in-
vestment involves plans that span at least two periods. However, autonomous
expenditure is also determined by government spending and by recognizing
this dependence I will be able, in this paper, to explain how a search model
of the labor market can be embedded into general equilibrium in a relatively
simple environment; a one period model that abstracts from investment in
which output and employment are driven by fiscal policy.
    The one period model I will describe is simpler than a fully articulated
dynamic general equilibrium model of the variety that is often used to artic-
ulate real business cycle theory. It is simpler since I abstract from dynamics
and assume that all output is produced from labor and existing fixed fac-
tors. Adding dynamics would abstract from the main point of the paper; to
articulate a mechanism that can provide a microfounded model of the labor
market in which there may be a continuum of stationary equilibrium un-
employment rates. I will tackle the problem of adding dynamics elsewhere.
Dynamic Keynesian models will add additional richness and a distinct set
of issues that separate them from the Cass-Ramsey model that provides the
basis for RBC models.


3    Households
In this section and in subsequent sections I will construct a one period model
that contains the essential ideas of aggregate demand and supply. I begin by
describing the problem of the households. Since I am going to concentrate
on the theory of aggregate supply, I will assume the existence of identical
households, each of which solves the problem

                               max J = j (C) ,                             (1)
                               {C,H}




                                       4
subject to the constraints
                                      ¡           ¢
                      p · C ≤ (1 − τ ) Lw + r · K̄ + T,                     (2)
                                       H ≤ 1,                               (3)
                                   L = q̃H,                                 (4)
                                 U = H − L.                                 (5)
Each household has a measure 1 of members. C is a vector of n commodities,
p is a vector of n money prices, w is the money wage, r is a vector of money
rental rates and K̄ is a vector of m factor endowments. I use the symbol rj to
refer to the j 0 th rental rate. The factors may be thought of as diﬀerent types
of land although in dynamic models they would have the interpretation of
diﬀerent types of capital goods. I will maintain the convention throughout
the paper that boldface letters are vectors and x · y is a vector product.
    The household decides on the measure H of members that will search
for jobs, and on the amounts of its income to allocate to each of the n
commodities. T is the lump-sum household transfer (measured in dollars)
and τ the income-tax rate. A household that allocates H members to search
will receive a measure q̃H of jobs where the employment rate q̃ is taken
parametrically by households. I will assume that utility takes the form
                                       n
                                       X
                             j (C) =         gi log (Ci ) ,                 (6)
                                       i=1

where the commodity weights sum to 1,
                                  n
                                  X
                                        gi = 1.                             (7)
                                  i=1

Later, I will also assume that each good is produced by a Cobb-Douglas
production function and I will refer to the resulting model as a logarithmic-
Cobb-Douglas, or LCD, economy. Although the analysis could be generalized
to allow utility to be homothetic, and technologies to be CES, this extension
would considerably complicate the algebra. My intent is to find a compromise
model that allows for multiple commodities but is still tractable and for this
purpose, the log utility model is familiar and suitable.
    The solution to the household’s decision problem has the form
                                       H = 1,                               (8)

                                         5
                                  Ci = gi Z D ,                              (9)
where gi is the budget share allocated to the i0 th good. For more general
homothetic preferences these shares would be functions of the price vector p.
   Household income, Z is defined as

                               Z ≡ Lw + r · K̄,                             (10)

and is measured in dollars. The term Z D in Equation (9) represents dispos-
able income and is defined by the equation

                             Z D = (1 − τ ) Z + T.                          (11)

Since all income is derived from the production of commodities it follows
from the aggregate budget constraints of households, firms and government
that Z is also equal to the value of the produced commodities in the economy,
                                      n
                                      X
                                 Z≡          pi Yi ,                        (12)
                                       i=1

and since the government budget must be balanced in equilibrium, it also
follows that
                               Z = ZD.                              (13)
The equivalence of income and the value of output is a restatement of the
familiar Keynesian accounting identity, immortalized in the textbook concept
of the ‘circular flow of income’.


4     Firms
This section deals with the production of commodities in a decentralized
economy. The main aspect that is novel is my description of the hiring
process in which I will assume that a firm must use part of its labor force in
the activity of recruiting.
    I assume that there are n ≥ m commodities. Output of the i0 th commod-
ity is denoted Yi , and is produced by a constant returns-to-scale neoclassical
production function
                               Yi = Ψi (Ki , Xi ) ,                       (14)
where Ki is a vector of m capital goods used in the i0 th industry and Xi is
labor used in production in industry i. The j 0 th element of Ki , denoted Ki,j ,

                                       6
is the measure of the j 0 th capital good used as an input to the i0 th industry
and Ki is defined as,

                           Ki ≡ (Ki,1 , Ki,2 . . . , Ki,m ) .               (15)

The function Ψi is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas,
                                            a      a          a
                   Ψi (Ki , Xi ) ≡ Ai Ki,1i,1 Ki,2i,2 . . . Ki,m
                                                               i,m
                                                                   Xibi ,   (16)

where the constant returns-to-scale assumption implies that the weights ai,j
and bi sum to 1,
                             Xm
                                 ai,j + bi = 1.                        (17)
                                   j=1

Since the assumption of constant returns-to-scale implies that the number of
firms in each industry is indeterminate I will refer interchangeably to Yi as
the output of a firm or of an industry.
    Each firm recruits workers in a search market by allocating a measure
Vi of workers to recruiting. The total measure of workers Li , employed in
industry i, is
                                Li = Xi + Vi .                           (18)
Each firm takes parametrically the measure of workers that can be hired,
denoted q, and employment at firm i is related to Vi by the equation,

                                         Li = qVi .                         (19)

    I have assumed that labor, rather than output, is used to post vacancies
in contrast to most search models. This innovation is not important and is
made for expositional simplicity and to allow me, in related work, to write
down models that can easily be compared with more familiar real business
cycle economies. The timing of the employment decision deserves some dis-
cussion since by implication I am allowing the firm to use workers to recruit
themselves.
    If a firm begins the period with no workers, and if workers are an essential
input to recruiting, it might be argued that the firm can never successfully
hire a worker. Since I will be thinking of the time period of the model as
a quarter or a year, this assumption should be seen as a convenient way of
representing the equilibrium of a dynamic process. The firm puts forward
a plan that consists of a feasible n−tuple {Vi , Yi , Li , Ki , Xi }. Given the

                                             7
exogenous hiring elasticity, q, a plan to use Vi workers in recruiting results
in qVi workers employed of whom Xi are used to produce commodities.
    We are now equipped to describe the proft-maximization of a firm in
industry i. The firm solves the problem
                              max            pi Yi − wi Li − r · Ki        (20)
                         {Ki ,Vi ,Xi ,Li }

                                         a       a         a
                         Yi ≤ Ai Ki,1i,1 Ki,2i,2 . . . Ki,m
                                                          i,m
                                                              Xibi ,       (21)
                                       Li = Xi + Vi ,                      (22)
                                             Li = qVi .                    (23)
Using equations (22) and (23) we can write labor used in production, Xi , as
a multiple, Q, of employment at the firm, Li
                                         Xi = Li Q,                        (24)
where Q is defined as               µ        ¶
                                           1
                               Q= 1−           .                           (25)
                                           q
Q acts like a productivity shock to the firm but it is in fact an externality
that represents ‘labor market tightness’. I will return to the role of Q below.
Using this definition we may write the firm’s profit maximization problem in
reduced form,
                          max pi Yi − wi Li − r · Ki ,                     (26)
                         {Ki ,Vi ,Xi ,Li }
                                                 a    a           a
                        Yi ≤ Ai Lbi i Qbi Ki,1i,1 Ki,2i,2 . . . Ki,m
                                                                   i,m
                                                                       .   (27)
The solution to this problem is characterized by the first-order conditions
                        ai,j pi Yi = Ki,j rj , j = 1, . . . , m,           (28)
                                       bi pi Yi = wLi .                    (29)
Using these conditions to write Li and Ki,j as functions of w, r, and pi and
substituting them the production function leads to an expression for pi in
terms of factor prices,               µ     ¶
                                        w
                              pi = pi     ,r .                           (30)
                                        Q
The function pi : Rm+1 → R+ is known as the factor price frontier and is
homogenous of degree 1 in the vector of m money rental rates r and in the
productivity adjusted money wage, w.

                                                 8
5    Search
I have described how individual households and firms respond to the aggre-
gate variables w, p, r, q and q̃. This section describes the process by which
searching workers find jobs. To model the job finding process I assume that
there is an aggregate match technology of the form,

                                m̄ = H̄ 1/2 V̄ 1/2 ,                       (31)

where m̄ is the measure of workers that find jobs when H̄ unemployed work-
ers search and V̄ workers are allocated to recruiting in aggregate by all firms.
I have used bars over variables to distinguish aggregate from individual val-
ues. Since leisure does not yield disutility and hence H̄ = 1, this equation
simplifies as follows,
                                  m̄ = V̄ 1/2 .                             (32)
Further, since all workers are initially unemployed, employment and matches
are equal,
                                    L̄ = V̄ 1/2 .                      (33)
In a dynamic model employment at each firm will become a state variable
that acts much like capital in the RBC model. In the one period model I
have abstracted from this role by assuming that all workers begin the period
unemployed.
     Equation (33) describes how aggregate employment is related to the ag-
gregate search eﬀort of all firms. I will refer to the measure of workers that
can be hired by a single employee engaged in recruiting as the hiring eﬀec-
tiveness of the firm. To find an expression for the hiring eﬀectiveness of the
i0 th firm I assume that jobs are allocated in proportion to the fraction of
aggregate recruiters attached to firm i; that is,
                                               Vi
                                 Li ≡ V̄ 1/2      ,                        (34)
                                               V̄
where Vi is the number of recruiters at firm i. The hiring eﬀectiveness of firm
i is given by the expression
                                       1
                                           ,                               (35)
                                    V̄ 1/2
which is a decreasing function of aggregate recruiting eﬀorts. This reflects
the fact that when many firms are searching there is congestion in the market
and it becomes harder for an individual firm to find a new worker.

                                         9
6    The Social Planner
The purpose of this paper is to describe a micro-founded model of the Key-
nesian idea that equilibrium is determined by the intersection of aggregate
demand and supply. A secondary purpose is to study the properties of a Key-
nesian equilibrium and to formulate the idea of Keynesian unemployment.
To describe how employment may be too low I will need a benchmark of
eﬃcient employment against which it can be measured; this section provides
such a bench-mark by studying the problem that would be solved by a social
planner who operates production and search technologies to maximize the
following welfare function,
                                                      n
                                                      X
                             max j (C) =                     gi log (Ci ) ,       (36)
                         {C,V,L,H}
                                                       i=1

subject to the resource constraints,
                         a         a          a
            Ci ≤ Ai Ki,1i,1 Ki,2i,2 . . . Ki,m
                                             i,m
                                                 (Li − Vi )bi , i = 1, . . . n,   (37)
                             n
                             X
                                   Ki,j ≤ K̄j , j = 1, . . . m                    (38)
                             i=1
                                              µ       ¶1/2
                                                  H
                                       Li =                   Vi ,                (39)
                                                  V
                                              H ≤ 1.                              (40)
Since the optimal value of H, denoted H ∗ , will equal 1, Equations (39)
and (40) can be rearranged to give the following expression for aggregate
employment as a function of aggregate labor devoted to recruiting,
                                            n
                                            X
                                       L≡         Li = V 1/2 .                    (41)
                                            i=1

Combining this expression with Equation (39) leads to the following relation-
ship between labor used in recruiting at firm i, employment at firm i, and
aggregate employment,
                                Vi = Li L.                               (42)
Equation (42) restates the implication of (34) in a diﬀerent form. The social
planner recognizes that it takes more eﬀort on the part of the recruiting

                                                  10
department of firm i to hire a new worker when aggregate employment is
high and he will take account of this relationship between hiring activities of
diﬀerent industries when allocating labor to alternative activities.
   Using Equation (42) to eliminate Vi from the production function we can
rewrite (37) in terms of Ki and Li ,
                                a     a         a
                   Ci = Ai Ki,1i,1 Ki,2i,2 . . . Ki,m  Li (1 − L)bi .
                                                    i,m bi
                                                                           (43)

Equation (43) makes clear that the match technology leads to a production
externality across firms. When all other firms have high levels of employment
it becomes harder for the individual firm to recruit workers and this shows
up as an external productivity eﬀect, this is the term (1 − L), in firm i0 s
production function. The externality is internalized by the social planner
but may cause diﬃculties that private markets cannot eﬀectively overcome.
    To find a solution to the social planning solution, we may substitute
Equation (43) into the objective function (36) and exploit the logarithmic
structure of the problem to write utility as a weighted sum of the logs of
capital and labor used in each industry, and of the externality terms that
depend on the log of (1 − L). The first-order conditions for the problem can
then be written as
                                Pn
                        gi b i        gi b i
                               = i=1         , i = 1, . . . , n,         (44)
                         Li      (1 − L)
                   gi ai,j
                           = λj , i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , m,      (45)
                   Ki,j
                         m
                         X
                                Ki,j = K̄j , j = 1, . . . , m.             (46)
                          j=1

The variable λj is a Lagrange multiplier onP     the j 0 th resource constraint.
Using Equation (44) and the fact that L = ni=1 Li , it follows from some
simple algebra, that the social planner will allocate half of the labor force in
the LCD economy to employment;

                                       L∗ = 1/2.                           (47)

The remaining half will be unemployed. The fraction 1/2 follows from the
Cobb-Douglas elasticity of the matching function. The fact that one half
of the labor force remains unemployed in equilibrium follows from the fact

                                           11
that resources would have to be diverted from production to recruiting in
order to increase employment and increasing employment beyond 1/2 would
be counterproductive and result in a loss of output in each industry. In this
economy, the ‘natural rate of unemployment’ is 50%.
    The social planning solution provides a clear candidate definition of full
employment - it is the level of employment L∗ that maximizes per-capita
output. In the General Theory, Keynes argued that a laissez-faire economic
system would not necessarily achieve full employment and he claimed the
possibility of equilibria at less than full employment as a consequence of
what he called a failure of eﬀective demand.
    The first-order conditions can also be used to derive the following expres-
sion for the labor L∗i used in industry i;
                                        gi bi
                               L∗i = Pn         L∗ .                       (48)
                                            g
                                       i=1 i ib
To derive the capital allocation across firms for capital good j, the social
planner solves Equations (45) and (46) to yield the optimal allocation of
capital good j to industry i;
                              ∗       gi ai,j
                            Ki,j = Pn            K̄j.                  (49)
                                     i=1 gi ai,j
To recap, in the LCD economy, the social planner sets employment at 1/2 and
allocates factors across industries using weights that depend on a combination
of factor shares and consumption weights in preferences.


7    Aggregate Demand and Supply
This section derives the properties of the Keynesian aggregate supply curve
for the LCD economy. When I began this project I thought of aggregate
supply as a relationship between employment and output. Intuition that
was carried over from my own undergraduate training led me to think of this
function as analogous to a movement along a production function in a one-
good economy. This intuition is incorrect: A more appropriate analogy would
be to compare the aggregate supply function to the first order condition for
labor in a one good model.
    Consider a one-good economy in which output, Y, is produced from labor
L and capital K using the function
                                    ¡ ¢
                            Y = A L̄ K α L1−α ,                         (50)

                                      12
where A may be a function of aggregate employment because of the search
externalities discussed above. It would be a mistake to call the function,

                               A (L) K α L1−α ,                            (51)

where L̄ is replaced by L, the Keynesian aggregate supply function.
   If this is not what Keynes meant by aggregate supply then what did
he mean? The points that I want to make are worth emphasizing because
the original intent of the General Theory has been obfuscated by decades
of misinterpretation. The first point is that although the aggregate demand
and supply diagram plots demand and supply prices against quantities, these
are not prices in the usual sense of the term. Keynes defined the aggregate
supply price of a given volume of employment to be the

     ‘expectation of proceeds which will just make it worth the while of
     the entrepreneurs to give that employment’ (Keynes, 1936, Page
     24).

   By aggregate demand he meant,

     the proceeds which entrepreneurs expect to receive from the em-
     ployment of L men, the relationship between D and L being
     written D = f (L) which can be called the Aggregate Demand
     Function. (Keynes, 1936, Page 25, ‘L’ is substituted for ‘N’ from
     the original).

    Keynes then asked us to consider what would happen if, for a given value
of employment, aggregate demand D is greater than aggregate supply Z. In
that case...

     there will be an incentive to entrepreneurs to increase employment
     beyond L and, if necessary, to raise costs by competing with one
     another for the factors of production, up to the value of L for
     which Z has become equal to D. (Keynes, 1936, Page 25, N
     replaced by L and italics added).

    It is not possible to understand this definition without allowing relative
prices to change since the notion of competing for factors requires an ad-
justment of factor prices. In a general equilibrium environment Walras law

                                     13
implies that one price can be chosen as numeraire; the price chosen by Keynes
was the money wage. Given a value of w, competition for factors requires
adjustment of the money price p and the rental rate r to equate aggregate
demand and supply.
    In the one-good economy, the equation that triggers competition for work-
ers is the first-order condition
                               (1 − α) Y  w
                                         = .                             (52)
                                   L      p
Aggregate demand Z, is price times quantity. Using this definition, Equation
(52) can be rearranged to yield the expression,
                                             wL
                             Z ≡ pY =              ,                     (53)
                                           (1 − α)
which is the Keynesian aggregate supply function for a one-good economy.
By fixing the money wage Keynes was not assuming disequilibrium in factor
markets; he was choosing a numeraire. Once this is recognized, the Keynesian
aggregate supply curve takes on a diﬀerent interpretation from that which
is given in introductory textbooks. A movement along the aggregate supply
curve is associated with an increase in the price level that reduces the real
wage and brings it into equality with a falling marginal product of labor.
    In an economy with many goods the aggregate supply price, Z, is defined
by the expression
                                    X n
                                Z≡      pi Yi .                          (54)
                                     i=1
For the LCD economy the aggregate supply function has a particularly simple
form since the logarithmic and Cobb-Douglas functional forms allow individ-
ual demands and supplies to be aggregated. The first order condition for the
use of labor at firm i has the form
                                         bi Yi pi
                                   Li =           .                       (55)
                                            w
To aggregate labor across industries we need to know how relative prices
adjust as the economy expands. To determine relative prices we must turn
to preferences and here the assumption of logarithmic utility allows a simpli-
fication since the representative agent allocates fixed budget shares to each
commodity
                              Yi pi = gi Z D = gi Z,                      (56)

                                     14
where the equality of Z and Z D follows from the government budget con-
straint. Combining Equation (55) with (56) yields the expression,

                                         bi gi Z
                                  Li =           ,                           (57)
                                            w
and summing Equation (57) over all i industries and choosing w = 1 as the
numeraire leads to the expression
                                    1
                               Z=     L ≡ φ (L) ,                            (58)
                                    χ
where                                  n
                                       X
                                  χ≡         gi bi .                         (59)
                                       i=1

Equation (58) is the Keynesian aggregate supply curve for the multi-good
logarithmic-Cobb-Douglas economy.
     To reiterate; the aggregate supply curve in a one-good economy is not
a production function; it is the first-order condition for labor. In the LCD
economy it is an aggregate of the first order conditions across industries with
a coeﬃcient that is a weighted sum of preference and technology parameters
for the diﬀerent industries.
     Can this expression be generalized beyond the LCD case? The answer
is yes, but the resulting expression for aggregate supply depends, in general,
on factor supplies, that is, Z will be a function not only of L but also of
K̄1 , . . . K̄m . The following paragraph demonstrates that, given our special
assumptions about preferences and technologies, these stocks serve only to
influence rental rates.
     The first order condition for the j 0 th factor used in firm i can be written
as
                                          ai,j Yi pi
                                   Ki,j =            .                        (60)
                                             rj
Combining the first order conditions for factor j and summing over all i
industries leads to the expression
                              Xn        Pn
                                             ai,j Yi pi
                        K̄j =     Ki,j = i=1            .          (61)
                              i=1
                                             r j




                                       15
Exploiting the allocation of budget shares by consumers, Equation (56), one
can derive the following expression,
                                        χj Z
                                 rj =        ,                          (62)
                                        K̄j

where                                  n
                                       X
                                χj ≡         ai,j gi .                  (63)
                                       i=1

Equation (62) determines the nominal rental rate for factor j as a function
of the aggregate supply price Z and the factor supply K̄j .


8    Keynesian Equilibrium
What determines relative outputs in the Keynesian model and how are ag-
gregate employment, L, and the aggregate supply price Z, determined?
Aggregate demand follows from the gdp accounting identity,
                                       n
                                       X
                                D=           pi Ci .                    (64)
                                       i=1

In an economy with government purchases and investment expenditure this
equation would have two extra terms as in the textbook Keynesian accounting
identity that generation of students have written as

                               Y = C + I + G.                            (65)
                                  P
In our notation C is replaced by ni=1 pi Ci , Y is replaced by D, and G and I
are absent from the model. The Keynesian consumption function is simply
the budget equation
                          Xn
                              pi Ci = (1 − τ ) Z + T,                    (66)
                          i=1
                Pn
and since D = i=1 pi Ci and χZ = L, from Equation (58), the aggregate
demand function for the LCD economy is given by the expression,
                                              L
                            D = (1 − τ )        + T.                    (67)
                                              χ

                                       16
                                               The Aggregate Supply
                                               Function
         Z, D
                  The Aggregate Demand Z = 1 L
                  Function                 χ
                                 L
                  D = (1 − τ )       +T
                                 χ
           ZK




          T
                         1
                         χ
                                                LK            1
                                                                      L


                 Figure 1: Aggregate Demand and Supply

In a Keynesian equilibrium, when D = Z, the value of income, Z K is given
by the equality of aggregate demand and supply; that is,
                                               T
                                      ZK =       ,                        (68)
                                               τ
and equilibrium employment is given by the expression.

                                     LK = χZ K .

The Keynesian aggregate demand and supply functions for the LCD economy
are graphed in Figure 1.


9    Keynes and the Social Planner
How well do markets work and do we require government micro-management
of individual industries to correct ineﬃcient allocations of resources that are

                                          17
inherent in capitalist economies? Keynes gave a two part answer to this
question. He argued that the level of aggregate economic activity may be
too low as a consequence of the failure of eﬀective demand and here he was a
strong proponent of government intervention. But he was not a proponent of
socialist planning. In this section I will show that the model outlined in this
paper provides a formalization of Keynes’ arguments. If eﬀective demand
is too low, the model displays an ineﬃcient level of employment and in this
sense there is an argument for a well designed fiscal policy. But the allocation
of factors across industries, for a given volume of employment, is the same
allocation that would be achieved by a social planner.
    To make the argument for fiscal intervention one need only compare aggre-
gate employment in the social planning solution with aggregate employment
in a Keynesian equilibrium. The social planner would choose
                                       1
                                   L∗ = .                                  (69)
                                       2
The Keynesian equilibrium at
                                           χT
                                  LK =        ,                            (70)
                                            τ
may result in any level of employment in the interval [0, 1]. For any value
of LK < L∗ we may say that the economy is experiencing Keynesian unem-
ployment and in this case there is a possible Pareto improvement that would
make everyone better oﬀ by increasing the number of people employed.
    The formalization of Keynesian economics based on search contains the
additional implication that there also may be overemployment since LK may
be greater than L∗ . Overemployment is also Pareto ineﬃcient and welfare
would, in this case, be increased by employing fewer workers in all industries.
Although a value of LK greater than L∗ is associated with a higher value of
nominal gdp (Z K > Z ∗ ), there is too much production on average and by
lowering L back towards L∗ the social planner will be able to increase the
quantity of consumption goods available in every industry.
    In an overemployment equilibrium the additional workers spend more
time recruiting their fellows than in productive activity. In the limit, as
employment tends to 1, nominal gdp tends to its upper bound, 1/χ. But
although gdp measured in wage units always increases as employment in-
creases, for very high values of employment the physical quantity of output
produced in each industry is very low and in the limit at L = 1, Yi is equal

                                      18
to zero in each industry and pi is infinite. Every employed worker is so busy
recruiting additional workers that he has no time to produce commodities.
    What about the allocation of factors across industries. Here the capitalist
system fares much better. Equations (48) and (49), that determine factor
allocations in the social planning solution, are reproduced below
                                      gi bi
                              L∗i = Pn        L∗ ,                        (71)
                                          g
                                     i=1 i ib

                             ∗       gi ai,j
                            Ki,j = Pn           K̄j.                      (72)
                                    i=1 gi ai,j

Given the resources K̄j for j = 1, ..., m, Equation (72) implies that these
resources will be allocated across industries in proportion to weights that
depend on the preference parameters gi and the production elasticities ai,j .
Equation (71) implies that the volume of resources employed, L∗ , will be
allocated across industries in a similar manner.
    Contrast these equations with their counterparts for the competitive equi-
librium. The factor demand equations (60), and the resource constraints (61)
are reproduced below,
                                       ai,j Yi pi
                                Ki,j =            ,                       (73)
                                          rj
                              Xn          Pn
                                                   ai,j Yi pi
                       Kj =       Ki,j = i=1                  .           (74)
                              i=1
                                                  rj
Consumers with logarithmic preferences will set budget shares to utility
weights
                             pi Yi = gi Z.                         (75)
Combining this expression with Equations (60) and (74) leads to the fol-
lowing equation that determines the allocation of factor j to industry i in a
Keynesian equilibrium,
                                     gi ai,j
                            Ki,j = Pn           K̄j .                     (76)
                                    i=1 gi ai,j

This expression is identical to the social planning solution, Equation (72).
   What about the allocation of labor across industries? The first order
conditions for firms imply
                                 bi pi Yi = wLi .                        (77)

                                       19
Combining this expression with Equation (75) and using the fact that χZ K =
LK gives,
                                       gi b i
                              Li = Pn           LK ,                      (78)
                                      i=1 gi bi
                                      P
where I have used the fact that χ ≡ ni=1 gi bi . Equation (78) that determines
the allocation of labor across industries is identical to the social planning
solution with one exception; the eﬃcient level of aggregate employment L∗
is replaced by the Keynesian equilibrium level LK . It is in this sense that
Keynes provided a General theory of employment; the classical value L∗ is
just one possible rest point of the capitalist system, as envisaged by Keynes,
and in general it is not one that he thought would be found by unassisted
competitive markets.


10        Concluding Comments
It is diﬃcult to read the General Theory without experiencing a disconnect
between what is in the book and what one has learned about Keynesian
economics as a student. The most egregious misrepresentation is the notion
of aggregate demand and supply that we teach to undergraduates and that
bears little or no relationship to what Keynes meant by these terms. The
representative textbook author has adopted the Humpty Dumpty approach
that, “...when I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean - neither
more nor less.”1
    The textbook aggregate demand curve slopes down; the Keynesian aggre-
gate demand curve slopes up. The textbook aggregate demand curve plots
a price against a quantity; so does the Keynesian aggregate demand curve,
at least in name, but the “aggregate demand price” and the “aggregate sup-
ply price” of the General Theory are very diﬀerent animals from the price
indices of modern theory. Beginning with Patinkin (1956), textbook Keyne-
sians have tried to fit the round peg of the General Theory into the square
hole of Walrasian general equilibrium theory. The fact that the fit is less than
perfect has caused several generations of students to abandon the ideas of
the General Theory and to follow the theoretically more coherent approach
of real business cycle theory. The time has come to reconsider this decision.


  1
      The quote is from Alices’ Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll.

                                           20
References
Farmer, R. E. A. (1999): The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies.
  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, second edn.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
 Money. MacMillan and Co.

Patinkin, D. (1956): Money Interest and Prices. Harper and Row, New
  York, first edn.
