                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE EFFECTS OF MANDATORY SEATBELT LAWS ON SEATBELT USE, MOTOR
    VEHICLE FATALITIES, AND CRASH-RELATED INJURIES AMONG YOUTHS

                                      Christopher S. Carpenter
                                             Mark Stehr

                                        Working Paper 13408
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13408


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




We are grateful to Steven Kinchen and Shari Shanklin at the Centers for Disease Control for assistance
in obtaining the data. Daniel Eisenberg, Anindya Sen, and anonymous referees provided very useful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Christopher S. Carpenter and Mark Stehr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Mandatory Seatbelt Laws on Seatbelt Use, Motor Vehicle Fatalities, and Crash-Related
Injuries among Youths
Christopher S. Carpenter and Mark Stehr
NBER Working Paper No. 13408
September 2007
JEL No. I1

                                                ABSTRACT

We provide the first comprehensive assessment of the effects of mandatory seatbelt laws on self-reported
seatbelt use, highway fatalities, and crash-related injuries among high school age youths using data
from the Centers for Disease Control's (CDC) national, state, and local Youth Risk Behavior Surveys
(YRBS) and the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) from 1991 to 2005, a period spanning
over 20 changes in state seatbelt laws. Our quasi-experimental approaches isolate the independent
effects of seatbelt laws net of demographic characteristics, area and year fixed effects, and smooth
area-specific trends. Across all data sources, we find consistent evidence that state mandatory seatbelt
laws -- particularly those permitting primary enforcement -- significantly increased seatbelt use among
high school age youths by 45-80 percent, primarily at the extensive margin. Unlike previous research
for adults, however, we find evidence against the selective recruitment hypothesis: seatbelt laws had
consistently larger effects on those most likely to be involved in traffic accidents (drinkers, alcohol-involved
drivers). We also find that mandatory seatbelt laws significantly reduced traffic fatalities and serious
injuries resulting from fatal crashes by 8 and 9 percent, respectively. Our results suggest that if all
states had primary enforcement seatbelt laws then regular youth seatbelt use would be nearly universal
and youth fatalities would fall by about 120 per year.

Christopher S. Carpenter
University of California, Irvine
The Paul Merage School of Business
443 SB
Irvine, CA 92697-3125
and NBER
kittc@uci.edu

Mark Stehr
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
Matheson Hall 504E
3141 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-2875
stehr@drexel.edu
                                                                                                   p.1


1. Introduction

An enormous body of research shows that seatbelts save lives, in large part by reducing

the severity of injuries in traffic collisions (NHTSA 2003).               States began adopting

mandatory seatbelt laws in the 1980’s, and research has shown that these laws have been

effective at reducing highway fatalities, primarily by inducing very large increases in

regular seatbelt use among adults (Cohen and Einav 2003, Dee 1999 and others).1

Research has also shown that laws permitting primary enforcement of seatbelt laws –

whereby police authorities can cite violators of the seatbelt law even in the absence of

other violations – have been relatively more effective than weaker laws mandating only

secondary enforcement (see, for example, Houston and Richardson 2006, and others).

        In contrast to the large body of evidence on the effects of mandatory seatbelt laws

on adults, there is very little evaluation research focusing on youths. Youths, however,

are of heightened interest in the context of seatbelt use for two key reasons. First, rates of

seatbelt use among high school age youths are much lower than the associated rates for

adults (Womack et al. 1997, Williams et al. 2003, and others). In our national data

covering the period 1991-2005 (described below), only about one third of high school age

youths report always wearing a seatbelt when riding in someone else’s car, while data

from the University of Michigan’s Monitoring the Future Study over the period 1986-

2000 show that only one quarter of high school seniors report always wearing a seatbelt

when driving a car. These figures are less than half the associated rate for adults

according to surveys fielded by the National Highway Transportation Safety

Administration (NHTSA), which produce seatbelt use rates of over 70% for adults by


1
 A similar relationship has also been documented throughout provinces in Canada. See, for example, Sen
2001 and 2006.
                                                                                                      p.2


2001. Second, traffic fatalities are disturbingly common among youths, both in absolute

and relative terms: fatal crash rates of youths age 16-19 are about four times higher than

the associated rates for older adults age 25-69 (NHTSA 2003), and motor vehicle crashes

are the leading cause of death for 15-20 year olds in the United States (according to 2002

mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics). Finally, previous research

has argued that youths are unlikely to be strongly responsive to seatbelt laws because of

“selective recruitment” – whereby those most likely to be in accidents are those least

likely to increase seatbelt use in response to a law. These facts heighten the importance

of understanding the relationship between seatbelt laws and seatbelt use among youths.

        We provide the first comprehensive evaluation of the effects of mandatory

seatbelt laws on youth seatbelt use, traffic fatalities, and crash-related injuries. To do so,

we use area-identified versions of the 1991-2005 national Youth Risk Behavior Surveys

(YRBS), the 1993-2005 state YRBS, and the 1993-2005 local YRBS, all coordinated by

the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). The national YRBS microdata provide the

benefit of large sample sizes, multiple meaningful measures of seatbelt use, the ability to

directly control for individual demographic characteristics, and the ability to test

hypotheses about selective recruitment among youths using information on other risky

behaviors such as drinking and alcohol-involved driving. The state and local YRBS

samples improve on previous research because the majority of these surveys are designed

to be representative of the larger high school student population.2 We complement the

analyses of self-reported seatbelt use – which may suffer from endogenous reporting bias

– with more objectively measured evidence on traffic fatalities and crash-related injuries


2
 For a similar example of the state and local representative YRBS data used in this way, see Carpenter and
Cook (2007, forthcoming).
                                                                                                       p.3


using data from the 1991-2005 Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS).3 Our data

span a time period that witnessed over 20 changes in state seatbelt laws. Because of this,

our models are able to support unrestricted controls for area (city or state) and year fixed

effects, resulting in difference-in-differences models of the effect of seatbelt laws on

youth outcomes. Our most preferred specifications also account for smooth area-specific

linear trends which are consistently significant predictors of the youth outcomes we

study.

         The results from these four independent data sources return consistent evidence

that mandatory seatbelt laws permitting primary enforcement (i.e. where authorities need

only observe the seatbelt violation to issue a citation) have significantly increased seatbelt

use among high school age youths by about 45-80 percent. The FARS data also indicate

that adoption of a primary enforcement seatbelt law significantly reduces youth fatalities

by about 8 percent and serious crash-related injuries by about 9 percent relative to the

sample means. Across all outcomes, we find a lesser role – but often still a statistically

significant one – for seatbelt laws permitting only secondary enforcement (where another

violation must be observed before a seatbelt citation can be issued). Finally, unlike

previous research, we find evidence against the selective recruitment hypothesis: among

high school youths, those most likely to be involved in accidents (drinkers, binge

drinkers, alcohol-involved drivers) have relatively larger seatbelt use increases in

response to seatbelt laws.



3
  Endogenous reporting bias refers to the fact that youths may be more likely to falsely report increased
seatbelt use when stricter seatbelt laws are adopted due to the increased stigma of riding unbelted. In the
extreme, our seatbelt use models could return evidence of a seatbelt law induced increase even in the
absence of any true behavioral change. Analyzing more objectively measured fatalities and injuries
therefore provides important complementary evidence on seatbelt law effectiveness. These outcomes are
also independently interesting as they are more likely to motivate public policy.
                                                                                       p.4


       In addition to providing the literature’s first comprehensive analysis of seatbelt

laws on youth outcomes, our research advances the literature in several other key ways.

First, we analyze the most recent data available – through 2005. Although the most

recent relevant studies have examined data through 2002, fully 10 states have adopted an

initial seatbelt law or upgraded their existing law since 2002. As such, estimates using

the most current data are highly relevant and useful for current state policy debates.

Second, we consider both traffic fatalities and serious crash-related injuries resulting

from fatal crashes in our analyses of health outcomes. Most previous evaluation studies

consider only the former. Third, our analyses of the national YRBS microdata uncover

new evidence regarding how mandatory seatbelt laws increase seatbelt use: specifically,

we find that the laws mainly affect the extensive margin of seatbelt use (increasing any

seatbelt participation) rather than the intensive margin (increasing use among users).

And finally, our fatality and injury analyses use more precise information on the timing

of seatbelt laws by matching them by exact date of implementation instead of assigning

fractional values for mid-year changes.

       The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the previous literature,

and Section 3 describes the data and empirical approach. Section 4 presents the results,

and Section 5 discusses and concludes.



2. Previous Literature

Numerous studies have evaluated the effects of state seatbelt laws on overall fatalities

and adult seatbelt use. These studies have shown that adoption of a mandatory seatbelt

law significantly increases adult seatbelt use and reduces traffic fatalities (for recent
                                                                                                         p.5


examples, see Cohen and Einav 2003, Houston and Richardson 2005 and 2006, and

others). These studies also generally agree that primary enforcement laws have been

more effective than weaker secondary enforcement laws. Finally, there is evidence of

selective recruitment among adults: those most likely to be involved in accidents are the

least likely to take up seatbelt use in response to a mandatory seatbelt law.

         A handful of studies have examined seatbelt laws and fatalities among youths.

Eisenberg (1999) studied the effects of .08 BAC laws on fatalities and included a seatbelt

law variable in his models. He estimates that a state seatbelt law significantly reduces

fatal crashes among youths under age 21 by 15 percent over 1982-2000. Similarly, Dee

and Evans (2001) estimate fatality reductions among 16-17 year olds of about 8 percent

for primary enforcement laws and about 4 percent for secondary enforcement laws over

the 1977-1992 period, while Dee et al. (2005) focus on graduated driver licensing

programs but obtain similar seatbelt law estimates to Dee and Evans (2001) over the

period 1992-2002 that are not statistically significant.

         Importantly, none of these studies examines the effects of seatbelt laws on self-

reported seatbelt use among high school age youths.4 Instead, the existing literature on

the determinants of self-reported youth seatbelt use has been largely descriptive.5 Only

one previous study has directly considered the effects of state seatbelt laws on youth

4
  Dee and Evans (2001) present results for BRFSS 18 and 19 year olds, but the BRFSS does not sample
individuals younger than age 18. Notably, both the BRFSS and the YRBS are coordinated by the Centers
for Disease Control.
5
  Williams et al. (2002) observed seatbelt use rates among youths being dropped off at schools in the
morning and driving to football games in the evening at 12 schools in Connecticut and Massachusetts,
finding that youth seatbelt use rates were lower than those of the adults who were driving them. McCartt
and Shabanova (2002) provide a descriptive analysis of seatbelt use by teenagers killed in fatal traffic
accidents and find that belt use rates were higher among youths in states with primary enforcement seatbelt
laws compared to states with only secondary enforcement. This study did not explicitly evaluate the effects
of the laws, however, and suffers from a usual limitation of fatality data (i.e. if the laws have independent
                                                                                                          p.6


seatbelt use. O’Malley and Wagenaar (2005) use data from the Monitoring the Future

(MTF) study and relate the presence of state seatbelt laws mandating secondary

enforcement to self-reported seatbelt use by youths. Their analysis is based on pre-post

differences in belt use within states and includes controls for secular trends. They find

very large effects of secondary enforcement laws on the likelihood that high school

seniors report “always” wearing a seatbelt when they drive or ride as a passenger, on the

order of 14 percentage points (i.e. a 70 percent effect off the pre-reform mean of 20.5

percent for the passenger seatbelt variable, see their Table 2).

         There are, however, some limitations to the O’Malley and Wagenaar (2004) study

which motivate further analysis of the effects of seatbelt laws on youths. First, the MTF

data are not designed to be representative of the sampled states. Our data, described

below, allow us to estimate models that restrict attention to data from state and local

YRBS surveys that were explicitly designed to produce representative estimates,

increasing the confidence we have in our estimates. Second, the O’Malley and Wagenaar

study only considered high school seniors due to the nature of the MTF sampling frame.

Younger youths are clearly of interest, however, as there may be different underlying

effects of the seatbelt laws by age.6 Third, O’Malley and Wagenaar examine secondary

enforcement seatbelt laws but do not account for the numerous adoptions of stricter

primary enforcement laws over their time period. Below, we show this distinction to be

important. Finally, O’Malley and Wagenaar do not study more objectively measured

outcomes such as traffic fatalities or injuries. We improve on these limitations below.


effects on crashes or fatalities, then observed belt use rates among fatally injured youths conflates multiple
underlying relationships).
                                                                                                      p.7




3. Data Description and Research Design

We use four main sources of data to evaluate the effects of mandatory seatbelt laws on

youths. First, we use the national, state, and local Youth Risk Behavior Surveys (YRBS)

from the Centers for Disease Control which provide us information on self-reported

seatbelt use by high school youths across the US. We also use data from the Fatality

Analysis Reporting System (FARS) to provide information on fatalities and crash-related

injuries. The FARS analyses complement the YRBS analyses by providing information

on outcomes that are more objectively measured and are therefore less subject to

concerns about endogenous reporting bias. Throughout, we consider data from 1991-

2005, a period spanning over 20 changes in state seatbelt laws.7



3.1: National, State, and Local Youth Risk Behavior Surveys (YRBS)

To estimate the effect of state mandatory seatbelt laws on youth seatbelt use, we employ

restricted use area-identified versions of the 1991-2005 national Youth Risk Behavior

Surveys, in conjunction with the independent state and local versions of the YRBS. The

national surveys – which are distinct from the state and local surveys and were not

designed to be representative below the national level – are coordinated every other year

by the Centers for Disease Control and are administered to high school students at school

in the spring.8 These data provide standard demographic characteristics, information on


6
  McCartt and Shabanova (2002), for example, show that there is a noticeable age gradient in seatbelt use
among youths who were fatally injured in car crashes: 18 year olds were less likely to have been belted
compared to 17 and 16 year olds.
7
  Most of these law changes reflect “upgrades” from states with existing laws mandating secondary
enforcement to laws mandating primary enforcement.
8
  The fact that the YRBS data are administered at school induces potential sample selection bias because
dropout behavior by older youths and/or absenteeism may be important. If there is selective recruitment in
                                                                                                              p.8


seatbelt use, and the state of survey (requested in a restricted use version of the data

directly through CDC). We restrict attention to youths with no missing data on the

demographic characteristics or seatbelt use questions, yielding well over 110,000 youths.9

         The state and local YRBS data are coordinated by public health officials in the

respective states and include standard questions that exactly mirror those in the national

survey.10 The majority of these state and local efforts were designed to be representative

of the state or locality in question, and below we present estimates from the full sample

and the subsample of representative surveys.11 To our knowledge, these weighted state

and local surveys are the only consistent state/year panel of representative data on youth

seatbelt use.12 The coverage of state surveys is extensive (see Appendix Table 1), while

the local YRBS modules are generally concentrated in large urban centers such as Los

Angeles, New York City, Boston, and Chicago (see Appendix Table 2 for a complete

list). The state and local YRBS are fielded every other year, and these estimates are

published in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Included in each report are various


the effects of seatbelt laws, the omission of high school dropouts and absent students could impart an
upward bias in our seatbelt use estimates (i.e. if those least likely to take up seatbelt use in the presence of a
law are missing from our sample). Below, we show that there is evidence against selective recruitment; as
such, omission of these students likely imparts a downward bias to our estimates. To address the issue of
dropout behavior, below we estimated seatbelt use models for younger youths (e.g. age 14-16) in the
national YRBS data and found similarly sized increases in seatbelt use.
9
  Only 342 youths did not respond to the question about seatbelt use. This is only about .3 percent of the
sample.
10
   It is important to reiterate that the national survey is not composed of the local and state surveys. Each
state and local survey is an independent sample, as is the biennial national survey.
11
   Throughout, however, we drop any state/year or city/year observations in which the CDC determined the
response rates to be too low to be deemed reliable, regardless of whether the survey was designed to be
representative.
12
   The other main data source on youth risk behaviors – the Monitoring the Future Study – is not designed
to be representative of each participating state.        Another possible source of data we considered were
parental reports of youth seatbelt use from the CDC’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS), which is designed to be state representative of adults. Unfortunately, the questions changed
multiple times over the sample period and were not consistently part of the core questionnaire. In some
years parents were asked about the oldest child, while in other years the parents were asked about the
youngest child in the household. While both are independently interesting, we are unable to create a
consistent series of parental self reports for either high school age youths or younger youths.
                                                                                                      p.9


characteristics for each site. Specifically, we observe: the relevant sample size on which

the estimates are based; whether the survey was unweighted or weighted to be

representative; the overall, student, and school response rates; the fraction of the school

population that is white, black, other race, and Hispanic; the fraction of the population

that is in each grade (9-12); and an aggregate outcome representing seatbelt surveillance.

          Each year the YRBS core questionnaire has included a question about usual

seatbelt use. Specifically, the question reads “How often do you wear a safety belt when

riding in someone else’s car?”, and the response options are “always”, “often”,

“sometimes”, “rarely”, and “never”. For surveillance purposes, two constructs are often

used. First, the Centers for Disease Control publishes in their main report the fraction of

youths who respond “rarely” or “never” to this question, a variable we call “infrequent

use”. Because we do not have access to the underlying microdata on which the state and

local YRBS figures are based, we necessarily examine this outcome.                        The national

microdata, however, allow us to consider measures that are more routinely used in the

literature on adult seatbelt use: specifically, we consider as an outcome whether a youth

reports she “always” wears a seatbelt (Dee 1999). Finally, we follow Cohen and Einav

(2003) to create a weighted continuous measure of seatbelt use for the national YRBS

data.13

          The YRBS seatbelt question is limited by the fact that it refers to seatbelt use

when in someone else’s car. It would clearly have been useful to have information on

seatbelt use among youths in the context of their own driving. This is unlikely to be a

serious problem in our analysis, since seatbelt use when driving is likely to be highly


13
   Specifically, we assign a weight of 0 to “never” responses, .1 to “rarely” responses, .3 to “sometimes”
responses, .75 to “often” responses, and 1 to “always” responses.
                                                                                                        p.10


correlated with seatbelt use as a passenger.14 As evidence of this, we note the O’Malley

and Wagenaar study shows extremely similar mean seatbelt use rates for these two

distinct measures in the MTF (2.85 on the continuous scale for seatbelt use when driving

and 2.78 for seatbelt use when riding as a passenger). Of course, our measure of seatbelt

use is independently interesting, as many of the high school age youths are under their

state’s minimum driving age.15 Understanding seatbelt behavior among these youths for

whom passenger use is the only meaningful measure is important.

           To estimate the effect of the mandatory seatbelt laws, we follow previous

approaches in the economics and policy evaluation literature. Specifically, we estimate

reduced form models of youth seatbelt use as a function of state seatbelt laws, other state

characteristics and policies that may be relevant to youth driving, unrestricted area and

year fixed effects, and linear area-specific time trends. For our state and local YRBS

analyses, we estimate separate weighted least squares models where the weights are the

relevant sample sizes on which the seatbelt use rates are based.                       This amounts to

estimation of the following:

     (1)   Yat = β0 + β1Xat + β2(Primary Seatbelt Law)at + β3(Secondary Seatbelt Law)at +

           β4Zat + β5Area + β6Year + εat



14
   Unfortunately, questions about seatbelt use while driving were only asked in the 2001 and 2003 waves.
Among drivers, these variables are highly positively correlated (above .7).
15
   Also, some state laws are explicitly related to seatbelt use while a passenger (as opposed to while
driving). Some state graduated driver licensing programs, for example, explicitly require a young driver to
ensure that all passengers are restrained or otherwise reinforce seatbelt requirements (e.g. Tennessee, Utah,
North Carolina, and Wisconsin). We do not make use of this variation in the analyses below, however,
because we are not aware of a source that consistently documents these provisions for all states over our
sample period. We also do not distinguish among laws that set different enforcement standards for youths
of different ages based on where in the vehicle they are seated because the YRBS questions do not
distinguish between front or rear seats. Also, we do not observe exact ages of youths in our preferred state
or local YRBS data, so we cannot exactly match for each individual whether she is covered by a particular
seatbelt law. As such, our reduced form estimates can best be though of as the effects of mandatory
seatbelt laws on the high school age population.
                                                                                                    p.11


where a denotes area (city or state) and t denotes survey year. Since we only observe the

aggregate outcomes reported in the MMWR publications, Yat is the fraction of the sample

reporting infrequent use (i.e. “rarely” or “never” wears a seatbelt when riding in a car).

Xat is a vector of sample characteristics that includes: overall response rate, school

response rate, student response rate, percent grade 10, percent grade 11, percent grade 12,

percent black, percent other race, and percent Hispanic. We also include in X the state

unemployment rate. Z is a vector of motor vehicle safety laws and alcohol control

policies that may influence driving and seatbelt use behaviors, including: the presence of

a graduated driver licensing program with an intermediate phase, the presence of a Zero

Tolerance drunk driving law, the presence of a .08 BAC per se drunk driving law, and

dummy variables for speed limits (65mph, and 70mph or greater) pertaining to cars on

rural interstates. Area is a vector of either state dummies or city dummies, depending on

the dataset. Year is a vector of survey year dummies. Primary (Secondary) Seatbelt Law

is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent lives in a state that has a primary

(secondary) seatbelt law in place at the time of interview.16 For states that upgrade from

secondary seatbelt laws to primary seatbelt laws, we turn off the secondary seatbelt law

indicator when the primary seatbelt law becomes effective.17

        The coefficient of interest, β2 (β3), captures the relative effect of the primary

(secondary) seatbelt law on youth seatbelt use by comparing within area changes in state


16
   Although we do not observe the actual interview date, we do know that the surveys were administered in
the spring in odd-numbered calendar years. In practice, this allows us to know for each observation
whether a seatbelt law is in place (given the timing of seatbelt law adoptions).
17
   For effective dates of seatbelt laws, we use the published dates from Cohen and Einav (2003, Table 1),
updated with lexis-nexis searches and documents from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS).
For GDL programs, we use the published dates from Dee et al. (2005), updated with lexis-nexis searches
and documents from IIHS. Information on .08 BAC effective dates comes from published NHTSA reports
(www.nhtsa.gov), while state unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Speed limits
were provided by Tom Dee through 2000, and we updated them through 2005 with information from IIHS.
                                                                                             p.12


seatbelt use outcomes coincident with policy adoption to the associated outcomes for

youths in states/cities that did not experience a policy change in that year. In further

models we also allow for linear area trends. This amounts to including a variable called

Trend which equals 1 in 1991, 3 in 1993, and so forth, multiplied by each state or city

fixed effect. In these models, the coefficients of interest reflect deviations in youth

seatbelt use from a smooth linear trend, coincident with adoption of the state seatbelt law.

Standard errors are clustered at the state level throughout (Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan 2004).18

           Estimation of the effects of state seatbelt laws with the national YRBS microdata

follows a similar approach, though we augment the models to take advantage of the

individual demographic information and the richer set of outcomes (since, unlike the state

and local samples, we observe the entire distribution of responses to the seatbelt

question). For comparability to the state and local analyses, we create an indicator

variable equal to one for youths who report “rarely” or “never” wearing a seatbelt when

riding in someone else’s car (i.e. “infrequent” use). Estimation of the effects of seatbelt

laws proceeds by probit:

     (2)   Yist = β0 + β1Xist + β2(Primary Seatbelt Law)st + β3(Secondary Seatbelt Law)st +

           β4Zst + β5State + β6Year + εist

where all variables in Z are as described above. Here, Yist is an indicator for infrequent

seatbelt use.       Xist is a vector of individual demographic characteristics, including

dummies for: female, black, other race, Hispanic, grade, and age. State is a vector of

state dummies, and Year is a vector of year dummies.                Again, β2 and β3 are the


18
   We also experimented with city level clustering for the local YRBS models. Standard errors were
extremely similar and are available upon request.
                                                                                                 p.13


coefficients of interest. Because we observe the exact response to the seatbelt question,

we also estimate probit models of the likelihood the youth reports she “always” wears a

seatbelt, as well as OLS models for the continuous seatbelt variable (described above).

        Note that in our models the seatbelt coefficients are estimated relative to

state/year observations that have no seatbelt law in effect. This is problematic for our

analysis of the local YRBS data since the cities represented in these data are almost

exclusively concentrated in states that had adopted some kind of seatbelt law by 1993; as

such, for the local analysis we estimate the effect of the primary enforcement seatbelt

laws.19 Although the time period covered for the state analysis is the same as the local

analysis, we have a much wider coverage of states in the state YRBS analysis, including

states that had no law in effect by 1993.20 Therefore, our analyses of state and national

YRBS data can support meaningful estimation of models with both the primary and

secondary seatbelt indicators.



3.2: Fatality Analysis Reporting System

A limitation of the YRBS seatbelt information is that the data are all self-reported by the

students. Unfortunately, we do not have a way to verify the accuracy of the self-reports

directly. The concern here is that students may provide socially desirable responses to

questions about risky behaviors such as (not) wearing a seatbelt, and this reporting bias

may be correlated with adoption of tougher seatbelt laws (since the stigma of not wearing

a seatbelt may have plausibly increased after stricter laws are put in place).


19
   The lone exception is Boston, Massachusetts, which we observe in 1993 but which did not adopt a
seatbelt law until 1994.
20
   Appendix Table 1 shows the states and years represented in each of our independent YRBS samples, as
well as the seatbelt laws in effect at the time of the survey.
                                                                                                          p.14


         To address the possibility of this endogenous reporting bias, we perform a parallel

analysis of health outcomes that are objectively measured: motor vehicle fatalities and

serious nonfatal injuries resulting from fatal crashes. Specifically, we use data from the

Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) which contains data on a census of fatal

traffic crashes within the 50 States and the District of Columbia. For each fatal accident,

FARS includes information on the number of fatalities and non-fatal injuries of different

severity levels that resulted from the fatal crash, as well as the date of the accident. For

nonfatal injuries, we consider only the most severe injuries – those “incapacitating”

injuries that prevent the injured person from “walking, driving or normally continuing the

activities the person was capable of performing before the injury occurred.”21 Using

these data, we create counts of the number of occupant fatalities and crash-related serious

injuries among high school youths aged 14-18 that occurred from fatal accidents in each

state on each day from 1991 through 2005.22 The final sample consists of fifteen years of

daily fatalities for the 50 states and DC yielding a total of 279,429 state/day observations.

         The basic model set up mirrors the seatbelt use analysis above. To model the

count nature of the outcome variables we estimate negative binomial models on the



21
   Examples of such injuries include broken bones and unconsciousness. We exclude non-incapacitating
injuries such as bumps and bruises, as well as injuries whose severity was unknown. Note that our sample
of serious injuries is conditioned on there having been at least one fatality that resulted from the accident;
as such, we must be careful not to interpret the associated estimates as the overall effect of seatbelt laws on
the universe of nonfatal injuries. The purpose of examining serious nonfatal injuries is to provide
additional corroborating evidence on a serious and objectively measured health outcome.
22
   Note that our analysis of state/day counts of fatalities is slightly different than the usual approach of
aggregating up to state/year fatality counts (see, for example, Dee and Evans 2001). We examine daily
fatalities to increase the precision of our seatbelt law estimates. Specifically, we know the exact date on
which each state’s seatbelt law went into effect. Rather than the usual approach using state/year aggregate
data in which fractional values are applied to the fatalities in any state/year cell where a policy adoption
occurred, our approach of using state/day counts allows us to precisely match the correct policy in place for
every state/day observation. We follow the same approach in coding ZT laws, GDL policies, and .08 BAC
laws. For speed limits, we use fractional values. Recall that we do not observe exact interview dates in the
YRBS data, and as such we only make use of exact dates for the fatality analysis.
                                                                                                     p.15


state/day fatality counts (Cameron and Trivedi 1998).23 Specifically, we estimate models

of the form:

     (3)   Yst = β0 + β1Xst + β2(Primary Seatbelt Law)st + β3(Secondary Seatbelt Law)st +

           β4Zst + β5State + β6Year + εst

where X is a vector of state-specific demographic characteristics including average per

capita income, the unemployment rate, and an estimate of the number of miles driven per

year in each state.24 To account for exposure, X also includes the log of the relevant

state/year population (14-18 year olds).            The Primary and Secondary Seatbelt Law

variables are as defined above and are matched to the exact date each relevant law

became effective in the state, and we do the same matching for the state laws pertaining

to motor vehicle safety and alcohol control in the Z vector (as described above in the

seatbelt analysis). In addition to a full vector of state and year dummies, we also include

dummies for: month, day of the week, Presidents’ Day, St. Patrick’s Day, Cinco de

Mayo, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Halloween, the day before Thanksgiving,

Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, and New Year’s Eve. As above, we

cluster standard errors at the state level. Because the resulting coefficient estimates from

the negative binomial model are not easily interpretable, in the tables below we present

the associated marginal effects.



4. Results



23
   Although both poisson and negative binomial models are appropriate for count data, we select a negative
binomial model because tests reject that the mean and variance of the dependent variable are the same, a
key assumption of the poisson model.
24
   Vehicle miles traveled come from the 1991-2005 issues of the US Department of Transportation
publication Highway Statistics.
                                                                                       p.16


We begin with analyses of self-reported seatbelt use from the YRBS.           We present

descriptive statistics for the national YRBS data in Table 1a, and in Table 1b we present

relevant means for the local and state YRBS data. About 38 percent of youths in the

national data are from state/year observations with primary enforcement seatbelt laws,

while another 59 percent face secondary enforcement seatbelt laws. Only 36 percent of

youths reports always wearing a seatbelt, while almost 1 in 5 reports infrequent seatbelt

use. These rates of infrequent seatbelt use are extremely similar for the YRBS state

surveys in the rightmost column of Table 1b as well as the YRBS local surveys in the

middle column of Table 1b. Notably, the race distribution of students from the YRBS

state surveys is very similar to that of the national YRBS data, though the local YRBS

surveys are largely non-white. As discussed above, nearly all youths represented in the

local surveys faced some kind of mandatory seatbelt law throughout the sample period,

yet fully 19.3% reported infrequent seatbelt use.

       We present the distribution of actual responses to the seatbelt question from the

national data in Figure 1, stratified by the type of seatbelt law in place. This picture

confirms the descriptive types of evidence used in previous research on youths: seatbelt

use is more common in primary enforcement states than in secondary enforcement states,

which in turn is more common than in states with no seatbelt law at all. Of course, our

empirical models below will rely only on the staggered timing of adoption of the seatbelt

laws for identification of the policy effects. As a final piece of descriptive evidence, we

present in Figure 2 the rates of infrequent seatbelt use by year from each of the three

aggregated surveys (national, state, and local YRBS). Although there is some divergence
                                                                                          p.17


– particularly for the state YRBS – all three show general declines in infrequent use (i.e.

increases in use) over the 1993-2005 period.

       We now turn to the evaluation evidence from the local, state, and national YRBS

data. Table 2 presents the baseline estimates for the local (first panel) and state (second

panel) YRBS analyses. Within each panel, we show results both for the full sample and

for the sub-sample of state and local observations that were explicitly designed to be

representative of the sampled locality in that survey year. The odd numbered columns

report estimates from two-way fixed effects models with area and year fixed effects,

while the even numbered columns add linear area-specific time trends. All models also

include the relevant sample controls described earlier. Recall that because the local

YRBS data were fielded in major cities located in states that had some type of seatbelt

law by 1993, we include only the primary enforcement seatbelt law indicator in the local

YRBS regressions.

       The estimates in Table 2 provide consistent evidence that mandatory seatbelt laws

have reduced infrequent seatbelt use by youths (i.e. they increased seatbelt use). In the

differences-in-differences model using local YRBS data in Column 1, for example,

primary enforcement laws are associated with a 15.5 percentage point reduction in

infrequent seatbelt use, statistically significant at the five percent level. Including linear

city-specific trends in Column 3 slightly increases the magnitude of the estimate –

suggesting a 15.9 percentage point reduction in infrequent seatbelt use. Notably, the

models support the inclusion of the city trends, as they are jointly significant predictors of

youth seatbelt use. Restricting attention to city/year observations that were designed to
                                                                                                         p.18


be representative (Columns 3-4) does not materially alter the conclusions drawn from the

full sample estimates in Columns 1-2.

         In the second panel of Table 2 we present the results using the state YRBS data,

each time replacing city dummies and trends with state dummies and trends. Because of

the wider coverage of states in these analyses, we include the secondary enforcement law

variable in these models.          The findings from the state YRBS analysis confirm our

findings from the local YRBS analysis in the first panel: specifically, we find that a

primary enforcement seatbelt law is estimated to significantly reduce infrequent seatbelt

use by high school age youths by about 9.6 percentage points in Column 5, while

secondary enforcement laws are estimated to reduce infrequent use by about 6.9

percentage points. Allowing for smooth linear state specific time trends increases the

magnitude of these estimates (and again the trends are jointly significant determinants of

youth seatbelt use in the state YRBS analyses), and the patterns do not change when we

restrict attention to state/year observations with representative data.25

         In Table 3 we present results from models that use the national YRBS data with

state identifiers.      Again, we note that these data were not designed to be state


25
   Recall that the estimated primary enforcement seatbelt law effect in the local YRBS models should be
interpreted as the effect relative to states with a secondary enforcement law, since the cities covered in the
local YRBS data had almost all been covered by a secondary enforcement law at the beginning of the
sample period. The state YRBS data, however, has more extensive coverage, and as such the primary
enforcement law indicator is the effect relative to states without any seatbelt law (i.e. we can credibly
distinguish the effects of secondary enforcement laws in the state YRBS data). It is notable, then, that the
local YRBS evaluations produce larger effects of primary enforcement laws relative to the state YRBS
evaluations. Our most preferred models, for example, suggest an increase of 13.1 percentage points in the
local YRBS evaluation, while the associated marginal increase for primary enforcement laws in the state
analysis is 14.5-7.8=6.7. What explains the apparent difference in the magnitude of these estimates? First,
note that the difference is actually small relative to the sampling variation: the 6.4 percentage point
difference is less than twice the standard error on the primary enforcement law indicator in both the local
YRBS evaluation and the state YRBS evaluation. Second, it is plausible that seatbelt laws have larger
effects in urban centers than in more rural areas (which are represented in the state YRBS data but not the
local data), perhaps due to more visible enforcement or enhanced information dissemination. We tried to
test for this directly in the fatality models below, but these models did not converge.
                                                                                                       p.19


representative, though economists have previously used the national YRBS data in

evaluations such as ours (see, for example, Gruber and Zinman 2001). We present results

from estimation of equation (2) in Table 3. Columns 1-2 report results for the “infrequent

use” outcome (which is directly comparable to the outcome considered in Table 2),

Columns 3-4 show estimates for the “always wears seatbelt” outcome, and Columns 5-6

present results for the Cohen/Einav (2003) weighted continuous seatbelt use measure.

For all outcomes, we show the state and year fixed effects estimates, and the estimates

that include linear state trends.26

        The results in Table 3 confirm the effectiveness of primary enforcement seatbelt

laws at reducing infrequent use in Columns 1-2, although we do not find evidence that

secondary enforcement laws significantly reduced infrequent seatbelt use by youths.27

The point estimate in Column 2 with linear state trends suggests that primary

enforcement laws reduced infrequent use by 55 percent.                       Across all data sources

analyzed, then, primary enforcement seatbelt laws are estimated to significantly increase

youth seatbelt use. Interestingly, another informative pattern also emerges from Table 3:

we find quantitatively and qualitatively different results for the other measures of seatbelt

use available to use in the national YRBS data. Specifically, the infrequent use outcome

is the only one to return statistically significant results for the primary enforcement law

variable: neither the “always” outcome nor the continuous seatbelt use outcome indicates

a statistically significant effect of these strict laws, though the magnitude of the primary



26
   A full set of coefficient estimates is available upon request.
27
   The magnitudes of the estimated reductions in infrequent seatbelt use associated with mandatory seatbelt
laws are smaller in the national YRBS data than in the state and local analyses. Note, however, that the
standard errors for the state and local YRBS estimates are large. As such, the confidence intervals on both
seatbelt law indicators for both the state and local models with area fixed effects easily include the point
estimate from the national YRBS data (and vice versa).
                                                                                                        p.20


enforcement law coefficient on the continuous Cohen/Einav measure is large relative to

the sample mean, implying a 43 percent effect in the model with state specific linear time

trends. Overall, the patterns suggest that primary enforcement laws have their greatest

effect on the extensive margin of youth seatbelt use as opposed to increasing use among

users.28

           The results in Tables 2-3 provide strong evidence that state seatbelt laws –

particularly those mandating primary enforcement – significantly increased seatbelt use

by youths. In Table 4 we provide further evidence on the unique relationship between

seatbelt laws and youth seatbelt use by performing a series of falsification exercises on

placebo outcomes. That is, we use the national, state, and local YRBS data to estimate

parallel models of other risky youth behaviors that are similarly specified to the baseline

model (i.e. models (1) and (2) above with linear area specific time trends). The outcomes

we consider are: the likelihood of having had any sexual activity in the previous 3

months, the probability of having smoked cigarettes in the previous 30 days, and the

probability of having consumed alcohol in the previous 30 days.29


28
   We also investigated whether seatbelt laws had different effects by demographic group using the race and
sex information available to us in the national YRBS. These comparisons are interesting because of the
well-known structural differences in belt use rates by demographic group: black and Hispanic individuals
are less likely to use seatbelts, while females are more likely to use seatbelts than males. Models run
separately by demographic group on the national YRBS data showed that seatbelt laws have been
particularly effective at increasing belt use among minorities: primary enforcement laws reduced infrequent
belt use by black and Hispanic males by 20 and 27 percentage points, respectively. For these groups,
secondary enforcement laws were also effective at increasing belt use. The associated estimates for white
youths are smaller and not statistically significant. The national YRBS also returned evidence that primary
enforcement laws were more effective at reducing infrequent use among males than among females, though
the state and local YRBS data – which report seatbelt use aggregates by sex but not by race – returned very
similar estimated seatbelt law effects. FARS data do not include data on race/ethnicity consistently until
1999, and models estimated on the 1999-2005 period did not converge. We were able to estimate fatality
and injury models by sex. Results generally showed larger effects for female fatality and injury reductions
associated with tougher seatbelt laws, though these differences were not significant
29
   Our choice of placebo behavioral outcomes was driven by two concerns. First, the behaviors should
have been plausibly unrelated to seatbelt laws (bicycle riding, for example, could have plausibly substituted
for car riding, and as such would not have been an appropriate placebo outcome. And second, the
behaviors needed to be common enough to provide us sufficient statistical power to meaningfully test the
                                                                                                        p.21


         The intuition behind these exercises is straightforward: to rule out the possibility

that state seatbelt laws reflect some other unobserved shock to risky behaviors among

youths more generally (e.g. a state public health campaign targeted at high school age

teens), we examine whether state seatbelt laws had “effects” on outcomes that should

have been plausibly unaffected by the policies (or, at a minimum, these behaviors are

much farther removed from the laws than seatbelt use itself). If similarly specified

models returned consistent evidence that state seatbelt laws reduced several risky

behaviors among youths – instead of just increasing seatbelt use – this would be evidence

of omitted variables bias or some other specification error. The estimates in Table 4 –

which show the associated effects on the primary and secondary seatbelt law indicators in

difference-in-differences models with linear trends – show that adoption of tougher state

seatbelt laws was not systematically associated with changes in sexual activity, smoking,

or alcohol consumption among youths. The point estimates are generally several times

smaller than the associated policy effects on the infrequent seatbelt use outcome, are

almost always statistically indistinguishable from zero, and exhibit no apparent pattern

(i.e. seatbelt laws are about as likely to predict “good” outcomes as “bad”). These

findings support the idea that mandatory seatbelt laws were uniquely effective at

increasing seatbelt use among youths and provide evidence against the possibility of




relationship between seatbelt laws and the placebo outcome (marijuana use, for example, should have been
plausibly unrelated to seatbelt laws but is very rare in the youth self-reports). We also considered exercise
outcomes and body weight/obesity, but these questions were not consistently asked in the YRBS until
1999. For the state and local YRBS analyses, we restrict attention to the data that were designed to be
representative.
                                                                                                          p.22


other omitted state programs or policies that were coincident with seatbelt law

adoptions.30

         In Table 5 we use the national YRBS data to provide new evidence on the

selective recruitment hypothesis – i.e., that individuals most likely to be involved in an

accident might be the least likely to increase seatbelt use in response to a mandatory

seatbelt law. This idea has been put forth by traffic safety researchers for two decades,

and empirical evidence has been found for adults using seatbelt law adoptions and

upgrades over the late 1980s and early 1990s. Specifically, Dee (1998) found that

seatbelt laws had smaller effects on seatbelt use for drinkers and binge drinkers who have

higher crash risk than other individuals.               The national YRBS data, which provide

information on drinking, binge drinking, and alcohol-involved driving, provide us a

unique opportunity to provide a parallel analysis of selective recruitment for high school

youths. We also consider past month smoking and sexual activity over the previous 3

months to assess whether youths who engage in these relatively risky behaviors are more

or less responsive to mandatory seatbelt laws.31 We present these results in Table 5 for

all of our seatbelt use outcomes (infrequent use, always use, and continuous use). The

top row reprints the baseline estimates from our preferred models with linear state time

trends from Table 3, and the successive rows restrict attention to individuals exhibiting

various risky behaviors. We only report the coefficient on the primary enforcement law


30
   Of course, we do not wish to make too much of these falsification exercises given that we have not
controlled for other determinants of these risky behaviors (sexual activity, smoking, and drinking) that
previous research has shown to be important. They do, however, provide useful complementary evidence.
31
   Note that the null findings in Table 4 increase the validity of these comparisons across subgroups (i.e. the
behaviors that define these groups were not themselves affected by mandatory seatbelt laws). Note also
that this approach provides evidence against desirability bias driving our main results since these additional
analyses restrict attention to youths who have already revealed a willingness to report risky and socially
undesirable activity. That these youths are – as we show below – more responsive to seatbelt laws provides
evidence against the idea that all of the observed increase is due to desirability/reporting bias.
                                                                                                         p.23


indicator, though each entry is from a separate regression that includes all of the control

variables described earlier.

         Our results in Table 5 provide evidence against selective recruitment among high

school age youths. That is, we estimate that young adults who exhibit relatively risky

behaviors – including those that are directly related to crash risk (drinking, binge

drinking, and alcohol-involved driving) – are estimated to have larger increases in

seatbelt use than the full sample. Consider the results for infrequent seatbelt use in

Column 1, for example.              While the full sample estimate indicates a statistically

significant reduction in infrequent use of about ten percentage points, we find larger

reductions of 11.7, 13.9, and 24.6 percentage points for drinkers, binge drinkers, and

alcohol-involved drivers, respectively. Smokers and young adults with recent sexual

behavior also show somewhat larger responsiveness on this margin.                       While we cannot

statistically distinguish the estimates from these relatively “risky” subgroups from the

baseline estimate, the patterns in Column 1 are uniformly supportive of the idea that

young adults with higher crash risk were more responsive to primary enforcement

seatbelt laws. We find similar patterns for continuous seatbelt use outcome in Column 3

where we find that restricting attention to the riskier subgroups returns larger coefficient

estimates than the baseline that are often statistically significant. Results for “always

use” in Column 2 are inconclusive.32




32
  These results in Table 5 also highlight the value of considering different aspects of seatbelt use. Previous
research finding the strongest evidence for selective recruitment among adults came from Dee’s (1998)
analysis that considered the “always” seatbelt outcome. Our findings, in contrast, provide evidence against
selective recruitment for different measures of belt use – infrequent use and continuous use. In addition to
a different time period and different age group being studied, our analysis of other seatbelt outcomes may
also account for the differences in findings.
                                                                                                         p.24


         Having documented that seatbelt laws were uniquely effective at increasing self-

reported seatbelt use among high school youths, we now turn to the more objectively

measured outcomes available to us: highway fatalities and serious crash-related injuries

from the FARS. Table 6 presents the mean descriptive statistics from the FARS over our

sample period, 1991-2005. The mean traffic fatality outcome for our 14-18 year old

sample is .20 measured as a state/day average or 74.2 fatalities measured as a state/year

average. The associated means for nonfatal injuries are .14 and 50.5, respectively.33 We

also present the mean fatality trends over our sample period separately for young adults

in states with primary enforcement and secondary enforcement seatbelt laws in Figure 3.

Like the seatbelt use estimates in Figure 2, we find that youth fatality rates have exhibited

an overall decline since the beginning of the sample period. Consistent with a role for

tougher seatbelt laws at reducing fatalities, we find that fatalities of youths living in states

covered by primary enforcement seatbelt laws fell faster than fatalities of youths living in

states covered by weaker secondary enforcement laws.34

         We present the main fatality and injury results in Table 7. The format of Table 7

follows the seatbelt use equations from the previous tables in that for each outcome we

present coefficients on the mandatory seatbelt law indicators (primary and secondary) for

the difference-in-differences model with state and year fixed effects and a model that


33
   Note that the means of the policy variables – including the seatbelt law indicators – are slightly lower
than the associated sample means from Tables 1a and 1b. This is because the analyses of fatalities and
injuries use the complete balanced panel available to us from 1991-2005; that is, we observe all states in all
survey years. In contrast, Appendix Tables 1 and 2 show that our coverage of states in the early part of the
sample period – while extensive – is far from complete. As such, a smaller proportion of our fatality and
injury observations are “covered” by the more recent traffic safety policy interventions such as primary
enforcement seatbelt laws and graduated driver licensing programs. Below, we return to this issue by
restricting attention to fatalities and injuries from the state/year combinations observed in our YRBS data.
34
   There are, of course, composition changes in the samples in Figure 3 since states are generally moving
out of the secondary enforcement law group and into the primary enforcement law group. The overall
trends, however, are informative.
                                                                                                       p.25


incorporates state-specific linear time trends. All models include the state demographic

controls described earlier (e.g. average per capita income) as well as the other traffic

safety and alcohol control laws. The table entries are marginal effects derived from the

negative binomial models, which are more directly interpretable than the coefficient

estimates. We present results for occupant fatalities in Columns 1-2 and for nonfatal but

serious incapacitating injuries in Columns 3-4.

        Results for fatalities in Columns 1-2 of Table 7 return evidence consistent with

the seatbelt use results shown earlier: after accounting for state and year fixed effects, we

find that adoption of primary enforcement mandatory seatbelt laws reduced highway

fatalities of 14-18 year olds by .008 fatalities on an average state/day. This estimate is

about a four percent effect relative to the sample mean (i.e. .008/.20) though it is not

statistically significant.     Allowing for linear state trends in Column 2 increases the

magnitude of the coefficient estimate on the primary enforcement law indicator and

suggests that such laws reduce fatalities among 14-18 year olds by about .016 – or about

8 percent of the sample mean – and this estimate is statistically significant at the one

percent level. The increase in the magnitude of the effects of seatbelt laws when trends

are included is consistent both with our previous seatbelt use estimates (see Tables 2 and

3 above) and with other recent fatality research suggesting downward bias from within-

state variation in youth traffic fatalities in traditional fixed effects specifications.35

Coupled with the fact that – as in the seatbelt use models – the state trends are always

jointly significant in the models presented in Table 7, we consider the models with state


35
   Dee et al. (2005) also find that the policy effects for graduated driver licensing laws and seatbelt laws
increase substantially when state trends are included in models estimated from 1992-2002. This and other
evidence from their difference-in-difference-in-differences models suggest downward bias in the traditional
fixed effects specifications.
                                                                                                         p.26


trends to be our preferred estimates. Notably, this model also returns evidence of a

marginally significant fatality reduction associated with secondary enforcement seatbelt

laws of about 4.4 percent relative to the sample mean.36 Estimates for incapacitating

injuries resulting from fatal crashes in Columns 3-4 show a marginally significant

reduction associated with the adoption of a primary enforcement seatbelt law among 14-

18 year olds by about 9 percent in the models with state time trends (i.e. .013 injury

reduction relative to a sample mean of .14), with smaller and statistically insignificant

effects for secondary enforcement laws. These patterns – large and significant youth

health improvements for primary enforcement seatbelt laws with smaller effects for

secondary laws – are consistent with the youth seatbelt use effects presented above.

         We investigate the robustness of the fatality and injury effects in Table 8. Our

first robustness check addresses the possible concern that our seatbelt use estimates may

not directly correspond to the fatality and injury estimates because of the differences in

geographic and time coverage across the various samples (i.e. for the YRBS we are

missing data from several states in various years, while we have a complete panel of

fatalities and injuries for 1991-2005). To test whether the composition of the sample is

contributing to the fatality and injury results, we re-estimated models on those outcomes

that restricted attention to data from state/year combinations that we observe in the state

YRBS data – our preferred data – as shown in Appendix Table 1. The results from this

exercise are presented in Column 1 (fatalities) and Column 3 (injuries) of Table 8. We


36
   A full set of coefficient estimates is available upon request. With the exception of state graduated driver
licensing programs, we do not find systematic evidence that the other control variables are significantly
related to fatalities of 14-18 year olds. We were able to reproduce the main result from Dee et al. (2005)
that state graduated driver licensing programs mandating an intermediate driving phase were associated
with significant reductions in fatalities of 15-17 year olds in models that included state and year fixed
effects. When estimated on our 14-18 year old sample, we also found that the graduated driver licensing
variable was consistently negative and significant.
                                                                                                     p.27


find that the estimates from the FARS subsample that most closely correspond to our

seatbelt use outcomes are very similar to the baseline fatality and injury outcomes from

Table 7, though not surprisingly they are much less precisely estimated with standard

errors that are about two thirds larger than the baseline.37                   The similarity in the

magnitudes of the seatbelt law estimates from the full sample and the restricted

subsample suggests that composition problems are unlikely to be seriously biasing our

estimates.

        We also present the results from another robustness exercise in Table 8. Recall

that we depart from most previous literature by considering fatality and injury outcomes

at the state/day level instead of the usual state/year aggregation. We do so to more

precisely match the exact seatbelt law in place at the time of the accident instead of the

usual approach of assigning fractional values to mid-year policy changes, effectively mis-

measuring the policy in effect for outcomes on either side of the mid-year policy adoption

in the adoption year. For purposes of comparison to the previous literature, we estimated

fatality and injury models with the usual state/year aggregation and present those results

in Columns 2 and 4 of Table 8, respectively. The results from this exercise again produce

evidence consistent with the idea that primary and secondary enforcement mandatory

seatbelt laws significantly reduced fatalities among 14-18 year olds by about 12 and 8

percent, respectively (i.e. 8.87/74.2 and 5.91/74.2). Interestingly, these effect sizes are

remarkably similar to the associated estimates of 11.7 and 10 percent from Dee et al.

(2005) who employ state/year fatality aggregates over the shorter 1992-2002 period,

except that our estimates are statistically significant. Estimates for injuries are similar in

37
   Interestingly, the estimated marginal effect for secondary enforcement law indicator is larger in the
restricted subsample than in the full sample. The standard errors, however, are sufficiently large that we
                                                                                                        p.28


magnitude but are not statistically significant. Overall, the results in Columns 2 and 4 of

Table 8 show that our baseline results on the effectiveness of mandatory seatbelt laws are

not driven by our choice of state/day aggregation.

         We conclude the results section by addressing a remaining concern with the

evaluation evidence presented above.                 Specifically, we have not controlled for

enforcement efforts and media campaigns that are designed to increase compliance with

state seatbelt laws. “Click it or ticket” campaigns, for example, have been used for over a

decade by states to increase awareness of new seatbelt laws, and twice a year “Buckle Up

America” mobilizations occur throughout the country. These campaigns include paid

media “blitzes” and increased citations by police authorities.38 And, since fiscal year

1998, states have been eligible to receive federal funding through the Transportation

Equity Act for the specific purpose of increasing seatbelt use rates. If these efforts are

correlated with state adoption of mandatory seatbelt laws, as is plausible, then the

concern is that our seatbelt law estimates may be biased upward.39 Unfortunately, we

know of no data source that systematically tracks these efforts over our time period.40

         To address these types of concerns, we made use of the actual incentive grants

awarded to states by the federal government for the purpose of increasing seatbelt use.

The intuition is that these state grants are likely decent proxies for other unobserved

efforts to increase enforcement and/or compliance. The seatbelt grant data are publicly


cannot say they are significantly different from each other.
38
   There are literatures on the effectiveness of these types of media campaigns, though the focus is very
different from that considered here. Specifically, these interventions are “blitzes”, or very short term high
intensity treatments. Evaluations typically examine seatbelt use (using telephone surveys or observational
studies) just before, during, and just after the campaigns. Much less research has focused on the longer
term effects of the interventions, which is a distinct but very important outcome.
39
   Of course, our inclusion of smooth area specific trends mitigates these concerns somewhat.
                                                                                                    p.29


available on NHTSA’s website back to 1998. We therefore observe state seatbelt grants

for 1999, 2001, 2003, and 2005 for the YRBS data and for 1999-2005 for the fatality

data.41     We append the actual amount of grant dollars awarded (in thousands) by

state/year. For those states without grant information (either because they were observed

prior to 1999 or because they received no federal grant), we set the awarded grant equal

to zero and include an indicator variable for observations where the federal seatbelt grant

is missing. The results from this attempt to directly control for seatbelt grants are

presented in Table 9 for all of the outcomes considered (seatbelt use, fatalities, and

injuries). In each case, we present the coefficients on the relevant seatbelt law indicators

from the difference in differences models with linear area specific time trends, and we

also show the associated estimate on the actual grant award variable.42 In no case does

the inclusion of seatbelt grants materially alter the main results that primary enforcement

seatbelt laws increased youth seatbelt use and reduced youth fatalities and serious

injuries.    Moreover, estimates on the seatbelt grant variable are very small and

statistically insignificant. While this approach is not ideal for capturing media campaigns

and enforcement, the stability of the seatbelt law estimates suggests that the bias from

their omission is not severe.



5. Discussion and Conclusion

The results above show that mandatory seatbelt laws adopted by states over the 1991-

2005 period were highly effective at increasing seatbelt use and reducing fatalities and

40
   We attempted, for example, to obtain these data from the National Safety Council – which organizes the
“Buckle Up America” program, but they indicated that this information was not tracked or readily
available.
41
   That is, we assume that grants awarded to states in year t can affect outcomes in year t+1.
                                                                                                           p.30


crash-related serious injuries among high school age youths (14-18). Specifically, we

estimate that primary enforcement laws significantly reduce the likelihood that youths

report “rarely” or “never” wearing a seatbelt by at least 8 percentage points in the

national YRBS data and about 11-15 percentage points in the state and local YRBS data.

Secondary enforcement laws are estimated to reduce infrequent seatbelt use by youths in

the state YRBS data, though in the national data the effects are not statistically

significant. With respect to the underlying mechanisms, we find the strongest and most

consistent evidence that the laws increased the likelihood of any seatbelt use rather than

inducing intermittent users to always buckle up. We also provide new evidence that

among high school youths, those most likely to be involved in an accident show the

largest increases in reported seatbelt use in response to primary enforcement laws. The

self-reported seatbelt use effects were corroborated using more objectively measured data

on fatalities and crash-related injuries.               Similarly specified models of these health

outcomes revealed that primary enforcement seatbelt laws significantly reduced fatalities

of 14-18 year olds by 8 percent, with a 9 percent reduction for crash-related injuries.

           It is worth comparing our results on self-reported seatbelt use to those of the only

other study examining state seatbelt laws and youth seatbelt use.                            O’Malley and

Wagenaar (2004) estimate that secondary seatbelt laws significantly increase youth

seatbelt use by upwards of 70 percent. Our results, in contrast, return much more modest

evidence regarding secondary enforcement laws. While there are numerous possible

explanations for this discrepancy (different time periods, samples, etc.), we suspect two

to be particularly relevant. First, our models include unrestricted area and year fixed

effects, and we found the seatbelt law estimates to be sensitive to inclusion of these

42
     For the state and local YRBS analyses, we show results that restrict attention to weighted surveys.
                                                                                         p.31


controls (i.e. the effect sizes fell when state and year dummies were included). Second,

the previous study did not differentiate between laws that mandate secondary

enforcement and laws that permit primary enforcement. This is important because the

sample period in their study (1986-2000) witnessed 12 state adoptions of primary

enforcement seatbelt laws, 8 of which were “upgrades” from previous secondary

enforcement laws (see Cohen and Einav, Table 1). If these laws further increase seatbelt

use rates by youths (as previous research on adults suggests and our results confirm), then

failing to account for state upgrades from secondary enforcement to primary enforcement

will overstate the effects of the secondary enforcement laws (since it will wrongly

attribute additional increases in belt use to the secondary enforcement law that should be

properly attributed to the primary enforcement law).

       How important are seatbelt laws in explaining the increase in youth seatbelt use

and reduction in youth fatalities over our time period? Consider that over the period

1993-2005, rates of infrequent seatbelt use fell from about 20-30 percent down to about

10 percent in all three surveys (see Figure 2). We estimate that primary enforcement

seatbelt laws accounts for about 8 of the 15 percentage point decline in infrequent use in

the national data, or about half of the decrease. In the state and local analyses, we

estimate somewhat larger percentage point reductions in infrequent use, such that primary

enforcement laws can explain about two thirds of the improvements in the state data (i.e.

primary enforcement seatbelt laws account for as much as 14 of the 21 percentage point

decline in infrequent seatbelt use in the state data) and essentially all the improvements in

the local data.     Overall, our most conservative estimates suggest that primary

enforcement seatbelt laws can account for well over half of the overall improvements in
                                                                                                     p.32


youth seatbelt use from the early 1990s to 2005. With respect to fatalities, consider that

the traffic fatality rate for youths aged 14-18 fell from 21.4 to 17.4 per 100,000 from the

beginning to the end of our sample period. Calculations based on our estimate from

column 2 of Table 7 indicate that 10.7% of this reduction was due to primary

enforcement seatbelt laws.

        Our results mark an important step in understanding the likely public health

consequences for youths of state upgrades to primary enforcement seatbelt laws.

Currently, fewer than half of all states have mandatory seatbelt laws permitting primary

enforcement, and rates of infrequent use remained as high as ten percent even at the end

of the sample period. Our estimates suggest that were all remaining states to upgrade

their seatbelt laws to primary enforcement, regular seatbelt use by high school age youths

would be nearly universal and youth fatalities would fall by around 121 per year.43




43
  2005 traffic fatalities of those aged 14-18 totaled 1512 in those states without primary enforcement. An
8% reduction is equal to 121 fewer deaths.
                                                                                     p.33


                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much
       Should We Trust Difference-In-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 119(1): 249-275.

Bureau of Labor Statistics online files www.bls.gov. Accessed February 25th, 2007.

Cameron, A.C. and Trivedi, P.K. 1998. Regression Analysis of Count Data.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Carpenter, C. and P. Cook (2007). “The Effects of Cigarette Taxes on Youth Smoking:
      New Evidence from National, State, and Local Youth Risk Behavior Surveys,”
      Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

Cohen, A. and L. Einav (2003). “The Effects of Mandatory Seat Belt Laws on Driving
      Behavior and Traffic Fatalities,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4): 828-
      843.

Dee, T. (1998). “Reconsidering the Effects of Seat Belt Laws and Their Enforcement
       Status,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, 30(1): 1-10.

Dee, T. and W. N. Evans (2001a). “Behavioral Policies and Teen Traffic Safety,”
      American Economic Review, 91(2): 91-96.

--- (2001b). “Teens and Traffic Safety,” in Risky Behavior Among Youths: An
       Economic Analysis, J. Gruber, Ed. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Dee, T., D. Grabowksi, and M. Morrisey (2005). “Graduated driver licensing and teen
       traffic fatalities,” Journal of Health Economics, 24(3): 571-589.

Eisenberg, D. (2001). “Evaluating the Effectiveness of Policies Related to Drunk
       Driving,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(2): 249-274.

Evans, W. and J. Graham (1991). “Risk reduction or risk compensation? The case of
       mandatory safety-belt use laws,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4: 61-73.

Gruber, J. and J. Zinman (2001). “Youth Smoking in the United States: Evidence and
       Implications,” in Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, J.
       Gruber, Ed. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Hedlund, J. and R. Compton (2005). “Graduated Driver Licensing Research in 2004 and
      2005,” Journal of Safety Research, 36: 4-14.

Houston D. and L. Richardson (2006). “Reducing Traffic Fatalities in the American
      States by Upgrading Seat Belt Use Laws to Primary Enforcement,” Journal of
      Policy Analysis and Management, 25(3): 645-659.
                                                                                     p.34




--- (2005). “Getting Americans to buckle up: The efficacy of state seat belt laws,”
       Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37: 1114-1120.

McCartt, A., and V. Shabanova (2002). “Teenage Seat Belt Use: White Paper.” The
      National Safety Council’s Air Bag & Seat Belt Safety Campaign.

Morrisey M., D. Grabowski, T. Dee and C. Campbell (2006). “The Strength of Graduated
       Drivers License Programs and Fatalities Among Teen Drivers and Passengers,”
       Accident Analysis and Prevention, 38:135-141.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) (2003). “Safety Belts and
       Teens       2003         Report”.               Available       online  at
       http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/airbags/buasbteens03/index.htm.

O’Malley, P. and A. Wagenaar (2004). “Effects of safety belt laws on safety belt use by
      American High School Seniors, 1986-2000,” Journal of Safety Research, 35: 125-
      130.

Sen, A. (2006). “Estimating the Impact of Seat Belt Use on Traffic Fatalities: Empirical
       Evidence from Canada,” working paper.

--- (2001). “Do stricter penalties deter drinking and driving? An empirical investigation
        of Canadian impaired driving laws,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 34(1): 149-
        164.

U.S. Department of Transportation (1990-2005). Highway Statistics, Federal Highway
      Administration, Office of Highway Policy Information.

Williams, A., A. McCartt, and L. Geary (2003). “Seat belt use by high school students,”
       Injury Prevention, 9: 25-28.

Womack, K., N. Trout, and B. Davis (1997). “Characteristics and Conditions of Teenage
     Safety Belt Use.” Report No. DOT HS-808-676. Washington, DC. National
     Highway Transportation Safety Administration.
                                                                                 p.35




               Figure 1: Distribution of Seatbelt Use Frequency, By
                 Type of Seatbelt Law, 1991-2005 National YRBS

          50
          45
          40
          35
          30
Percent




          25
          20
          15
          10
           5
           0
                   Never        Rarely     Sometimes       Often        Always
                  "How often do you wear a safety belt when riding in someone
                                         else's car?"

                       No law   Secondary Enforcement   Primary Enforcement
                                                                                         p.36




               Figure 2: Percent Infrequent Seatbelt Use Among High School
                  Age Youths, 1991-2005 National, State, and Local YRBS

          35

          30

          25
Percent




          20

          15

          10

          5

          0
                1991    1993      1995         1997       1999     2001    2003   2005
                                                Survey Year

                               National YRBS          State YRBS   Local YRBS
                                                                                                p.37




                                 Figure 3. Average Young Driver Fatality Rates by Seatbelt
                                                 Law Enforcement Status

                          0.25
Fatalities per Thousand




                          0.22

                          0.19

                          0.16

                          0.13

                           0.1
                             1990              1994            1998               2002       2006
                                                               Year

                                                         Primary      Secondary
                                                                                     p.38


                                        Table 1a:
                                  Descriptive Statistics
                     1991-2005 National Youth Risk Behavior Surveys
Age                                                              16.1
Black race                                                        .14
Other race                                                        .10
Hispanic                                                          .11
Female                                                            .49

Primary enforcement seatbelt law                                 .38
Secondary enforcement seatbelt law                               .58
Any GDL program with intermediate phase                          .42
.08 BAC law                                                      .44
Zero Tolerance law                                               .70
65 mph speed limit                                               .54
70+ mph speed limit                                              .40

Always wears seatbelt                                            .36
Never/rarely wears seatbelt (infrequent use)                     .18

National YRBS data are weighted means.

                                       Table 1b:
                                  Descriptive Statistics
                 1993-2005 Local and State Youth Risk Behavior Surveys
                                               YRBS Local       YRBS State Surveys
Percent from representative surveys               .88                 .79
Of the representative surveys:
Overall response rate                             72.8                   68.7
School response rate                              97.8                   85.1
Student response rate                             74.4                   80.9
Percent female                                    50.6                   49.4
Percent grade 9                                   33.7                   28.9
Percent grade 10                                  26.3                   25.6
Percent grade 11                                  21.3                   23.3
Percent grade 12                                  18.4                   21.5
Percent white                                     19.5                   68.3

Primary enforcement seatbelt law                  .46                    .26
Secondary enforcement seatbelt law                .53                    .65
Any GDL program                                   .62                    .42
.08 BAC law                                       .57                    .44
Zero Tolerance law                                .82                    .74
65 mph speed limit                                .41                    .48
70+ mph speed limit                               .55                    .45

Percent infrequent seatbelt use                   19.3                   18.5
State and Local YRBS means are unweighted.
                                                                                                          p.39




                                                             Table 2:
                          Mandatory Seatbelt Laws and Infrequent Seatbelt Use – Local and State YRBS Data
                                                            1993-2005
                              (1)                 (2)           (3)                (4)              (5)                 (6)           (7)                (8)
                                                   Local YRBS Data                                                       State YRBS Data
                                    Full sample              Only city/year representative                Full sample              Only state/year representative
                                                                     observations                                                           observations
                         City and year     + City trends    City and year     + City trends   State and year     + state trends   State and year + state trends
                         fixed effects                      fixed effects                      fixed effects                       fixed effects

 Primary                    -15.5*            -15.9*           -15.1*           -13.1**           -9.64**           -13.9**          -11.3**          -14.5**
 Enforcement Law            (5.38)            (5.68)           (6.00)            (3.51)            (3.22)            (3.78)           (3.14)           (4.50)
 Secondary                    --                --               --                --              -6.86*           -8.17**           -7.63*          -7.80**
 Enforcement Law                                                                                   (2.88)            (2.50)           (3.12)           (2.98)

 R squared                    .89                 .94            .89               .94
 N                            112                 112            98                98               .91                 .96            .93              .98
                                                                                                    227                 227            178              178
 Controls For:
 Year dummies?                Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes         Yes                Yes
 Area dummies?                Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes         Yes                Yes
 Area trends?                  No               Yes                No               Yes                No                 Yes          No                Yes
Each column represents a separate weighted least squares regression. Infrequent seatbelt use is defined as the fraction of students who reported that they “rarely”
or “never” wear a seatbelt when riding in someone else’s car. Models also include controls for: the state unemployment rate, an indicator for the presence of a
.08 BAC law, a Zero Tolerance law, a graduated driver licensing law, speed limits (65mph and 70mph+), overall survey response rate, student response rate,
school response rate, percent female, percent black, percent Hispanic, percent other race, percent grade 10, percent grade 11, and percent grade 12. † significant
at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. In all cases, robust standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                                                        p.40




                                                           Table 3:
                  Mandatory Seatbelt Laws and Alternative Measures of Youth Seatbelt Use – National YRBS Data
                                                          1991-2005
                                       (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)
                                 State and year         + state trends        State and year        + state trends        State and year        + state trends
                                  fixed effects                                fixed effects                               fixed effects
                                    Infrequent Seatbelt Use, Probit              Always Wears Seatbelt, Probit            Cohen & Einav Continuous Belt Use,
                                           Sample mean = .18                            Sample mean = .36                                 OLS
                                                                                                                                    Sample mean = .64
Primary Enforcement Law              -.084†                -.099**                 .051                  -.009                 .316                  .277
                                     (.042)                 (.034)                (.062)                 (.061)               (.222)                (.193)
Secondary Enforcement                -.028                   -.050                -.004                  -.054                 .107                  .092
Law                                  (.013)                 (.031)                (.067)                 (.056)               (.250)                (.173)

R squared                             .07                    .08                   .05                    .06                   .11                    .12
N                                   112864                 112864                112864                 112864                112864                 112864

Controls For:
Year dummies?                            Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State dummies?                           Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State trends?                            No                    Yes                   No                     Yes                   No                    Yes
Infrequent seatbelt use is an indicator variable equal to one for students who reported that they “rarely” or “never” wear a seatbelt when riding in someone else’s
car. For probit models we present marginal effects estimated at sample means. Models also include controls for: the state unemployment rate, indicators for the
presence of a .08 BAC law, a Zero Tolerance law, a graduated driver licensing law, and speed limits (65 mph, 70+ mph), age dummies, grade dummies,
race/ethnicity dummies (black, other race, Hispanic), and a female dummy. † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. In all cases, robust
standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                                                    p.41




                                                                     Table 4:
                                                   Falsification Exercises on Placebo Outcomes
                                                   1991-2005 National, State, and Local YRBS
                        (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)              (8)            (9)
                      Any sex –      Past 30 day    Past 30 day     Any sex –      Past 30 day    Past 30 day     Any sex –      Past 30 day    Past 30 day
                       past 3          smoker         drinker        past 3          smoker         drinker        past 3          smoker         drinker
                       months                                        months                                        months
                      National        National       National         State           State          State         Local            Local          Local

Sample mean:             .33             .29            .46            35.1           27.9            45.8           36.9           18.7            39.4

Primary                  .021           .011            .057           1.06           .789            4.83           -1.99           -1.51          -1.07
Enforcement Law         (.053)         (.028)          (.038)         (3.44)         (2.23)          (6.25)         (2.43)          (3.17)         (2.11)
Secondary               -.012          .043*            .045           -.393          .859            6.45             --              --             --
Enforcement Law         (.037)         (.021)          (.033)         (2.53)         (1.53)          (6.57)

R squared                .07             .05            .03            .98             .98            .89             .97            .98            .95
N                      112407          112864         112864           158             181            181             96             97             97

Controls For:
Year dummies?              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes   Yes           Yes
Area dummies?              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes   Yes           Yes
Area trends?               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes   Yes           Yes
Each column represents a separate regression. All models include state and year fixed effects and linear state trends. See notes to Table 3 for additional
regressors for the national YRBS models in Columns 1-3. See notes to Tables 2 for additional regressors for the state and local YRBS models in Columns 4-9. †
significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. In all cases, robust standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                                                        p.42


                                        Table 5:
                            Evidence on Selective Recruitment
              Coefficients on Primary Enforcement Seatbelt Law Indicator
                                1991-2005 National YRBS
                                               (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                           Infrequent      Always wears        Continuous       Number of
                                          seatbelt use       seatbelt          seatbelt use    observations

Baseline (full sample)                      -.099**            -.009              .277            112864
                                             (.034)            (.061)            (.193)

Past month drinkers                         -.117*              .017              .343†            50662
                                            (.043)             (.055)            (.189)

Past month binge drinkers                   -.139*              .073             .485*             31086
                                            (.062)             (.064)            (.230)

Past month alcohol-involved drivers               †            -.017              .513             15203
                                            -.246
                                            (.121)             (.099)            (.411)

Past month smokers                                †             .038                  †            29299
                                            -.104                                .368
                                            (.058)             (.066)            (.202)

Had sexual activity in past 3 months          -.132*              -.028                .303        41613
                                              (.032)              (.081)              (.259)
Each entry represents a separate regression. All models include state and year fixed effects and linear state
trends. See notes to Table 3 for additional regressors. † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. In all cases, robust standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                                                      p.43


                                         Table 6:
                                   Descriptive Statistics
                   1991-2005 Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS)

Traffic fatalities, age 14-18                                                     74.2
Traffic fatalities, age 14-18 (state/day average)                                  .20
Incapacitating nonfatal crash-related injuries, age 14-18                         50.5
Incapacitating nonfatal crash-related injuries, age 14-18                          .14
(state/day average)
Primary enforcement seatbelt law                                                   .28
Secondary enforcement seatbelt law                                                 .66

Any GDL program with intermediate phase                                            .39
.08 BAC law                                                                        .40
Zero Tolerance law                                                                 .69
65mph speed limit                                                                  .54
70+ mph speed limit                                                                .34

Sample means are state/year averages (except where noted) for the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
                                                                                                   p.44


                                     Table 7:
       Mandatory Seatbelt Laws, Traffic Fatalities, and Crash-Related Injuries
                                FARS 1991-2005
                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                    Occupant fatalities             Incapacitating nonfatal injuries
                            State and year      + state trends     State and year      + state trends
                             fixed effects                          fixed effects

Primary Enforcement             -.007              -.016**             -.002              -.013†
Law                             (.006)              (.006)             (.008)             (.007)
Secondary Enforcement            .004                     †             .007              -.007
                                                    -.009
Law                             (.004)              (.005)             (.007)             (.007)


N                              279429              279429             279429              279429

 Controls For:
 Year dummies?                      Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
 State dummies?                     Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
 State trends?                      No                 Yes               No                Yes
Each column represents a separate negative binomial regression estimated on the state/day count of
fatalities (Columns 1-2) or injuries (Columns 3-4) of youths age 14-18. We present marginal effects and
associated standard errors clustered at the state level. Models also include controls for: the state
unemployment rate, an indicator for the presence of a .08 BAC law, a Zero Tolerance law, a graduated
driver licensing law, and speed limits (65mph, 70+ mph). † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%.
                                                                                                      p.45


                                        Table 8:
                        Robustness Analyses: Fatalities and Injuries
                                    FARS 1991-2005
                                  (1)                    (2)                (3)                (4)
                                          Fatalities                  Incapacitating nonfatal injuries
                                Only the         Aggregating the         Only the       Aggregating the
                               state/year           fatalities to       state/year        injuries into
                             combinations       state/year instead    combinations     state/year instead
                             represented in        of state/day       represented in      of state/day
                            the state YRBS                           the state YRBS
                                sample                                   sample

Primary Enforcement              -.014               -8.87**             -.011                -5.46
Law                             (.010)                (2.70)             (.013)              (3.33)
Secondary Enforcement           -.016†               -5.91**             -.005                -3.14
Law                             (.009)                (1.95)             (.012)              (2.64)


N                               87600                  765               87600                765

 Controls For:
 Year dummies?                      Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes
 State dummies?                     Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes
 Linear state trends?               Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes
Each column represents a separate negative binomial regression estimated on the state/day count of
fatalities (Columns 1-2) or injuries (Columns 3-4) of youths age 14-18. We present marginal effects and
associated standard errors clustered at the state level. Models also include controls for: the state
unemployment rate, an indicator for the presence of a .08 BAC law, a Zero Tolerance law, a graduated
driver licensing law, and speed limits (65mph, 70+ mph). † significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%.
                                                                                                             p.46




                                      Table 9:
             Addressing Concerns About Enforcement & Media Campaigns
                      1991-2005 National, State, and Local YRBS
                              (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)
                          Infrequent        Infrequent       Infrequent         Fatalities        Injuries
                         Seatbelt Use      Seatbelt Use     Seatbelt Use
                           National        State YRBS       Local YRBS           FARS              FARS
                            YRBS

 Primary                    -.099**          -14.5**           -13.2**          -.016**           -.013†
 Enforcement Law             (.035)           (4.61)            (3.78)           (.006)           (.007)
 Secondary                    -.050           -7.82*              --                   †           -.007
                                                                                 -.008
 Enforcement Law             (.032)           (2.95)                             (.005)           (.007)

 Seatbelt grant               .000            -.0001             .001            -.001              .001
 (x 1000)                    (.000)           (.003)            (.003)           (.000)            (.001)

 N                          112864             178                98            279429            279429

  Controls For:
  Year dummies?                Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
  Area dummies?                Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
  Area trends?                 Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
Each column represents a separate model with area and year dummies and area-specific linear time trends.
See notes to Table 3 (2) for an additional description of the national (state/local) YRBS model. See notes
to Table 7 for an additional description of the fatalities and injuries models. † significant at 10%; *
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. In all cases, robust standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                                                                       p.47


                                 Appendix Table 1:
             N indicates national YRBS data for that state in that year
               S indicates state YRBS data for that state in that year
    L indicates local YRBS data for at least one locality in that state in that year
                 Primary Seatbelt law indicated by dark shaded area
               Secondary seatbelt law indicated by light shaded area
Location         1991     1993      1995      1997      1999      2001      2003        2005
Alabama                    NS        NS        NS        NS        NS        NS          S
Alaska                                S                   S                   S
Arizona                    N                   N         N        N          NS         NS
Arkansas                   NS       NS        NS          S        S         N           S
California        N        NL       NSL       NSL        NL       NL         NL         NL
Colorado          N        N        NSL       NS                  NS                     S
Connecticut                                   NS         S                              NS
Delaware                   S        NS         S         S         S        NS           S
DC                         S        NS         S         S         S         S           S
Florida           N       NL        NL        NSL       NSL       NSL       NSL         NSL
Georgia           N       NS        NS         N         N         N        NS          NSL
Hawaii                     S         S         S        NS         S                     S
Idaho                      S         S                            NS         S           N
Illinois          N       NSL       NSL        L        NSL       NSL       NL          NL
Indiana           N                                               NS        NS          NS
Iowa                                 N        NS         S         S                    NS
Kansas                     N                   N                             N          NS
Kentucky                   S                   S         S         S         S          NS
Louisiana                 SL         NL       NSL       NSL       SL        NL          NL
Maine                     NS         NS       NS        NS        NS        NS           S
Maryland          N        N                  NL                             N          SL
Massachusetts             NSL       NSL       NSL       SL        NSL       NSL         NSL
Michigan          N        N        NSL       NSL       NSL       NSL       NSL         NSL
Minnesota                  N                                                             N
Mississippi       N       NS         NS        NS       NS        NS        S            S
Missouri          N        N         NS         S       NS        NS        NS          NS
Montana                    S          S         S        S        NS        S            S
Nebraska                  NS          S                  S         S        S            S
Nevada                     S          S        S         S        NS        S            S
NewHampshire      N        S          S        S         S         S         S           S
New Jersey        N       SL         SL       NSL       NS        NS        N           NS
New Mexico        N       NS                   N         S         N        N            S
New York          N       NSL        N        NSL       NSL       NSL       NS          NSL
North Carolina            NS         NS       NS         N        NS        S           NSL
North Dakota                          S        S         S         S        S            S
Ohio              N        NS        NS       NS        NS         N        NS          NS
Oklahoma                                       N                   N        S           NS
Oregon                     NS                                      N                     N
Pennsylvania      N        NL        NL       NL        NL         L        NL          NL
Rhode Island                          S        S        N          S         S           S
                                                     p.48


South Carolina   N   NS    S   NS    S   NS     N     NS
South Dakota     N    S    S    S    S    S    NS      S
Tennessee            NS   NS   NS   NS   NS    SL     NSL
Texas            N   NL   NL   NL   NL   NSL   NSL    NSL
Utah                  S    S    S    S    S    NS     NS
Vermont          N    S    S    S    S    S    NS      S
Virginia         N        N         N           N      N
Washington       N   NL   NL   N     L    N            N
West Virginia        NS    S    S    S    N     S     NS
Wisconsin             S        NS   NS   NSL   NSL    NSL
Wyoming               S   S     S    S    S     S      S
                                                                                 p.49


                                   Appendix Table 2:
                         Cities participating in the Local YRBS
                   Primary Seatbelt law indicated by dark shaded area
                  Secondary seatbelt law indicated by light shaded area
Location                1993      1995     1997      1999      2001       2003    2005
Los Angeles, CA                    X        X                   X          X
San Bernardino, CA                                     X        X          X       X
San Diego, CA            X         X         X         X        X          X       X
San Francisco, CA        X         X         X         X        X                  X
Denver, CO                         X
Broward County, FL                                                         X       X
Ft. Lauderdale, FL       X         X         X         X         X
Hillsborough Cty, FL                                                               X
Miami, FL                X         X         X         X         X         X       X
Palm Beach, FL                                         X         X         X       X
Orange County, FL                                                          X       X
Orlando, FL                                                      X
DeKalb County, GA                                                          X       X
New Orleans, LA          X         X         X         X         X         X       X
Baltimore, MD                                X                                     X
Boston, MA               X         X         X         X         X         X       X
Detroit, MI                        X         X         X         X         X       X
Jersey City, NJ          X         X         X
Newark, NJ                                   X
New York, NY             X                   X         X         X         X       X
Charlotte, NC                                                                      X
Philadelphia, PA         X         X         X         X         X         X
Memphis, TN                                                                X       X
Dallas, TX               X         X         X         X         X         X       X
Houston, TX                        X         X         X         X
Seattle, WA              X         X                             X
Milwaukee, WI                                                    X         X       X
