NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AID VOLATILITY AND POVERTY TRAPS
Pierre-Richard Agénor
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 13400
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13400

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Pierre-Richard Agénor and Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Aid Volatility and Poverty Traps
Pierre-Richard Agénor and Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 13400
September 2007, Revised March 2009
JEL No. F35,H54,O19
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the impact of aid volatility in a two-period model where production may occur with
either a traditional or a modern technology. Public spending is productive and "time to build" requires
expenditure in both periods for the modern technology to be used. The possibility of a poverty trap
induced by high aid volatility is first examined in a benchmark case where taxation is absent. The
analysis is then extended to account for self insurance (taking the form of a first-period contingency
fund) financed through taxation. An increase in aid volatility is shown to raise the optimal contingency
fund. But if future aid also depends on the size of the contingency fund (as a result of a moral hazard
effect on donors' behavior), the optimal policy may entail no self insurance.

Pierre-Richard Agénor
School of Social Sciences, University of Mancheste
Manchester M139PL, United Kingdom
Pierre-richard.Agenor@manchester.ac.uk
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Aid Volatility and Poverty Traps
Pierre-Richard Agénor∗ and Joshua Aizenman∗∗
Final version: February 7, 2009

Abstract
This paper studies the impact of aid volatility in a two-period
model where production may occur with either a traditional or a modern technology. Public spending is productive and “time to build”
requires expenditure in both periods for the modern technology to be
used. The possibility of a poverty trap induced by high aid volatility is first examined in a benchmark case where taxation is absent.
The analysis is then extended to account for self insurance (taking the
form of a first-period contingency fund) financed through taxation.
An increase in aid volatility is shown to raise the optimal contingency
fund. But if future aid also depends on the size of the contingency
fund (as a result of a moral hazard eﬀect on donors’ behavior), the
optimal policy may entail no self insurance.
JEL Classification Numbers: F35, H54, O19.

∗

School of Social Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13
9PL, United Kingdom, and Centre for Growth and Business Cycle Research; and
∗∗
Department of Economics, University of California at Santa Cruz, 217 Social Sciences 1,
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA; and National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful
to three anonymous referees and the Editor for helpful comments on a previous version.

1

“There is an incredible and increasing burden (on African countries) of aid with diﬀerent conditions and aid that is not predictable...
It is often very diﬃcult for countries who need resources from outside
to be able to plan ... if there is not enough predictability of the flows
of aid.”
Rodrigo de Rato, IMF Managing Director, Cape Town (March 16, 2007).

1

Introduction

Various observers have advocated a large and sustained increase in foreign aid
to facilitate the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
in low-income countries. The underlying argument is often that, given the
limited ability of many of these countries to raise domestic resources through
taxation, concessional external finance is essential to support a multi-year
public investment program aimed at developing public capital in infrastructure, health, and education. In a recent report on Sub-Saharan Africa, for
instance, the World Bank (2005a) called for a doubling of spending on infrastructure in the region (from 4.7 percent of GDP in recent years to more
than 9 percent over the next decade), with much of this increase supported
by net inflows of concessional resources.1
The unfortunate news, however, is that aid volatility tends to be quite
high and may have in fact increased in recent years. Pallage and Robe (2001),
using data for 63 aid recipients for the period 1969-95, found that aid is approximately twice as volatile as real output. In the same vein, Bulir and
Hamann (2003), using data covering 72 countries over the period 1975-97,
1

See also the report of the Commission for Africa (2005) and Sachs (2005) for a discussion of the importance of a “Big Push” in public investment for achieving the MDGs.
Agénor (2006) provides a theoretical analysis that highlights the role of improved governance in the context of a Big Push.

2

found that aid flows are significantly more volatile than domestic fiscal revenues; in addition, the information content of aid commitments in predicting
actual flows is either very small or statistically insignificant–a result subsequently corroborated by Celasun and Walliser (2008). They also found
much larger prediction errors in program assistance than in project aid, and
a stronger tendency to over-estimation.2 In subsequent studies, Bulir and
Hamann (2007), as well as Hudson and Mosley (2006), found corroborating
evidence; the volatility of aid continues to be much larger than the volatility
of domestic tax revenues, with coeﬃcients of variation in the range of 40-60
percent of mean aid flows. Both studies also found that aid volatility has
actually increased since the late 1990s, as do the IMF’s Independent Evaluation Oﬃce (2007) with respect to aid to Sub-Saharan Africa and Kharas
(2007) for a larger group of aid recipients.
Of course, by their very nature, some types of aid should exhibit a high
degree of volatility, because they are designed to deal with local economic
and social crises. This is certainly the case for emergency aid.3 The World
Bank (2005b, p. 106) for instance found that emergency assistance is more
than three times more volatile than overall Oﬃcial Development Assistance
(ODA) flows. To a lower extent, high volatility may also characterize program
2

Program aid (also referred to as budget or “untied” aid) generally takes the form of
a cash disbursement and is perfectly fungible. By contrast, project aid (or “tied” aid)
consists of transfers for investment projects agreed between the donor and the recipient
country; whether it is fungible or not depends on whether, prior to the aid commitment,
the recipient country intended to finance the project itself.
3
Volatility in emergency aid, such as food, can have important macroeconomic implications because its timing and scale could have a stabilizing eﬀect on the government
budget. When, for instance, the domestic supply of food falls, government revenues may
decline and spending may rise; monetization of food aid in this case can stabilize flows
to the budget, in addition to allowing some degree of consumption smoothing. However,
based on past aid surges, Bulir and Haman (2007) found no evidence that these eﬀects
were significant or large.

3

assistance, given that it may depend (through conditionality) on short-run
macroeconomic performance and disbursement triggers. By contrast, project
aid should be relatively stable, given that it is designed to promote (directly
or indirectly) investment in physical and human capital.4 According to estimates by the World Bank (2006, p. 93), physical infrastructure accounted
for 32.2 percent of ODA to low-income countries during the period 199092 and 40 percent during 1995-97, whereas education and health amounted
to 8.1 percent and 10.9 percent for the same periods. As a proportion of
domestic investment, project aid has also increased dramatically since the
1960s for many poor countries. Thus, in addition to complicating short-run
macroeconomic management, volatility in that category of aid could be very
detrimental to long-term economic and social development in these countries.
But here again the news are not good. In a study of disaggregated
aid inflows to 66 low-income recipients over the period 1973-2002, Fielding
and Mavrotas (2005) found that project aid (particularly in the more open
economies) tends also to be quite volatile. Moreover, aid does not seem to
operate as an “insurance mechanism” against adverse economic shocks; by
and large, as documented by Pallage and Robe (2001) and Bulir and Hamann
(2003, 2007), it tends to behave procyclically, thereby exacerbating the impact of these shocks. If the reasons for aid volatility are beyond the control
of recipient countries, understanding its implications and designing ways to
cope with it become primary policy concerns.
A key implication of lack of predictability in aid disbursements (particularly of project aid) is that it makes it diﬃcult for recipient governments
4

If donor countries provide aid for financing large and “lumpy” projects, some degree
of aid volatility should naturally be expected. Our contention, however, is that the recent
increase in volatility of aid flows has been associated with an across-the-board increase in
uncertainty associated with the availability of foreign assistance.

4

to formulate medium-term spending plans to spur growth and achieve the
MDGs. If aid finances a large fraction of infrastructure investment, as is
often the case in low-income countries, and if creating public capital requires
time (as a result of a “time to build” assumption, for instance), an aid shortfall could bring the process to a halt if no alternative sources of financing
are available. In addition, in response to high volatility, countries may opt
to reduce the desired level of investment, which, ceteris paribus, means lower
funding requirements; donors, seeing lower requirements, may misinterpret it
as a signal of absorption problems, and eﬀectively reduce aid commitments–
making the initial concerns about lower assistance self-fulfilling and possibly
contributing to the perpetuation of a stagnation equilibrium, or more broadly
speaking a poverty trap. Aid volatility may therefore have permanent costs
in terms of lost output and exert potentially large eﬀects on growth and
welfare.
Despite the importance of these potential eﬀects, there has been relatively
limited research on the consequences of aid volatility.5 Among available empirical studies, Lensink and Morrissey (2000), Markandya, Ponczek, and Yi
(2006), and Neanidis and Varvarigos (2007) have all found that aid volatility
(particularly with respect to program aid) has a significant negative impact
on growth. This eﬀect appears to be robust across country groups, regression
specifications, and estimation techniques. More directly relevant to the issue
addressed in this paper, Hudson and Mosley (2008) found that aid volatility
tends to reduce both government expenditure and aggregate investment–
5

Much recent research has focused on the general issue of volatility and growth; see,
for instance, Turnovsky and Chattopadhyay (2003), Aghion et al. (2005), Blackburn
and Pelloni (2004), Hnatkovska and Loayza (2005), Chong and Gradstein (2006), Geert,
Harvey, and Lundblad (2006), Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2005), Norrbin and Yigit
(2005), and Imbs (2007), for some recent contributions. However, none of these studies
addresses the more specific issues related to the volality of aid.

5

particularly so when considering sudden declines or shortfalls in aid. At the
analytical level, most of the research has focused on the impact of the level
of aid and its implications for growth. Chatterjee, Sakoulis, and Turnovsky
(2003), and Chatterjee and Turnovsky (2005, 2007), for instance, analyze the
impact of aid tied to public investment in infrastructure on private capital
formation and growth, and so do Agénor and Yilmaz (2008) in a model with
endogenous relative prices. Studies that examine specifically the volatility
of aid, such as Arellano, Bulir, Lane, and Lipschitz (2009), and Pallage,
Robe, and Bérubé (2006), tend to focus on the implications of such volatility for consumption smoothing. In doing so, however, they tend to neglect
longer-term, supply-side eﬀects, namely, the fact that aid volatility may affect governments’ ability to finance public investment programs and spur
private capital accumulation and production–fluctuations in which may in
turn generate large movements in consumption and sizable welfare eﬀects.
This paper takes a step forward by studying the impact of aid volatility on
production and welfare. We do so in a two-period model where risk-neutral
agents must choose between a traditional and modern technologies. In addition, a “time to build” assumption requires public expenditure in both
periods for the modern technology to be adopted. Although aid disbursements are known with certainty in the first period, they are uncertain in the
second. Section II considers the benchmark case where domestic taxation
is absent and shows how a poverty (or low output) trap induced by high
aid volatility can emerge. Section III extends the analysis to account for the
possibility of self insurance, through a first-period contingency fund. Reserve
accumulation has indeed been advocated by various observers (including the
International Monetary Fund (2007)) as a way to mitigate adverse eﬀects of
sharp fluctuations in foreign assistance on government spending programs.
6

We show, however, that if future aid is dependent on the size of the contingency fund (as a result of a moral hazard eﬀect), the optimal policy may
entail no self insurance. The final section oﬀers some concluding remarks.

2

The Basic Framework

We consider a two-period economy with population constant at L̄ and riskneutral agents. Each agent supplies up to one unit of labor. Production of
a single good can take place under two alternative technologies: a “traditional” technology, which involves only labor, and a more productive “modern” technology, which requires not only labor but also government services
(infrastructure, for short) provided in both periods. There is no private physical capital and there is no opportunity to borrow on international financial
markets.
The representative agent’s discounted present value utility is given by
U = C1 − νL1 +

C2 − νL2
,
1+β

(1)

where Ch is consumption, Lh labor supply (both in period h = 1, 2 ), ν ∈

(0, 1), and β > 0 is a subjective discount rate. For simplicity, the instantaneous utility function is taken to be linear in both arguments.
In the first period, the economy uses the traditional technology only; in
the second, whether the traditional or the modern technology is used depends
on expected profits. Because of the low level of income, we assume initially
that the government cannot raise resources domestically; therefore spending
in both periods is financed solely by foreign aid.
For simplicity, the traditional production technology is assumed to be
Ricardian. Let Y1 denote output in period 1; thus
Y1 = L̄,
7

(2)

where, for simplicity, the marginal product of labor is set equal to unity.
Output in period 2 can be produced with either the modern or the traditional technology. The modern technology requires a labor commitment in
quantity L2 –perhaps because time is needed to relocate workers from the
traditional to the modern sector–and a combination of public infrastructure
services in both periods. The production function is given by
Y2 = b

Lγ2 (Gα1 G1−α
)1−γ
2
,
γ

(3)

where G1 (G2 ) denotes government spending in period 1 (2), b > 0 measures
the total productivity of the modern technology, and α, γ ∈ (0, 1). The use of

the modern technology also involves a “startup cost” of κ1 , which is incurred
in period 1.6
If, instead, the traditional technology is used in period 2, production is
given by
Y2 = L̄ − L2 ,

(4)

given that the labor commitment L2 is made in period 1.
For the time being, we assume that aid, given by Ai , i = 1, 2, finances
government spending in both periods. In period 1, there is no uncertainty;
however, second-period aid is uncertain. Specifically, we assume that
A1 = G1 ,

(5)

A2 = G2 = (1 + ε)Ā,

(6)

where Ā > 0 and ε is a random variable with zero mean, so that E(ε) = 0,
and variance σ 2ε . In what follows, we will assume that ε follows a symmetric
distribution over the interval (−ε̄, +ε̄), ε̄ ≤ 1, and density function f (ε).
6

Our analysis is not altered if κ1 = 0.

8

Assuming a constant wage normalized to unity, the optimal labor commitment is the solution of the following maximization problem:
¾
½ γ α 1−α 1−γ
L2 (A1 G2 )
max E b
− (1 + β)κ1 − L2 ,
L2
γ
where E is the expectations operator and (1 + β)κ1 measures the value of the
startup cost from the perspective of period 2. The solution of this problem
for the individual agent yields7
(1−α)(1−γ)

L∗2 = b1/(1−γ) Aα1 {E[G2

]}1/(1−γ) ≤ 1.

(7)

Using this result, expected private profits (measured from the perspective
of the first period) associated with the adoption of the modern technology
are thus given by
Π=

1/(1−γ)
b1/(1−γ) (γ −1 − 1)Aα1 [E(GΩ
2 )]
− κ1 ,
1+β

(8)

where Ω ≡ (1 − α)(1 − γ) < 1.

Because of homogeneity, all agents L̄ adopt the modern technology, if it

profitable to do so. Using (8), and abstracting from any cost associated with
aid, the expected social surplus of the recipient country is thus given by
½ 1/(1−γ) −1
¾
1/(1−γ)
b
(γ − 1)Aα1 [E(GΩ
2 )]
V = L̄
− κ1 − Ā.
(9)
1+β
If the term in brackets is positive, a large enough value of L̄ will ensure
that V > 0, implying that the modern technology is welfare enhancing. In
turn, for the term in brackets to be positive, the productivity of the modern
7

We assume that b and A1 are such that this inequality holds. Recall that each agent
supplies up to one unit of labor. Equation (7) implies an internal solution, where both
technologies are used in period 2. If L∗2 > 1, we will observe a corner solution, where all
workers are committed to the modern sector and the second-period wage exceeds unity.
Our analysis can be extended to apply to this case.

9

technology, as measured by b, must be high enough, in comparison to the
startup cost κ1 , and the discount rate β cannot be too high.
The impact of volatility on the social surplus operates through E(GΩ
2 ).
The concavity of GΩ
2 –which results from the diminishing marginal productivity of public infrastructure in private production, that is, γ < 1–implies
that volatile aid reduces expected private profits as well as the social surplus.
This is a reflection of Jensen’s inequality, embodied in the strict concavity of
8
GΩ
2 , as a function of G2 . In eﬀect, the economy would be better oﬀ getting

the amount of aid Ā with certainty than getting the same amount on average,
but with a non-zero variance.
By implication, if b is suﬃciently low and the degree of aid volatility high
enough, private agents may not find it profitable to adopt the modern technology; the economy may be stuck therefore in a stagnation equilibrium, or
more broadly speaking a poverty trap (which we define as a state of “low”
output, that is, output produced by the traditional technology), with possibly large welfare losses. This result can be summarized in the following
proposition:
Proposition 1. High aid volatility, by reducing expected private profits
associated with the modern technology and the social surplus, may lead to a
poverty (or low output) trap.
Thus, in this model, a necessary condition for a stagnating equilibrium
8

Ω
More specifically, Jensen’s inequality implies here that E(GΩ
2 ) < (EG2 ) , that is, using
Ω
Ω
(6), E([(1 + ε)Ā] ) < Ā . Given diminishing returns, an increase in uncertainty (higher
volatility of ε) leads to a worse outcome than ε̄ = 0. For small support ε̄, a second-order
Taylor approximation implies that higher aid volatility reduces expected profits. More
generally, the concavity of expected profits implies that for a symmetric distribution of
aid shocks, higher volatility induced by a multiplicative increase in the distribution reduces
the expected surplus associated with the modern technology. That is, magnifying the aid
shock, ε, by a factor q to qε, where q > 1, increasing thereby the standard deviation of
the aid shock by a factor of q, can be shown to reduce the expected surplus.

10

to emerge (that is, V < 0) is for adoption of the modern technology to be
feasible (or desirable) when aid is at its expected value Ā–as can be inferred
from (9)–but not feasible when actual aid flows are too volatile.
Figure 1 illustrates the welfare cost of aid volatility, reporting a simulation of an economy where the aid shock follows a uniform destitution in
the interval (−ε̄, +ε̄). We plot the expected surplus, (9), for varying levels
of ε̄ ∈ (0, 1). Panel A corresponds to the case where the productivity is

relatively high, hence public investment is highly productive. In the absence
of aid volatility, public investment yields a surplus that exceeds the public
investment second period cost by about 55 percent. The optimal share of
labor employed in the nontraditional sector is about 0.2. Volatility reduces
the surplus of the non-traditional sector to about 40 percent for ε̄ = 1.
Panel B corresponds to the case where the productivity of the non tradition sector is low. For zero volatility, the non-tradition sector yields a surplus
that exceeds the second public investment by about 9 percent. High enough
volatility would terminate the non-traditional sector, eliminating thereby any
surplus (recall that the surplus is zero in the traditional sector). The optimal
share of labor employed in the non-traditional sector is about 0.15, dropping
to zero for high enough volatility. Thus, small changes in productivity have
sizable eﬀects on the expected surplus.

3

Self Insurance and Moral Hazard

We now consider the case where the government self insures by building a
contingency fund in the first period, in order to alleviate the risk of an aid
shortfall in the second period. For simplicity, we will assume in what follows
that A1 (which is given) is normalized to unity.

11

The first step is to calculate the optimal value of spending in the second
period for the case, where the realized level of aid is large enough to ensure
that the aid constraint does not bind. This is determined so as to maximize
the diﬀerence between output produced with the modern technology and the
“best” alternative use of the aid inflow, that is, consumption:
¾
½
(L∗2 )γ GΩ
2
max E L̄b
− G2 ,
G2
γ
where L∗2 is given by (7). The term in brackets represents the diﬀerence
between the benefit from spending aid for productive purposes if it induces
agents to adopt the modern technology, compared to the benefit derived from
simply consuming those resources. Solving this problem yields
G∗2

¾1/(1−Ω)
½
L̄b1/(1−γ) Ω
Ω γ/(1−γ)
)[E(G2 )]
= (
.
γ

(10)

The second step is to determine the resources available to the government
in the first and second periods. In the first period, as noted earlier, production uses the traditional technology. Because agents supply one unit of labor
and the productivity of labor is unity, total income is also unity. With τ 1
denoting the period-1 tax rate, tax revenues are in principle given by L̄τ 1 .
However, suppose also that collecting taxes is subject to costs, which reduce
proceeds (in a nonlinear fashion) by −L̄λτ 21 /2. Total resources (or liquid-

ity) that the government can have access to in the second period to finance
spending, taking into account both domestic resources and (volatile) aid, is
given by9
Γ(τ 1 , ε) = L̄(τ 1 −

λτ 21
)(1 + β) + (1 + ε)Ā.
2

9

(11)

We assume that due to administrative lags in the collection of taxes, only first-period
taxes and realized second-period aid (rather than A1 ) can be used to fund second-period
public investment. The main results of our paper do not depend on this assumption.

12

Given that the unconstrained, optimal second-period spending is determined by (10), there are two cases to consider, depending on the value of the
aid shock:
G2 =

½

Γ(τ 1 , ε) if ε < εC
,
G∗2
if ε > εC

where the critical value of the shock, εC , is obtained from Γ(τ 1 , εC ) = G∗2 . It
follows that the threshold state, εC , depends negatively on the tax rate and
positively on the parameter λ, which characterizes tax collection costs:
εC = εC (τ 1 ; λ),
with ∂εC /∂τ 1 < 0 and ∂εC /∂λ > 0.
In the first case, ε < εC , spending is constrained by available resources
and the optimal level cannot be achieved. In the second case, ε > εC ,
spending is unconstrained, because resources exceed the optimal value; if so,
we assume that the “excess” resources, given by Γ(τ 1 , ε) − G∗2 = Ā(ε − εC ),

are consumed.

The expected social surplus may now be written as
Z εC γ
L Γ(τ 1 , ε)Ω
V = L̄(1 − τ 1 ) + L̄
b 2
f (ε)dε
γ 1+β
−ε̄
¾
Z ε̄ ½
Ā(ε − εC )
L2
Lγ2 G∗Ω
2
+
f (ε)dε − L̄κ1 − 1 −
.
+
L̄b
γ 1+β
1+β
1+β
εC

(12)

The optimal period-1 tax rate is therefore given by
½Z εC γ
¾
Z ε̄
dV
L2 ΩΓ(τ 1 , ε)Ω−1
= −L̄ + L̄(1 − λτ 1 )
b
f (ε)dε = 0,
f (ε)dε +
dτ 1
γ
1+β
εC
−ε̄
which can be rewritten as
½Z εC γ
¾
Z ε̄
L2 ΩΓ(τ 1 , ε)Ω−1
f (ε)dε +
b
f (ε)dε = 0,
−1 + (1 − λτ 1 )
γ
1+β
εC
−ε̄
13

or equivalently10
1
=
1 − λτ 1

Z

εC

−ε̄

Lγ2 ΩΓ(τ 1 , ε)Ω−1
f (ε)dε +
b
γ
1+β

Z

ε̄

f (ε)dε.

(13)

εC

This condition can be interpreted as a public finance intertemporal arbitrage characterizing the optimal tax, which in turn determines the optimal
resources held in the contingency fund, and second-period liquidity, Γ. The
left-hand side of (13) is the gross cost of public funds; raising one unit of
net public funds requires higher gross tax revenue of 1/(1 − λτ 1 ).11 The

right-hand side is the expected marginal benefit of liquidity, discounted to
the first period. Specifically, a unit of net public funds increases secondperiod liquidity by dΓ/dτ 1 = 1 + β. In states of low aid (ε < εC ), the
extra liquidity would finance higher second-period infrastructure spending,
dG2 /dτ 1 = dΓ/dτ 1 , increasing second-period output by (dY2 /dG2 )(1 + β).

In terms of the first period, extra liquidity would lead to a welfare gain of
dY2 /dG2 . If spending in the second period is unconstrained (ε > εC ), the
extra liquidity will support higher second-period consumption, inducing a
discounted welfare gain of 1 (that is, (1 + β)/(1 + β)). The right-hand side
of (13) is thus the discounted expected welfare gain derived from marginal
second-period liquidity.
These results are illustrated in Figure 2, which relates the marginal productivity of government spending (MP G) to the realized aid shock. The bold
curve shown in the figure depicts max{[∆Y2 /∆G2 ]/(1 + β); 1}. For ε < εC ,
it is the discounted marginal product of public infrastructure; for ε > εC ,
it is the discounted increase of second-period consumption financed by mar10

Note that in solving for the optimal tax rate we take G∗2 as given, as implied by the
Envelope theorem; a change in G∗2 would lead to a change in εC , which in turn would have
a negligible eﬀect on the term on the right-hand side of equation (13).
11
The wedge 1/(1 − λτ 1 ) − 1 = λτ 1 /(1 − λτ 1 ) measures the cost spent on collecting a
unit of net tax revenue.

14

ginal liquidity, (1 + β)/(1 + β) = 1. The bold curve is also the discounted
marginal benefit of first-period liquidity, that is, the right-hand side of (13).
The optimal first-period tax rate equates this expected gain with the gross
cost of public funds, 1/(1 − λτ 1 ). Hence, for a given λ, factors increasing

the expected discounted gain of marginal liquidity (as represented by the
bold curve in the figure) would increase optimal liquidity, thereby requiring
a higher tax rate.12
Another implication of Figure 2 is that, in the limiting case of lump-sum
taxes, the cost of self insurance approaches zero, and the optimal policy is
full insurance–holding liquidity that would allow financing G∗2 even in the
worst state of nature, that is, εC → −ε̄ when collection costs tend to zero

(λ → 0).13

From condition (13), the following proposition can be established regard-

ing the impact of aid volatility, as measured by an increase in the standard
error of the shock, σε :
Proposition 2. An increase in aid volatility raises the optimal tax rate,
dτ ∗1 /dσ ε > 0.
The proof of this proposition is provided in the Appendix. It stems again
from the application of Jensen’s inequality–in this case now due to the
convexity of the marginal impact of the tax rate on the surplus with respect to
ε (see the Appendix). It would hold therefore for any symmetric distribution
with zero mean.
The impact of volatility on the optimal tax rate is illustrated in Figure
12

The sign of dτ 1 /dλ is, in general, ambiguous. In terms of Figure 2, the change in λ
implies that there is no one-to-one connection between the induced changes in the expected
value of the bold curve and the tax τ 1 . By implication, the impact of an increase in the
tax collection cost on the critical threshold of the aid shock cannot be established a priori.
13
Indeed, with lump-sum taxation, the gross cost of public finance is 1, hence the optimal
policy should equate the expected bold curve to 1, implying that εC → −ε̄ when λ → 0.

15

3, plotting the marginal cost of public funds as a function of the tax rate
(curve MCP ) and the expected marginal productivity of public spending in
period 2 (curve E(MP G)), drawn for λ > 0 and for given aid volatility,
σ ε . The upward-sloping MCP corresponds to λ > 0 (positive tax collection
costs ) and the flat MCP corresponds to λ = 0 (lump-sum tax economy).
More costly tax collection makes the MCP curve steeper, reducing thereby
the optimal tax rate. The convexity of curve MP G, which is proved in the
Appendix, implies that higher aid volatility shifts curve E(MP G) upward,
increasing thereby the optimal tax rate (from τ ∗1 to τ ∗∗
1 ), and the optimal
precautionary reserves.
Holding volatility of the aid shock ε constant, another result emerges if
there is a “moral hazard” eﬀect associated with building precautionary resources through first-period taxation. Rather than modeling donor behavior
explicitly, we address this issue by using a “reduced form” approach. Let
R = L̄(τ 1 − λτ 21 ) denote the total contingency fund built in the first period.

Suppose also that the expected value of aid in the second period, Ā, is inversely related to the size of the fund, so that, assuming a linear form for
simplicity,
Ā = Ā(R) = Ā0 (1 − φR),
where Ā0 > 0 and φ > 0. As discussed in the introduction, this could be
due to the fact that donors, observing the existence of a contingency fund in
the recipient country, choose to reduce their future commitments–perhaps
because an increase in liquidity is perceived as a reflection of absorption
capacity problems. If so, the following proposition can be established:
Proposition 3. If the existence of a contingency fund creates a moral
hazard problem, the optimal tax rate is lower than otherwise.

16

Graphically, the eﬀect of adding moral hazard is to entail a uniform shift
of the bold curve in Figure 2. The adverse eﬀect of self insurance on expected
aid acts as a tax on the gains of marginal second-period liquidity (the expression on the right-hand side of (13)), reducing thereby optimal hoarding and
the optimal tax rate. In terms of Figure 2, higher φ shifts the downwardsloping portion of the bold curve, thereby reducing the expected discounted
gain of marginal second-period liquidity, and thus lowering the optimal tax
rate. This eﬀect reflects the moral hazard resulting from the combination of
aid uncertainty and aid responsiveness to holding a contingency fund.

4

Concluding Remarks

This paper studied the impact of aid volatility on economic performance
in a simple two-period model with a traditional and modern technologies.
Public spending is productive and “time to build” requires expenditure in
both periods for the modern technology to be used. The possibility of a
stagnation equilibrium or poverty trap (defined as a state where secondperiod production continues to be carried out with the traditional technology)
induced by high aid volatility is first examined in a benchmark case where
taxation is absent. Government spending (whose sole purpose is to provide
productive services) is thus financed in its entirety by aid. The analysis is
then extended to account for self insurance (taking the form of a first-period
contingency fund) financed through taxation. We showed that an increase
in aid volatility raises the optimal tax rate and that if expected future aid is
dependent on the size of the contingency fund (as a result of a moral hazard
eﬀect), the optimal policy may entail no self insurance.
Despite the fact that they have been derived in a highly stylized setting,

17

our results have several broad implications. The first is that aid volatility
may not only potentially exacerbate the impact of macroeconomic shocks
(due to its procyclical nature, as demonstrated in some studies), but it may
also contribute to the emergence, or persistence, of a poverty and low-output
trap if aid exerts productive eﬀects–either directly (because donors commit
to certain projects) or through its impact on public spending. In that sense,
the model’s predictions are consistent with the results of Kose, Prasad, and
Terrones (2005, Table 6), which show that volatility in government spending has an adverse eﬀect on economic growth. The second is that although
an increase in aid volatility may call for an increase in (optimal) tax rates,
in practice these increases may not be feasible, due to various administrative and political constraints. Aid volatility may therefore hamper resource
mobilization. Finally, our results cast doubt on the wisdom of a commonly
suggested policy response to aid volatility–the buildup of a contingency or
buﬀer fund, typically in the form of accumulation of international oﬃcial
reserves (see for instance Eifert and Gelb (2006) and International Monetary Fund (2007)). The very existence of such a fund may lead donors to
change their behavior in terms of future aid commitments–which in turn
would reduce the recipient’s incentives to raise taxes, “save for a rainy day,”
and maintain government spending plans at the desired level to spur growth.
The extent to which these adverse moral hazard eﬀects on individual donor
behavior can be mitigated through greater donor coordination, or a common
external agency, remains a matter for debate.14

14

The British proposal for an international finance facility (see the report of the Commission for Africa (2005)) was an attempt to tackle the issue. However, so far it has
received only limited support by major donors.

18

Appendix
Derivation of Proposition 2
With the representative agent’s discounted present value utility given in
(1), the social surplus function can be written as
(
Lγ
L2
ΓΩ
) − L̄κ1 − 1 − 1+β
L̄(1 − τ 1 ) + L̄b( γ2 )( 1+β
for ε ≤ εC
S=
,
Lγ2
G∗2 Ω
Γ−G∗2
L2
L̄(1 − τ 1 ) + L̄b( γ )( 1+β ) + 1+β − L̄κ1 − 1 − 1+β for ε > εC
(A1)
where Γ is given in (11). Thus,
(
Lγ
dS
−L̄ + L̄b( γ2 )ΩΓΩ−1 L̄(1 − λτ 1 ) for ε ≤ εC
=
.
(A2)
for ε > εC
dτ 1
−L̄ + L̄(1 − λτ 1 )
The first-order condition (denoted by F) determining the optimal tax
rate, and thereby also optimal liquidity hoarding, is F = E(dS/dτ 1 ) = 0; it
corresponds to (13) in the text. The implicit function theorem implies that
dτ 1
Fσ
= − ε.
dσ ε
Fτ 1
The second-order condition for maximization implies that Fτ 1 < 0 (it is
easy to verify that F = 0 and (10) implies that the second-order condition
holds for all relevant tax rates). Now, note that dS/dτ 1 is a convex function
of ε:
(
Lγ
d2 (dS/dτ 1 )
L̄b( γ2 )Ω(Ω − 1)(Ω − 2)ĀΓΩ−2 L̄(1 − λτ 1 ) > 0 for ε ≤ εC
=
.
for ε > εC
dε2
0
(A3)
Thus, higher volatility of ε increases dS/dτ 1 , so that Fσε > 0. Consequently, given the sign of Fτ 1 , we have dτ 1 /dσ ε : an increase in aid volatility
raises the optimal tax rate, partially oﬀsetting the eﬀect of such volatility by
“self insurance,” in the form of hoarding liquidity in the first period. Equation (A3) also implies that curve E(MP G) in Figure 3 is weakly convex.

19

References
Agénor, Pierre-Richard, “A Theory of Infrastructure-led Development,” Working
Paper No. 83, Centre for Growth and Business Cycle Research, University
of Manchester (December 2006).
Agénor, Pierre-Richard, and Devrim Yilmaz, “Aid Allocation, Growth and Welfare with Productive Public Goods,” Working Paper No. 95, Centre for
Growth and Business Cycle Research (January 2008).
Aghion, Philippe, George-Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee, and Kalina Manova,
“Volatility and Growth: Credit Constraints and Productivity-Enhancing Investment,” Working Paper No. 11349, National Bureau of Economic Research (May 2005).
Arellano, Cristina, Ales Bulir, Timothy Lane, and Leslie Lipschitz, “The Dynamic Implications of Foreign Aid and its Variability,” Journal of Development Economics, 88 (January 2009), 87-102.
Bekaert Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, “Growth Volatility
and Financial Liberalization,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
25 (July 2006), 370-403.
Blackburn, Keith, and Alessandra Pelloni, “On the Relationship between Growth
and Volatility,” Economics Letters, 83 (April 2004), 123-128.
Bulir, Ales, and A. Javier Hamann, “Aid Volatility: An Empirical Assesssment,”
IMF Staﬀ Papers, 50 (March 2003), 64-89.
––, “Volatility of Development Aid: An Update,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, 54 (December 2007), 727-39.
Celasun, Oya, and Jan Walliser, “Predictability of Aid: Do Fickle Donors Undermine Aid Eﬀectiveness?,” Economic Policy, 23 (July 2008), pp. 545-94.
Chatterjee, Santanu, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, “Financing Public Investment
through Public Aid: Consequences for Economic Growth and Welfare,” Review of International Economics, 13 (March 2005), 20-44.
––, “Foreign Aid and Economic Growth: The Role of Flexible Labor Supply,”
Journal of Development Economics, 84 (September 2007), 507-33.
Chatterjee, Santanu, Georgios Sakoulis, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, “Unilateral
Capital Transfers, Public Investment, and Economic Growth,” European Economic Review, 47 (December 2003), 1077-103.
Chong, Alberto, and Mark Gradstein, “Policy Volatility and Growth,” Working
Paper No. 578, Inter-American Development Bank (August 2006).
Commission for Africa, Our Common Interest: Report of the Commission for
Africa, Department of International Development, London (March 2005).
20

Eifert, Benn, and Alan Gelb, “Improving the Dynamics of Aid: Toward more
Predictable Aid Support,” in Budget Support as more Eﬀective Aid? Recent
Experiences and Emerging Lessons, ed. by Stefan Koeberle, Zoran Stravreski,
and Jan Walliser, World Bank (Washington DC: 2006).
Fielding, David, and George Mavrotas, “The Volatility of Aid,” Discussion Paper
No. 0508, University of Otago (June 2005).
Gong, Liutang, and Heng-fu Zou, “Foreign Aid, Public Spending, Optimal Fiscal
and Monetary Policies, and Long-run Growth,” unpublished, World Bank
(May 2005)
Hnatkovska, Viktoria, and Norman Loayza, “Volatility and Growth,” in Managing Economic Volatility and Crises, ed. by Joshua Aizenmann and Brian
Pinto, Cambridge University Press (Cambridge: 2005).
Hudson, John, and Paul Mosley, “Aid Volatility, Policy and Development,” unpublished, Wider Conference (June 2006).
––, “The Macroeconomic Impact of Aid Volatility,” Economics Letters, 100
(June 2008), 486-89.
Imbs, Jean, “Growth and Volatility,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (October 2007), 1848-62.
Independent Evaluation Oﬃce, An Evaluation of the IMF and Aid to SubSaharan Africa, International Monetary Fund (Washington DC: March 2007).
International Monetary Fund, Fiscal Policy Response to Scaled-Up Aid, unpublished, Fiscal Aﬀairs Department (Washington DC: June 2007).
Kharas, Homi, “Trends and Issues in Development Aid,” Working Paper No. 1,
Wolfensohn Center for Development, Brookings Institution (November 2007).
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, “Growth and Volatility
in an Era of Globalization,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, 52 (March 2005), 31-63.
Markandya, Anil, Vladimir Ponczek, and Soonhwa Yi, “What is the Link between Aid Volatility and Growth?,” unpublished, Wider Conference (June
2006).
Neanidis, Kyriakos, and Dimitrios Varvarigos, “The Allocation of Volatile Aid
and Economic Growth: Evidence and a Suggestive Theory,” Working Paper
No. 07, Loughborough University, (March 2007).
Norrbin, Stefan C., and F. Pinar Yigit, “The Robustness of the Link between
Volatility and Growth of Output,” Review of World Economics, 141 (June
2005), 343-56.
Pallage, Stéphane, and Michel A. Robe, “Foreign Aid and the Business Cycle,”
Review of International Economics, 9 (November 2001), 641-72.

21

Pallage, Stéphane, Michel A. Robe, and Catherine Bérubé, “The Potential of
Foreign Aid as Insurance,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, 53 (December 2006), 453-75.
Sachs, Jeﬀrey, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for our Time, Penguin
Press (New York, NY: 2005).
Turnovsky, Stephen J., and Pradip Chattopadhyay, “Volatility and Growth in
Developing Economies: Some Numerical Results and Empirical Evidence,”
Journal of International Economics, 59 (March 2003), 267-96.
United Nations, The Millennium Development Goals Report 2005, United Nations (New York: 2005).
World Bank, Meeting the Challenge of Africa’s Development: A World Bank
Group Action Plan, Africa Region, World Bank (Washington DC: 2005a)
––, Global Development Finance 2005: Mobilizing Finance and Managing Vulnerability, World Bank (Washington DC: 2005b).
––, Global Development Finance 2006: The Development Potential of Surging
Capital Flows, World Bank (Washington DC: 2006).

22

Figure 1
Aid Volatility and the Expected Social Surplus

Panel A: high productivity ( b = 0.45 )

Panel B: low productivity ( b = 0.4 )

Note: The simulations assume that α = 0.5, γ = 2 / 3, L = 34, A = 1, β = 0, κ1 = 0 .

Figure 2
Determination of the Optimal Tax Rate

MPG

1

_

-ε

εc

Note: MPG denotes the marginal productivity of public spending in period 2.

_

ε

Figure 3
Aid Volatility and the Optimal Tax Rate

MCP,
E(MPG)

E(MPG; σε2 )
σ ε1 < σ ε2
MCP = 1/(1-λτ1 )
E(MPG; σε1 )

MCP [λ = 0]
1

0

τ1*

τ1**

Note: MCP stands for the marginal cost of public funds. The upward-sloping MCP
corresponds to λ > 0 and the flat MCP corresponds to λ = 0.

τ1

