NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HATRED AND PROFITS:
GETTING UNDER THE HOOD OF THE KU KLUX KLAN
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Steven D. Levitt
Working Paper 13417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13417

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We are grateful Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Lawrence Katz, Robert Margo, and Peter Temin
for helpful comments and suggestions. The authors thank the Bowling Green University, Clark Historical
Library, Emory University, Harvard University Libraries, University of Kentucky, the Indiana Historical
Society, the Montana Historical Society, and the Pennsylvania State Archives for their help in constructing
our database. Paras Bhayani, Mandy Ching, Steve Cicala, Ethan Lieber, Alipo Melusi, and Lisandra
Rickards provided exceptional research assistance. Correspondence can be addressed to either of the
authors at (Fryer) 1805 Cambridge Street, Littauer Center -- North Yard, Harvard University, Cambridge
MA 02138 [rfryer@fas.harvard.edu]; (Levitt) 1126 East 59th Street, University of Chicago, Chicago
IL 60637. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr and Steven D. Levitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Hatred and Profits: Getting Under the Hood of the Ku Klux Klan
Roland G. Fryer, Jr and Steven D. Levitt
NBER Working Paper No. 13417
September 2007
JEL No. J15,N32
ABSTRACT
The Ku Klux Klan reached its heyday in the mid-1920s, claiming millions of members. In this paper,
we analyze the 1920s Klan, those who joined it, and the social and political impact that it had. We
utilize a wide range of newly discovered data sources including information from Klan membership
roles, applications, robe-order forms, an internal audit of the Klan by Ernst and Ernst, and a census
that the Klan conducted after an internal scandal. Combining these sources with data from the 1920
and 1930 U.S. Censuses, we find that individuals who joined the Klan were better educated and more
likely to hold professional jobs than the typical American. Surprisingly, we find few tangible social
or political impacts of the Klan. There is little evidence that the Klan had an effect on black or foreign
born residential mobility, or on lynching patterns. Historians have argued that the Klan was successful
in getting candidates they favored elected. Statistical analysis, however, suggests that any direct impact
of the Klan was likely to be small. Furthermore, those who were elected had little discernible effect
on legislation passed. Rather than a terrorist organization, the 1920s Klan is best described as a social
organization built through a wildly successful pyramid scheme fueled by an army of highly-incentivized
sales agents selling hatred, religious intolerance, and fraternity in a time and place where there was
tremendous demand.
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center, M-7
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu
Steven D. Levitt
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
slevitt@midway.uchicago.edu

I. Introduction
The Ku Klux Klan (KKK) is without a doubt the most prominent hate-based organization
in American history. Founded in the aftermath of the Civil War as a whimsical social club, the
Klan quickly transformed into a terrorist organization aimed at subjugating newly freed blacks
and driving out moderate whites who attempted to improve the plight of Freedmen in the
Reconstruction South. Legal and military action undermined the effectiveness of the Klan, and
by the 1870s it had largely disappeared. The Klan was revived in 1915. Its popularity and
influence grew, first slowly, and then more rapidly, to a peak in the mid-1920s. By that time it
claimed four million members, was credited with engineering the election of politicians across
the country, and included in its membership some of the most powerful men in America.1
Marred by a high profile sex scandal, the Klan’s membership rolls decreased dramatically in the
latter half of the 1920s and the Klan has since remained a shadow of its former self.
In this paper, we analyze the Klan during its peak years in the 1920s with the goal of
understanding a number of different questions. First, is the 1920s Klan principally a terrorist
organization, as most believe, or better described as a popular social club with an enormously
successful marketing department? Second, what were the quantifiable social and political
impacts of the 1920s Klan? Third, does economics provide a useful lens for understanding the
internal organization of the Klan?
Few words can conjure up the history of racism, intimidation, and violence in America as
much as the word “Klan,” and few symbols can send this message as strongly as the Ku Klux

1

It is alleged that President Warren Harding was inducted into the Klan in a ceremony performed at the White
House (Wade 1987), though there is disagreement among historians on this point (Newton 2006).

1

Klan’s calling-card since 1915: the burning cross. It is believed that the Klan is responsible for
thousands of deaths since its inception. 2
On the other hand, extreme segments of any organized group are not likely to represent
the views or actions of the typical member.3 Had all the Klan’s four million members had an
appetite for extreme violence and intimidation, the Klan could have had a debilitating impact on
the advancement of civil rights and, indeed, on the whole course of Black history. It is an open
question as to whether the 1920s Klan is better characterized as a terrorist organization hell-bent
on subjugating blacks and Catholics, or a social club immensely successful at bundling racial and
religious intolerance with other goods and services.
To begin to answer these questions, we first construct a unique data set on membership in
the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s. The datasets contains data on over 60,000 actual Klan members
whose names we gleaned from internal Klan documents including membership lists, filed
application forms, meeting attendance sheets, pieces of signed correspondence between members
and officials, and order forms for robes and other paraphernalia. Using the names, the
individual’s geographic location, and other identifying characteristics from the Klan records, the
individuals were then matched with census records, giving us data on a range of demographic
and other variables.
Second, we use county-level data from Indiana and Pennsylvania, two Klan strongholds
during the 1920s, on the number of Klansmen in a given county to relate the popularity of the

2

Some of the most well-known examples are the Colfax Massacre, the assassination of NAACP leader Medgar
Evers, the deaths of four black schoolgirls at the 16th Street Baptist Church, and the murder of civil rights organizers
James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, and Viola Liuzzo.
3
For instance, Terry, et. al. (2003) estimates that four percent of Catholic priests have been accused of abusing a
child.

2

Klan to measures of migration and political influence. Finally, using credible estimates of the
number of Klan members in Indiana between 1923 and 1925 from two sources, an internal audit
performed by Ernst & Ernst and a census of Klan members in Indiana conducted in response to
the scandal surrounding the Klan leader of Indiana and twenty-two other states, we estimate the
revenues that high-ranking individuals within the Klan likely accrued.
The results we obtain using our new dataset on members of the Klan are in some cases
quite surprising. Individuals who joined the Klan were better educated and more likely to hold
professional jobs than the typical American, reinforcing earlier findings of a number of historians
on the subject (Goldberg 1981). Yet, despite the sophistication of its members and its enormous
rolls, we find that the Klan had few tangible social or political impacts. There is little evidence
that the Klan had an effect on black or foreign-born residential mobility or on lynching patterns.
There is some evidence that the Klan was successful at getting candidates it favored elected, but
the direct impact of the Klan was small. Moreover, even when the Klan succeeded in the
electoral process (e.g. Indiana in 1925 had a Klan-endorsed governor, as well as control of the
state legislature), there is little evidence that the legislation that got passed effectively advanced
the Klan’s mission (Jackson 1992, Goldberg 1981).
Instead, the Klan’s true genius lay in its uncanny ability to raise revenue. We estimate
that at the peak of the Klan, initiation fees, dues, and profits from robes in the state of Indiana
alone generated nearly $4 million (in 2006 dollars) annually for the national Klan leader, $2.4
million for the head of the Indiana Klan, and over $300,000 each for the national head salesman
and the salesman responsible for Indiana. Per capita income in the United States at this time was
roughly $8,000 in 2006 dollars. Rather than a terrorist organization, the 1920s Klan is better

3

described as a wildly successful pyramid scheme fueled by an army of highly incentivised sales
agents.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II provides a brief history of the Ku Klux
Klan. Section III describes and summarizes our unique dataset and provides some basic social
and economic demographics of Klan members. Section IV estimates the effect of the Klan on
lynching, black and foreign-born migration, and politics in Indiana and Pennsylvania. Section V
estimates the revenues that accrued to key Klan officials from the state of Indiana during the
peak years of membership. Section VI concludes. There are two appendices: Appendix A
provides details of how we constructed our database of Klan members and Appendix B is a guide
to Klan terminology.

II. A Brief History of the Ku Klux Klan
In December 1865, six ex-Confederates from Pulaski, Tennessee (near the Alabama
border) organized a social club in which the six, dressed in white sheets, rode around on
horseback for amusement.4 They called themselves the Ku Klux Klan, merging the Greek for
circle (kyklos) with “clan.” The founding members envisioned the group as a secret fraternity
replete with ridiculous names, costumes, and an elaborate initiation ceremony that consisted of
blindfolding the candidate, subjecting him to lengthy oaths, and bringing him before a “royal
altar” (a mirror) where he was to be invested with the “royal crown” (two large donkey ears).

4

Our discussion of the history of the Klan draws heavily on the excellent accounts provided in Chalmers (1987),
Wade (1987), Moore (1991), Alexander (1965), Newton (2006), Newton (2001), Tucker (1991).

4

The group soon discovered that their strange appearance frightened newly freed AfricanAmericans (Chalmers 1987).5 The idea caught on among others, and similar autonomous Klans
began to emerge across the south. Many of the Klan’s early activities were child-like mischief. In
one favorite Klan tactic, a white-sheeted, masked Klansman would ride up to a Black home at
night and demand water. When the well bucket was offered, the Klansman would gulp it down
and demand more, having actually poured the water through a rubber tube that flowed into a
leather bottle concealed beneath his robe. After draining several buckets, the Klansman would
exclaim that he had not had a drink since he died on the battlefield at Shiloh, and gallop away.
In April 1867, representatives of the various—and heretofore independent—Klans met in
Nashville, Tennessee (Chalmers 1987). The meeting, organized by the original, Pulaski-based
Klan in an effort to unify the disparate organizations under common leadership, resulted in the
election of Nathan Bedford Forrest, a former Confederate general from Memphis, as the Klan’s
chief, or Grand Wizard. In addition, the representatives agreed on an elaborate hierarchy and
nomenclature for local groups and leaders.
According to historians, this Klan was remarkably effective at spreading fear and
influencing politics (Chalmers 1987, Wade 1987, Newton 2006).6 But despite its apparent

5

Prior to the Klan, there had been only one similar organization in U.S. history: the American Party, better known
as the “Know-Nothings.” The Know-Nothings were an actual political party whose beliefs were predicated on a
strong opposition to immigration. The party was largely based on nativism, not racism. The party arose during a
period of massive immigration and directed its fire at new immigrants from nations such as Ireland, which had
experienced a horrendous Potato Famine in 1848. Because the subjugation of Blacks was not a concern before the
Civil War—most were enslaved, after all—the Reconstruction Klan was the first major American organization
whose primary objective was targeting Blacks.
6
Contemporary reports state that during the particularly Klan-active winter in 1870-1871, many South Carolina
blacks slept in the woods (Chalmers 1987). In Meridian, Mississippi at an 1871 trial of Black leaders accused of
making inflammatory speeches, freedmen assembled to show support for their leaders, leading to a riot in which a
number of freedmen were shot and killed, the Black leaders executed, and the remaining freedmen chased into the

5

success, the Klan’s membership began to “deteriorate” as it spread. Having once included
prominent southerners and high-ranking Confederates, the Klan became less selective as older
members dropped out in favor of lower status new members. In January 1869, Nathan Forrest
ordered the dissolution of the Klan, arguing that it was “being perverted from its original
honorable and patriotic purposes, becoming injurious instead of subservient to the public peace.”
Though many local Klans did dissolve following Forrest’s orders, many others did not (Chalmers
1987).
In response to continued Klan violence in the South, the Radical Republicans began a
campaign to destroy the Klan through the use of federal law enforcement. In January 1871,
Senator John Scott of Pennsylvania held committee hearings on Klan atrocities, and in February,
Representative Benjamin Franklin Butler of Massachusetts, a former Union General, introduced
legislation modeled after state-level anti-Klan laws. The bill, known as the Ku Klux Klan Act,
was passed that spring and signed by President Ulysses S. Grant in the summer of 1871.
Combined with the 1870 Force Act, an early civil rights law, federal authorities began using U.S.
Army troops to break up Klan activities and began prosecuting Klansmen in federal courts. The
Klan ceased operations by the mid-1870s, but not before the Colfax massacre in Louisiana—the
bloodiest incident of Klan violence in history—which resulted in the death of 280 Blacks (Wade
1987).

The Second Coming and the Height of Power

woods, where many were hunted down and shot. “Unless there were federal troops at hand, the safest thing for
Negroes to do was to hide during periods of Klan activity” (Chalmers 1987).

6

For over forty years the Klan laid dormant. Around 1915, it is widely believed that the
confluence of two events, the release of The Birth of a Nation and the lynching of Leo Frank led
to the coming of the second Klan (Wade 1987, Newton 2006).
In the summer of 1915, D.W. Griffith released a largely fictional documentary, The Birth
of a Nation, which greatly enhanced the public opinion of the Klan. Griffith’s film was an
adaptation of a book—The Clansmen: An Historical Romance of the Ku Klux Klan, by Thomas
Dixon—that largely conformed to what was the commonly accepted historical record of the day
(Wade 1987).7 The film’s second portion, which focuses on the Klan, portrays ex-slaves as being
criminals intent on raping white women and northern carpetbaggers as co-conspirators in Blacks’
attempt to subjugate white southerners. The film shows the Klan as an organization founded to
empower and defend white southerners, particularly “white womanhood,” and willing to engage
in noble violence to achieve its ends. The film, which some have claimed had the highest box
office gross of any silent movie, was endorsed by President Woodrow Wilson, a former historian
and friend of Dixon. After a White House screening, Wilson commented: “My only regret is that
it is all so terribly true” (Wade 1987).
Around the time of the release of The Birth of a Nation, an affluent, a Cornell-educated
Jew named Leo Frank, a manager at a pencil factory, was arrested and accused of raping and
7

David Wark Griffith was an up-and-coming filmmaker when he directed The Birth of a Nation. A Kentuckian and
son of a Confederate colonel, Griffith got his start with Biograph Studios in 1908, for whom he spent five years
making several well-received films notable for his experimentation with lighting and camera setups. In 1913,
Griffith resigned from the studio to start his own company. During his first few months in business, Griffith made a
few more small-impact films, and in March 1914, he announced to his company that they were going to make a big
picture based on Thomas Dixon's novel The Clansman. According to Wade, “Race baiting was not unusual in turnof-the-century America. But Dixon was unique. The degree to which he saw the difference between good and evil
determined entirely by race was unrivaled until Mein Kampf.” (Wade 1987) Indeed, while many books and films
from this period depicted Blacks as being subhuman, what made both The Clansman and Birth of a Nation different
was the presence of a “good” guy. Through their portrayal of the Klan, Dixon and Griffith provided not only people
for racist whites to hate, but also another group for them to glorify.

7

murdering one of his employees: a 12-year-old girl named Mary Phagan. Despite the fact that
prosecutors provided only circumstantial evidence against Frank, he was convicted, and all of his
appeals—including one to the U.S. Supreme Court, where his position was backed by Charles
Evans Hughes and Oliver Wendell Holmes—were denied. After the emergence of evidence that
questioned the validity of Frank’s conviction, however, the governor of Georgia commuted his
sentence to life in prison.
After the commutation, a thirty-man group calling itself the Knights of Mary Phagan
immediately began to plan a lynching of Frank. On August 17, 1915 the group kidnapped Frank
from his prison cell and transported him to a site nearly 150 miles away where they lynched him.
After this, the group went to Stone Mountain, a large granite dome outside of Atlanta, and
burned a large cross—an aspect of Klan myth that had been invented in The Birth of a Nation.
(Wade 1987, Newton 2006)
In September 1915, a Georgia physician named William J. Simmons saw Griffith’s film.
Inspired, he led a group of 34 men, including two veterans of the first Klan and many members
of the Knights of Mary Phagan, on a second trip to Stone Mountain. On Thanksgiving Day, in
what Simmons would later claim were sub-zero temperatures, the group inaugurated the second
coming of the Klan. Simmons declared himself Grand Wizard (Newton 2006, Wade 1987).
Over the next several years, the Klan spread, though the overall membership remained
small. In 1921, new Klan leadership forced Simmons out and instituted strong financial
incentives for recruiters. Only then did membership truly accelerate. By 1924, estimates of the
Klan’s peak size range from 1.5 million (Jackson 1992) to as many as four million, or roughly 5-

8

14% of the eligible population.8 The largest estimates of membership are based on claims of
Klan leaders, which are likely to be inflated. Figure 1 depicts this dramatic rise.9
The second coming of the Klan was far more centralized than its predecessor. The
organizational structure of the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s is a hybrid of a social club and a
multi-level marketing firm, with two distinct sets of reporting hierarchies that operated more or
less independently. One hierarchy was made up of the Klan’s members, from the lowliest rank
and file to the highest leadership. This hierarchy corresponds to the social club aspect of the
Klan—the arm that intimidated Blacks and foreigners and attempted to influence political
outcomes. In addition, however, there was a nearly invisible, parallel hierarchy of Klan
recruiters, organized like a modern multi-level marketing firm, which represents the financial
arm of the Klan. This highly incentivised sales force was responsible for recruiting new members
to the Klan, and almost all of the financial rewards accrued to either the handful of top leaders or
the individuals in this auxiliary hierarchy.
The structure of the main portion of the Klan is presented in Figure 2. The highest level
of the organization was the Empire, which governed the Klan’s national operations. The Grand
Wizard (or Emperor) served as the nominal chair of the body, with the Imperial Wizard acting as
8

While these self-reported Klan numbers are likely an exaggeration, they are not completely out of the realm of
possibility. An analysis of data from an internal census of Indiana Klan membership in 1925 finds that a total
number of Klansmen is 162,267 or 18.44% of the eligible Indiana population. Klan penetration into Indiana is
reputed to have been among the highest in the country, so extrapolating this percentage to the whole of the United
States will yield a (potentially very loose) upper bound of 5.2 million Klan members. If instead we extrapolate from
the membership rolls of the Pennsylvania we obtain estimates of approximately 400,000; using the Colorado Klan
numbers yields an estimate even greater than the 5.2 million based on Indiana.
9
While the Klan’s rapid rise and fall make it rare among membership organizations, the years in which it hit peak
operations are almost exactly those in which similar cross-class, fraternal organizations reached their apex (Skocpol
(2003)). Given that the Klan was part of a broader trend of civic engagement, one interesting question is why these
groups thrived in these particular historical periods. Skocpol (2003) argues that the civil war and World War I had
important impacts on views regarding mobilizing citizens under common civic causes. Of course the motivations of
the founders of the Klan were not civic in the conventional sense—they were fueled not by a sense of progressivism
but by what they considered affronts to southern and national dignity.

9

the chief executive and aided by a fifteen-member Imperial Kloncilium. These included the
Klaliff (first vice president), the Klazik (second vice president), the Klokard (lecturer), the Kludd
(chaplain), the Kligrapp (secretary), the Klabee (treasurer), the Kladd (conductor), the Klarago
(inner-guard), the Klexter (outer-guard), the Klonsel (general counsel), the Night Hawk
(courier), and the four Klokann (auditors). These individuals were responsible for keeping the
Klan’s books, providing in-house legal advice, and serving as a Klan cabinet. (Newton 2006)
The next tier of the organization consisted of the Realms, or the states, which were
overseen by Grand Dragons and their staffs. The Realms served as administrative centers that
recorded and processed new members. They also coordinated political activities within the
states; in places of great Klan strength, such as Indiana, the Grand Dragon often wielded great
political power. Reporting to the Grand Dragon was a fifteen member cabinet composed of
Hydras, who held the same responsibilities as the Imperial Kloncilium, but at the state level. The
most important positions were the Kligrapp, akin to a chief operating officer, and the Klabee, the
treasurer. These officials handled much of the actual administration of the Klan (Newton 2006,
Wade 1987).
In the bottom tier of the organization, individual Klansmen, or Ghouls, were organized
into local Klaverns. Exalted Cyclopses presided over the Klaverns—which at the Klan’s peak
typically had as many as 200 active members—and organized Klan activities, including monthly
meetings.
In addition to the main Klan hierarchy, there was an auxiliary structure (illustrated in
Figure 3) that existed primarily as a source of income generation for those involved. Klan
members generated a tremendous amount of revenue. Each Ghoul paid a $10 initiation fee

10

(equivalent to $115 in current dollars), $6.50 to buy an official Klan robe (which cost roughly $2
to make), an annual membership fee of $5, an imperial tax of $1.80, and was also encouraged to
purchase other Klan-sanctioned merchandise including swords, Bibles, helmets, dry-cleaning,
and life insurance.
Joining the Klan was not a cheap endeavor. Using the numbers above, the first year of
membership costs $23.30 (roughly $275 in 2006 dollars) and subsequent years were $6.80
(approximately $80 in 2006 dollars). At its peak in 1924, the Klan conservatively generated
annual revenues from all sources of at least $25 million – equivalent to $300 million in current
dollars. Only a small portion of this revenue was required to fund basic operations (Alexander
1965).
The period of the Klan’s membership explosion was also the period when their political
power is believed to have reached its pinnacle, especially in Indiana, Tennessee, Colorado,
Oklahoma, and Oregon, where the Klan controlled portions of the state governments.10 The Klan
shifted its focus from opposing the rights of Freedmen to those of immigrants, while also
becoming more populist. The Klan typically aligned itself with the Democratic Party (at least in
the South), though a candidate’s religion was a better indicator of Klan support (Moore 1991,
Tucker 1991).
The second Klan fell as swiftly as it rose. David Curtis Stephenson, the Grand Dragon of
Indiana and twenty-two other states and arguably the most powerful and visible Klan official in
the country, was accused of raping and murdering Madge Oberholtzer, a 28-year-old
schoolteacher in whom he had a sexual interest (Wade 1987).
10

See, for instance, Jackson (1992), and Moore (1991).

11

In March 1925, Stephenson kidnapped Oberholtzer, forced her onto a train heading to
Chicago, forced her to drink, raped her, and even bit off portions of her flesh. Oberholtzer died
shortly thereafter, leaving a death bed statement detailing her treatment at Stephenson’s hands. In
November 1925, Stephenson was tried and convicted of second-degree murder and sentenced to
life in prison. The trial received spectacular media attention. The details of the murder were so
gory and contrasted so sharply with Stephenson’s support of temperance and his self-defined
image as a defender of “Protestant womanhood,” that entire Klaverns deserted the Klan. Ed
Jackson, the governor who had been Stephenson’s protégé, refused to pardon him. In response,
Stephenson released two boxes full of “dirt” he had collected on politicians and individuals he
had once supported, destroying the careers of many Indiana officials. This internal turmoil
devastated the Klan: by 1930, its national membership had declined to 30,000 (Moore 1991,
Wade 1987).
In 1939, Grand Wizard Hiram Evans sold the Klan to James Colescott, an Indiana
veterinarian. Throughout World War II, the Klan was tarnished by persistent accusations that
Colescott was a Nazi-sympathizer and that the Klan was attempting to disrupt the American war
effort. In 1944, the U.S. government filed suit against the Klan for $685,000 in back taxes,
forcing its official dissolution. Although splinter groups operating under the Klan name—
including Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and the United Klans of America—continued their
activities, the Klan has never returned to the prominence it enjoyed in the 1920s.

IV. Constructing a Database of Members of the Ku Klux Klan

12

We have developed an extensive database of members of the Klan during the 1920s,
when the organization was at its peak of popularity. The database was developed in three stages.
First, we scoured the country for archives, libraries, and historical societies that contained data
on the Klan. Once we found those that contained potentially relevant information, we analyzed
these collections for data on individual Klan members, minutes from Klavern meetings,
expenses, applications, and so on. Many of these forms contain information about each Klan
member (e.g., name, height, weight, years of education). From this, we developed an initial list
of Klan members. In the final stage, we link Klan members to the 1920 and 1930 Censuses so
that they could be compared to non-Klan individuals. Appendix A details each of these stages.
Our two most comprehensive datasets are from Pennsylvania and Colorado. The
Pennsylvania data consists of thirty microfilms worth of material and 32,390 Klan members. The
majority of the membership data comes from dues records, personal correspondence, and
applications for membership. There is also a wealth of information on finances, including
receipts, checks, and quarterly reports sent from the Klabee to the Realm office. The data from
Colorado is contained on three microfilms, one of which is a copy of the membership and dues
ledger from the Denver metro area Klans totaling 20,351 names, addresses, and records of dues
paid.
We have similar individual level data, though less expansive in terms of numbers of
Klansmen or accompanying information, gathered from Harlowton, Montana; Knox County,

13

Tennessee; and Wood County, Ohio. The total number of Klansmen in these data was 2,800
making a total of over 55,000.11
Given the clandestine nature of Klan activities, it is impossible to know how
representative the data set we have assembled is. We are encouraged, however, by the
geographic diversity of the areas the data cover, and by the varied ways in which the different
data sources originated (in one case Klan headquarters was burglarized and the stolen files
dropped off at a police station; in another case old records were found years later stored in an
attic). Perhaps the most limiting feature of our data is that we were unable to obtain any records
on Klan members or activities in the Deep South.
After finding and constructing our bank of Klan members, the final stage was to link
them with their census data. The extent of information on individual Klan members varied
widely from archive to archive. For instance, Knoxville reports years of formal education while
much of Pennsylvania consisted only of last name and first initial. Because of this, matching
individuals to their census information is key to providing a uniform structure across datasets.
Further, it allows us to have a way of formally comparing Klan members to a representative
cross-section of the population.
To link our database to the census, we used three approaches. For the smallest
community – Harlowton – it was feasible to manually keypunch all of the information from the

11

These data were found in the following archives: Emory University (Knox County Klan Number 14, Knoxville,
Tennessee), the Pennsylvania State Archives (Census of Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey Klans), Bowling
Green University (Ohio Knights of the KKK, Wood County), the Indiana Historical Society (Census of Indiana),
the Montana Historical Society (Wheatland Klan Number 29, Harlowton Montana), and the Colorado Historical
Society (Denver Area Klans). Other individual level data was available for Bayfield, Colorado, Tillamook, Oregon
and Tulsa, Oklahoma. Unfortunately, a large fraction of the data only contains last name and first initial that makes
matching to the census too unreliable.

14

1920 decennial censuses using copies of the original hand-written census rolls that we
downloaded from Ancestry.com. We then linked the data we have from Klan membership rolls
directly to the census data. Thus, for Harlowton, we not only have a complete match of Klan
members and census data, but also all non-Klan members in the data set.
For Knox and Wood counties, we follow the same matching procedure using the original
Census rolls, but found it impractical to type in the entire population of non-Klan members.
Instead, for these two cities, our control group of non-Klan members is constructed from two
complimentary sources. First, we include individuals from those counties who are included in the
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) from the University of Minnesota Population
Center in 1920 and 1930. Unfortunately, the IPUMS is only a 1 percent sample in 1920 and a 0.5
percent sample in 1930, yielding relatively small control samples.12 To supplement this, we
constructed a random sample of 500 individuals in Knox County and 1,000 individuals in Wood
County by randomly choosing PDF pages of the original hand-written census rolls for the 1920
census, and keypunching all of the information on white males above twenty-one.
The Pennsylvania and Colorado data sets are too large to feasibly link individual Klan
members to original census rolls by hand. Instead, we matched our Klan data to 1920 and 1930
IPUMS data using last names and first names, or in some cases, first initials, along with city or
county of residence. The merge of our Klan data with IPUMS yields 475 matches on first name,
last name, and county in Pennsylvania and 243 on first and last name in Colorado. We used the
observations from the census data that did not merge with the Klan data as our controls. Two
12

The data from Knoxville was quite comprehensive; 6 of the census variables were already in our files. Further,
there were other interesting variables in the data such as years of education. As such, we just appended census data
onto these datasets and assumed that those from the census were not Klan members.

15

different types of errors can arise when merging IPUMS and Klan data this way. First, since
IPUMS is only a 1 percent sample in 1920 and 0.5 percent sample in 1930, most Klan members
will go unmatched. This reduces our usable sample size, but will not otherwise bias our findings.
More problematic is the fact that if an individual’s name is at all common, there maybe multiple
people in the county who share that name. The IPUMS entry that matches the name in the Klan
data base may be a different person who happens to share the same name. To deal with this
problem, we cataloged the names of every individual included in the 1910, 1920, and 1930
IPUMS in states geographically proximate to Pennsylvania and Colorado respectively.13 Based
on the population of the county in question, we then used this large pool of names to estimate the
expected number of people in the county who shared the same name as a Klan member whenever
we found a match between IPUMS and the Klan data.14 The probability that the IPUMS record
that matches the Klan data is a true match is the inverse of the expected number of people with
that name, and that is the value we use as our measure of Klan involvement in the Pennsylvania
and Colorado samples. For common names in large counties, the expected number of people
sharing a name is not trivial, e.g. we estimate that there were approximately 500 John Smith’s in
Philadelphia County in 1920. Most names, however, are relatively uncommon, making the
probability high that the match we find is the correct one.

13

For Colorado, we used Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota,
Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming. For Pennsylvania, we used D.C., Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Maine,
Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, West Virginia, Vermont
and Virginia.
14
More precisely, we estimated the expectation of the number of people sharing the name of the Klan member in the
county conditional on there being at least n people in the county with that name, where n is the number of people
with that name in the county’s IPUMS data. Because n people are present in IPUMS with that name, there must be
at least that many people in the county as a whole with that name.

16

Summary statistics for Klan members and our comparison group of males aged 21 and up
who are not in the Klan members are displayed in Table 1 for each of our five data sets. Klan
members are shown in the odd-numbered columns, with non-Klan males in the even columns. In
Colorado and Pennsylvania we match Klan members probabilistically. Any case with a positive
match is classified as Klan members, with the entries in those columns weighted in inverse
proportion to our estimate of the number of people sharing that name in the county. As one
would predict, members of the Klan are much more likely to be native born. They are also less
likely to hold unskilled jobs and more likely to be in service jobs or professionals (except in
Pennsylvania), which stands in sharp contrast to the image of today’s Klansmen. Literacy rates
for all individuals, Klan and non-Klan, are very high, but slightly higher within the Klan. In most
locations, Klan members are less likely to never have been married. In both Colorado and
Pennsylvania, where we have data across counties, the share of blacks and foreigners is similar
for Klan members and those not in the Klan.
Table 2 presents regression estimates of the social, demographic, and economic
predictors of Klan membership in each of our locations for which we have individual level data.
The specifications estimated are of the form:
klan _ membership i = " + "1 $ economic + " 2 # social + ! i ,

where klan_membership is the probability that individual i is a Klan member. Except in
Pennsylvania and Colorado, this variable takes a value of 0 or 1 (either we know you are in the
Klan or we know you are not); in Pennsylvania and Colorado, any name in IPUMS that matches
a name in our Klan data base will have a positive value, but that value is always less than one
because of the possibility that multiple people share the same name. The set of covariates

17

available in both the Klan data sets and the census in these years is limited to indicator variables
for whether an individual is native born, a measure of occupational status (which we have
divided into three mutually exclusive categories: unskilled/trade jobs (e.g. manual laborers,
carpenters), service workers (e.g. clerks, salesman, agents), and professional jobs (e.g. doctors,
lawyers, engineers)). In our regressions, unskilled jobs are the omitted category. Other covariates
include age (which we turn into a dichotomous variable corresponding to whether the person is
above or below the median age in the sample),15 and whether the respondent is literate, owns his
own home, has ever been married, is the head of household, and is a veteran. Because the
Pennsylvania data cover a broad geographic area, we are able to estimate an additional
specification which controls for the percent Black and percent foreign in an individual’s county,
which we dichotomize into above or below the median of counties in the state.16
With the exception of Pennsylvania and Colorado, we estimate this equation using a
logistic specification. The coefficient estimates are interpretable as odds ratios. Given the
relative size of our Klan and IPUMS observations varies widely across data sets, odds ratios are
more easily interpretable than are OLS coefficients.17 The dependent variable in Pennsylvania
and Colorado is continuous, thus we cannot use the logistic specification. Instead, we use OLS,
but transform these estimates into odds ratios, using the Delta Method to compute the
appropriate standard errors. Finally, since our data in Pennsylvania and Colorado crosses county
lines, we are able to include county-level variables measuring whether the county of residence is

15

We dichotomize the continuous covariates in order to make the interpretation of the odds ratios more
straightforward.
16
For our other data sets, all of the individuals reside in just one county.
17
For instance, in Bowling Green we have the universe of Klan members, but only a small fraction of non-Klan
residents in the county. The OLS parameter estimate will not have the usual interpretation in this setting.

18

above or below the median percentage Black and foreign born for the sample of included
counties. The two standard error confidence interval is reported in parentheses.
A number of patterns emerge from Table 2. As would be expected given the strong
nativist sentiments of the Klan, being native born is positively associated with Klan membership
in all of our samples, with odds ratios ranging from 1.38 in Harlowton (i.e. being native born
raises the likelihood of being in the Klan by 38 percent) to 3.26 in Pennsylvania (being native
born more than triples the likelihood of being in the Klan). For Knoxville all Klan members are
native born, so the parameter can not be estimated. The estimate is statistically different from
one for all columns except Harlowton. For all of the areas except Pennsylvania, Klan
membership is associated with relatively high status jobs (both those in service jobs and
professionals are over-represented relative to the unskilled/unemployed), although the
differences are not always statistically significant. Literacy is higher among Klansmen in all
samples, though the estimates are not statistically significant in a few of the cases. These
findings are consistent with a quote MacLean (1994, p. xii) attributes to an unnamed
contemporary who described Klan members as “if not the ‘best people,’ at least the next
best…the good, solid middle class citizens.” 18 Klan members also tend to be older and more
likely to have been married. In Colorado and Pennsylvania, where we can include the share of

18

In terms of having relatively high education, this pattern of Klan membership parallels that of modern day terrorist
organizations, as reported by Krueger and Malecková (2003), or social movements more generally (Glaeser,
Laibson, and Sacerdote 2002).

19

the population in the county that is Black or foreign, the only statistically significant result is that
in Pennsylvania Klan membership is strongly positively related to the percent foreign.19

IV. Quantifying the Social and Political Impact of the Ku Klux Klan
There are extensive anecdotal examples of both the terror that the Klan produced and its
political clout, but there has been little in the way of systematic quantitative analysis to
substantiate such claims. Complicating this analysis is the fact that even if one finds a positive
correlation between Klan activity at the county level and an outcome such as hate crimes, it is
unclear whether this is causal since the same factors that lead people in an area to commit hate
crimes lead them to embrace the Klan. The Klan may worsen hate crimes, or it may simply
thrive in places where hate crimes would have occurred regardless of their presence.
Our attempts to differentiate these two stories hinge on the crucial role that D.C
Stephenson played in the rise and fall of the Klan. Stephenson’s charisma and entrepreneurial
skills were critical to the success of the Klan in Indiana. Although similar nativist sentiments
were at work in nearby states such as Pennsylvania and Ohio, the Klan grew much more slowly
in these places absent a Stephenson-like figure. Thus, one might argue that a comparison of
Indiana to Pennsylvania over the first part of the 1920s provides a crude measure of an
independent contribution of the Klan. With Stephenson’s conviction for murder, however, the
Indiana Klan collapsed even more quickly than it grew. Assuming that underlying nativist beliefs
were unlikely to dissipate simply because of the murder trial and the dissolution of an
19

To further understand the determinants of Klan involvement, we regressed county-level data on klan membership
on county characteristics. Unfortunately, very imprecise estimates made this exercise of little marginal value beyond
the individual level regressions presented.

20

organization, the period immediately following his conviction in 1925 provides another avenue
for identifying the causal impact of the Klan.
In this section, we look for evidence of an impact of the Klan in the form of the number
of lynchings, migration patterns of Blacks and foreigners, vote shares in congressional elections,
and legislation passed. We tackle these various outcomes in turn.

Klan membership and the number of lynchings
Given the hate-based beliefs of the Klan and its notoriety for violence, it is plausible that
Klan activity would be associated with the increased frequency of hate crimes. The only type of
hate crime for which there is any form of systematic data during this time period is lynchings.20
The Tuskegee Institute has assembled an extensive catalog of documented lynchings in
collaboration with Project HAL – an amazing effort to accumulate a database of all the lynchings
that have taken place in the United States.21
Figure 4 presents a time series of Black lynching from 1880-1930 using data from Project
HAL. The time series pattern in lynchings is exactly opposite of what one would expect if the
Klan had a major impact. The number of lynchings peaked after 1890—a time period in which
the Klan did not exist—and decreases steadily afterward. Between 1915 and 1925, when Klan
memberships grew at fever pace, lynching continued to decrease, hitting their lowest levels in the
time-series precisely when Klan popularity is at its peak. There is not a single recorded Black
lynching in either Pennsylvania or Indiana in the 1920s when the Klan was thriving there.
20

For instance, the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s uniform Crime Reports, for instance, are not available until
1929, though these data would not have provided any systematic insight into hate crimes anyway.
21
See http://people.uncw.edu/hinese/HAL/HAL%20Web%20Page.htm#HAL%20History for more information on
the database, its origins, and purpose.

21

The relationship between Klan membership and patterns of migration for Blacks and
foreigners
Even if there is little evidence of widespread lynching on the part of the 1920s
incarnation of the Klan, it is nonetheless possible that the Klan engaged in less drastic forms of
intimidation and persecution which made life difficult for Blacks and foreigners. If that is the
case, than one would expect to observe increased emigration and decreased immigration for
these two groups in places where the Klan was most active.
To test this hypothesis, we run first differenced county-level regressions of the form
$ % Black c, t = # (% Klanc ,1924 ) + " 1 ln( Popc, t %10 ) + " 2 ln( Black c ,t %10 ) + " 3 ln( Foreignc , t %10 ) + ! c ,t

(1)

where the dependent variable is the percent change in the Black (or in some cases foreign)
population in the county from one decennial census to another. The key explanatory variable is
the percent of men aged 21 and up in the county who were in the Klan in 1924. The sample used
is all counties in Pennsylvania and all counties in Indiana for which we have data.
We examine changes between the 1910-1920 censuses as a test of pre-existing trends in
these outcomes that we do not think should be strongly causally related to our measure of Klan
activity both because the Klan was not particularly strong in this period (the meteoric rise of the
Klan began in 1921), and because our Klan measure is for the later period. In contrast, we do
think that migration patterns between 1920 and 1930 are potentially influenced by Klan activity.
In all cases, the unit of observation is a county with observations weighted by county population.
Table 3a presents estimation results for Pennsylvania. Columns 1-4 correspond to
changes between the 1910 and 1920 censuses; columns 5-8 are for changes between 1920 and

22

1930. In each case the dependent variable in the first two columns is the change in percent Black,
with the change in percent foreign in the next two columns. We present regressions coefficients
on our Klan measure with no controls and including controls for the log of population and share
Black and foreign at the start of the period.
The results in Table 3a provide little evidence for a causal impact of Klan activity on
migration patterns of Blacks or foreigners. The coefficients in the period before the Klan
becomes active (columns 1-4) are generally similar in sign and magnitude to those when the
Klan is at its peak (columns 5-8). Absent controls, for both these periods the Klan measure is
associated with strong negative values on migration of both groups. In other words, the places
where the Klan will thrive/is thriving, are places that are experiencing relative declines in the
share Black or foreign. Once one controls for county population and the initial shares, however,
the results for Blacks disappear. Black populations are growing more quickly in the most
populous counties (such as Philadelphia), which are also areas with relatively little Klan activity.
The coefficients for foreigners persist with controls. The fact that the same pattern exists in the
1910-1920 period, however, suggests a common cause of foreign emigration and Klan activity,
as opposed to a causal impact of the Klan itself. All results are robust to the exclusion of
Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, the two urban centers of Pennsylvania.
Table 3b is identical in structure to Table 3a, except that the sample used is Indiana
counties. The results largely parallel the findings from Pennsylvania. The Indiana results for
Blacks provide a hint of evidence that the Klan had some impact. In the pre-period, there is no
apparent relationship between future Klan intensity and Black migration patterns. Between 1920
and 1930, there is a statistically significant negative relationship between the Klan and Black

23

migration when controls are absent. Once controls are included, both the magnitude of the
coefficient and the statistical significance decline, but the point estimate remains negative. The
coefficient implies that a 10 percentage point increase in Klan prevalence is associated with
roughly a 0.3 percent reduction in the Black share of the population between 1920 and 1930.
The baseline Black share of the population was 3 percent, so in percentage point terms, a 10
percentage point increase in the Klan reduces the Black share of the population from 3 percent to
2.91 percent. The data provide no support whatsoever for a claim that Klan activity drove away
the foreign born; in all four specifications presented, the coefficient on the Klan variable is
positive, and the point estimates in the later period are larger than in the pre-period.

The impact of the Klan on Voting Behavior and Legislation
The Klan of the 1920s is well-known for its political influence. Numerous historians have
documented widespread electoral victories for Klan-supported candidates across the nation
(Jackson 1992). The Klan exercised its political might in other ways as well, such as marching
50,000 Klansmen down Pennsylvania Avenue in August 1925. There is anecdotal evidence of
Klan-initiated voter intimidation; an example is depicted in figure 5.
Politicians of both parties throughout the south and Midwest were under the Klan’s sway.
Five U.S. Senators and at least four governors were Klansmen (Jackson 1992, McVeigh 2001).
In 1924, the Klan captured the Republican primaries in Colorado, elected a governor of one
house of the legislature, several judges and sheriffs, and the Denver chief of police. (Goldberg
1981). In Alabama, it ended the career of veteran Senator Oscar Underwood, whom it

24

denounced as the “Jew, jug, and Jesuit candidate,” and replaced him with Hugo Black, who
accepted an engraved life membership in the KKK (Morison 1980).
While the Klan clearly had a national reach and was particularly strong throughout much
of the Midwest and the South, most historians believe that it experienced the most political
success in Indiana. Stephenson not only aggressively boosted Klan membership and used his
wealth to sponsor favored candidates, but actively meddled in Republican Party politics to
engineer the election of pro-Klan candidates. At the 1924 Republican convention, Stephenson
was able to force a large number of anti-Klan Republicans off the party’s ticket, an event that
foreshadowed a near sweep of the state legislature and the Indiana congressional delegation that
November.22 Edward L. Jackson's election to the governorship was the Klan’s crowning
achievement that year (Jackson 1992).
Many historians have presented these anecdotes as prima facie evidence that the Klan had
an important impact on the political scene. Here we attempt a more rigorous, quantitative
approach. Again using county level data on Klan membership in Indiana and Pennsylvania, we
estimate the Klan’s effect on the change in republican vote share during the Klan's rise and fall.
To do this, we estimate first differences county-level regressions similar to equation (1):

" Republican Vote c,t = # (%Klan c,1924 ) + $1 ln( popc,1920 ) + $ 2 ln(blackpopc,1920 ) + $ 3 ln( foreignpopc,1920 ) + %c,t

!

where the dependent variable is the change in the Republican vote share. Election data is gleaned
from electoral data for counties in the US between 1840-1972. We examine changes between
22

The Klan turned Republican around this time as the Republican Party became more conservative and the
Democrats turned more liberal. At least in Indiana, the Klan focused its efforts on knocking “old-guard” liberal
Republicans out of the party, as best seen by the defeat of Merrill Moores, a veteran congressman from Indianapolis,
at the 1924 Republican convention.

25

1920 and 1924 when the Klan’s membership growth was in overdrive and their political strength
hit its zenith. We also investigate the change in Republican vote share between 1924 and 1926
and between 1924 and 1934. The Stephenson case, which initiated the crumbling of the Klan,
occurred in 1925. This provides a rare opportunity to estimate the impact of the Klan during its
decline. In all cases, the unit of observation is a county, with observations weighted by the
county's population.
Table 4a presents results for Pennsylvania. Columns 1-2 correspond to changes between
1920 and 1924, the rise of the Klan; columns 3-4 relate to changes between 1924 and 1926, the
immediate impact of the Stephenson trial; and column 5-6 cover the years between 1924 and
1934, the years subsequent to the Klan's fall. We present regression coefficients on our Klan
measure with no controls and including controls for the log of population and log of Black and
foreign population, respectively.
The estimates in Table 4a provide little evidence that the Klan had much influence on
vote shares in Pennsylvania during its peak years. Between 1920 and 1924, the effects actually
go in the opposite direction that one might have expected. Similarly, from 1924 to 1926, there is
an increase in Republican vote shares, the opposite of what one might expect, which then
declines modestly.23
Table 4b provides the estimates of most interest, partly because many have argued that
the Klan had an overwhelming influence on Indiana politics (Moore 1991) and partly because
Stephenson provides a quasi-experiment regarding the effect of the Klan's rapid rise and fall on
politics. Yet, as the table suggests, the Klan had surprisingly little influence. During the Klan’s
23

These results are robust to excluding the two most populous counties, Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, from the
estimation.

26

peak growth period, the coefficient on percent Klan is .22. Evaluated at the mean, this implies
that a 10 percentage point increase in Klan was associated with a 2.2 increase in the Republican
vote share between 1920 and 1924. Klan popularity in a county is associated with a small decline
immediately following the Stephenson trial, a decline that grows larger with time.
Figure 6 further underscores the lack of causal influence the Klan had on politics. The
figure plots the change in Republican vote share in three states: Pennsylvania, Indiana, and
Illinois. Illinois makes an interesting “control” state, as it was deeply nativist but experienced
only limited Klan activity. The trend lines follow a remarkably similar pattern.
Despite our estimates regarding the relatively small effect of the Klan on changes in vote
shares, one cannot deny that eleven of the thirteen elected candidates elected to the U.S. House
in Indiana in the 1924 elections were those backed by the Klan, and the Klan controlled virtually
the entire state government. A key question, then, is whether these politicians were able to pass
legislation that furthered Klan goals. In 1925, a series of bills were introduced, mainly
concerning education, to further the Klan’s “100 percent Americanism” campaign. Weaver
(1954) provides careful documentation of Klan-initiated legislation. The bills included the
Religious Garb Bill, which would have prevented any person (i.e. Catholic nuns) who wore
religious garb from teaching in the public schools; the Public Schools Graduate Bill, which
would have required that teachers' licenses in Indiana be granted only to individuals who
attended public schools; the Uniform Textbook Bill, which would have made it compulsory for
private and public schools to use the same textbooks; and the Bible Reading Bill, which would
have made Bible reading mandatory in the public schools. Also on the Klan's agenda were bills
to allow college students to receive credit for Bible study outside the school, to allow public

27

school students to leave school early for religious education, to create an entirely new board of
education, and to have all students in Indiana study the U.S. Constitution. The final bill, which
lost by the thinnest of margins in the previous congress, was the only one enacted (Weaver
1954).

V. The Fiscal Genius of the Klan
While the Klan did not appear to have much impact on social policy, it was tremendously
successful at the activity it truly put its mind to: making money. Indeed, the true genius of the
Klan was how it managed to amass millions of dollars from members in the form of dues, taxes,
and product sales.
Unlike a firm, which generates revenues by selling products to outsiders, the Klan
derived all of its funds from its own members. Growing the membership was therefore critical to
generating profits for those in leadership positions in the Klan. In order to fuel this growth, the
Imperial Wizard and Imperial Kleagle created a sales force in 1921 whose job it was to enlist
new members. The subsequent meteoric growth in the Klan appears to be directly attributable to
the work of this sales force, as well as the Klan’s new posture against groups such as Jews,
Catholics, and immigrants (Alexander 1965, Wade 1987).
For most members of the social hierarchy, the promise of financial rewards was not an
important enticement. Among the local leadership, only the Exalted Cyclops and the Kligrapp
were paid for their services, but this pay was minimal and these individuals almost always held
other jobs outside the Klan as well. Klan membership appears to be driven less by pecuniary
opportunities and more by the factors that underlie social clubs of all kinds, namely shared

28

interests and ideologies, networking opportunities, a sense of belonging or “fraternity,” etc.
(Alexander 1965).
The one exception was the Grand Dragon in charge of a state (or “realm”).24

When the

sales structure was initially put into place in 1922, it appears that none of the initiation fees went
to the Grand Dragon who was in charge of the state, but by 1924, $2.50 of each initiation was
funneled to the Grand Dragon. In addition, each member was required to pay an annual $1 realm
tax which was paid to the Grand Dragon responsible for that state (Alexander 1965). Loucks
(1936) also reports that 50 cents of the $6.50 cost of a robe went to the Grand Dragon.
The strongest financial incentives, however, were for the sales force and the national
leaders. The sales force was organized on a multi-level marketing principle, much like modern
companies such as Amway and Avon. The U.S. was split into nine Domains with a Grand
Goblin in charge of each. A Goblin would then hire a King Kleagle for each state under his
control; the King Kleagle was responsible for the army of Kleagles, salesmen who were paid by
commission, in his state. The Kleagles were the core of the financial structure, actively hawking
memberships for $10 apiece, and pocketing $4 from each membership sold. As noted earlier, by
1924, $2.50 was directed to the Grand Dragon who ran the state. The remaining $3.50 was sent
up the recruiting structure, with the person in charge of sales in the state (King Kleagle) taking
$1, the regional sales overseer (Great Goblin) getting $.50, the national sales overseer (Imperial
Kleagle) $1.25, and the two most powerful men in the klan (Imperial Wizard and Grand Wizard)
splitting 75 cents.

24

At his pinnacle, D.C. Stephenson was Grand Dragon of 23 states.

29

Robes and other Klan paraphernalia generated a second source of revenue. All Klan
members were required to purchase an official Klan robe produced by an approved factory; Klan
members were not allowed to make their own robes. These robes were sold initially for $6.50,
with the price later reduced to $5.00 when the Klan constructed its own robe production factory
(Jackson 1992). The robes cost only $2.00 to produce, generating large profits for the Klan
leadership. The revenues from the sale of robes were split four ways. The Kleagle who recruited
the purchaser, the King Kleagle, and the Grand Dragon who headed the realm each received 50
cents. The remaining $5 went to the national headquarters, which netted $3 in profit after paying
the $2 production cost.
In addition to being a source of direct revenue for the Klan national leaders, the
requirement that all members purchase officially sanctioned robes presumably served a second
important purpose. Individual salesmen had strong financial incentives to under report the
number of new members they recruited, allowing them to keep the full $10 initiation fee rather
than sharing it with the central leadership. Because each member had to purchase a robe from
the Klan leadership, that provided the central office with a roster of all new members, potentially
allowing the Klan leaders to identify new members whose initiation fees had been pilfered by the
local sales agent.
Besides the purchase of robes, members were encouraged to buy an array of other
officially-sanctioned products ranging from life insurance sold through the Empire Mutual Life
Insurance Company, robe dry-cleaning services, and even specially wrapped candies with the
klan insignia on it (Alexander 1965).

30

The final source of income was the “Imperial Tax,” which was levied on all members of
a Klavern after it had received its charter, usually when it had 100 members (Alexander 1965).
The tax, which totaled $1.80 per Klansmen per year, was levied in four parts of $0.45 year. This
revenue stream flowed directly to the top and was not shared by anyone outside the Imperial
office.25
Reliable information on the total earnings of those in the financial side of the Klan is
generally not available since the number of Klan members nationwide is so uncertain. There is,
however, credible membership numbers for Indiana during the period 1923-25, allowing us to
calculate revenues generated in Indiana during that time period. In 1923, the Klan commissioned
Ernst & Ernst to conduct an internal audit in Indiana to investigate impropriety within the
hierarchy. As of August 27, 1923, the report shows 117, 245 members. In 1925, as part of the D.
C. Stephenson trial, the Klan took an internal census, reporting approximately 162,000 members.
Based on these numbers, knowledge of initiation fees, membership dues, and purchases of robes
and other paraphernalia, we are able to construct estimates of revenues accruing to the various
levels of the hierarchy. It is important to stress, however, that this case study is far from
representative – the Klan’s recruiting success in Indiana was unparalleled and the period studied
represents the Klan’s peak there. In addition, a number of important caveats apply. First, there is
anecdotal evidence that the Klan had some difficulty actually collecting dues from members, and
at least in later years offered discounts on initiation fees. (Kennedy 1990) This would lead us to
overstate Klan revenues across the board. On the other hand, we make two assumptions that will
bias our calculated revenues downwards: (1) our calculations on merchandise are limited to
25

There are also references to local taxes levied by individual Klaverns (see Alexander 1965), but we have been
unable to determine how widespread or large such taxes might have been.

31

robes, excluding other paraphernalia, and (2) we compute new initiations as the increase in the
size of the membership, ignoring the fact that there was exit as well. Since much of the revenue
was generated from initiation fees, trading a new member for an existing member boosted
revenues.
Table 5 provides estimates of the distribution of the annual revenues generated by the
Klan from the state of Indiana at its peak. The first four columns correspond to the four different
sources of revenues: new initiations, robes, the realm tax, and the imperial tax. The final column
is the sum of these sources. The values shown have been transformed into 2006 dollars using the
consumer price index.26 Our estimates are based off an assumption of 140,000 total Klan
members in Indiana and 22,511new members per year, with the latter number derived from the
increase between the two Klan internal audits. New initiation fees, shown in column 1,
generated revenues of nearly $200,000 for the national headquarters, over $300,000 for the
highest ranking person in the national sales structure (Imperial Kleagle), over $600,000 for D.C.
Stephenson, the Grand Dragon of Indiana, $132,000 for the regional sales manager (Great
Goblin), $265,000 for the sales manager in Indiana (King Kleagle), and over $1 million for the
street-level salesmen (Kleagles). Because we have no reliable data on the number of Kleagles in
Indiana, we are unable to calculate a per capita wage for the salesmen.
The sale of robes generated almost $800,000 in profit for the national headquarters; these
numbers are net of the costs of supplying the robes. The Grand Dragon, King Kleagle, and the
Kleagles each received over $100,000 from robes. The Imperial Tax was the single greatest

26

Between 1924 and 2006, prices rose approximately 1200 percent.

32

source of revenue, contributing nearly $3 million to national headquarters. The Realm Tax
provided $1.65 million to D.C. Stephenson.
According to our estimates, the single state of Indiana generated nearly $4 million in
revenues for the national headquarters.27 After some modest expenses, most of that revenue
would go directly to the Imperial Wizard, with the Grand Wizard having claims on some of it.
D.C. Stephenson, the head of the Indiana Klan, received nearly $2.5 million annually from the
state’s operations. The head of the state sales hierarchy pocketed nearly $400,000 a year. To
put these numbers into perspective, in current dollars, a typical full professor during this time
earned $45,000 in current dollars (Bachman 1929), Babe Ruth earned $613,000, and President
Calvin Coolidge earned $885,000.28

VI. Conclusion
The Ku Klux Klan symbolizes the extremes of race hatred in America. Since its inception
in the months after the Civil War, the Klan’s organization, mission, and power have varied
tremendously, with membership and political influence peaking in the mid-1920s when over one
million Americans were members. Our statistical analysis, however, finds that, contrary to
conventional wisdom, the Klan had little impact on Black or foreign born migration, lynchings,
or politics during this time period. Rather, the 1920s Klan is best described as an enormously
successful marketing ploy; a classic pyramiding scheme – officials at the top getting rich off of
27

Alexander (1965) reports that D.C. Stephenson remitted $641,475 (in 1923 dollars) to Klan national headquarters
covering the period February 17-July 14, 1923. In current dollars, that is roughly $7 million for a five-month period.
That number is roughly three times higher than our estimate and is inconsistent with the other numbers reported in
Alexander (1965).
28
It was not until 1931 that Ruth famously demanded a salary of $80,000 -- $5,000 more than President Calvin
Coolidge – with the explanation that “I had a better year than he did.”

33

the individuals at the bottom – energized by sales agents with enormous financial incentives to
sell hatred. Our findings fit squarely into Glaeser’s (2005) pioneering analysis of “entrepreneurs
of hate,” in which political and business leaders create and encourage hatred for private benefit.

34

References
Alexander, Charles. “Kleagles and Cash.” 1965. The Business History Review. Vol. 39, No. 3,
pp. 348-367
Bachman, Frank P. (1929) “Salaries and Supplemental Earnings of College
Teachers.” Science, Vol. 70, No. 1802, pp 26-29.
Chalmers, David. Hooded Americanism. 1987. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Davis, Lenwood and Janet Sims-Wood. 1984. The Ku Klux Klan: A Bibliography. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Glaeser, Edward L. “The Political Economy of Hatred.” 2005. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Vol. 120, No. 1, pp. 45-86.
Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2002. “The Economic Approach to
Social Capital,” Economic Journal 112, 437-458.
Goldberg, Robert Alan. 1981. Hooded Empire: The Ku Klux Klan in Colorado. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Jackson, Kenneth T. The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915-1930. 1992. Chicago, IL: Elephant
Paperback.
Kennedy, Stetson, 1990, The Klan Unmasked. University Press of Florida.
Krueger, Alan and Maleckova, Jitka. “Education, Poverty, and Terrorism.” 2003. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives. Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 119-144.
Loucks, Emerson Huntsberger. The Ku Klux Klan in Pennsylvania, a Study in Nativism. 1936.
New York, Harrisburg, PA: The Telegraph Press.
MacLean, Nancy. Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku Klux Klan. 1994.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
McVeigh, Rory. “Power Devaluation, the Ku Klux Klan, and the Democratic National
Convention of 1924.” 2001. Sociological Forum 16(1):1-30.
Moore, Leonard. Citizen Klansmen. 1991. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Morison, Samuel, Commager, Henry, and Leuchtenburg, William. The Growth of the American
Republic. 1980. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

35

Newton, Michael. The Ku Klux Klan. 2006. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Company.
Newton, Michael. The Invisible Empire. 2001. Gainesville, FL: University of Florida Press.
Skocpol, Theda. Diminished Democracy. 2003. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Terry, et al. “The Nature and Scope of the Problem of Sexual Abuse of Minors by Catholic
Priests and Deacons in the United States: A Research Study Conducted by the John Jay College
of Criminal Justice.” 2003. http://www.usccb.org/nrb/johnjaystudy/index.htm
Tucker, Richard. The Dragon and the Cross. 1991. Hamden, CT: Archon Books.
Wade, Wyn Craig. The Fiery Cross. 1987. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weaver, Norman. The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in Wisconsin, Indiana, Ohio, and Michigan.
1954. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin.

36

Appendix A: Data Appendix
We have developed an extensive database of members of the Ku Klux Klan during the
1920s. The database was developed in three stages. First, we scoured the country for archives,
libraries, and historical societies that contained data on the Ku Klux Klan. Once we found those
that contained potentially relevant information, we attempted to partner with these institutions by
offering to pay for their collections to be microfilmed. Our price: one copy of all microfilm.
Second, we analyzed these microfilms for data on individual Klan members, minutes from
Klavern meetings, expenses, filed applications, and so on. Many of these forms contain
information about each Klan member (name, height, weight, e.g.). From this, we developed the
initial list of Klan members from all the microfilm that had such information. The final stage in
creating our database was to link up Klan members to census information so that they could be
compared to non-Klan members. Below, we detail each of these stages.
Below, we provide the details of this process.
In Search of Klan Members
For obvious reasons, identifying members of secret societies or terrorist groups is a
difficult task. We began by searching university libraries, archives, and historical societies
around the country. Twenty-three of these organizations possessed a total of thirty collections
regarding the Ku Klux Klan (see Appendix Table 1 for details). Most were simply old copies of
Klan propaganda, a robe here and there, or various copies of the Kloran and the Klan monthly
newsletter. Five institutions, contained remarkable data on members of the Invisible Empire
including membership roles and dues paid, financial records, first and last names, as well as
other useful information. These included Emory University (Knox County Klan Number 14,
Knoxville, Tennessee), the Pennsylvania State Archives (Census of Pennsylvania, Delaware, and
New Jersey Klans), Bowling Green University (Ohio Knights of the KKK, Wood County), the
Indiana Historical Society (Census of Indiana), Clark Historical Library (Newaygo and Mecosta
County, Michigan and Calvin Enders Collection), and the Montana Historical Society
(Wheatland Klan Number 29, Harlowton Montana).
As with most data on organizations that are difficult to obtain, one worries that the
information that has been discovered is not representative of the organization. While we cannot
answer this directly, we have gone to great lengths to understand the origins of each of the
collections in our database. The Klan collections arrived at their respective locations in various
ways. In Pennsylvania, the Grand Wizard was burglarized and all the Klan’s confidential files
were dropped off at the State Police headquarters in Harrisburg in the middle of the night. The
collections at Emory and Bowling Green Universities and the Montana Historical Society were
donated by unknown sources; typically an individual who discovered the files in their attic and
believes they may have historical value but for which they want to distance themselves. The
Indiana Historical Society was donated by a series of individuals in various parts of Indiana.
Further information about the Indiana Klan was made publicly available through the criminal
trial of D.C. Stephenson.

37

Once the files from the assorted collections were microfilmed, we printed each page to
PDFs, which are available from the authors upon request. We then keypunched all information
on individual members from these PDFs into Excel. This serves as the set of Klan members.
Other information of interest such as dues records, expenses, checks written, bank statements, or
other financial information were also type into separate spreadsheets.
Matching Klan Members to the 1920 and 1930 Censuses
To link our database to the census, we used three approaches. For the smallest
community (Harlowton), it was feasible to manually keypunch all of the information from the
1920 and 1930 decennial censuses using PDF versions of the original hand-written census rolls
available at ancestry.com. Appendix Figure 1 provides a sample of a typical census image. The
census rolls are small and hand-written, which can make it difficult to be certain about some
entries. In cases in which information was either blank or not legible, we created an indicator
variable to denote both of these types of missing data.
We then linked the data we have from Klan membership rolls directly to the Census data.
Thus, for Harlowton, we not only have a complete match of Klan members and census data, but
also have all non-Klan members included in the data set.
For Knox and Wood counties, we follow the same matching procedure using the original
Census rolls, but found it impractical to type in the entire population of non-Klan members.
Instead, for these two cities, our control group of non-Klan members is constructed from two
complimentary sources. First, we include individuals from those counties who are included in the
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) from the University of Minnesota Population
Center in 1920 and 1930. Unfortunately, the IPUMS is only a 1 percent sample in 1920 and a 0.5
percent sample in 1930, yielding a relatively small control samples.29 To supplement this, we
constructed a random sample of 500 individuals in Knox County and 1,000 individuals in Wood
County by randomly choosing PDF pages of the original hand-written census rolls for the 1920
decennial census available at ancestry.com, and keypunching all of the information on white
males 21 or older.
The randomization was accomplished in a few steps. First, we set the number of
observations equal to the total number of sheets available across all enumeration districts in a
county. Then we generated a variable that took the values of 1 through the total number of
sheets. Next, we took a random sample of 50 of those numbers. Before we took the sample we
set the seed, which allows you to re-produce the same random numbers each time you run the do
file. Finally, we took those numbers and calculated the actual sheet number within each district.
For example, random number 151 in Knoxville represents sheet 39 of District 95.
The Pennsylvania and Colorado data sets were too large to feasibly link individual Klan
members (more than 50,000 of them) to original census rolls by hand. Thus, in these data, we
exclusively matched our Klan observations to IPUMS data. Unfortunately, the data on Klan
members from Pennsylvania and Colorado consisted mainly of last names and first names, or in
29

The data from Knoxville was quite comprehensive; 6 of the census variables were already in our files. Further,
there were other interesting variables in the data such as years of education. As such, we just appended census data
onto these datasets and assumed that those from the census were not Klan members.

38

many cases, first initials, along with city or county of residence. Merges were performed on last
name, first name, and county.
Appendix B: A Guide to Klan Terminology
Realm: In both the Reconstruction and modern Klans, a realm is equivalent to a state,
administered by a grand dragon. The term is never applied to smaller geographical units,
although the 1920s saw the term occasionally applied to larger areas, when membership in one
state was insufficient to justify an imperial charter. Thus, the states of Maine, Vermont, and New
Hampshire were considered a single realm.
Kludd: the chaplain of a Klan, this rank is occupied by an ordained Protestant minister whenever
possible. A great kludd offers prayers at the province level, with a grand kludd serving the realm
and an imperial kludd selected for the Invisible Empire at large.
Klokard: designated as the lecturer of a klan, the klokard has no counterpart at the province level.
A grand klokard serves for the realm, while an imperial klokard is elected for the Invisible
Empire at large.
Klexter: Designated as the outer guard of a klan, the klexter is responsible for external security
during regular meetings. The office does not exist at the province level. Each realm is served by
a grand klexter, while the imperial klexter operates from KKK national headquarters.
Kligrapp: As secretary of a klan or other jurisdictional unit, this title is further designated by rank
to include the great kligrapp (at the province level), the grand kligrapp (of a realm), and the
imperial kligrapp (for the overall Klan).
Klokan: An individual member of the klokann, this officer serves as an adviser, auditor, and
investigator for his respective geographical unit.
Klokann: The advisory board of a klan, serving as auditors and investigators, the klokann is
composed of several members dubbed klokans. At the klanton and province levels, three
members are selected for each board, with the latter body known as the great klokann. Five
members are specified for the grand klkann (at the realm level), and the imperial klokann (at
national headquarters).
Klavern: Technically applied to the local headquarters of a klan, this term is often used
interchangeably to describe the klan itself.
Kleagle: IN Klan parlance, a kleagle is an organizer or recruiter, appointed by the imperial
wizard or his imperial representative to “sell” the KKK among nonmembers. Kleagles are
generally paid on commission, receiving an established percentage of each recruiter’s klectoken.

39

Klarogo: As the inner guard of a klanton, the klarogo is roughly equivalent to a sergeant-at-arms.
The office does not exist at the province level. Other rank designations include the grand klarogo
(of a realm) and the imperial klarogo (for the national Klan).
Klabee: The treasurer of a klanton, klabees are further designated by rank with the title of great
klabee (at the province level), grand klabee (for a realm), and imperial klabee (for the national
Klan).
Kladd: As the conductor of a klanton, a kladd is the custodian of ritual paraphernalia, and he also
introduces candidates for “naturalization.” The office does not exist at the province level, but
rank is otherwise designated by the titles of grand kladd (for a realm) and imperial kladd (at the
national levels).
Klaliff: The vice president of a klanton, klaliffs multiply as one ascends the Klan ladder of rank.
At the province level, three great klaliffs serve as an advisory board for the great titan. The grand
klaliff is vice president of a realm, while the imperial klaliff serves as second in command after
the imperial wizard.
Klan: The smallest unit of the Invisible Empire, a klan is administered by an exalted Cyclops and
his twelve terrors presiding. To further confuse the issue, local units of the Constitutional Union
Guard were also referred to as “klans” during Reconstruction.
Imperial Kloncilium: In the modern United Klans of America, the kloncilium consists of fifteen
genii serving as the imperial wizard’s command staff. Members include the imperial klaliff,
imperial klokard, imperial kludd, imperial kligrapp, imperial klabee, imperial kladd, imperial
klarogo, imperial klexter, imperial klonsel, imperial nighthawk, and the five-man imperial
klokann.
Imperial Wizard: Since 1915, this title has generally applied to the presiding officer of the
Invisible Empire. He is the Klan’s supreme chief executive, its military commander-in-chief, and
(at least in the United Klans of America) chairman of the imperial kloncilium, consisting of his
fifteen genii. Some Klans use other titles for their leader: a few cling to the original “grand
wizard” designation used by Nathan Forrest during Reconstruction. Other Klan chiefs have
proclaimed themselves “emperor,” “grand emperor,” or simply “president.”
Hydras: IN Klan parlance, hydras are the advisory officers chosen to serve a grand dragon.
During Reconstruction, there were six, each one without individual titles. The modern Klan
specifies nine hydras, including the grand klaliff, grand klokard, grand kludd, grand kligrapp,
grand klabee, grand kladd, grand klarogo, grand klexter, and grand nighthawk.
Grand Wizard: As supreme leader of the Reconstruction Klan, the grand wizard was advised and
assisted by ten genii.

40

Grand Titan: The commanding officer of a dominion during Reconstruction, this officer was
advised by six furies.
Grand Dragon: Throughout Klan history, this title has applied to the chief officer of a realm.
During Reconstruction, the grand dragon was advised by eight hydras, a number increase to nine
for the 20th century Klan.
Ghouls: The original prescript of the Reconstruction KKK applied this designation to rank-andfile Klansmen. Published sources differ on whether the term still applies to modern Klansmen,
but it does not appear in the Kloran or in any current constitution of the various competing
Klans.
Klavern: The official designation for local Klan unit or meeting place.

41

Sources: 1921, Jackson (1992); 1922, Chalmers (1965), 1923-1930, Newton (2006); and 1970-2000, Anti-Defamation League
(Year?)

Figure 2: Klan Basic Organization
Empire: U.S.
Grand Wizard: Chairman
Imperial Wizard: CEO
15-member Imperial Kloncilium (cabinet) composed of Genii:
Klaliff (first v p), Klazik (second v p), Klokard (lecturer), Kludd (chaplain), Kligrapp (secretary),
Klabee (Treasurer), Kladd ("Conductor")*, Klarogo (Inner-guard), Klexter (Outer-guard), Klonsel (Attorney),
Night Hawk (Courier), and the four Klokann (auditors).

Realm: State
Grand Dragon: Head of Realm
Imperial Wizard: CEO
15 Hydras: Same positions as Kloncilium, except at state level.

Realm

Realm

Congressional District
District

Grand Titan: Head of electoral operations in each district

District

Furies: Aides to the Grand Titan

Klavern: Local Organizations
Klavern

Exalted Cyclopes: Head of Klavern
Several local officers, depending on Klavern, almost
always including Kligrapp (secretary),
Klabee (treasurer), and Kludd (chaplain)

Ghoul
Rank-and-file Klansman who mostly attending Klavern meetings

Klavern

Figure 3: Auxiliary Recruiting Structure of the Ku Klux Klan
Grand Wizard
National: 20 percent

Imperial Wizard

Imperial Kleagle

National: 12.5 percent

Great Goblin

National: 12.5 percent

Great Goblin
Nine nationally: 5 percent

Great Goblin

King Kleagle
King Kleagle

Kleagle

State: 10 percent

Kleagle
Local Salesman: 40 percent

Ghouls
Members

King Kleagle

Kleagle

Figure 4: Black Lynching, 1880-1930

Figure 5: An Example of Klan Initiated Voter Intimidation

.7
.6

% Republican Vote

.5
.4
.3
1900

1910

1920
Year
Indiana
Illinois

1930
Pennsylvania

Figure 6: Republican Vote Share, by State

1940

Appendix Figure 1: 1930 Census Image from Ancestry.com

Area:
Number of observations
Native born
Unskilled/unemployed
Service worker
Professional
Literate
Own home
Never married
Age
Head of household
Veteran
% black in county
% foreign born in county

Table 1: Summary Statistics from our Data Files
Harlowton
Knoxville
Bowling Green
Klan
Non-Klan
Klan
Non-Klan
Klan
Non-Klan
41
569
551
942
2208
1316
0.902
(0.300)
0.439
(0.502)
0.390
(0.494)
0.171
(0.381)
1.000
(0.000)
0.771
(0.426)
0.075
(0.267)
46.900
(11.112)
0.927
(0.264)
0.171
(0.381)
---

0.851
(0.357)
0.711
(0.454)
0.171
(0.377)
0.118
(0.323)
0.991
(0.093)
0.408
(0.492)
0.294
(0.456)
41.820
(14.911)
0.698
(0.460)
0.167
(0.374)
---

---

---

1.000
(0.000)
0.595
(0.491)
0.297
(0.458)
0.108
(0.310)
0.959
(0.198)
---

0.983
(0.129)
0.664
(0.473)
0.265
(0.442)
0.071
(0.257)
0.936
(0.245)
---

---

0.961
(0.194)
0.499
(0.500)
0.373
(0.484)
0.127
(0.333)
0.987
(0.112)
0.607
(0.489)
0.205
(0.404)
43.336
(16.852)
0.724
(0.447)
0.124
(0.330)
---

0.882
(0.323)
0.812
(0.391)
0.127
(0.333)
0.061
(0.239)
0.960
(0.197)
0.594
(0.491)
0.188
(0.391)
43.948
(15.480)
0.765
(0.424)
0.078
(0.269)
---

0.183
(0.387)
34.849
(11.064)
---

0.246
(0.431)
37.069
(14.204)
---

---

---

-----

---

---

---

Colorado
Klan
Non-Klan
243
1573

Pennsylvania
Klan
Non-Klan
475
40789

0.895
(0.307)
0.518
(0.501)
0.395
(0.490)
0.086
(0.282)
0.996
(0.065)
0.465
(0.500)
0.255
(0.437)
41.619
(14.593)
0.657
(0.476)
---

0.765
(0.424)
0.593
(0.491)
0.336
(0.473)
0.071
(0.257)
0.987
(0.112)
0.509
(0.500)
0.335
(0.472)
40.405
(15.640)
0.556
(0.497)
---

0.886
(0.318)
0.713
(0.453)
0.265
(0.442)
0.022
(0.147)
0.994
(0.079)
0.484
(0.500)
0.251
(0.434)
40.162
(14.752)
0.638
(0.481)
---

0.740
(0.438)
0.737
(0.441)
0.219
(0.413)
0.045
(0.207)
0.952
(0.214)
0.521
(0.500)
0.297
(0.457)
39.642
(15.116)
0.621
(0.485)
---

0.020
(0.009)
0.130
(0.022)

0.020
(0.008)
0.131
(0.024)

0.041
(0.034)
0.171
(0.056)

0.037
(0.035)
0.147
(0.068)

Notes: Data in this table correspond to the five different geographic areas noted in the column headings. The first column in each area
corresponds to Klan members that we successfully matched to individuals in either the 1920 or 1930 Census; the second column contains
Census data for white males over 21 who did match anyone in our Klan records. For Harlowton, the Non-Klan data reflects the entire Census
population. For the other areas, the non-Klan samples are based on all individuals included in the Public Use Microdata for 1920 and 1930 in
these areas. In addition, we supplemented the PUMS data with a random sample drawn from the original Census rolls in Knoxville and Bowling
Green. For Colorado and Pennsylvania, a probablistic match was made between Klan records and the PUMS data (see appendix for details).
Any record with a positive match with the Klan data is treated as a Klan member in these summary statistics; some of these are false positives do
to multiple people in a county sharing the same name. Standard deviations in parentheses.

Table 2: Odds Ratios of Characteristics Associated with Klan Membership
City/State:
Variables:
nativity
service workers
professionals
literacy
own home
never married
Age greater than median in
sample

Harlowtown
Klan

Knoxville
Klan

Bowling Green
Klan

Colorado
Klan

Pennsylvania
Klan

1.38
(0.45 - 4.26)
3.66
(1.68 - 7.98)**
2.00
(0.77 - 5.22)
---

---

2.27
(1.29 - 4.00)**
5.20
(3.47 - 7.80)**
3.15
(1.75 - 5.65)**
1.68
(0.66 - 4.31)
0.96
(0.65 - 1.42)
2.08
(1.28 - 3.36)**

2.74
(1.76 - 4.28)**
1.22
(0.89 - 1.68)
1.27
(0.73 - 2.19)
1.58
(0.20 - 12.28)
0.90
(0.66 - 1.22)
0.88
(0.57 - 1.36)

3.26
(2.43 - 4.37)**
1.00
(0.81 - 1.24)
0.40
(0.21 - 0.75)**
4.66
(1.47 - 14.74)**
0.87
(0.72 - 1.06)
0.64
(0.47 - 0.86)**

0.88
(0.63 - 1.24)
1.70
(0.90 - 3.18)
1.54
(0.69 - 3.45)

1.21
(0.89 - 1.65)
1.11
(0.72 - 1.73)
---

1.23
(1.00 - 1.51)*
0.80
(0.61 - 1.05)
---

4.38
(1.89 - 10.16)**
0.59
(0.14 - 2.58)

1.19
(0.86 - 1.63)
1.75
(1.06 - 2.89)*
1.36
(0.69 - 2.66)
--0.69
(0.48 - 1.00)

1.67
(0.78 - 3.59)
5.51
(0.84 - 36.03)
1.02
(0.39 - 2.68)

0.73
(0.54 - 0.99)*
---

% black in county greater than
median county

---

---

---

0.94
(0.62 - 1.44)

0.82
(0.66 - 1.01)

% foreign born in county
greater than median county

---

---

---

528
41

1493
551

3522
2208

1.45
(0.73 - 2.87)
1805
243

3.03
(2.39 - 3.82)**
41150
475

Head of household
Veteran

Observations
Klan Observations

---

Notes: Coefficients in the table are estimated odds ratios. Each column in the table represents results
from a single regression. The first three columns are from a logistic regression. Because the
Klan/Census match is done probabilistically for Colorado and Pennsylvania, the dependent variable in the
final columns is a continuous variable rather than an indicator variable. The entries in the final two
columns are based on linear probability models, with the coefficients transformed into odds ratios. 95
percent confidence intervals in parentheses. For the final two columns, these confidence intervals are
computed using the delta method. One asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 5% level; two
asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% level. Literacy in column 1 and nativity in column 2 are
dropped because there is no variation within Klan members.

Decade:
Variable:
% Klan in
1924

Table 3A: The Relationship Between KKK Membership and Migration, Pennsylvania
1910 -1920
1920-1930
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
% change in % change in % change in % change in % change in % change in % change in
blacks
blacks
foreigners
foreigners
blacks
blacks
foreigners
-0.3054
0.0021
-0.3263
-0.7244
-0.6269
0.0040
-0.4408

(8)
% change in
foreigners
-0.6631

(0.0834)**
_

(0.0724)
0.0036

(0.2560)
_

(0.2151)**
-0.0062

(0.1606)**
_

(0.1223)
_

(0.2002)*
_

(0.1523)**
_

log (black pop
in 1910)

_

(0.0022)
0.0007

_

(0.0067)
0.0066

_

_

_

_

log (foreign
pop in 1910)

_

(0.0007)
0.0001

_

(0.0019)**
-0.0110

_

_

_

_

log (county
pop in 1920)

_

(0.0011)
_

_

(0.0033)**
_

_

0.0075

_

0.0147

log (black pop
in 1920)

_

_

_

_

_

(0.0034)*
0.0022

_

(0.0043)**
0.0003

log (foreign
pop in 1920)

_

_

_

_

_

(0.0010)*
-0.0012

_

(0.0013)
-0.0161

Observations
R-squared

67
0.17

67
0.61

67
0.02

67
0.57

67
0.19

(0.0018)
67
0.69

67
0.07

(0.0022)**
67
0.65

log (county
pop in 1910)

Notes: The dependent variable in odd columns is the percent change in the black population in a county between
decennial censuses; the dependent variable in even columns is the percent change in percent foreign born in the
county. The first four columns are the changes between 1910 and 1920; the last four columns represent changes
between 1920 and 1930. The key dependent variable in the specifications is the percent of the eligible county
residents in the Klan at its peak in 1924. Klan membership began to grow rapidly beginning in 1921. Standard errors
in parentheses. One asterisk denotes significance at the 5 percent level; two asterisks reflect significance at the 1
percent level. See the data appendix for further details on the data sources and construction. The unit of observation
is a county in Pennsylvania.

Decade:
Variable:
% Klan in
1924

Table 3B: The Relationship Between KKK Membership and Migration, Indiana
1910 -1920
1920-1930
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
% change in % change in % change in % change in % change in % change in % change in
blacks
blacks
foreigners
foreigners
blacks
blacks
foreigners
-0.0254
0.0083
0.0990
0.0320
-0.0709
-0.0285
0.1483
(0.0146)

log (county
pop in 1910)

(0.0120)
0.0054

(0.0244)**

(0.0174)
0.0123

(0.0175)**

(0.0160)
_

(0.0337)**

(8)
% change in
foreigners
0.0423
(0.0229)
_

(0.0030)
-0.0023

(0.0043)**
0.0003

_

_

(0.0007)**
0.0038

(0.0011)
-0.0139

_

_

(0.0012)**
_

(0.0017)**
_

-0.0098

0.0303

log (black pop
in 1920)

_

_

(0.0038)*
0.0002

(0.0054)**
-0.0020

log (foreign
pop in 1920)

_

_

(0.0010)
0.0083

(0.0014)
-0.0219

log (black pop
in 1910)
log (foreign
pop in 1910)
log (county
pop in 1920)

Observations
R-squared

84
0.04

83
0.49

84
0.17

83
0.67

84
0.17

(0.0015)**
82
0.48

84
0.19

(0.0022)**
82
0.72

Notes: The dependent variable in odd columns is the percent change in the black population in a county between
decennial censuses; the dependent variable in even columns is the percent change in percent foreign born in the
county. The first four columns are the changes between 1910 and 1920; the last four columns represent changes
between 1920 and 1930. The key dependent variable in the specifications is the percent of the eligible county
residents in the Klan at its peak in 1924. Klan membership began to grow rapidly beginning in 1921. Standard errors
in parentheses. One asterisk denotes significance at the 5 percent level; two asterisks reflect significance at the 1
percent level. See the data appendix for further details on the data sources and construction. The unit of observation
is a county in Indiana.

Variable:
% Klan in 1924

Table 4A: The Effect of th KKK on Political Vote Shares, Pennsylvania
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Change in
Change in
Change in
Change in
Change in
republican vote republican vote republican vote republican vote republican vote
1920-1924
1920-1924
1924-1926
1924-1926
1924-1934
-0.4829
(0.8892)
---

(6)
Change in
republican vote
1924-1934

-0.5313
0.6555
2.3358
2.6619
-0.3480
(1.0899)
(0.8327)
(0.9708)*
(1.1883)*
(1.0713)
log (county pop in 1920)
-0.0468
--0.0261
--0.0580
(0.0321)
(0.0286)
(0.0316)
log (black pop in 1920)
--0.0094
--0.0093
---0.0363
(0.0093)
(0.0083)
(0.0092)**
log (foreign pop in 1920)
--0.0255
---0.0137
---0.0360
(0.0163)
(0.0145)
(0.0160)*
Observations
67
67
67
67
67
67
R-squared
0.00
0.06
0.01
0.15
0.07
0.52
Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is the percent change in the Republican vote share for the U.S. House of Representatives in a
county across elections. Virtually all Klan supported candidates in the North were Republican. The key dependent variable in the
specifications is the percent of the eligible county residents in the Klan at its peak in 1924. Klan membership began to grow rapidly
beginning in 1921 and then quickly declined after 1924. Standard errors in parentheses. One asterisk denotes significance at the 5
percent level; two asterisks reflect significance at the 1 percent level. See the data appendix for further details on the data sources and
construction. The unit of observation is a county in Pennsylvania.

Variable:
% Klan in 1924

Table 4B: The Effect of the Klan on Political Vote Shares, Indiana
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Change in
Change in
Change in
Change in
republican vote republican vote republican vote republican vote
1920-1924
1920-1924
1924-1926
1924-1926
0.1186
(0.0694)
---

(5)
Change in
republican vote
1924-1934

(6)
Change in
republican vote
1924-1934

0.2182
-0.0541
-0.0932
0.0450
-0.1584
(0.0597)**
(0.0706)
(0.0693)
(0.1088)
(0.0749)*
log (county pop in 1920)
0.0169
---0.0586
--0.0194
(0.0143)
(0.0166)**
(0.0179)
log (black pop in 1920)
---0.0036
--0.0101
---0.0038
(0.0036)
(0.0042)*
(0.0045)
log (foreign pop in 1920)
--0.0125
--0.0088
---0.0390
(0.0059)*
(0.0069)
(0.0074)**
Observations
84
82
84
82
84
82
R-squared
0.03
0.42
0.01
0.24
0.00
0.61
Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is the change in the Republican vote share for the U.S. House of Representatives in a county
across elections. Virtually all Klan supported candidates in the North were Republican. The key dependent variable in the specifications is
the percent of the eligible county residents in the Klan at its peak in 1924. Klan membership began to grow rapidly beginning in 1921 and
then quickly declined after 1924. Standard errors in parentheses. One asterisk denotes significance at the 5 percent level; two asterisks
reflect significance at the 1 percent level. See the data appendix for further details on the data sources and construction. The unit of
observation is a county in Indiana.

Table 5: Estimates of the Revenues Generated by the Klan in Indiana in 1924, (in thousands of $2006)
Source of Revenue
Initiation
Imperial
Fees
Robes
Tax
Realm Tax Total
Recipient of Revenue
National Headquarters
Imperial Wizard
Grand Wizard
Imperial Kleagle

532
100
100
332

796
796
0
0

2,971
2,971
0
0

0
0
0
0

4,299
3,867
100
332

Grand Dragon of Indiana
Great Goblin
King Kleagle
All other Kleagles combined

663
133
265
1,062

133
0
133
133

0
0
0
0

1,650
0
0
0

2,447
133
398
1,195

Total

2,655

1,195

2.971

1,650

8,472

Notes: Entries are the estimated revenues (in thousands of $2006) generate by the Klan in the state of Indiana in
the year 1924 for Klan leaders and the sales force. Estimates are based on author calculations. Estimated
number of Klan members in Indiana in 1924 is 140,000, with 22,511 new Klan members that year. The sources
of revenue and the distribution across Klan leaders are based on a number of (sometimes conflicting) historical
accounts, but especially on Anderson (1965). Entries are inflation adjusted using the CPI.

Appendix Table 1: Results From our Search for Klan Archives and Special Collections
Collection Name
Location
Description
Size
Ku Klux Klan collection (ca. 1915Atlanta History Center,
No membership
2 boxes (.5
[ongoing])
Atlanta GA
roles or finances cu.ft.)
Detailed
Ohio Knights of the KKK, Wood
Membership
County
Bowling Green State U
Records
very large
Correspondence,
CALIFORNIA STATE
Newspapers, and 33 items (1
Ku Klux Klan (1915- )
UNIV, NORTHRIDGE
Pamphlets
box) ; 28 cm.
Ku Klux Klan (Newaygo County,
Mich.), (Mecosta County, Mich.),
Calvin Enders Collection.
CLARKE HIST LIBR
Membership Cards 3.5 cubic ft.
One volume of
3 linear ft. (1
Colorado Historical Society, members and
box, 2
Stephen H. Hart Library,
applications for
oversize
Ku Klux Klan (1915-)
Denver CO
membership
volumes).
No membership
Collection of miscellaneous papers,
DUKE UNIV LIBR
roles or finances 146 items.
East Carolina University, J.
Y. Joyner Library, Special
0.073 cu. ft. (6
Ku Klux Klan
Collections, Greenville NC Klan Publications items)

Ku Klux Klan. No. 30 Butte, Montana

EASTERN WASHINGTON
STATE HIST
Emory University, Robert
W. Woodruff Library,
Special Collections
Department, Atlanta GA

Ku Klux Klan (1915- ) Knox County
Klan No. 14, Knoxville, Tenn.
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ), Crown Point
Klan #72 (Crown Point, Ind.),
Whitewater Klan #60 (Richmond, Ind.),
Local Officers, Indiana, Odon Unit,
Klan 90, Logansport, Indiana
Indiana Historical Society
Montana Historical Society,
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ). Wheatland Klan Library and Archives Dept.,
No. 29 (Harlowton, Mont.)
Helena MT
Ohio Historical Society,
Archives-Library Division,
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ). Ohio Knights Columbus OH

Membership and
financial records

2 ft.

Membership and
Dues Records

288 items (8
linear feet)

Membersip and
financial records

4 microfilm
Reels

Membership
Records

.1 linear ft.

Correspondence of
Brown Harwood
Minutes of
meetings relating
to Klans
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ). La Grande, Or., Oregon Historical Society, Involvement in
Chapter No. 14
Library, Portland OR
politics
Pennsylvania State Police Collection,
Membership and
30.16 – 30.19
Pennsylvania State Archive financial records
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ). Pond Creek
UNIV OF KENTUCKY
Membership
Klan, no. 117 (Ky.)
LIBR
Records
Oklahoma
Ku Klux Klan Women's Organization
Women's group
(Okla.)
UNIV OF OKLAHOMA
from 1924-1928

1/6 ft.

190 items
30 microfilm
reels
1 microfilm
reel

.66 ft.

Women of the Ku Klux Klan. Klan 14
(Chippewa Falls, Wis.).

UNIV OF WISCONSIN,
EAU CLAIRE
University of Georgia,
Libraries, Hargrett Rare
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ). Athens Klan #5 Book and Manuscript
(Athens, Ga.)
Library, Athens GA
University of Maryland,
Archives and Manuscripts
Ku Klux Klan. Klan No. 51, Mt.
Department, College Park
Rainier, Maryland
MD
University of Memphis,
Special Collections /
Mississippi Valley
Collection, McWherter
Ku Klux Klan ((1915- ))
Library, Memphis TN
University of Oregon,
Ku Klux Klan (1915- ) Tillamook, Or., Knight Library, Special
Chapter No. 8
Collections, Eugene OR

Ku Klux Klan
Bayfield Ku Klux Klan Collection

Minutes of
meetings

0.2 c.f. (5
folders)

Membership and
financial records

2.5 linear ft.,
3068 items

Minutes

0.5 ft. or 5 ft.
(two listings
differ)

Miscellaneous
papers

1 box

Membership
records

1.25 linear ft.
(4 containers)

University of Tulsa,
McFarlin Library, Tulsa OK Membership list
Fort Lewis College,
Membership
Colorado
Records

140 (11x17)
printed pages
.8 linear ft.

