                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               RISKS AND PRICES:
               THE ROLE OF USER SANCTIONS IN MARIJUANA MARKETS

                                       Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                            Beau Kilmer
                                         Michael Grossman
                                         Frank J. Chaloupka

                                        Working Paper 13415
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13415


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




This research was supported by grant number 49977 from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to
the National Bureau of Economic Research. A version of this paper was presented at the International
Society for the Study of Drug Policy, the International Health Economics Association 5th World Congress,
the NBER Summer Institute, and the Association of Public Policy and Management Conference. We
appreciate helpful comments received by Martin Bouchard, Jon Caulkins, Isaac Ehrlich, Mark Kleiman,
Peter Reuter, Jody Sindelar, Neeraj Sood, and participants at all of these conferences. This paper has
not undergone the review accorded official National Bureau of Economic Research Publications; in
particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of Directors. All opinions expressed
in the paper are those of the authors and should neither be attributed to the funding source, nor the
mentioned institutions, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Beau Kilmer, Michael Grossman, and Frank J. Chaloupka. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risks and Prices: The Role of User Sanctions in Marijuana Markets
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Beau Kilmer, Michael Grossman, and Frank J. Chaloupka
NBER Working Paper No. 13415
September 2007
JEL No. I18,K42

                                               ABSTRACT

User sanctions influence the legal risk for participants in illegal drug markets. A change in user sanctions
may change retail drug prices, depending on how it changes the legal risk to users, how it changes
the legal risk to dealers, and the slope of the supply curve. Using a novel dataset with rich transaction-level
information, this paper evaluates the impact of recent changes in user sanctions for marijuana on marijuana
prices. The results suggest that lower legal risks for users are associated with higher marijuana prices
in the short-run, which ceteris paribus, implies higher profits for drug dealers. Additionally, the findings
have important implications for thinking about the slope of the supply curve and interpreting previous
research on the effect of drug laws on demand for marijuana.

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula                                Michael Grossman
RAND                                                   City University of New York Graduate Center
1776 Main Street                                       365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
P.O. Box 2138                                          New York, NY 10016-4309
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                            and NBER
and NBER                                               mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
pacula@rand.org
                                                       Frank J. Chaloupka
Beau Kilmer                                            University of Illinois, Department of Economics
RAND                                                   College of Business Administration
1776 Main Street                                       601 S. Morgan Street, Room 2103
P.O. Box 2138                                          Chicago, IL 60607-7121
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                            and NBER
kilmer@rand.org                                        fjc@uic.edu
       Over 25 million Americans consumed marijuana in 2005 and there have been over 4
million arrests for marijuana possession since 2000 (SAMHSA, 2006; FBI, annual). Given its
popularity and the widespread belief that its harms are low relative to other illicit substances, a
significant debate has continued regarding marijuana policy reform in the United States and
abroad (MacCoun & Reuter, 2001). The only successful policy reforms that have come out of
the recent debate involve modified sanctions facing users. Canada, Germany, Great Britain,
Portugal, and Spain have all recently adopted policies that dramatically reduce the penalties and
sanctions faced by users of marijuana (Hall and Pacula, 2003). Even in the United States there
has been a softening of sanctions toward individuals caught in possession of small amounts of
marijuana in many states (Chriqui et al., 2002; Pacula et al., 2003).
       A modest literature has developed examining how these small differences in sanctions
observed across states in the United States are correlated with differences in marijuana use
(Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999; Farrelly et al., 2001; Pacula et al., 2003; Williams et al, 2004).
Many studies find that lower sanctions, typically indicated through reduced jail time and lower
fines, are associated with greater use although the effect sizes are small and occasionally
insignificant. The small or insignificant effect may be explained by one of three possibilities.
First, the policies may truly have little impact on demand, especially if enforcement is negligible.
Second, people may not be aware of the sanctions or if they have changed, again suggesting that
the policies will not affect demand (Pacula, et al., 2005). Third, if supply is upward sloping as
with other normal goods there could be an offsetting price effect that reduces the net effect of the
policies observed in analyses.
       This paper considers this last possibility by examining the role of user sanctions in
marijuana markets and whether changes in these sanctions, believed to shift demand, influence
the prices paid by users in local markets. Economic theory suggests that price will be affected by
demand side policies if supply is upward sloping, a perfectly reasonable assumption for
marijuana. To date virtually no work has been done examining the slope of the supply curve for
marijuana, presumably due to lack of reliable data given the illegal nature of the good. However,
it is possible to infer basic information on the slope of the supply curve by understanding how
shifts in the demand for marijuana influence the equilibrium level of prices observed in the
market.
        In this paper, we use rich transaction-level information from recent marijuana purchases
made by arrestees who are part of the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) Program to
estimate the impact of state marijuana policies on self-reported price per bulk gram paid. We
first develop a model focused exclusively on proximal measures of transaction risk, and then use
natural variation in state marijuana laws over time and within states to evaluate the impact of
these demand-side policies on the equilibrium prices of marijuana observed in illegal markets.
Because it is possible that demand-side policies influence sellers’ risk as well, we test the
robustness of our findings with respect to these state-policies by considering the impact of other
demand shifters on price, in particular the beer tax. The sensitivity analyses support the
interpretation that reductions in user risk raise price. There are three implications of these
findings. First, the findings support the conclusion that marijuana use is sensitive to changes in
the legal risks targeting users. A reduction in sanctions will increase use of marijuana. Second,
the supply of marijuana is upward sloping at least in the short run, implying that temporary
shortages caused by a reduction in supply or an increase in demand will impact market price.
Third, shortages caused by shifts in demand (such as that generated by a reduction in user
sanctions) will raise sellers’ profits, ceteris paribus.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we provide some
background literature about state marijuana laws, the operation of marijuana markets, and
marijuana prices. In Section 3 we discuss how policies targeting users of marijuana might
influence marijuana prices under alternative assumptions about supply. In Section 4 we discuss
the data used for this analysis and present our empirical model in Section 5. Section 6 presents
the results from these models and in Section 7 we offer some discussion and conclusion.


1.0     Marijuana Laws, Markets and Price
1.1     State marijuana laws
        Even though the U.S. federal government retains a strict prohibition on the possession of
even small amounts of marijuana, there is significant variation across the states in the legal
penalties associated with this offense (Pacula et al., 2003; Chriqui et al., 2001). Given that the
majority of marijuana possession offenses are tried in state courts, state law applies (Ostrom and
Kauder, 1999). The proportion of these arrests leading to conviction is unknown, but those
convicted of marijuana possession are often sentenced to probation and/or a fine, not jail



                                                    4
(MacCoun & Reuter, 2001; National Research Council, 2001; Office of National Drug Control
Policy, 2005).1 Although twelve states are generally recognized as having “decriminalized”2
possession of small amounts of marijuana, fifteen states have actually eliminated criminal
sanctions associated with it and another twenty-six states have conditional discharge provisions
for first time offenders (Pacula et al., 2003).3
        A significant literature has developed in recent years demonstrating that consumption of
marijuana by youths and young adults is sensitive to changes in the legal penalties associated
with possession of marijuana (e.g., Farrelly et al., 2001; Pacula et al, 2003; Williams, 2004).
Presumably, this effect is due to the fact that lower penalties reduce the legal risk if caught in
possession of marijuana. However, implicit in this interpretation is the assumption that people
are actually aware of these reduced sanctions and are responding to them. Aggregate data from
the 2001 National Survey on Drug Use or Health linked to information on state laws suggests
this may not be the case. Pacula and colleagues (2005) show that nearly one-third of household
respondents report that they do not know what the maximum penalty is for possession of an
ounce of marijuana in their state and just over another third report that mandatory or possible jail
time was the maximum penalty when they lived in a state that did not impose any jail for
offences involving small amounts of marijuana. The authors could not examine knowledge of
laws by use rate using the aggregate data so it is not entirely clear that these low correlations are
indicative of a lack of knowledge among users. Nonetheless, they clearly indicate a lack of
knowledge in the general household population and suggest that an alternative interpretation for
the negative correlation between severity of penalties and use may be warranted. For example, it
may be the case that states that have adopted relatively lower penalties all share some
unobserved characteristics, such as a strong belief in personal liberties or normative values,
which are more favorable toward using marijuana. Alternatively, it may be the case that these
policies targeting users also inadvertently influence the risk to sellers so that lower penalties
facing users translates into a reduced risk to sellers and thus lower marijuana prices. Given that


1 MacCoun and Reuter make this claim and footnote: “This statement is a conjecture since no data sets allow the
tracking of misdemeanor arrests to sentence. It accords with the impressions of officials and researchers in many
jurisdictions” (343).
2 While decriminalization is common in the literature, we think depenalization is the more accurate term to describe
these legal changes. See MacCoun and Reuter (2001, Chapter 5) and Pacula et al. (2005) for expositions of the
distinction.
3 Appendix I presents the depenalization and medicalization policies for the 29 states included in our analysis.



                                                         5
our information on marijuana prices is relatively poor, many studies have not controlled for
marijuana prices when evaluating the effect of these policies on demand and thus the coefficient
on the policy variable reflects the net effect (direct effect and potentially off-setting indirect
effect).
           Medical marijuana provisions represent another area of state policy in which there has
been substantial change in recent years (see Appendix I). As is the case with sanctions targeting
users, state medical marijuana laws have the potential of influencing both the supply and the
demand for marijuana within the state. Although it is believed that the medical marijuana market
is relatively small (GAO, 2002; MPP 2006, Appendix F) and diversion from a relatively small
medicinal market to a very large recreational market would normally not be expected to have any
real impact on black market supply, current provisions for medicinal marijuana are extremely
vague in terms of how patients are allowed to obtain marijuana. Nine state statutes allow for
home cultivation, while several others remain silent or allow patients to obtain marijuana through
“any means necessary” (Pacula et al., 2002). Large-scale diversion can easily occur in
environments such as these where the government or some other oversight agency does not
closely monitor the production and distribution of marijuana for medicinal purposes. More
importantly, such ambiguity regarding source of supply creates legitimacy for illegal suppliers,
who become the only source of marijuana for individuals unable or unwilling to grow their own.
This legitimacy may translate into a reduction in the risk of supplying marijuana to the black
market and a reduction in the monetary price.
           Medicinal marijuana laws could also influence the demand for recreational marijuana
through one of three alternative mechanisms: (1) a change in the legal risk to users of marijuana,
(2) a change in the perceived harm associated with using marijuana, and (3) an increase in the
social availability. States with medical necessity defenses allow individuals who have received
permission from a physician to use marijuana for medicinal purposes without risk of prosecution.
Thus, these policies directly influence the legal risk of users who obtain medicinal allowances,
although this is expected to be a very small segment of the population (GAO, 2002). Second,
attitudes and perceptions of marijuana as a harmful drug, which numerous studies have identified
as an important correlate with drug use (Bachman et al., 1998; Pacula et al., 2001), are likely to
be diminished by policies recognizing its medicinal value because these allowances formally
recognize that marijuana can have a beneficial impact on one’s health, at least in some



                                                   6
circumstances. Finally, medicinal allowances might also influence the social availability of
marijuana by increasing the number of social encounters in which youths are around individuals
who have used or are using marijuana. Social availability can be further increased if teenagers
live in households or near homes where patients and/or their caregivers are growing marijuana,
as it is possible for them to share or steal the drug.
1.2     Marijuana Markets
        Unlike the markets for cocaine and heroin, marijuana markets are relatively understudied
and not well understood. Although ethnographic information provides insights about how
particular markets operate (ONDCP, 2004), very little work has been done modeling marijuana
markets in general and virtually nothing is known about supply. This is perhaps due to the fact
that the primary source of information used to evaluate other drug markets, the Drug
Enforcement Agency’s System To Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE), is
severely limited in two important ways when it comes to marijuana markets. First, unlike
observations for cocaine, heroin and other drugs included in the STRIDE database, marijuana is
not chemically assayed when purchased or seized by agents. Thus, the STRIDE database does
not contain any information on marijuana purity or quality. Second, marijuana purchase
observations in STRIDE are highly concentrated in a single city, Washington, DC. These two
factors make the STRIDE data relatively less useful for examining the dynamics of these
markets.
        Data sources providing systematic information on markets geographically dispersed
across the nation have begun to emerge, although none contain information on purity and all of
the information is obtained from a buyer’s perspective. The National Survey on Drug Use and
Health (NSDUH; formally, the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA)) has been
collecting information from marijuana users on their experiences in marijuana markets since
2001 and the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) Program has been asking arrestees
about their last purchase since 2000. Both surveys ask respondents about their drug use
behavior, and among recent marijuana users, their methods and circumstances for procuring the
drug. In a recent analysis of the 2001 NHSDA data, Caulkins and Pacula (2006) show that most
respondents who report use of marijuana in the past year obtain marijuana indoors (87 percent),
from a friend or relative (89 percent), and for free (58 percent). Among those who do buy their
marijuana, these purchases generally involve small quantities (less than 10 grams), are acquired



                                                   7
from a friend (79 percent), and are exchanged indoors (62 percent). Similar transaction
characteristics are reported by youth (SAMHSA, 2003) and arrestees (Taylor et al., 2001) and
are consistent with evidence obtained from ethnographic studies (ONDCP, 2004). Thus it seems
clear that marijuana markets function differently than that of cocaine and heroin markets
(Caulkins et al., 1999; Caulkins and Reuter, 1998; Caulkins, 1997). Most notably, open air
markets and purchases from strangers are generally rare as compared to other drugs (ONDCP,
2004), suggesting that standard street methods of drug enforcement (undercover buys and
patrolling the streets) might not be as effective at deterring marijuana transactions. However,
Caulkins and Pacula identify at least two similarities between marijuana markets and other illicit
drug markets. First, they find evidence of quantity discounts in marijuana markets, so that
people who buy in larger quantities pay less per gram than those who buy in smaller quantities.
Second, they find that a minority of users account for the vast majority of purchases.
1.3    Marijuana Prices
       There is substantial ethnographic evidence of large geographic differences in the black
market price of marijuana (ONDCP, 2002; 2004). For example, information reported in a recent
summary of ethnographic studies conducted by the Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) shows that an ounce of commercial-grade marijuana in Phoenix, Arizona and San
Diego, California sold for between $60-$100, while an ounce of commercial-grade marijuana in
New York City and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania sold for between $100-$200 in Fall 2002
(ONDCP, 2004). A number of factors could generate this sort of variation including differences
in the cost of production (particularly labor, given that this is a labor-intensive commodity),
regional differences in quality, transportation costs, imperfect information, search costs, and
differential risks to buyers and sellers participating in the market.
       Only two studies empirically examine the role of specific factors on the prices paid for
marijuana. In an early study, Caulkins (1995) examines data from nine states reported in the
Middle Atlantic-Great Lakes Organized Crime Law Enforcement Network (MAGLOCLEN) and
tests two conjectures about how prices vary from location to location within the United States.
The first conjecture is that prices increase as one moves away from the source, which in the case
of marijuana is largely domestic. The second conjecture is that prices are lower in larger
markets, as proxied by population. He examines these hypotheses by evaluating prices for
cocaine, LSD, and marijuana. In the case of marijuana, Caulkins only finds support for the first



                                                  8
hypothesis. The mean price per bulk gram paid for marijuana got statistically higher as the cities
got more distant from the mid-west /Appalachian growing region. These results, however, are
based on a very limited number of price observations (fewer than 60 in total) that were not
representative of all transactions within these states. Thus, although they are suggestive that
transportation costs might explain some of the geographic variation in marijuana prices, the
evidence cannot be viewed as definitive.
       Caulkins and Pacula (2006) evaluate how differences in transaction-level characteristics
influencing individual buyers’ and sellers’ risk correlate with the self-reported price paid per
bulk gram of marijuana using data from the 2001 NSDUH. Transaction-specific characteristics
evaluated in the models include from whom they purchased (a friend, relative or stranger), where
they purchased (inside a private dwelling, inside a public building, outside, or some other
location), and proximity to home (near where they live). They find that, contrary to intuition, the
quantity-adjusted self-reported price per bulk gram is positively associated with purchases made
in private dwellings. Purchases made outside or inside public buildings were associated with
lower prices on average. They also find no association between whom they purchased from and
price paid. Given that the public use data contain no geographic information, their analyses
could not account for location-specific factors. Thus, the authors interpret this counter-intuitive
finding as potentially reflecting omitted variable biases caused by unmeasured quality or local
intensity of enforcement.
       Although it is possible that imperfect information and variation in search costs,
transportation costs, production costs and quality generate some of the geographic variability in
price, it seems implausible that variation in any of these factors could generate the substantial
differences in marijuana street prices that are currently observed across cities. To understand the
relative importance of geographic differences in production/distribution costs versus the
economic value of risks incurred, it is useful to consider the cost of producing a pound of
marijuana in a legal market. If marijuana were legal, then the cost of producing a pound of dried
marijuana, which according to federal agents is approximately equivalent to the yield of a single
plant during one growing season, would simply be the fixed cost of obtaining the plant
(depreciated over the lifetime of the plant) plus the maintenance cost of caring for the plant
(labor, soil, good lighting, water, and nutrients or pesticides if grown outside). These are the
exact same inputs needed to grow any other agricultural product, such as tomatoes or oranges,



                                                 9
which can be grown in a home garden or through mass production in certain areas.4 The trick
with growing marijuana is identifying and separating the female plants from the male plants.
Female plants, which contain the more potent THC, can be easily determined once a plant
matures to a certain stage (e.g. it starts to bud).
         Given that mass production of marijuana is not allowed today, we will consider the cost
of producing marijuana in a small home garden to keep the comparison fair, although it should
be recognized that mass production would allow for economies of scale that are not achieved
through home production.5 Today, a young fruit tree (showing buds) can be purchased at a
nursery for approximately $50 while sufficient soil, nutrients, pesticides, and water for a single
growing season could be purchased for less than $25. Carrying this analogy forward and
assuming that marijuana plants produce buds only once (one growing season) and the total labor
cost involved in caring for the plant is slightly more than $100 (a maximum of 20 hours of labor
x $5.15 minimum wage), we estimate that the maximum legal price for a pound of marijuana
would be less than $200.6 Ethnographic data suggest that a low-end price for a pound of
commercial grade marijuana fell in the range of $500-$700 (ONDCP, 2004). Thus, even
relatively low prices of marijuana are substantially higher than the back-of-the-envelope
production cost estimate for a product being produced in a relatively low-scale effort. Even if
we add to this the cost of transporting the drug, it is improbable that the cost of legal marijuana
would come anywhere near its black market price (Kleiman, 1989; 1992).




4 It is important to note that marijuana is a weed that grows naturally in several parts of the country, and hence the
analogy to a home garden is not as far a field as might otherwise be considered. Of course the quality of THC from
a female plant grown in the wild is likely to be inferior to plants that receive special care and attention.
5 We owe credit for insights regarding the differentiation of growing at home versus in mass production to Jonathan
Caulkins.
6 The total labor time involved may be greater than twenty hours, and larger estimates could be inserted without
detracting from the point of the argument. This estimate assumes that the opportunity cost of someone’s time is the
federal minimum wage, which may under estimate the opportunity cost of some individuals with better employment
opportunities.


                                                         10
2.0      Theoretical Framework
2.1      Supply and Demand Analysis
         The impact of changing user sanctions on price depends on how it influences user and
seller risk as well as one’s assumptions about supply. Assumptions about supply are necessary
as no empirical analyses examining the elasticity of supply have been conducted, so theories
develop based on alternative plausible assumptions (e.g. Becker, Murphy, and Grossman, 2006).
         If the supply of marijuana is perfectly competitive or one presumes a relatively short run
adjustment period, then it is appropriate to think of the supply function as infinitely elastic. If
state depenalization or medicalization policies truly only affect the user’s risk of using marijuana
and not the enforcement or risks to sellers, then adoption of these policies should not influence
the monetary price of marijuana.
         If we assume supply is upward sloping, there are two mechanisms by which lowering the
user sanctions could increase the retail price. First, increase use due to lower penalties could
shift the demand curve to the right and subsequently increase the price at least in the short run.
Second, if relaxing user sanctions causes police officers to spend more time targeting marijuana
sellers, then the subsequent increase in seller risk could cause the supply curve to shift in,
resulting in higher prices. However, there is also reason to believe that relaxing user sanctions
will actually lower the legal risk to sellers. This could happen if, for example, marijuana
depenalization policies reduce the likelihood that police pursue low-end marijuana transactions
or if sellers are able to pass themselves off as users rather than sellers (by carrying less with them
and selling smaller consumption bundles). There is some evidence suggesting that retail dealers
are aware of the differential penalties and willing to use them to reduce their own legal
consequences. Sevigny and Caulkins (2004) report that 20% of state inmates in prison on
charges for drug possession (or possession with intent to sale) actually self-report being retail
sellers7 Thus, the net impact of lower sanctions on equilibrium prices is theoretically ambiguous.
         If we assume supply is downward sloping,8 lower user sanctions can only lead to higher
retail prices if it leads to a net increase in the legal risk to sellers. Therefore, if we hold the legal



7 From authors’ calculation of numbers presented in Table 1b.
8 It has been argued that for a given level of enforcement, an increase in the number of suppliers reduces the relative
risk facing any single supplier in the market, suggesting that the supply curve for any illicit substance is actually
downward sloping rather than upward sloping (Reuter and Kleiman, 1986).


                                                          11
risk to sellers constant we should anticipate that a reduction in penalties should lead to a lower
equilibrium price.
         Findings of the impact of relaxing user penalties on equilibrium prices can therefore
provide insight into the slope of the marijuana supply curve. If relaxing penalties leads to no
change in prices, then the supply curve is either perfectly elastic or upward sloping (assuming
seller risks are also affected by this change). If relaxing penalties lowers equilibrium prices,
supply is either downward sloping or upward sloping (which assumes the decline in sellers’ risks
is greater than the decline in buyers’ risks). If relaxing penalties leads to a higher equilibrium
price, then the supply curve for marijuana must be upward sloping.


2.2      Modeling the Price of Marijuana
         We begin with a simple model of the market price for marijuana (Pjt):
(1)      Pjt = P(Djt, Sjt),
where Djt and Sjt represent local market demand and supply in jurisdiction j at time t. Both
supply and demand will depend on the legal risk in the jurisdiction (Ljt) as well as other factors.
The supply of marijuana, for example, will depend on the legal risk of selling marijuana in
jurisdiction j at time t (LSjt), the cost of producing and transporting the marijuana (Xjt), and the
size of the market (Cjt): 9
(2)      Sjt = S(LSj,(ACjt, SPjt), Xjt, Cjt).
The legal risk of selling marijuana in jurisdiction j at time t is presumed to be a function of the
risk of getting caught (ACjt) and the penalties imposed on sellers if caught (SPjt). Because
information on the size of the marijuana market is not readily available, we will approximate the
size of the market (Cjt) using a vector of community-level demographic and socio-economic
variables that are known to be correlated with demand. Demand for marijuana in jurisdiction j at
time t can be further specified as:
(3)      Djt = D(Pjt, LDjt (ACjt, PPjt), Cjt),




9 Supply is currently specified presuming that individual firms are not price takers (i.e., it is not a perfectly
competitive market). Given the barriers to entry in the market and the ability to differentiate products, this seems
plausible although we recognize it is an empirical question that is currently unanswered due to insufficient data on
all aspects of production and the number of firms.


                                                         12
where LDjt represents the legal risks facing the user of marijuana in jurisdiction j at time t, which
is itself a function of the probability of getting arrested and the severity of penalties facing
buyers if caught (PPjt). The vectors Pjt and Cjt are defined above.
         A unique feature of drug markets, however, is that a single market price is never
observed in a given jurisdiction, as currently indicated by equation (1). One reason for the lack
of uniformity in price within particular markets is that there are unique risks associated with each
individual transaction (Rijt) generated by particular decisions made by the buyers and sellers.
Although the transaction-specific risks may be associated with the legal risks of buying or selling
a drug in market j, there are some independent factors that can be represented as follows:
(4)      Rijt = R(Tijt, Iijt, LSjt , LDjt),
where Tijt is a vector of variables capturing where and how the transaction took place (e.g.
indoors, outdoors, contacted by phone, contacted on the street) for bundle i in jurisdiction j at
time t, and I represents the information that the buyer and seller have about each other (strangers,
friends, acquaintances), including observable characteristics of each other. In addition to
capturing an important part of the legal sanction associated with the transaction, vectors T and I
reasonably capture the non-legal risks associated with a black market transaction (e.g., risk of
robbery, risk of being swindled). To reflect this idiosyncratic risk associated with individual
exchanges, we modify equation (1) as follows:
(5)      Pijt = P(Rijt Djt, Sjt).
         Substituting Eqs. (2) - (4) into Eq. (5) gives us the following reduced form equation for
the price of marijuana for a specific transaction:
(6)      Pijt = P(Tijt, Iijt, ACjt, SPjt, PPjt, Xjt, Cjt).10
         Fundamentally, we are interested in determining whether the vector of penalties that are
intended to influence users (PPjt) are found to be important attributes of the monetary price of
marijuana after controlling for all of the other factors that can influence the price for a specific
bundle. In this analysis, we have several different measures of the penalties that we wish to
consider. First, we will examine the fines and allowances for conditional discharge associated




10 An implicit assumption of this model, as specified here, is that the risk of arrest is the same for the buyer and
seller. In the empirical analysis, we will approximate the buyers’ and sellers’ risks of arrests separately, but for ease
of exposition we group them together here.


                                                           13
with possession of small amounts of marijuana. Then we will examine the penalties associated
with the use and provision of medical marijuana.
3.0     Data
        Information about marijuana transactions is obtained from the Arrestee Drug Abuse
Monitoring (ADAM) Program (formerly Drug Use Forecasting System). From 1987 to 2003,
the U.S. Department of Justice interviewed arrestees in urban booking facilities about their drug
use patterns as well as tested them for drug use.11 The purpose of the study is to provide local
law enforcement and other local officials with reliable estimates of the prevalence of drug abuse
and related problems in the population of arrestees in their jurisdiction. ADAM sites were
originally selected through applications from those jurisdictions interested in participating, but
the number of sites increased substantially from 24 in 1996 to 43 in 2003. ADAM data
collection takes place four times a year at each site, usually for one or two weeks per calendar
quarter. Arrestees are approached within 48 hours of their arrest and asked to participate in the
study. Although participation in ADAM is strictly voluntary, response rates hover around 80 to
90 percent (U.S. Department of Justice, 2000).
        From 2000 to 2003, questions about recent drug purchases (i.e., how the dealer was
contacted, relationship with dealer, location of transaction) were included to capture information
about local drug markets. To isolate the effect of penalties on the price paid for marijuana, we
limit the analysis sample in three important ways. First, we exclude transactions where the
marijuana was obtained with means other than cash, such as property or sex. Second, because
the penalties we are examining are only for possession of small amounts of marijuana, we only
include transactions where an ounce or less was purchased. In this way, we are able to isolate
the effect of penalties on the retail transactions they are meant to influence. Third, we only
consider transactions where the amount purchased was reported in grams and ounces since we
have no way of converting “joints”, “bags”, and “packets” to grams.
        State-level data on marijuana penalties and medicalization laws were collected by
lawyers and policy analysts at The MayaTech Corporation (See Pacula, Chriqui, & King, 2003
for a detailed description of the data collection procedures).12 Detailed information on the



11Most of these individuals were arrested for non-drug offenses.
12We also used data Marijuana Policy Project (2006) for information about the implementation of medicalization
laws in 2002 and 2003.


                                                       14
statutory implementation of the depenalization policies is available for the first three quantity
amounts specified in each law. In this analysis we use information on state statutory fines and
conditional discharge provisions for possession offences involving 10 grams or less of
marijuana.13 We limit our analysis to those arrestees who live in states where the maximum fine
for possessing and selling marijuana is statutorily defined.
         The type of medicalization provision is important because it indicates the number of
patients likely to be affected by the provision as well as the legal rights. Therapeutic research
program provisions and rescheduling laws are generally viewed as more restrictive as they are
passive laws and do not provide active defenses to patients except if use is federally sanctioned.
The physician recommendation laws and medical necessity defenses provide greater protection
to patients and potentially a larger number of patients might be affected.
         These statutory laws represent one dimension of the legal risk of buying and selling
drugs. Another dimension is the degree of law enforcement in the area in which the drugs are
sold. To proxy this enforcement risk, we divide the number of marijuana arrests (for possession
and sales separately) by the total number of arrests at the county-level. These arrest data are
pulled from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), which collects and reports information on
the number of arrests and crimes reported to the police for every city in the country. While the
shortcomings of these data are well documented (e.g. O’Brien, 1985; Maltz and Targonski,
2002), they remain the only national source of geographically disaggregated crime and arrest
data in the United States.14
         These ratios capture the relative importance of marijuana enforcement to police officers
in the county and have been used in other studies (e.g., Farrelly et al., 2001; Pacula et al., 2003).
While the ideal measure to capture enforcement would be possession arrests per unit of
consumption, annualized consumption information is not available at the county level.
DeSimone and Farrelly (2003) demonstrate with data from the 1990-1997 National Household
Surveys on Drug Abuse that the effect of the probability of arrest on self-reported use rates for


13 States are classified as allowing conditional discharge if completion of the terms or conditions translate into a
complete dismissal of charges.
14 Despite problems with county-level UCR data from ICPSR and how they have been used (Maltz & Targonski,
2002), we are comfortable using them for this analysis of large urban counties. Not only do we only consider the
period after the ICPSR changed the imputation strategy, we also exclude observations from jurisdictions with a
coverage indicator score less than 70. The coverage indicator is an indicator of the quality of the data made available
to the FBI and ranges from 0 (no information) to 100 (complete information).


                                                          15
adults is negative regardless of whether they denominated by number of users or number of
Index I arrests. Thus, we believe marijuana arrests as a fraction of all arrests in a county is a
reasonable proxy for the probability of being arrested for possession.
        To capture differences across counties in the demand for marijuana and size of the market
(Jacobson, 2005), we merge data about county demographic and socio-economic characteristics.
Information on the demographics of the county population, such as age, race/ethnic categories,
percent male are obtained from the U.S. Census. Information pertaining to per capita income
and local unemployment rates are obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau
of Labor Statistics, respectively.
        Descriptive statistics about these enforcement variables, as well as information about
marijuana transactions and state penalties for the analytic sample employed here are reported in
Table 1. Because of the geographic dispersion of the ADAM sites, we see that the maximum
fine for possessing 10 grams of marijuana ranges from $100 to $150,000 in our analytic
sample.15 For this sample, the average nominal maximum fine is $16,401 and the median is
$500.16 Almost 88 percent of arrestees in the analysis sample live in states where possession of
10 grams can be conditionally discharged. We focus on fines and allowances for conditional
discharges because they have been shown to be correlated with demand in previous studies
(Farrelly et al., 2001; DeSimone and Farrelly, 2003; Pacula et al., 2003).
        Approximately 36 percent of the arrestees in the analysis sample live in states where
there is either a provision for physicians to recommend marijuana or allowance for a medical
necessity defense for those who use marijuana for medicinal purposes. There also appears to be
tremendous variation in the enforcement of marijuana laws across the ADAM counties. For
example, in 2000 over 10.5 percent of all arrests made in Douglas County, NE were for
marijuana possession; the equivalent figure for Bernalillo County, NM was less than 0.4 percent
(UCR, 2001).17
        With respect to the last marijuana purchase, roughly 49 percent of the sample bought
from their regular source, 35 percent bought from an occasional source, and 16 percent made the



15 Oklahoma does not have a maximum fine for possessing 10 grams and is not included in these calculations.
16 The average maximum fine decreases to $1,059 when observations from Arizona (where the maximum fine is
$150,000) are omitted.
17 These figures come from UCR, not ADAM. Surprisingly, ADAM does not report arrests by specific drug.



                                                      16
purchase from a new source. Most buyers contacted the dealer by making a phone call or going
to a house or apartment building. Approximately 60 percent of the transactions occurred in a
house, apartment, or public building and this is consistent with the claim that most marijuana
transactions do not occur in bustling street markets (Kleiman, 1992). The price paid per bulk
gram ranges from approximately $0.10 to $680, with the median and mean values being $4.44
and $10.19, respectively ($2004). This is strikingly similar to the price per bulk gram derived
from the Drug Enforcement Administration’s System to Retrieve Information from Drug
Evidence (2000-$9.21, 2001-$10.06, 2002-$11.65, 2003-$11.94; Caulkins et al., 2004).18
         Table 2 displays the mean prices paid per bulk gram by marijuana policy. Using data
from the entire sample, Panel A suggests that in states with more liberal marijuana laws
(conditional discharge, physician recommendation, decriminalization), arrestees pay more per
bulk gram for marijuana. Panel B examines the arrestees from three states that changed medical
marijuana policies during the sample period (Colorado, Hawaii, and Nevada). In almost every
case, the mean price paid was higher after the physician recommendation or medical necessity
law was enacted. But since only one of the three pairwise comparisons is statistically significant
at the 10 percent level, we cannot rule out that these differences are simply attributable to
chance. We also cannot rule out whether these differences are attributable to some other
confounding factor. This motivates the multivariate analyses.
4.0      Empirical Specifications
         To ensure the proper specification of our models with a skewed dependent variable (See
Figure 1), we adopt a strategy that involves the testing of both the conditional mean and mean-
variance relationship of our dependent variable (Deb, Manning and Norton, 2003). A Box-Cox
test is first used to determine the appropriate transformation of the dependent variables
dependent on our controls, and findings from these tests are confirmed using Pregibon’s link test
(Pregibon, 1980).19 Following these, we use a general linear model with a log link function:
(7)      E(PPGijt)=
      exp(δ0+Tijtδ1+ Iijtδ2 + ACjtδ3+ SPjtδ4 + PPjtδ5 + Cjtδ6 + Yeart δ7+ Quartert δ8 + Statejδ9 +μijt)


18 The average per bulk gram price for those responding to the National Household Survey on Drug Use was $5.45
in 2001 ($2004); Caulkins and Pacula, 2006). Since our ADAM analysis is limited to transactions <=1 ounce and
the NHSDA is not, we attribute this discrepancy to quantity discounting.
19 It is important to note that in running “linktest” in Stata is not always instructive. In these instances we rely
completely on the theta from the Box-Cox test, which for this analysis is always close to 0 (link=log).


                                                         17
where PPG is the real price per bulk gram paid at the last transaction, Year, Quarter, and State
represent a vector of dummy variables noting the year and quarter of the transaction and state
where it occurred, and μ is the residual. All other variables are as specified in Section 3.2.
         Once we identify the proper transformation of our dependent variables, we then
determine the relationship between the transformed dependent variable’s mean and its variance
using a modified Park test (1966).20 Based on the size of gamma (which is reported in the
tables), we specify the mean-variance relationship with the Gamma distribution:
(8)      V(PPGijt) = E(PPGijt2).
Since we are primarily interested in the significance of state policy variables, we cluster the
standard errors at the state-level to account for correlation among the residuals for arrestees in
the same state.
5.0 Results
         Table 3 models the real price per bulk gram of marijuana as a function of transaction-
level variables while controlling for time-invariant state-level characteristics. One main finding
is that arrestees who contact dealers by going to a private dwelling (house or apartment)
generally pay lower prices than those who contact a dealer in public (the omitted category).
This may represent differences in search costs in that people going to private dwellings may have
a particular dealer in mind, while those buying in public may be looking for an available dealer
(73% of those who contacted a dealer in public make the exchange outdoors). The coefficient on
contacting the dealer by other means is also negative and statistically different from zero.
         We find no association between the price paid per bulk gram and whether the sale took
place in the buyers’ neighborhood, contrary to results presented in Caulkins and Pacula (2006).
The differential results may be due to a difference in the populations examined (arrestees versus
a household sample) or may be due to our ability to account for regional market differences in
this analysis which went unaccounted for in the previous analysis.




20 To perform a modified Park test, one runs a generalized linear model of raw y on x with link(log) and
family(gamma), keeping both the residuals and the predicted value of y. Then one regresses the ln(residuals
squared) on ln(yhat) and a constant. The value of the coefficient on the ln(yhat) term, referred to here as “gamma”,
gives information regarding the nature of the relationship between the variance and the mean. For example, if the
coefficient is 0 (or not significantly different from zero), then it implies a Gaussian distribution (which has constant
variance). See Deb et al. (2003) for more.


                                                           18
       Table 4 presents the results from models that include penalties for possessing small
amounts of marijuana. Because we have virtually no variation in these penalties within states
during the time period being examined, state fixed effects are not included in the model and
results should not be interpreted as causal. Further, the first two columns exclude the vector of
county-level variables which 1) do not change much from 2000-2003 and 2) effectively identify
many of the states in our analysis sample since most states only include one ADAM site. Column
1 begins by specifying the model without factors that may be correlated with the risks buyers and
sellers face, such as arrest rates and sales penalties. We find that higher maximum fines (which
indicate higher legal costs to buyers and are associated with less use) are indeed associated with
lower prices. Furthermore, states that allow for dismissal of charges for first time offenders
(conditional discharge provisions that have been shown to be positively associated with
consumption among youth and young adults) are associated with higher prices. These
preliminary findings suggest that the legal risks to buyers may be important correlates of price.
       In Column 2 we include a measure of the real maximum fine associated with selling
small amounts of marijuana. It may be the case that states with tougher penalties on users are
also tougher on sellers, and hence associations in the previous two regressions merely reflect
unaccounted variation in sellers’ risks. However, the results in Column 2 suggest that this is not
the case as the inclusion of penalties for the sale of marijuana does not change the principal
findings for our possession penalties and the transaction-level variables. Columns 1 and 2 still
indicate that those who contacted the dealer at an apartment or home paid less while those who
made the purchase in a residence paid more than those who made the exchange inside a public
location.
       Column 3 includes the vector of county-level covariates along with the user penalties and
the maximum fine for selling. While the coefficient on conditional discharge remains positive
and highly significant, it becomes roughly 50 percent smaller. It is also important to note how
the coefficients on the maximum fines essentially change from Column 2 to Column 3. In
Column 2, the coefficient on the log of the real maximum fine for possession is -0.125 and
statistically significant while the coefficient on the log of the real maximum fine for selling is
statistically indistinguishable from 0. In Column 3, which includes the vector of county-level
variables, the possession fine increases to almost 0 (-0.008) and the selling fine is now -0.16 and
statistically significant at the one-percent level. The instability in the coefficients on these fine



                                                  19
measures is likely attributable to the fact that they do not vary and are correlated with the county
factors that also do not really change during our sample period.
         The ideal measure of the monetary fine associated with marijuana possession would be a
statistic generated from assigned fines instead of statutory maximums. However,
geographically-disaggregated data about conviction rates and assigned fines for marijuana
possession are simply not available. We use the statutory maximum as a proxy for the expected
fine associated with using and buying marijuana, but realize the limits of this approach when
using data from Arizona—which has a statutory maximum of $150,000 and accounts for almost
10% of our ADAM sample. Column 4 of Table 4 drops the 1,000 observations from Arizona
and not surprisingly, the maximum fine is no longer significant. Despite the smaller sample, the
coefficient on conditional discharge is still positive and significant. The remaining columns in
Table 4 exclude observations from Arizona.
         Next, we introduce an indicator variable for the 11 “decriminalization” states that
reduced criminal sanctions for marijuana possession in the 1970s.21 While recent research
suggests the traditional interpretation of this variable as a measure of the legal risk is wrong,
decriminalization status remains an important correlate of demand even when measures of the
legal risk are included in the analysis (Pacula, Chriqui, & King, 2003). One interpretation of the
robustness of the decriminalization variable to the inclusion of other measures of legal risk is that
this policy more accurately reflects unobserved differences in the enforcement of the policy or
differences in unobserved state sentiment toward marijuana. Another interpretation is that it is an
information effect in that users/potential users may see decriminalization as a clear signal of
weaker penalties, even if the penalties are not that different from states that have not
decriminalized. The coefficient on decriminalization in Column 5 is positive and significant and
does not minimize the practical and statistical significance of the conditional discharge variable.
In fact, the inclusion of decriminalization actually increases the coefficient on conditional
discharge. The fact that both conditional discharge and decriminalization are positively
associated with price lends further support to the conclusion that shifts in demand will influence
price. However, one cannot rule out the possibility that these policies might also influence risk
to sellers because of corresponding shifts in enforcement that accompany the policy itself.


21While Arizona is often referred to as a decriminalization state because of policy changes in 1996, it does not
matter for Columns 4-6 since observations from Arizona are excluded.


                                                         20
           Column 6 includes county-level enforcement measures from the Uniform Crime Reports.
These enforcement measures should provide a better approximation of the general enforcement
risk, and hence expected penalty, associated with any transaction. In addition, by including
measures of enforcement risk in the model, we can evaluate the impact of the demand-side
policies holding enforcement (at least arrest rates) constant. After including these variables, the
coefficients on conditional discharge and dealer contact remain statistically significant with
smaller absolute values. The negative sign on the ratio of marijuana possession arrests to all
arrests is consistent with the hypothesis that as expected sanction for possession increases, price
decreases via a shift in demand. While we find no significant association between sales arrests
on price per gram, it does make sense that the coefficient is positive.
           In general, Tables 3 and 4 support the notion that the market prices for marijuana are
sensitive to transaction risks. Moreover, the results in Table 4 are consistent with the hypothesis
that users’ risks, which are at least partially determined by demand-side policies regarding
possession penalties for marijuana, are also important correlates of equilibrium price. However,
there are at least two limitations of the analyses presented thus far. First, the results presented in
Table 4 are based entirely on cross-sectional variation in policies. Thus, unobserved state factors
that are correlated with penalties for possession of marijuana may be driving the associations in
Table 4 rather than a real penalty effect. Second, all of the state laws evaluated thus far could
also influence the risk faced by sellers if dealers can effectively hide themselves as users or if
enforcement of low-end marijuana transactions changes as a result of these policies.
           In light of these limitations, we also consider the influence of state medical marijuana
laws on equilibrium prices in Table 5. Unlike the penalties for possession, there has been some
variation in state medical marijuana laws within the states even within our short time period
being examined; thus, it is possible to include state fixed effects in our models that account for
other unobserved state factors that might be associated with the policy and price. Moreover,
state medical marijuana laws are supposed to create protection for medical users, but not provide
protection to drug dealers and organized marijuana sellers.
           Columns 1 through 7 of Table 5 include an indicator variable that equals 1 if the state
actively allows physician recommendation and/or medical necessity defense.22 This measure



22   See Appendix I for the list of states that allow physician recommendation and/or medical necessity defense.


                                                          21
captures policies that protect physicians and/or their patients from state prosecution for
discussing, recommending, or using marijuana as medicine. The models are first evaluated
excluding state fixed effects so that comparison with results in Table 4 can be directly made. In
Columns 3-4 other state penalty measures are included and in Columns 5-7 the enforcement
measures are incorporated. Across the board, the coefficient on physician recommendation/
medical necessity defense is positive and statistically significant. In the specification with state
fixed effects, enforcement controls, county-, transaction-, and individual-level characteristics
(Column 6), the results suggest that arrestees in states with active medical marijuana programs
pay $1.40 more for a gram of marijuana compared to arrestees in non-medical states.23
         In Column 7, the natural log of the county population is included as a regressor. This
provides another proxy for market demand and allows us to test Caulkins’s conjecture (1995)
and Jacobson’s (2005) finding that the price is lower in larger markets. The coefficient and
standard error on physician recommendation/medical necessity defense remains virtually
unchanged. The coefficient on county population is negative and statistically significant, thus
confirming the hypothesis that price per gram in lower in larger markets.
         Since laws that allow physicians to recommend marijuana or patients to use a medical
necessity defense will primarily influence consumers (rather than dealers),24 the positive
association with price suggests that the market supply curve for marijuana is upward sloping
because a change in demand leads to an increase in equilibrium prices. It is important to note,
however, that all states with recommendation/medical necessity laws also have provisions for
home cultivation. If allowances for home cultivation reduced the risk to sellers of producing
marijuana, then prices should fall holding other factors constant. But because we see an overall
positive effect of these policies on price, it suggests that the shift in demand exceeds the shift in
supply that could occur with a reduction in risk to sellers.
         Finally, to address any remaining concerns that sellers’ risk—instead of buyers’ risk—is
driving our results, Table 6 reports how the state beer tax is related to the price paid by arrestees.
Previous research finds a negative relationship between the beer tax and marijuana prevalence
(e.g., Pacula, 1997) and several studies find alcohol and marijuana to be economic complements



23$2004. This marginal effect was calculated with the mfx command in State 9.2.
24 It could reduce the risk to suppliers (e.g., of being informed on by users trying to reduce their legal costs) which
could again lead to an increase in supply and lower price, making the net price effect ambiguous.


                                                          22
in the United States (Farrelly et al., 1999; Pacula, 1998; Saffer & Chaloupka, 1999; Williams et
al., 2004). Since there is variation in the state beer tax during our analysis period, we can use
state-fixed effects to control for the unobservable state-level characteristics that influence
marijuana prices and do not change over time.25 In Column 1 we find a negative and statistically
significant relationship between the real beer tax and the real price paid per bulk gram,
suggesting that reducing demand for alcohol, and subsequently marijuana, reduces the
equilibrium price for marijuana. In Column 2 we include the marijuana enforcement variables
and the results do not change.
        In Column 3 we add in a vector of county-level demographic and economic
characteristics, and not surprising, the coefficient on the state beer tax is no longer significant
(the t-statistic is -1.25). As mentioned before, many of the states in our analysis sample only
include one ADAM site; thus, saturating the model with too many state- and county-level
variables will increase the standard error on the coefficient for the state beer tax (especially given
our short time frame and the minimal variation). It is reassuring, however, to note that the beer
tax coefficient remains negative as we would expect. So although not definitive, Table 6 does
provide additional support for the claim that the supply curve for marijuana is upward sloping.
6.0     Discussion
        This paper finds that variations in policies associated with user risk are associated with
variations in self-reported marijuana prices per gram. Results exploiting cross-sectional
variation in possession penalties suggest that states with lower penalties have higher prices due
to increased demand that more than offsets the effect on price of any increase in supply. This
provides new evidence that user sanctions can influence demand. Given the variation examined
is purely cross-sectional, the direction of causality is not entirely certain. Thus, we also examine
state medical marijuana laws and using within state temporal variation in the adoption of liberal
marijuana policies, we find evidence that policies aimed at users do in fact lead to changes in
prices in a fashion that is consistent with anticipated shifts in demand. Robustness checks that
examine changes in beer taxes generally, but not definitively, support the conclusion that supply
is upward sloping in these markets.




25Changes in Alaska in 2002, Nebraska in 2003, Nevada in 2003, New York in 2001 and 2003, Tennessee in 2002,
Utah in 2003 (Brewers Almanac)


                                                     23
           There are a number of plausible explanations for an upward sloping supply curve for
marijuana even in the long run. As was discussed previously and has been published elsewhere
(Kleiman, 1990; Reuter and Kleiman, 1986), a substantial fraction of the monetary price of
marijuana represents the economic value of risk associated with engaging in an illicit market.
Although it is frequently presumed in other areas of economics that producers are risk-neutral,
such a notion is inconsistent with empirical evidence showing that marijuana sellers receive large
compensation for incurring risk in bringing the drug to market. A more plausible assumption is
that producers of marijuana are not risk-neutral.26 If we further presume that the population of
potential suppliers to the market has heterogeneous risk preferences, it is easy to identify a
potential barrier to entry into this market - the risk premium. If the current monetary
compensation for incurring risk is relatively low, then some potential suppliers may choose to
stay out of the market. Only by increasing the risk premium (and hence monetary price of
supplying the good) will new suppliers decide to enter the market.
           An upward sloping supply curve could also exist if input prices rise with increases in
output. Although in legal markets rising input prices are relatively less common for agricultural
products, the illicit nature of the marijuana market means that suppliers need to compensate field
workers for the risk they incur participating in the production of an illegal good. If individuals
who make up the potential pool of laborers have heterogeneous preferences in risk, then it is
possible that input costs could rise with the level of production as those with the lower risk
preference will have to be paid a higher premium to be enticed to work in this market versus a
legal market. The extent to which heterogeneous risk preferences among potential laborers could
influence the cost of production depends on the distribution of high and low risk preferences in
the population of workers and the relative tax imposed on legitimate wages.
           There are a number of important caveats that need to be considered when interpreting
these results. First, the data that are employed in this study are drawn from a convenience
sample of what is presumed to be heavy and/or regular users who are frequently engaged in the
marijuana market. We do not know to what extent purchases described here are representative of
the full population of purchases made in the market. Furthermore, we only observe purchases
over a small window of time (16 quarters over the course of 4 years). However, these ADAM



26   Even if all suppliers are risk averse, the supply function will slope upwards if their risk premiums vary.


                                                            24
data do represent a very good source of information on marijuana prices in the U.S., as it is clear
that arrestees are frequent users who engage regularly in the market (Caulkins and Pacula, 2006).
       A second and perhaps more important limitation of the study is the lack of information on
the quality of marijuana. The omission of information on quality is clearly important because it
is possible that several transaction-specific characteristics that we interpret as indicative of risk
are also highly correlated with quality. To the extent that certain transaction patterns are highly
correlated with the quality of marijuana (e.g. high quality marijuana purchased indoors and only
sold to regular customers), then there may be some bias in interpreting the transaction
coefficients as measuring differences in risk. However, unless the quality of marijuana is
systematically correlated with state-level policies, it is not clear how the omission of quality
from this analysis could potentially bias the findings regarding the effect of state policies.
       While the finding of an upward sloping supply curve in marijuana markets may not be
surprising, it does have important implications for thinking about the impact of changing user
sanctions in illegal drug markets. First, it suggests that price effects may offset some of the
policy effects of reducing legal risk to users on demand. This helps us better understand the
small and sometimes statistically insignificant coefficients on policy variables in previous
demand analyses. Second, it suggests that lowering legal risks for users are associated with
higher marijuana prices, which ceteris parabis, implies higher profits for drug dealers in the
short-run. Evaluating the welfare and moral implications of increasing profits for dealers is
beyond the scope of this paper, but it is important to note that the increase in profits could lead to
a rise in the number of dealers in the long run if barriers to entry, such as heterogeneous risk
preferences across sellers, do not exist.




                                                  25
8.0    References

Bachman, J., Johnston, L., & O’Malley, P. (1998). Explaining recent increases in
     students’ marijuana use: Impacts of perceived risks and disapproval, 1976 through 1996.
     American Journal of Public Health, 88, 887-892.

Becker, G., Murphy K., & Grossman M. (2006). The economic theory of illegal goods: The
       case of drugs Journal of Political Economy 114 (1): 38-60.

Breusch, T., & Pagan, A. (1979). A simple test for heteroscedasticity and random
      coefficient variation. Econometrica, 47,1287-1294.

Caulkins, J. (1995). Domestic geographic variation in illicit drug prices. Journal of
       Urban Economics, 37, 38-56.

Caulkins, J. (1997). Modeling the domestic distribution network for illicit drugs. Management
       Science 43(10): 1364-1371.

Caulkins, J., Johnson, B., Taylor, A., & Taylor, L. (1999). What drug dealers tell us about
       their costs of doing business. Journal of Drug Issues, 29, 323-340.

Caulkins, J., & Pacula, R. (2006). Marijuana markets: Inferences from reports by
       the household population. Journal of Drug Issues, 36.

Caulkins, J., & Reuter, P. (1998). What price data tell us about drug markets? Journal of
       Drug Issues. 28, 593-612.

Chriqui, J., Pacula, R., McBride, D., Reichmann D., VanderWaal, C., & Terry-McElrath,
       Y. (2002). Illicit drug policies: Selected laws from the 50 states and the District of
       Columbia, Berrien Springs, MI: Andrews University.

Deb, P., Manning, W., & Norton, E. (2003). Modeling health care costs and counts.
       Pre-conference workshop held before the International Health Economics Association
       Meeting, San Francisco, CA. Unpublished.

DeSimone J., & Farrelly, M. (2003). Price and enforcement effects on cocaine and marijuana
     demand. Economic Inquiry, 44, 98-115.

Farrelly, M., Bray, J., Zarkin, G., & Wendling, B. (2001). The joint demand for
        cigarettes and marijuana: Evidence from the National Household Surveys on Drug
        Abuse. Journal of Health Economics, 20, 51-68.

Federal Bureau of Intelligence. (Annual). Crime in the United States. Washington, DC:
       U.S. Department of Justice.

General Accounting Office. (2002). Early experiences with four states’ laws that allow use for



                                                26
       medicinal purposes. Washington, DC: GAO.

Hall W. and R.L. Pacula. (2003). Cannabis Use and Dependence: Public Health and Public
      Policy. Melbourne, Australia: Cambridge University Press.

Jacobson M. (2005). Baby Booms and Drug Busts: Trends in Youth Drug Use in the United
       States 1975-2000. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4): 1481-1512.

Kleiman, M. (1989). Marijuana: Costs of abuse, costs of control. New York:
      Greenwood Press.

Kleiman, M. (1992). Against excess: Drug policy for results. New York: Basic Books.

MacCoun R. & Reuter P. (2001). Drug war heresies: Learning from other places, times,
     and vices. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Marijuana Policy Project (2006). State-by-state medical marijuana laws.
       http://www.mpp.org/site/c.glKZLeMQIsG/b.1086567/k.65F1/StateByState_Medical_Ma
       rijuana_Laws.htm

Maltz, M., & Targonski, J. (2002). A note on the use of county-level UCR data. Journal
       of Quantitative Criminology, 18, 297-318.

National Institute of Justice (2000). Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program (ADAM).
       Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.

National Research Council. (2001). Informing America's policy on illegal drugs: What
       we don't know keeps hurting us. Washington DC: National Academy Press.

O’Brien, R. (1985). Crime and Victimization Data. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). (2002). Pulse check: Trends in drug
       Abuse. Special topic: A look at local drug markets. Washington DC: ONDCP.

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). (2004). Pulse Check: Trends in drug
       abuse. Drug markets and chronic users in 25 of America's largest cities. Washington
       DC: ONDCP.

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). (2005). Who’s really in jail for
       marijuana? Washington DC: ONDCP.

Ostrom, B. and Kauder, N. (1999). Drug crime: The impact on state courts. National Center for
      State Courts Caseload Highlights, 5 (1).

Pacula, R., Chriqui, J., & King, J. (2003). Decriminalization in the United States:
        what does it mean? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 9690
        Cambridge, MA: NBER.


                                              27
Pacula, R., Chriqui, J., Reichman, D., & Terry-McElrath, Y. (2002). State medical
        marijuana laws: Understanding the laws and their limitations. Journal of Public Health
        Policy, 23, 413-439.

Pacula, R., Grossman, M., Chaloupka, F, O’Malley, P., Johnston, L., &. Farrelly, M. (2001)
        Marijuana and youth, in J. Gruber (Ed.), Risky behavior among youths: An economic
        analysis (pp. 193-191). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Pacula, R., MacCoun, R., Reuter, P., Chriqui, J., Kilmer, B., Harris, K., Paoli, L., & Schaefer,
  C. (2005). What does it mean to decriminalize marijuana? A cross-national empirical
  examination. B. Lindgren and M. Grossman (Eds) Advances in Health Economics and Health
  Services Research Vol. 16: Substance Use: Individual Behavior, Social Interactions, Markets
  and Politics. Elsevier Press.

Pregibon, D. (1980). Goodness of link tests for generalized linear models. Applied
       Statistics, 26, 15-24.

Reuter, P., & Kleiman, M. (1986). Risks and prices: An economic analysis of drug
       enforcement. In M. Tonry & N. Morris (Eds.) Crime and justice: An annual review of
       research, Vol 7, (128-179). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Saffer H., & Chaloupka, F. (1999). The demand for illicit drugs. Economic Inquiry
       37, 401-411.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). (2006).
       National household survey on drug abuse. Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). 2001.
       Obtaining marijuana easy for youths: The NHSDA report. Rockville, MD:
       National Institutes of Health.

Williams, J., Pacula, R., Chaloupka, F., & Wechsler, H. (2004). Alcohol and cannabis
       use among college students: Economic complements or substitutes?” Health Economics,
       13, 825-843.




                                                28
                                         Table 1.
    Summary statistics for ADAM arrestees who purchased <=1oz marijuana with cash only

                                                 Variable     Obs.     Mean     Std. Dev.     Min.       Max.
        Conditional discharge allowed for possessing 10g     10370   0.879267   0.325832        0           1
              Nominal maximum fine for possessing 10g        9708    16401.29   45297.62       100      150000
                Classified as a "decriminalization" state    10370   0.506461   0.499982        0           1
                  Nominal maximum fine for selling 10g       9984    49410.8    106000.7       100      500000
         Physician recommendation or medical necessity       10370   0.355641    0.47873        0           1
                Current Therapeutic Research Program         10370   0.422758   0.494022        0           1
                                        Nominal beer tax     10370   0.25068    0.184921       0.06       1.07
         MJ possession arrests/All arrests (FBI-CI>=70)      8579    0.046083   0.024306    0.001656   0.123499
               MJ sales arrests/All arrests (FBI-CI>=70)     8579    0.004946   0.003898     0.0003    0.027496
                                Nominal transaction cost     10370   46.14262   78.58991        1        4500
                                  Total grams purchased      10370   10.23567   9.380081       0.05      28.35
                Real price per bulk gram (1982-84=100)       10370   5.393351   15.58225    0.059752   361.3777
                     Purchased in buyer's neighborhood       10370   0.400675   0.490059        0           1
                          Purchased from regular source      10370   0.487175    0.49986        0           1
                       Purchased from occasional source      10370   0.34783    0.476305        0           1
                           Purchased from a new source       10370   0.164995   0.371194        0           1
                    Contacted dealer: By phone or page       10370   0.43163    0.495327        0           1
                  Contacted dealer: Go to house or apt.      10370   0.236741   0.425102        0           1
                Contacted dealer: Approached in public       10370   0.200675   0.400525        0           1
                        Contacted dealer: Other method       10370   0.130955   0.337367        0           1
             Purchase location: In a house or apartment      10370   0.608197   0.488177        0           1
                      Purchase location: Public--Indoors     10370   0.12189    0.327175        0           1
                    Purchase location: Public--Outdoors      10370   0.269913   0.443936        0           1
                                                     Male    10370   0.923722   0.265455        0           1
                                            Age 20 or less   10370   0.224976   0.417587        0           1
                                              Age 21 to 25   10370   0.282642   0.450306        0           1
                                              Age 26 to 35   10370   0.293057   0.455186        0           1
                                          Age 36 or more     10370   0.199325   0.399512        0           1
                                                    White    10370   0.478206   0.499549        0           1
                                                    Black    10370   0.295178   0.456145        0           1
                                                    Asian    10370   0.00974    0.098213        0           1
                                               Other race    10370   0.216876   0.412137        0           1
                                                 Hispanic    10370   0.168081   0.373956        0           1
                                                 Married     10370   0.158631   0.365349        0           1
                                               Employed      10370   0.600579   0.489803        0           1
                          High School Graduate or GED        10370   0.717454   0.450259        0           1
                                     Unemployment rate       10370   5.10082    1.344728       2.5        8.6
                         Real per capita personal income     10370   19482.71    4807.44    8751.452   49842.63
                                                  % Male     10370   0.493118   0.010507    0.464833   0.508659
                                                 % Black     10370   0.131806    0.1197     0.004654   0.682782
                                                 % White     10370   0.779675   0.128884    0.258181   0.982966
                                     % American Indian       10370   0.01727    0.019336    0.002377   0.151804
                                                 % Asian     10370   0.071249   0.099024    0.004632   0.706677
                                              % Hispanic     10370   0.163728   0.136527    0.015745   0.945625
                                            % Age 0 to 17    10370   0.254745   0.023368    0.167865   0.367887
                                          % Age 18 to 24     10370   0.098556   0.009748    0.07286    0.128117
                                          % Age 25 to 34     10370   0.156673    0.01792    0.116671   0.215978
                                               % Over 34     10370   0.490026   0.028068    0.366178    0.5502
                                             County FIPS     10370   25723.81   17332.54      1073       53063
                                               State FIPS    10370   25.66538    17.3278        1          53
                                                 Quarter     10370   2.46297    1.090481        1           4
                                                     Year    10370   2001.551   1.090885      2000       2003
*
                                                             .




                                                             29
                                        Table 2.
  Price paid per bulk gram of marijuana by arrestees subject to different policies ($2004)

                                                                   No policy      With policy

                              Panel A: Price paid by arrestees under different state laws

                                                       Mean          $6.55           $10.69     ***
                       Conditional discharge
                                                        N            1252             9118

                    Physician recommendation /         Mean          $6.91           $16.13     ***
                         Medical necessity              N            6682             3688
                                                       Mean          $9.54           $10.81     **
                         Decriminalization
                                                        N            5118             5252

                           Panel B: Prices paid by arrestees in states that changed physician
                                  recommendation/medical necessity laws since 2000

                                                       Mean          $3.59           $4.87      *
                             Colorado
                                                        N              94             297
                                                       Mean         $18.11           $23.44
                              Hawaii
                                                        N              13             143
                                                       Mean          $7.78           $9.17
                              Nevada
                                                        N             233             239

Note: All figures are adjusted for inflation and reported in $2004. A two-sample t test is used to compare means.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                          30
                                         Table 3.
          GLM Estimates of Log Real Price Per Bulk Gram: Transaction Information
                                                                 (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)

                                                                0.042     0.047      0.028         0.030
                         Purchased from occasional source
                                                               [0.053]   [0.055]    [0.051]      [0.050]
                                                                0.027     0.038     -0.014        -0.009
                           Purchased from a new source
                                                               [0.071]   [0.068]    [0.072]      [0.072]
                                                               -0.027    -0.027     -0.023        -0.023
                        Purchased in buyer's neighborhood
                                                               [0.063]   [0.063]    [0.059]      [0.059]
                                                                          -0.022                  -0.095
                            Purchased in Public--Indoor
                                                                         [0.081]                 [0.086]
                                                                          -0.049                  -0.124
                           Purchased in Public--Outdoor
                                                                         [0.061]                 [0.079]
                                                                                     0.046        -0.014
                           Contact dealer: Phone or pager
                                                                                    [0.051]      [0.073]
                                                                                    -0.094*     -0.179**
                         Contact dealer: Go to house or apt.
                                                                                    [0.051]      [0.081]
                                                                                   0.287***      0.249**
                           Contact dealer: Other method
                                                                                    [0.085]      [0.097]
                                                                                                   0.076
                            Bought directly from dealer
                                                                                                 [0.090]
                                                               -2.842    -2.715     -5.003        -5.085
                                      Constant
                                                               [6.339]   [6.386]    [5.821]      [5.706]

                                State fixed effects             Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                              County-level variables            Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                            Individual-level variables          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                           Quarter and year fixed effects       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

                                 Observations                  10370     10370      10370        10370
                          Gamma from Modified Park test         1.97      1.97       2.07         2.09
                                     BIC                       -85422    -85228     -85339      -85334

Notes: All models estimated using GLM with link(log) and family(Gamma). Individual-level variables include Male, Age 21 to
25, Age 26 to 35, Age 36 or more, Black, Asian, Other race, Hispanic, Married, Employed, and High School Graduate or GED.
County-level variables include Unemployment rate, Real per capita personal income, % Male, % Black, % American Indian,%
Asian, % Hispanic, % Age 0 to 17, % Age 25 to 34, and % Over 34. Reference groups: Source (Regular source), Contact
(Approached in public), Purchase location (In a house or apartment). Standard errors clustered at the state-level in all models. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                               31
                                            Table 4.
                  GLM Estimates of Log Real Price Per Bulk Gram: User Penalties

                                                        (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)

                                                     0.847***         0.776***    0.370***   0.516***     0.605***     0.390***
Conditional discharge allowed for possessing 10g
                                                       [0.189]         [0.228]     [0.094]    [0.196]      [0.201]      [0.134]
                                                     -0.156***        -0.125**     -0.008     -0.056        0.004        0.065
   Ln(Real maximum fine for possessing 10g)
                                                       [0.029]         [0.054]     [0.016]    [0.069]      [0.054]      [0.047]
                                                                       -0.048    -0.162***
     Ln(Real maximum fine for selling 10g)
                                                                       [0.051]     [0.012]
                                                                                                          0.257**      0.540***
      Classified as a decriminalization state
                                                                                                          [0.131]        [0.149]
                                                                                                                       -8.721***
        MJ possession arrests/All arrests
                                                                                                                         [3.038]
                                                                                                                           6.202
           MJ sales arrests/All arrests
                                                                                                                        [12.314]
                                                        0.059        0.029          0.002       0.073       0.061       0.120**
        Purchased from occasional source
                                                       [0.055]      [0.053]        [0.053]     [0.060]     [0.061]       [0.060]
                                                       -0.002       -0.012         -0.043       -0.045     -0.046        -0.022
          Purchased from a new source
                                                       [0.085]      [0.090]        [0.082]     [0.088]     [0.090]       [0.103]
                                                        0.055        0.071          0.025        0.039      0.035          0.010
       Purchased in buyer's neighborhood
                                                       [0.065]      [0.068]        [0.062]     [0.059]     [0.062]       [0.058]
                                                       -0.056       -0.097         -0.102       -0.108     -0.086        -0.034
         Contact dealer: Phone or pager
                                                       [0.088]      [0.088]        [0.073]     [0.076]     [0.076]       [0.077]
                                                     -0.269***    -0.301***      -0.286***   -0.272***   -0.258***      -0.191**
       Contact dealer: Go to house or apt.
                                                       [0.086]      [0.086]        [0.074]     [0.081]     [0.082]       [0.083]
                                                       0.141*        0.130          0.122       0.128       0.155         0.190
          Contact dealer: Other method
                                                       [0.084]      [0.090]        [0.089]     [0.098]     [0.104]       [0.124]
                                                      -0.161**    -0.217***      -0.214***     -0.158*    -0.154*         -0.089
           Purchased in Public--Indoor
                                                       [0.079]      [0.052]        [0.057]     [0.088]     [0.088]       [0.101]
                                                       -0.105       -0.108        -0.149*     -0.173**    -0.163*         -0.092
          Purchased in Public--Outdoor
                                                       [0.094]      [0.093]        [0.081]     [0.085]     [0.087]       [0.097]
                                                        0.077        0.054          0.103      0.151*      0.152*      0.218***
           Bought directly from dealer
                                                       [0.103]      [0.102]        [0.091]     [0.083]     [0.082]       [0.073]
                                                     2.032***      2.396***         3.358        5.261     6.676*      13.669***
                    Constant
                                                       [0.281]      [0.265]        [3.247]     [3.939]     [3.509]       [2.815]

               State fixed effects                      No              No         No          No           No            No
             County-level variables                     No              No         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
           Individual-level variables                   Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
          Quarter and year fixed effects                Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes

               Observations                            9708            9322        9322        8708         8708         6917
        Gamma from Modified Park test                  1.75            1.68        1.85        1.68         1.76         1.82
                   BIC                                -77446          -74107      -75346      -69293       -69341       -53125

Notes: All models estimated using GLM with link(log) and family(Gamma). Columns 4-6 do not include 1,000 observations
from Arizona. The sample size decreases by an additional 1,791 observations in Column 6 because enforcement data are limited
to jurisdictions with UCR Coverage Indicator scores >=70. Individual-level variables include Male, Age 21 to 25, Age 26 to 35,
Age 36 or more, Black, Asian, Other race, Hispanic, Married, Employed, and High School Graduate or GED. County-level
variables include Unemployment rate, Real per capita personal income, % Male, % Black, % American Indian,% Asian, %
Hispanic, % Age 0 to 17, % Age 25 to 34, and % Over 34. Reference groups: Source (Regular source), Contact (Approached in
public), Purchase location (In a house or apartment). Standard errors clustered at the state-level in all models. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                 32
                                               Table 5.
                   GLM Estimates of Log Real Price Per Bulk Gram: Medical Marijuana
                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)

                                                   0.872***      0.729***     0.669***      0.574***      0.771***      0.165*      0.160*
Physician recommendation or medical necessity
                                                    [0.133]       [0.160]      [0.172]       [0.136]       [0.118]      [0.086]     [0.086]
                                                                                0.139
    Current Therapeutic Research Program
                                                                               [0.144]
                                                                                            0.432***
   Conditional discharge for possessing 10g
                                                                                             [0.138]
                                                                                              0.057
  Ln(Real maximum fine for possessing 10g)
                                                                                             [0.043]
                                                                                             0.155*
    Classified as a decriminalization state
                                                                                             [0.089]
                                                                                                         -7.706***      -1.638       -1.777
       MJ possession arrests/All arrests
                                                                                                           [1.960]      [4.042]     [4.167]
                                                                                                           14.778       25.282      30.306
          MJ sales arrests/All arrests
                                                                                                           [9.057]     [18.247]    [18.646]
                                                                                                                                   -0.119**
           Ln(County population)
                                                                                                                                    [0.054]
                                                      0.038        0.020         0.018        0.041          0.073       0.072        0.071
      Purchased from occasional source
                                                     [0.053]      [0.051]       [0.051]      [0.058]       [0.052]      [0.054]     [0.054]
                                                     -0.041       -0.054        -0.059       -0.058        -0.033       -0.018       -0.019
        Purchased from a new source
                                                     [0.083]      [0.082]       [0.081]      [0.092]       [0.087]      [0.084]     [0.084]
                                                      0.000       -0.029        -0.029        0.004        -0.053       -0.050       -0.050
      Purchased in buyer's neighborhood
                                                     [0.064]      [0.060]       [0.060]      [0.066]       [0.052]      [0.053]     [0.053]
                                                     -0.072       -0.051        -0.053       -0.082        -0.002        0.007        0.008
        Contact dealer: Phone or pager
                                                     [0.080]      [0.080]       [0.078]      [0.078]       [0.079]      [0.077]     [0.077]
                                                   -0.263***    -0.233***     -0.234***    -0.245***      -0.162**      -0.133       -0.131
      Contact dealer: Go to house or apt.
                                                     [0.091]      [0.086]       [0.084]      [0.085]       [0.081]      [0.084]     [0.084]
                                                     0.166*      0.225**       0.220**       0.168*       0.241**      0.262**      0.265**
        Contact dealer: Other method
                                                     [0.091]      [0.106]       [0.105]      [0.101]       [0.117]      [0.109]     [0.109]
                                                     -0.119       -0.127        -0.130      -0.150*         -0.069      -0.067       -0.067
         Purchased in Public--Indoor
                                                     [0.090]      [0.087]       [0.086]      [0.085]       [0.099]      [0.101]     [0.101]
                                                     -0.120       -0.130        -0.128      -0.157*         -0.065      -0.079       -0.077
        Purchased in Public--Outdoor
                                                     [0.098]      [0.087]       [0.086]      [0.089]       [0.089]      [0.088]     [0.088]
                                                      0.119        0.092         0.097       0.146*         0.134        0.126       0.130
         Bought directly from dealer
                                                     [0.096]      [0.088]       [0.088]      [0.084]       [0.096]      [0.093]     [0.093]
                                                   1.413***       8.293*         6.389     12.968***     16.503***     19.142**     13.379*
                   Constant
                                                     [0.228]      [4.765]       [4.907]      [3.537]       [3.492]      [7.491]     [7.892]

             State fixed effects                      No           No            No           No            No            Yes         Yes
          County-level variables                      No           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
         Individual-level variables                   Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
        Quarter and year fixed effects                Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes

                 Observations                         10370          10370       10370          8708          8579         8579        8579
       Gamma from Modified Park test                   1.64           1.70        1.74          1.77          1.95         2.16         2.15
                      BIC                             -84022        -84686       -84699        -69564        -68280       -68507      -68500
    Notes: All models estimated using GLM with link(log) and family(Gamma). Column 4 does not include 1,000 observations
    from Arizona and 662 observations from states that do not have a maximum fine for possessing 10 grams. The sample size
    decreases by 1,791 observations in Columns 5-7 because enforcement data are limited to jurisdictions with UCR Coverage
    Indicator scores >=70. Individual-level variables include Male, Age 21 to 25, Age 26 to 35, Age 36 or more, Black, Asian, Other
    race, Hispanic, Married, Employed, and High School Graduate or GED. County-level variables include Unemployment rate,
    Real per capita personal income, % Male, % Black, % American Indian,% Asian, % Hispanic, % Age 0 to 17, % Age 25 to 34,
    and % Over 34. Reference groups: Source (Regular source), Contact (Approached in public), Purchase location (In a house or
    apartment). Standard errors clustered at the state-level in all models. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
    1%.



                                                                    33
                                           Table 6.
                 GLM Estimates of Log Real Price Per Bulk Gram: Real Beer Tax

                                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)

                                                                  -0.742***    -0.704***    -0.486
                                      Real beer tax
                                                                    [0.153]      [0.211]    [0.388]
                                                                                 -2.535     -0.697
                            MJ possession arrests/All arrests
                                                                                 [2.814]    [3.549]
                                                                               43.902**     20.153
                               MJ sales arrests/All arrests
                                                                                [18.204]   [16.468]
                                                                    0.034         0.072      0.073
                           Purchased from occasional source
                                                                   [0.052]       [0.054]    [0.054]
                                                                   -0.014        -0.025     -0.020
                              Purchased from a new source
                                                                   [0.073]       [0.085]    [0.083]
                                                                   -0.022        -0.051     -0.049
                           Purchased in buyer's neighborhood
                                                                   [0.060]       [0.056]    [0.053]
                                                                   -0.007         0.026      0.007
                             Contact dealer: Phone or pager
                                                                   [0.074]       [0.077]    [0.077]
                                                                  -0.181**       -0.123     -0.133
                           Contact dealer: Go to house or apt.
                                                                   [0.081]       [0.083]    [0.084]
                                                                  0.254**       0.283**    0.262**
                              Contact dealer: Other method
                                                                   [0.104]       [0.115]    [0.108]
                                                                   -0.087        -0.057     -0.067
                              Purchased in Public--Indoor
                                                                   [0.088]       [0.101]    [0.101]
                                                                   -0.117        -0.063     -0.079
                             Purchased in Public--Outdoor
                                                                   [0.082]       [0.090]    [0.089]
                                                                    0.073         0.129      0.122
                              Bought directly from dealer
                                                                   [0.089]       [0.091]    [0.092]
                                                                  1.644***     1.590***    20.026**
                                        Constant
                                                                   [0.179]       [0.321]    [9.491]

                                  State fixed effects                  Yes       Yes         Yes
                                County-level variables                 No        No          Yes
                              Individual-level variables               Yes       Yes         Yes
                             Quarter and year fixed effects            Yes       Yes         Yes

                                   Observations                       10730      8579       8579
                            Gamma from Modified Park test              2.03      2.08       2.15
                                       BIC                            -85326    -68506     -68504

Notes: All models estimated using GLM with link(log) and family(Gamma). The sample size decreases by 1,791 observations in
Columns 2-3 because enforcement data are limited to jurisdictions with UCR Coverage Indicator scores >=70. Individual-level
variables include Male, Age 21 to 25, Age 26 to 35, Age 36 or more, Black, Asian, Other race, Hispanic, Married, Employed, and
High School Graduate or GED. County-level variables include Unemployment rate, Real per capita personal income, % Male, %
Black, % American Indian,% Asian, % Hispanic, % Age 0 to 17, % Age 25 to 34, and % Over 34. Reference groups: Source
(Regular source), Contact (Approached in public), Purchase location (In a house or apartment). Standard errors clustered at the
state-level in all models. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                 34
                                   Figure 1.
        Distribution of price paid per bulk gram of marijuana ($2004)




                       .15
                       .1
             Density
                       .05
                       0




                             0   20         40           60           80
                                             rppg04


Note: N=10,256. For display purposes we do not include the 114 observation with RPPG>$100.




                                           35
                                      Appendix I.
  Marijuana Penalties and Medicalization Policies for States in our Analysis Sample, 2003

                          Conditional   Nominal Max       Classified as      Physician                  Allows for
                                                                                            Current
     State        Obs.     Discharge       Fine for        "Decrim"       Recommendation/                 Home
                                                                                             TRP
                            for 10g     Possessing 10g       State         Med. Necessity               Cultivation

    Alabama         135       Yes               $2,000                                        Yes
     Alaska         367       Yes               $1,000        Yes              Yes                          Yes
    Arizona       1,000       Yes             $150,000        Yes
   California     1,384       Yes                 $100        Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes
    Colorado        391                           $100        Yes              Yes*                        Yes*
   Wash DC           17       Yes               $1,000
     Florida        172       Yes               $1,000
    Georgia         168       Yes               $1,000                                        Yes
     Hawaii         156       Yes               $1,000                         Yes*                        Yes*
     Illinois       137       Yes               $1,500                                        Yes
    Indiana         461       Yes               $5,000
      Iowa          303       Yes               $1,000
   Louisiana        107       Yes                 $500
 Massachusetts       15       Yes                 $500                                        Yes
   Michigan         114       Yes               $2,000
   Minnesota        386       Yes                $300*        Yes                             Yes
    Missouri         30                         $1,000
   Nebraska         329       Yes                 $100        Yes
     Nevada         472       Yes               $5,000                         Yes*                        Yes*
  New Mexico        303       Yes                 $100                                        Yes
   New York         397                           $100        Yes                             Yes
 North Carolina     188       Yes                 $200        Yes
      Ohio          434                           $100        Yes
   Oklahoma         662       Yes                  NA
     Oregon         376       Yes               $1,000        Yes              Yes                          Yes
  Pennsylvania       94       Yes                 $500
      Texas         577       Yes               $2,000                                        Yes
      Utah          313       Yes               $1,000
  Washington        882       Yes                 $250                         Yes            Yes           Yes

Notes: * Denotes change during sample period. Arizona and Louisiana have physician prescription laws on the
books, they are purely symbolic and do not afford medical users legal protection (MPP 2006). In Arizona, a law
was signed in 1997 which required all drugs dispensed as medicine must be approved by the federal FDA (New York
Times, 1997). This, in essence, repealed the medical marijuana law (Annas, 1997).




                                                         36
