NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCESS SENSITIVITY OF CONSUMPTION TO
CURRENT INCOME:
LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS OR MYOPIA?

Marjorie Flavin

Working Paper No. 13)-Li

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge,

MA 02138
May i981

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper !f13
May 1984

Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income:
Liquidity Constraints or Myopia?

ABSTRACT

Almost all of the recent empirical tests of the rational expectations —

permanent income hypothesis (RE—PIH) have rejected the hypothesis. The null
hypothesis in this empirical literature typically consists of the joint
hypothesis that 1) agents' expectations are formed rationally, 2) desired
consumption is determined by permanent income, and 3) capital markets are
"perfect" in the sense that agents can lend or borrow against expected future

income at the same interest rate. This paper attempts to determine whether
the excess sensitivity of consumption to current income can be attributed
to a failure of the third component of the joint hypothesis ——

the assumption

of "perfect" capital markets —— as opposed to a failure of one or both of
the first two assumptions.

The paper examines, as a specific alternative to the PIH, a simple
"Keynesian" consumption function in which the behavioral MPC out of transitory

income is different from zero. Interpreting the unemployment rate as a proxy
for the proportion of the population subject to liquidity constraints, the
paper uses a generalized version of the econometric model in my earlier paper
(1981) to conduct a specification test of the "Keynesian" consumption function.

The finding that the estimate of the MPC out of transitory income is dramatically affected, in both magnitude and statistical significance, by the
inclusion of the proxy for liquidity constraints suggests that liquidity constraints are an important part of the explanation of the observed excess
sensitivity of consumption to current income.

Marjorie Flavin
Economics Department
Rouss Hall
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901
(804) 924—6751

Almost all of the recent empirical tests of the rational expectations —

permanent income hypothesis (RE—PIH) have rejected the hypothesis.1 Using a
rich variety of data sets and estimation methods, the empirical work indicates
that the failure of the RE—PIlL Is significant, both statistically and quanti-

tatively. The null hypothesis in this empirical literature typically consists
of the joint hypothesis that 1) agents' expectations are formed rationally, 2)
desired consumption is determined by permanent income, and 3) capital markets
are "perfect" In the sense that agents can lend or borrow against expected

future income at the same interest rate. Most previous studies have concluded
that consumption is more sensitive to current income than is consistent with
the joint hypothesis stated above, without attempting to determine which
component of the joint hypothesis is responsible for the rejection.

This paper attempts to determine whether the excess sensitivity of consumption to current income can be attributed to a failure of the third component of the joint hypothesis ——

the

assumption of "perfect" capital markets ——

as opposed to a failure of one or both of the first two assumption. The first
two assumptions simply reflect the basic postulates that economic agents form
expectations rationally and make decisions based on Intertemporal utility

maximization. If these postulates fail in the context of consumption behavior, some doubt is cast on their validity in other macroeconomic applications.

If, on the other hand, capital market imperfections prevent agents from following their desired, permanent—income consumption path, the observed excess
sensitivity of consumption to current income may be fully consistent with
the basic postulate of the rational, forward looking agent.

This paper examines, as a specific alternative to the permanent income
hypothesis, a simple "Keynesian" consumption function in which the behavioral

MPC out of transitory income is different from zero. Empirical evidence that

2

the MPC out of transitory income is significantly different from zero is interpreted as evidence of myopic behavior; that is, evidence of a violation of
one or both of the basic postulates of rational expectations and intertemporal

utility maximization. As a specification test of the "Keynesian" consumption
function, the consumption equation is modified by the inclusion of an additional
variable; if the coefficient of the additional variable is different from zero,
then the simple "Keynesian" consumption function is incorrect or incomplete.

In principle, the specification test could be executed for an arbitrary choice

of the additional variable. However, because the purpose of the paper is to
investigate whether the observed excess sensitivity of consumption to current
income arises because capital market imperfections (liquidity constraints)

prevent agents from realizing their desired consumption paths, the specification of the simple "Keynesian" consumption function is tested with respect
to a variable which is selected as a proxy for the severity or prevalence of

liquidity constraints. Interpreting the unemployment rate as a proxy for the
proportion of the population subject to liquidity constraints, the paper uses
a generalized version of the econometric model in my earlier paper (1981) to
conduct the specification test.

The model

Permanent income, y, is defined as the current resource flow which,
conditional on expectations in period t, can be sustained for the remainder
of the individual's lifetime:
=

(1)

where 5 =

T s+l
Ex+)
k(T)(wt + sO

l/(l+r).

In this discrete time formulation, w represents real

(nonhuman) wealth at the beginning of period t: x represents labor income,
assumed to be paid at the end of the period; and r denotes the real discount

rate. E x

t t+s

denotes the mathematical expectation of x

t+s

conditional on

3

Information available in period t. The length of the individual's remaining
lifespan Is denoted T; and the annuity rate, which Is a function of T, Is
denoted k(T).

In an infinite horizon version of the model, T =

and k(T) has a con-

stant value equal to the discount rate. In the finite horizon case, the
annuity rate obeys the non—linear difference equation

(2)

k(T—1) =

k(T)/(1+r—k(T))

and the terminal condition k(O) = 1.

Following Hall (1978) and FlavIn (1981), the permanent Income consumption
hypothesis is represented as:

(3)

where

c =
Is the marginal propensity to consume out of permanent income.

Substituting (3) into the definition of permanent Income, the evolution of
permanent income over time is given by:

(4)

y = (l+k(T)(1— ))y1 + k(T)[w —

Eiw

+
s=O

6'(Et_Eti)x+]

If expectations are rational, both the expectation of next period's revision

In expected future labor Income, (Et—E 1)Xt+g, and the expectation of unanticipated capital gains, Wt—Et_iWt, conditional on information available in t—

I, are equal to zero. Thus if

=

1

permanent income, as defined in equation

(1), has the random walk property

(5)

EtIY =

which was stressed by Hall (1978). If

< 1, then permanent income is a

nonstationary first order autoregressive process.

4

Tests of the PIH against alternative hypotheses
In a series of nested tests, the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) is

tested against two alternative hypotheses. In the first alternative, the NPC

out of transitory income, T' is nonzero. The hypothesis is stated in first
differences rather than levels in anticipation of the specification used in
the empirical work:

(6)

Ac =

+ T(AYt —

Equation (6) includes as special cases both the PIH (with

=

0) and an

extreme form of the Keynesian consumption function in which consumption simply
responds to current income

=

). If

0 <

T

<

consumption is deter-

mined by a blend of the permanent income and Keynesian hypotheses. Because a
nonzero value of

indicates that there is some element of truth to the

Keynesian view of consumption, equation (6) will be referred to as the
"Keynesian" consumption function.

In addition to testing the PIH against the simple "Keynesian" alternative

hypothesis by testing the restriction T =

0,

the empirical work reported in

this paper tests the validity of the Keynesian consumption function as specified

by equation (6). As a specification test, equation (6) is modified by including
another variable, denoted

(7)

IC

= p't +

Tt

+

If y is nonzero, the consumption function specified in equation (6) is incorrect
or incomplete. Of the many possible sources of misspecification, this paper
focuses on the potential misspecification of equation (6) arising from the

exclusion of liquidity constraints as a determinant of consumption. That is,
the specification of equation (6) is tested with respect to a variable which
is selected as a proxy for the severity or prevalence of liquidity constraints.

5

Of the potential explanations of the observed excess sensitivity of
consumption to current income, perhaps the most obvious is that individuals
are "myopic" in the sense that the behavioral MPC Out of transitory income,

is substantially different from zero. If the excess sensitivity of consumption to current income arises because of this type of myopic behavior on
the part of consumers, equation (6) is a valid specification of the consumption

function. Alternatively, even if individuals are rational and forward looking,
as posited by the PIH, and the behavioral MPC out of transitory income is
zero, the observed excess sensitivity of consumption to current income could

arise if liquidity constraints prevent the individual from realizing his

desired consumption plan. n individual who is unable to borrow against
expected future income and whose stock of nonhuman wealth is insufficient to
maintain the desired consumption plan for the duration that transitory income

is expected to be negative is considered to be liquidity constrained. If
consumption is constrained by current income, actual consumption and transitory
income will be positively correlated even though desired consumption may be
determined by the PIll,

Of the variables which might proxy for the prevalence of liquidity con-

straints, the specification test focuses on the rate of unemployment. A person
becoming unemployed in a given year can expect to spend 3 to 5 months in one

or more spells of unemployment that year.3 The unemployment spell or spells
will reduce the individual's permanent income, although not by as much as the

reduction in current income. Thus individuals who are unemployed will typically
have negative transitory income.

Whether or not a significant fraction of the population has net worth
insufficient to smooth their consumption path in the face of the negative
transitory income realizations associated with a spell or spells of unemploy—

6

ment is an empirical question. According to survey data on the financial
characteristics of consumers compiled by the Federal Reserve System in 1963
(Projector (1964)), 25% of all families4 and 40% of all families with income

below the median had net worth less than $3,000 (in current dollars). Further,
these families held the bulk of their assets in illiquid form (equity in home,
auto, business or profession, and life insurance, annuities, or retirement plans);
the average holdings of liquid assets, stocks, and bonds was about $300 for this

group. Thus the survey data indicates that a significant fraction of the pop—
__1_
__'I_11_
U.LdL±ULL [idU ILeL WUtLI!
WLLLCLI
WdS 1L1SULj1C1UL

sumption

1__._1__
LU cumpieeiy

ILLSU.LdLe LLIeJ.L

LULL

path from the negative transitory income realizations associated with

a moderate spell of unemployment.
Even individuals with little or no nonhuman wealth could achieve their

permanent income consumption path if they are able 1) to borrow against future
expected labor income or 2) to insure against individual—specific risk in

their labor income. While markets for collateralized consumer borrowing are
well—developed, the personal bankruptcy laws would tend to prevent or distort

the development of a market for non—collateralized consumer borrowing. Further,
the problems of adverse selection and moral hazard may explain the absence of

a private market for insurance against individual—specific risk in labor income.5
Thus there seem to be important niicroeconomic factors which indicate that the

Arrow—Debreu contingent claims markets which would eliminate liquidity constraints in an ideal world might not actually exist.

If liquidity constraints are responsible, at least in part, for the excess
sensitivity of consumption to current income, an increase in the prevalence or
severity of liquidity constraints should reduce consumption, ceteris
Because the coefficient y in equation (7) represents the effect on consumption
of an increase in unemployment, the estimated value of y is expected to be neg—

ative if liquidity constraints affect consumption. It should be emphasized that

7

the coefficient y is estimated for the purpose of constructing a test statistic
to check the specification of the consumption function given by equation (6);

y should not be interpreted as a structural parameter.
Combining equations (3) and (4), one obtains:
(8)

c — (l+k(T)(l—

))c

=

k(T){w - E

1w +

E6(E —

Ei)x+}.

In order to simplify the estimation, the marginal propensity to consume out of

permanent income, ,

is

assumed to be exactly unity. With I3 =

1,

the left

hand side of equation (8) is simply the first difference of consumption,
Because the implications of equation (8) will be tested using aggregate

data, it is necessary to consider the effect on aggregate consumption of a

systematic trend in per capita income. Even though an individual's permanent
income is defined (assuming

= 1) so that its movement over time is trendless,

the presence of a trend in per capita income will induce a trend in aggregate

permanent income and therefore in aggregate consumption, If per capita income
has an exponential trend, due to advances in technical knowledge, for example,

later generations will have greater lifetime wealth than earlier ones. As the
older generations die and are replaced by the younger generations, aggregate
consumption will trend upward at the same rate of growth as per capita income.

Since the model is intended to explain revisions in planned consumption which
are caused by changes in expectations about future income, equation (8) applies
to the movement of consumption around a trend attributable to the trend in
per capita income.

If an accurate measure of nonhuman wealth were available for the sample

period under consideration (1929—1981), one could eliminate Eiw from equation
(8) by using the relation:
(9)

Eiw = (l+r)wi + x1 — cr1.

8

This is the basic approach taken by Hayashi (1982). However, in the absence
of a reliable and consistent series on nonhuman wealth for the 1929—81 sample
period, I take a different approach to measuring unanticipated capital gains

(w —

Eiwt)

in this paper.

Unanticipated capital gains on nonhuman wealth can be defined as the
present value of the revision in the expected earnings associated with the
current asset holdings:6
s+l
(10)

w Et1wt

s05 (E —

Ei)r+w.

The actual path of nonlabor income, r+5w÷, will reflect both the movements
in the return to capital, r+ which we want to capture, and the endogenous
changes in earnings flows which result from the individual's decisions to

accumulate or decumulate nonhuman wealth, w

t+s

•

I assume that the time series

properties of aggregate nonlabor income are dominated by fluctations in the

rate of return to capital, r÷5 rather than the endogenous changes in w1.7
With this assumption, unanticipated capital gains are approximated as the

present value of the revision in expecled nonlabor income. Replacing w —

with

the present value of the revision in expected nonlabor income,

equation (8) becomes:
=

(11)

where

T s+1

k(T) sO5 (E —

Ei)y+

denotes total (labor plus nonlabor) disposable income in period

t+s, stated in deviations from an exponential trend.

The information content of various observable variables for predicting
future income is modeled using an autoregression which includes disposable
income as one variable:
AA(L)
(12)

AB(L) 1

=

z

+

I

BA(L)

BB(L)

j

zt

it
€2t

9

In equation (12), AA(L), AB(L), BA(L), and BB(L) are polynomials in the lag
operator, L; for example, AA(L)

= a1(L)

+ a2(L) + ...

+ aLn. Constant terms

are included in the autoregression but are suppressed to simplify the notation.

The disturbances, c and €2t are independently distributed across time, but
may be contemporaneously correlated.

Inverting (12) to obtain the moving average representation of (Y,Z]
and evaluating the moving average polynomial at L =

5

=

(l+r),

one obtains

the 2 x 2 matrix which gives the partial derivative, with respect to each
innovation, of the present discounted value of the revision in the expected
path of each forecasted variable:

(PDV of y )

(PDV

it

(13)

of
2t

l—BB(5)

AB(6)

BA(S)

l—AA(6)

1

=

Bet

(PDVofz+)
t

B(PDVofz+)
t S
E1

62t

where "Det" is defined as the determinant of the matrix on the right hand side
of equation (13); Bet = (l—BB(5))(l—AA(8))—AB(8)BA(6).

Since we are not

interested in the path of the variable z except to the extent that it provides information about the path of disposable income, only the top row of the
matrix is pertinent. Using the notation c1

(PDV of y)

for

(PDV of

1t

and 'D

Z

for

2t
(14)

y

l-BB(6)
Bet

and

AB(8)
z

Det

As the innovations in the bivariate representation of (y,z)', Eit and
are unforecastabie on the basis of observations on

and

dated t—1 and

earlier. If, however, agents use other variables in addition to y and z to
forecast future income,

and 2t will be partially forecastable on the

basis of lagged values of these other informational variables. Thus the

10

innovations in the bivariate autoregression, Cit and c2, can each be decoin—
posed into a component which is predictable on the basis of lagged information
available to agents,

and a component which is orthogonal to the agent's

entire information set, Cit:

=

cit

+ Tilt_i

C2t = C2t + Ti2ti
The

terms are assumed to be serially uncorrelated and uncorrelated with

lagged values of

and z. By definition, the innovations perceived by
are uncorrelated with

agents, c1 and

2t—i' and lagged values of

and z.
In revising their estimates of permanent income, agents respond to all

available information, not just the new information contained in

=

and

k(T) [ ct + 2t1 +

where the error term

is included to reflect the fact that agents are re-

sponding to many sources of new information in addition to the current
observations on

and Zt. As a component of the revision in permanent in-

come, O is uncorrelated with all lagged variables in the agent's information
set, including its own lagged values. Substituting equations (15) and (16)
into the permanent income consumption function yields:

=

k(T)[ci

+ cC2t1 {k(T)( Tilt_I + Z2t1)

To simplify the notation, denote the consumption error term as c3t:

=

k(T)[ li +

112t 1 +

In summary, the model consists of the 3—equation system:

(1.l)

't i + AA(L)y + AB(L)zt + lt

(19.2)

at 2 + BA(L)y + BB(L)zt +
IL3 + k(T)[ci + (T)c2t1 +

(19.3)

In the empirical application of the model, the polynomials AA(L), AB(L),
BA(L), and 13B(L) were each specified as third order. Note, from equations
(15) and (le), that because agents form their forecasts of future income using

an information set which contains variables in addition to
negatively correlated with

t and Zt, 3t is

and E2t. Under the assumptions specified

above, the structural disturbances, c1, 2t and E3t, are each serially
uncorrelated.

Equation system (19) represents the restricted version of the model, in
the sense that current Yt and Zt affect consumption only to the extent that

they induce agents to revise their estimate of permanent income. In the
unrestricted version of the model, the consumption equation (19.3) is replaced
with a more general specification in which consumption responds directly to

changes in t and

in addition to the response consistent with the permanent

income hypothesis:

(20)

£Ct =

3 ÷ k(T) ( £1t +

zC2t + O't +

+ 2't—2 ÷ YOAZ +
Y1AZt 1 +
Equation (20) is a generalization of equation
well as current changes in y and

(8) in

+ 3t
the sense that lagged as

are included. (Note that the subscript T

has been dropped from the notation for the marginal propensity to consume out

of transitory income, o• Since the role of current Income in signaling
changes In permanent income has been explicitly included in the model, the

12

will differ from zero only if consumption is correlated with transitory in-

come. Similarly, non—zero values of the

indicate that the variable z has

some effect on consumption beyond its role in providing new information about
future income.

Estimation of the model

—

The three equation system consisting of the bivariate autoregression and
the consumptIon equatIon was estimated by Full InformatIon MaxImum LIkelIhood

(FIML). Estimates of the model were obtained for four different specifica-

tions of the consumption equation — a fully unconstrained version with no
and y1, a fully constrained version with the restric-

restrictions on the
tion

=0

=

imposed, and two partially constrained versions:
=

strained with the restriction

uncon-

0 imposed, and vice versa.

In interpreting the empirical results, it is important to understand the

relationship between the empirical approach pursued here, a single equation
instrumental variables approach, and the approach used by Hall (1978).

Consider the reduced form of the system. The reduced form of equation (20)
is:

EC —

+

0(p.1 + (AA(L)—L)y + AB(L)z)
+

+ y0(tt2 + BA(L)y + (BB(L)_L)z) +

+ ytz1
where

=

(k(T) +

+ y2tz

o1t

2

+

+ (k(T) + yo)c2 +

(19.2) are already reduced forms. Since f3 =

3t

=0

Equations (19.1) and

under the null hypo-

thesis, the fully restricted reduced form consumption equation is simply:

(22)

Ac =

+

13
Instrumental variables estimates of the excess sensitivity parameters,
the 13. and

(23)

could be computed by specifying the consumption equation as:

IC

where

=

+ Ot +

(l—0)zy,

+ 2AYt

2

+

+

1

+ '*2t2 +

and estimating the equation using lagged values of

and z as instruments. Since the revision in permanent income, which constitutes the disturbance in equation (23), is uncorrelated with previously available information, the lagged values of

and z a.re valid instruments.

Referring to the reduced form of the fully unconstrained system (equations
(19.1), (19.2), and (21)) it is easy to show that, in the absence of any

further restrictions, the structural parameters are just identified. When the
system is just identified, estimating the multivariate system by FIML provides

estimates of the excess sensitivity parameters, the 3. and y., which are
numerically identical to the estimates obtained by estimating equation (23)

by instrumental variables, using

and z1, 1=1,2,3, as instruments. That

is, in the just identified case, FIML is equivalent to Two Stage Least Squares
(2SLS) equation—by—equation, which in turn is equivalent to instrumental

variables, using the predetermined variables, in this case

and z1,

i1,2,3, as instruments.
Next, consider the restricted reduced form consumption equation (22), By
definition the reduced form expresses the conditional expectation of the
endogenous variable,

given the predetermined variables. Thus the emp-

irical content of the restriction 3. =
tation of Lic given lagged values of

= 0 is that the conditional expecand z is zero, which is an example

of the basic empirical implication of the permanent income hypothesis tested

by Hall (1978). To test this implication of the permanent income hypothesis,
Hall estimated by OLS the conditional expectation of c given ci and an
array of variables dated t—1 or earlier, then tested the hypothesis that the

14

lagged variables (other than cci) had no predictive content for current
consumption. As an application of Hall's test, one could estimate by OLS
equation (24):
(24)

=

U3+

+ 2t—2 + 'T3t3 + TF4Z + lISZt 2

and conduct an F—test of the hypothesis r. = 0.

+ •116t 3

+ "3t

Since the multivariate system

consisting of equations (19.1), (19.2), and (21) is just identified, there are

no over—identifying restrictions on the consumption reduced form, equation
(21); thus equations (21) and (24) both represent the identical reduced form

consumption equation. Further, imposing the restriction

=

=0

implies

that all of the reduced form coefficients (except the constant) should be

zero, which is exactly the restriction tested by Hall.8 Although both Hall's
approach and the approach pursued here lead to the same specification of the
reduced form consumption equation, under both the alternative and null hypotheses, the test procedure used here differs from Hall's in that the restriction is tested by computing the likelihood ratio statistic for the multi—
variate system (equations (19.1), (19.2), and (21)) while Hall's test sta-

tistic is computed by estimating the consumption equation alone. As proved
in Flavin (1981), however, the two tests yield numerically identical values

of the likelihood ratio test statistic,9
The purpose of this discussion is to establish that both the estimates of
and y.,, and the likelihood ratio

the excess sensitivity parameters, the
test statistic for the hypothesis 13. =

y.

= 0 are robust with respect to the

approximation introduced to measure capital gains on nonhuman wealth when the
multivariate model (equations (19.1), (19.2), and (21)) is just identified.
Without even attempting to measure unanticipated capital gains, one could
obtain consistent estimates of the 3. and y. by estimating equation (23) by
instrumental variables and test the restrictions imposed by the permanent

15

income hypothesis by using Hall's reduced form approach. Since the point
estimates of the excess sensitivity parameters and the value of the associated
likelihood ratio test statistic obtained by estimating the multivariate model

by FINL are numerically identical to the estimates and test statistic obtained
by the procedures which do not involve the approximation, these empirical
results do not depend on the approximation.1°

Data
In contrast to my earlIer paper (1981), the models examined in thIs paper

were estimated with annual rather than quarterly data. One advantage to using
annual data is that the annual series are available for a longer sample period,

1929 to present, than quarterly data, In addition, it is important to know
whether the results of the earlier paper are confirmed when the sampling

interval is changed from quarterly to annual. Observations for the years
1942— 1949 were excluded from the sample on the grounds that rationing during
World War II probably caused departures of actual from desired consumption.

After allowing for the construction of lags, the basic sample period was 1933—
41 and 1950—81.

Assuming that the utility function is separable in the major categories
of consumption ——

durables,

nondurables, and services ——

the model was estimated

using real consumption of nondurable goods alone as the consumption concept.
In principle, a series on the service flows from durable goods could be con-

structed. However, the model incorporates the assumption that consumption
adjusts fully to a revision in permanent income within the current time period.
Because of the costs associated with adjusting stocks of durable goods, a more
complicated adjustment model would be required to explain consumption of services

of durable goods. Consumption of services, which is dominated by the imputed
service flow of housing, was excluded for the same reason. Consumption of

16

nondurables accounts for about 45% of total personal consumption expenditure.
Both the consumption and income series, which was personal disposable income,
were stated in 1972 dollars per capita.

Empirical results for the model with univariate income forecasting equation
The model considered in my 1981 paper is a special case of the model

developed in the previous section. For comparison with the results of the
earlier paper, the basic tests of the simpler model with the univariate income
forecasting equatIon were repeated with the longer, annual data set,

Based on series of F—tests of the exclusion of higher order autoregressive parameters, the per capita disposable income series was modeled as a

third order autoregression with a deterministic exponential trend, The
estimated exponential growth in disposable income was 2,15482 percent annually,

with a standard error of .114 percent. The precision of the estimate of the
trend, even when estimated simultaneously with the autoregressive parameters,
supports the view that income can be modeled as a stationary process around

a positive trend. To simplify the estimation, the trend of 2.15482 percent
was removed from the income series, and the tests were conducted using the

detrended data. As mentioned above, the presence of an exponential trend
in per capita income will induce an exponential trend in per capita consump-

tion. Because the consumption variable is expenditures on nondurable goods
rather than total consumption, the trend in nondurable goods consumption
will not be equal to the trend in income unless the income elasticity of

nondurables consumption is unity. For this reason, the consumption series
was detrended by its own estimated exponential trend of 1.59896 percent.
With the univariate income forecasting equation, the model consists of
equations (19.1) and (21) with the parameters of AB(L), BA(L), and BB(L),

and 2'

and 2 constrained to equal zero. The estimates of the struc—

17

tural parameters and their standard errors are reported in Tb1e 1.
Table 1

a1

______

a2

436.

1.071

—.362

(124.)

(.130)

(.184)

a3
.004
(.121)

______

_____

—2.11

.370
(.085)

(2.27)

6i
.006
(.042)

62
—.011
(.036)

where a. denotes the coefficient of L1 In the lag polynomial AA(L).

Based on the estimated autoregressive parameters of the income process
and an assumed real interst rate of 5%, the present discounted value of the
revision in expected future Income associated with an innovation in current

income, ,

is

3.28. Assuming that the horizon of the representative

individual is 20 years, T=20, the annuity rate, k(T), is 0.079. Thus, the
change in permanent income induced by an innovation in current income,

k(T)yIS .26, With a likelihood ratio statistic of 23.786 for the restriction

=

62

=

0,

the null hypothesis of no excess sensitivity of consumption

to current income can be rejected at the .5% level,
In summary, the empirical results based on the model with a univariate

income forecasting equation indicate that the excessive sensitivity of

consumption to current income is significantly greater than zero, both

statistically and quantitatively. Keeping in mind that the parameter
measures the excess sensitivity of nondurables consumption alone, a point
estimate of .37 for 6o respresents a very large departure from the permanent
income hypothesis. Further, the estimate of 13o is reasonably precise, accord-

ing to the standard error of .09, These results are in very close agreement with the 1981 paper based on post war quarterly data. With the quarterly
data set, the point estimate of 6o was .355 (standard error .275) and the
restriction 6. = 0 could be rejected at the .5% level.

18

Empirical results using the unemployment rate to help forecast disposable income
In this section the general model with a bivariate income forecasting

equation is estimated, using the overall unemployment rate as the variable z.
Under the permanent income hypothesis, the current observation on the unemploy-

ment rate affects consumption only to the extent that the unemploymenrLnnovation
contains new information on future inocme. In the unrestricted version of the
model, equation (20), current and lagged changes in the unemployment rate also

have a direct impact on consumption. Results from the FIML estimation of the
unconstrained system consisting of equation (19.1), (19.2), and (21) are reported in lines 5, 6, and 1 of Table 2.

When the

are included without constraint and the

are constrained to

be equal to zero, the specification of the alternative hypothesis is cotnpar—

able to the alternative hypothesis in the model with the univariate income

forecasting equation. In this version of the model, the unemployment rate is
included as part of the information set used to predict future income but

assumed to have no direct impact on consumption. The resulting estimates of
the excess sensitivity of consumption to current income, the t31, are reported

in line 2 of Table 2. The estimate of o is .368, with a standard error of
.070; the estimates of

and 2 are numerically small and insignificantly

different from zero. Further, the estimates of the

are in very close

agreement with the estimates obtained from the model with the univariate
income forecasting equation.

When the unemployment rate is included in the model as possibly having a
direct Impact on consumption, the estimate of f3ç drops from .368 to .146 and

becomes statistically insignificant. Estimates of the

and y1 obtained from

the fully unrestricted version of the model are reported in line 1 of Table

2. Consistent with the interpretation of the unemployment rate as a proxy for

none

6.

(6.97)

—.026
(.006)
(.008)

.029

ba2

ba1

______

.965

—.842
(.260)

aa2

1.54
(.204)

aa

(232.)

387.

______

—.003
(.007)

ba3

(.220)

.048

aa3

.309
(.202)

bb1

19.2
(6.73)

ab1

and

(.243)

.559

bb2

—22.6
(8.10)

ab2

parameter estimates2
(standard errors in parentheses)

Bivariate Autoregression of

.024
(1.15)

—4.64
(3.33)

bb3

(6.:27)

4.04

ab3

—

.020
(.188)

z

.074
(1.05)

1.02
(2.65)

1.23

$40.97

SER.

135.854

149.841

149.233

152.374

value of log
likelihood1

$18.94

$12.77

$12.73

$12.65

SER

1.99

2.01

DW

1.21

2.13

1.96

2.04

DW

-

2.

aa1 denotes the coefficient
of

Lt in AA(L), etc.

1.
In each case, the three equation system consisting of the consumption equation and the bivariate autoregression was
estimated simultaneously. This column reports the log likelihood of the three equation system. Estimates of the autoregressive parameters associated with the constrained consumption equations are omitted in order to save space.

Notes

none

5.

constraints
imposed

1.92

(1.90)

(2.19)

4.

—11.6

—1.50

3=O

(.039)

(.070)

—.012
(.034)

(8.07)

—11.0

3.

.007

.368

(.075)

.050

—2.08
(2.20)

—.177
(.129)

11=0

.146

(.196)

2.

—2.89
(2.49)

parameter estimates
(standard errors in parentheses)

none

constraints
imposed

1.

line

TABLE 2
Consumption Equation

19

the prevalence of liquidity constraints, the excess sensitivity of consumption

to the unemployment rate is negative: y0 = —11.0.
of

The point estimate

of —11.0 indicates that a one percentage point increase in the unemploy-

ment rate decreases consumption by $11.00 per capita (in 1972 dollars). The
economic significance of the estimate of

is more easily interpreted if the

decrement to consumption is stated in terms of the dollar change in consumption per additional person unemployed as the unemployment rate increases by
one percentage point, rather than the change In consumption per capita.
Renormalizing the estimate of y, by multiplying by the ratio of total popul-

ation to 1% of the labor force (232,060/1,123.83 in 1982) the excess sensitivity of consumption to unemployment amounts to a decrement of $2,271.50

per additional person unemployed (1972 dollars). In assessing the magnitude
of this estimate of the excess sensitivity of consumption to the unemployment

rate, it is Important to keep in mind that the estimate of

of —11.0 was

obtained from the fully unconstrained version of the model. Since the parameters measuring the excess sensitivity of consumption to current income,

the , were

included in the specification of the alternative hypothesis, the

estimated decrement of $2,271.50 per additional person unemployed measures the

effect of unemployment on consumption, holding current income constant. With
a likelihood ratio statistic of 33.04, the full set of restrictions imposed by

the permanent income hypothesis ( =

= 0)

can be rejected at the .5%

level. As explained above, the likelihood ratio test statistic for the
hypothesis

=

=0

and the estimates of the

and

in the fully unre-

stricted version of the model are robust with respect to the approximation
introduced to measure capital gains on nonhuman wealth.
In addition to testing the permanent income hypothesis, a primary purpose
of the paper was to conduct a specification test of the simple "Keynesian"

20

consumption function In which the behavioral marginal propensity to consume

out of current income is greater than zero Interpreting the alternative
hypothesis with the

unconstrained and the restriction

= 0 imposed as the

"Keynesian" consumption function, the specification test is executed by

testing the restriction that the y1 are zero. With a likelihood ratio staare each equal to zero is

tistic of 6.282, the hypothesis that the

marginally rejected at the 10% level of significance.
At thIs juncture, the statIstIcal results concernIng the Importance of

liquidity constraints appear to be mixed: In both magnitude and statistical
significance, the estimates of the

sion of the y1, the estimates of the

are dramatically affected by the incluare of the predicted sign and indicate

a quantitatively large direct effect of unemployment on aggregate consumption,
but the formal specification test of the restriction

= 0 cannot be rejected

at conventional levels of significance, such as the 5% level, although it can

be rejected at the 10% level. Given the high correlation between aggregate
income and the unemployment rate, however, one might suspect that the formal

specification test has relatively low power against the restriction

= 0

when the . are included in the consumption equation without restriction.
To check this conjecture, the symmetric hypothesis test was executed: If
the

are included in the consumption equation without constraint, can the

restriction

0 be rejected? When the

are included in the consumption

equation, the likelihood ratio statistic for the hypothesis

= 0 is 5.066,

which has a marginal significance level of .167. Estimates of the
with the restriction

obtained

= 0 imposed are reported in line 3 of Table 2. In

summary, when either the

or the

are included In the consumption equation

without constraint, the restriction that the other set of excess sensitivity

parameters is zero cannot he rejected at the 5% level of significance. Based

21

on this finding, I would interpret the failure of the specification test to
reject the restriction

= 0 at a high level of significance as an indication

that the test has relatively low power. Since the symmetric hypothesis j3 = 0
—

cannot be rejected even at the 10% level, the empirical results cannot be interpreted as empirical confirmation of the simple "Keynesian" specification.
In addition to the estimates of the excess sensitivity parameters, the
model provides estimates of the summary measures of the information content

of innovations in income and the unemployment rate for the prediction of future

income. Based on the estimated parameters of the bivariate autoregression and
a real interest rate of 5%, the value of

y

was 3.72; the value of

z

was 27..

It is important to keep in mind that in the contett of the bivariate income
and c1

forecasting model, the parameters

have the interpretation of parti-'l

rather than total derivatives. In order to directly compare the information
content of an innovation in y in the bivariate autoregression to the information content of an innovation in the univariate income autoregression, one
T = d(PDV of y
can calculate the total derivative
y
dciv
cov(c1,e2)
T
(25)
z
y
y
var(c1)

t

=+

Using the estimated covarlance matrix of the disturbances,11 the value of
is 3.12, which is in close agreement with the value of '1'

of 3.28 for the

univariate income forecastIng model.

Similarly, the total derivative of the present discounted value of future
income with respect to an innovation in the unemployment rate is:

(26)

=
z

z

+

cov(c1 ,€2)

y

=

—60.60.

var(c2)

Renormalizing the estimate of

by multiplying by the ratio of total population

to 1% of the labor force, as before, the value of

implies a reduction in the

present discounted value of future income of $12,514 (or a reduction in permanent income, k(T)T, of $988.61) per additional person unemployed.

22

Conclusions

When the unemployment rate is included as part of the information set
used to predict future income but assumed to have no direct impact on consumption, the estimated excess sensitivity of consumption to current income

is quantitatively large and statistically significant, When the unemployment
rate, which is interpreted as a proxy for the severity and prevalence of
liquidity constraints, is included in the model as possibly having a direct
impact on consumption, the estimate of the excess sensitivity of consumption
to current income drops from .368 to .146 and becomes statistically insig-

nificant. Consistent with the interpretation of the unemployment rate as
a proxy for liquidity constraints, the estimated excess sensitivity of con-

sumption to the unemployment rate is negative. Further, the estimate of the
excess sensitivity of consumption to the unemployment rate implies that
consumption declines by $2,271.50 per additional person unemployed, holding
current income constant.

If the observed excess sensitivity of consumption to current income

arises because agents are myopic in the sense that the behavioral MPC out
of transitory income is nonzero, the proxy for liquidity constraints is an

extraneous variable in the consumption equation. The finding that the
estimate of the MPC out of transitory income is dramatically affected, in
both magnitude and statistical significance, by the inclusion of the proxy
for liquidity constraints indicates that the simple "Keynesian" consumption
function with nonzero MPC out of transitory income is an incomplete model,
and suggests that liquidity constraints are an important part of the explanation of the observed excess sensitivity of consumption to current income.

Footnotes
1.

Studies rejecting the RE—PIll include Blinder (1981), Flavin (1981), Hall

and Mishkin (1982), Hayashi (1982) and Sargent (1978). In his original paper,
Hall (1978) did not reject the RE—PIH decisively. However, Flavin (1981)
showed that with a minor alteration in the specification of the alternative
hypothesis, the RE—PIll could be rejected using Hall's test and data set.

Bernanke (1981), studying panel data on automobile expenditures, did not find

evidence aginst the hypothesis. For an extensive survey of the empirical literature on the RE—PIH, see King (1983).
2.

Because the model is estimated using aggregate data, the assumption

implicit in equation (3) that transitory consumption is identically zero can
be restated as an assumption that realizations of transitory consumption at

the micro level are distributed independently across the population. Thus
even if the variance of the individual's transitory consumption is nonnegli—
gible relative to the variance of permanent income, aggregate transitory consumption will be negligible as long as the individual realizations are mutually
independent.
3.

Akerlof and Main (1980) argue compellingly that statistics on the average

duration of completed unemployment spells substantially underestimate the
effective duration of unemployment because about half of all spells of uneni—

ployment in a given year are incurred by persons suffering multiple spells.

Thus the average number of weeks spent in unemployment by a person who becomes
unemployed in a given year is substantially larger than the average duration of

an unemployment spell: persons experiencing one spell of unemployment during the
year spent an average of 11.5 weeks unemployed, persons with 2 spells spent an
average of 15.5 weeks unemployed, and persons with more than 2 spells were unemployed an average of 18.3 weeks (Akerlof and Main (1980) p. 888).

4.

"Family" here refers to a family as defined by the Census Bureau, plus the

Census Bureau concept of "unrelated individuals".
5.

The public unemployment compensation program provides partial insurance

against individual—specific risk in labor income.
6.

In an exact specification, the rate at which future income is discounted,

5, would vary with the ex ante real interest rate. To keep the model

tractable,

the discount factor is approximated as a constant.
7.

[n recent years aggregate annual saving flows (defined as personal saving

plus undistributed corporate profits) have been in the range $l00—$150 billion,
or about 1% to 3% of aggregate nonhuman wealth (assuming, based on the data
in Hayashi (1982, p. 914) that the value of aggregate nonhuman wealth in the

U.S. is in the $5,000—$l0,000 billion range.) Thus even if the real interest
rate is as high as 10%, the change in nonlabor income due to endogenous savings
flows is on the order of .2% per year.
8.

While Hall's approach and the approach followed here lead to the same

restrictions on the reduced form of the consumption equation, the methodology
used in this paper has the advantage that it permits the recovery of the point
estimates of the parameters measuring the excess sensitivity of consumption to

current income and other variables, the . and y., and their individual
standard errors. With Hall's approach, the quantitative importance of a
departure from the predicted behavior of consumption is difficult to assess
since only reduced form

9.

In

coefficients are estimated.

Flavin (1981) the result is proven in the context of the simpler model

considered in that paper. An appendix proving the more general version of the
result appropriate for the model in this paper is available from the author.
10,

Since just—identification of the multivariate model was required to

establish that the estimates and the test statistics were robust with respect
to the approximation concerning capital gains on nonhuman wealth, the point

estimates and test statistics associated with the partially constrained versions,
which are over-identified, do depend on the validity of the approximation.

11. The reduced form covariance matrix was estimated as:
1,678.31
A

=

—35.85

1.507

318.05

—8.612

160.11

References

Akerlof, George A., and Main, BrianG. M. "Unemployment Spells and Unemployment Experience," American Economic Review, 70 (December 1980): 885—893.
and

.

"An Experience—Weighted Measure of Employment and

Unemployment Durations," American Economic Review, 71 (December 1981):
1003—1011.

Ando, Albert, and Modigliani, Franco. "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis of Saving:
Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Review, 53 (March
1963): 55—84.

Baily, Martin Neil. "The Worsening of Unemployment in the United States,"
unpublished paper, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. (1983).

Bernanke, Ben S. "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on Automobiles," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 756
(1981).

Blinder, Alan S. "Temporary Taxes and Consumer Spending," Journal of
Political Economy, 89 (February 1981): 26—53.

Clark, Kim B., and Summers, Lawrence H. "Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment: A Reconsideration," Brookings Papers, Washington, 1979:1, 13—72.

Flavin, Marjorie. "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, 89 (October 1981):
974—1009.

Friedman, Milton. A Theory of the Consumption Function. (General Series 63)
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1957.

Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the

Life

Cycle—Permanent Income

Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 86

(December 17R): 971—87.

Hall, Robert E., and Mishkin, Frederic S. "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
Transitory Income: Estimates from Pane] Data on Households,"
Econometrica, March 1982.

Hausman, Jerry A., "An Instrumental Variable Approach to Full Information
Estimators for Linear and Certain Nonlinear Econometric Models,"
Econometrica, Vol. 43 (July 1975): 727—738.

Hayashi, Fumio. "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and Testing by
Instrumental Variables," Journal of Political Economy, 90 (October 1982):
895—9 16.

___________

"The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A Cross

Sectional Analysis," forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Judge, George C., etal. Introduction to the Theory and Practice of
Econometrics. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1982.
King, Mervyn. "The Economics of Saving," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 1247 (December 1983).

King, Mervyn, and L—D. L. Dicks—Mireaux. "Asset Holdings and the Life—Cycle,"
The Economic Journal, 92 (June 1982): 274—267

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." In The
Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, edited by Karl Brunner and Allan H.

Meltzer. Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1976.
Projector, Dorothy S.

"Survey of Financial Characteristics of Consumers,"

Federal Reserve Bulletin, March 1964, PP. 285—293.

Sargent, Thomas J. "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity and
Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, 86 (August 1978): 673—99.

Appendix to "Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income: Liquidity
Constraints or Myopia?" by Marjorie Flavin

Proof that the likelihood ratio test statistic for the

=0

=

hypothesis

in the multivariate system consisting of equations

(19.1), (19.2), and (21) is numerically identical to the likelihood ratio test
statistic for the hypothesis 7T1= 0 in equation (24).

Write the system in stacked form:

Y=XI1+V

(Al)

where Y is the Tx3 matrix of observations on the endogenous
variables, Y =

[y

z Act]; X is the Tx7 matrix of observations on the prede-

termined variables, X — .11
3't—l t—2 t—3 z1 z2 z3l; V is the Tx3 matrix

of realizations of the reduced form disturbances, V =

[v1

v2 v3); and ri is

the 7x3 matrix of reduced form coefficients.

Let Q denote the 3x3 covariance matrix of the reduced form disturbances
and let P denote the lower triangular matrix P such that PP' =

Q

.

By post—

multiplying equation (Al) by P, one obtains the CLS transformation of the
system:

=

(A2)

1p

+ vt

Since the covarfance matrix of the transformed disturbances is diagonal,
the

value

of the log likelihood function of the three equation system (A2) is

equal to the sum of the values of the log likelihood functions of the three

individual equations. Consider the second equation in the transformed

system. The vector of coefficients of the transformed second equation (given

by the second column of UP) consists of a linear combination of the second and
third columns of [1.

The log likelihood of the transformed second equation is not affected by
restricting the reduced form coefficients of the consumption equation (given
in the third column of U) because each of the parameters in the second column

of 11 is a free parameter. By an analagous argument, one can show that the log
likelihood of the transformed first equation Is not affected by restricting

the reduced form coefficients of the consumption equation. Thus all of the
decrease In the log likelihood function of the three equation system (A2)
associated with the restriction

=

0 is attributable to the decrease in

the log likelihood function of the consumption equation alone.

