NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FURTHER RESULTS ON MEASURING THE WELL-BEING OF THE POOR USING
INCOME AND CONSUMPTION
Bruce D. Meyer
James X. Sullivan
Working Paper 13413
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13413

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We thank Kerwin Charles, Sheldon Danziger, Kara Kane, and Paula Worthington for extremely helpful
comments. We also thank Wallace Mok for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Further Results on Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption
Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 13413
September 2007
JEL No. D31,I31,I32,I38
ABSTRACT
In the U.S., analyses of poverty rates and the effects of anti-poverty programs rely almost exclusively
on income data. In earlier work (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003) we emphasized that conceptual arguments
generally favor using consumption data to measure the well-being of the poor, and, on balance, data
quality issues favor consumption in the case of single mothers. Our earlier work did not show that
income and consumption differ in practice. Here we further examine data quality issues and show
that important conclusions about recent trends depend on whether one uses consumption or income.
Changes in the distribution of resources for single mothers differ sharply in recent years depending
on whether measured by income or consumption. Measures of overall and sub-group poverty also
sharply differ. In addition to examining broader populations and a longer time period, we also consider
new dimensions of data quality such as survey and item nonresponse, imputation, and precision. Finally,
we demonstrate the flaws in a recent paper that compares income and consumption data.
Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
James X. Sullivan
Department of Economics
and Econometrics
447 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu

I.

Introduction
Conceptual arguments generally favor consumption for measuring well-being.

Consumption is a better measure of the long run resources available to the family (their
permanent income) than annual income. Income measures fail to capture differences
across families and over time in the accumulation of assets or access to credit. Also,
consumption is more likely to reflect private and government transfers and the insurance
value of government programs. Nevertheless, poverty and inequality in the U.S. are
almost exclusively measured using annual income. Income is also the primary measure
used to study the effects of anti-poverty programs.1
In earlier work (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003) we emphasized the conceptual and
measurement advantages of consumption over income. However, we did not show that
the choice between income and consumption matters in practice for important outcomes.
This paper shows that the choice between income and consumption matters when
measuring the well-being of the disadvantaged. We compare income data from the
Current Population Survey (CPS)—the official source of income and poverty data in the
U.S.—to consumption data from the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey—the most
comprehensive source of expenditure data. We find a substantial drop in income in the
bottom decile of single mothers while their consumption rises moderately.
The patterns are similar in two income and two consumption datasets. We find that CE
Survey and CPS income at the very bottom are remarkably similar in levels and changes.
These results are important because recent authors have emphasized these income

1

Exceptions include Cutler and Katz (1991), Gruber (1997, 2000), Slesnick (1992, 1993, 2001), Krueger
and Perri (2006), Jencks, Mayer, and Swingle (2004b), Johnson, Smeeding and Torrey (2005), Johnson
(2004), DeLeire and Levy (2006), Kaushal, Gao, and Waldfogel (2006), and Meyer and Sullivan (2003,
2004, 2006a,b, 2007).

1

patterns and used them to evaluate welfare reform (Blank and Schoeni 2003; Murray and
Primus 2005). Also, for those 65 and older, income poverty over the past two decades
falls by 28 percent, while consumption poverty falls by more than half. Deep poverty
and poverty gaps for the U.S. fall sharply when measured using consumption but remain
flat or rise when measured with income.
We present further evidence that consumption is measured better than income at
the bottom of the distribution. Our earlier work emphasized the case of single mothers
while here we show that the results are much broader. We also discuss new dimensions
to data quality including nonresponse, imputation, and the precision of estimates. The
bottom deciles of consumption exceed those for income, suggesting under-reporting of
income. There is a high and rising under-reporting rate for government transfers, a
source of income that is particularly important at the bottom. In addition, the
nonresponse and imputation rates are similar or higher in the CPS than in the CE Survey.
We also document the degree of under-reporting of consumption in the CE Survey, as
well as show that the speculation regarding possible bias due to attrition in the CE Survey
data is unfounded. Finally, low consumption for the worst off among the disadvantaged
seems to be more closely associated with other bad outcomes than is low income. On the
other hand, available consumption data sources have much smaller sample sizes than the
largest income datasets. These smaller samples limit the precision of estimates at the
state or city level, and may require the pooling of years to obtain precisely estimated
changes. As we show, the need for larger samples is significantly offset by the lower
variability and higher predictability of consumption, which reduce the standard errors of
estimates of changes in consumption relative to those for income.

2

The paper proceeds as follows. We first discuss previous studies that examine
income and consumption based measures of well-being of the worst off. We then
describe the CPS and CE Survey data that we use. Next, we document important
differences in recent years for income and consumption based measures of well-being.
We follow with an analysis of several dimensions of the relative data quality in the CPS
and CE Survey. We then examine whether income or consumption does a better job of
predicting measures of well-being at the bottom. Lastly, we offer conclusions and areas
for future research.

II.

Previous Research
A number of studies have documented differences in both levels and trends

between consumption and income based measures of well-being for disadvantaged
families. Cutler and Katz (1991) show that consumption poverty rose more than income
poverty during the 1970s, that both of these poverty measures rose in the early 1980s, but
between 1984 and 1988 income poverty fell while consumption poverty changed little.
They also document differences across these measures within demographic groups.
Johnson (2004) also finds that consumption poverty increased more than income poverty
during the 1970s and then remained steady through 1995. Using alternative equivalence
scales, there is evidence that consumption poverty fell considerably more than income
poverty from 1980 through 1995 (Slesnick 2001). Meyer and Sullivan (2003) show that
expenditures exceed disposable income for disadvantaged groups such as single mothers,
and that the differences are particularly noticeable for those at the very bottom of the
distribution.

3

In contrast to these papers, Bavier (2007) argues that “there is no huge
discrepancy in federal surveys between income and expenditures near the bottom of the
distribution.” This broad conclusion is based on evidence that changes in consumption
poverty are similar to changes in an after-tax disposable income measure. Bavier makes
this strong conclusion even though his measures of income and consumption poverty
move in opposite directions in recent years and these measures diverge sharply for some
demographic groups.
Differences between income and consumption have also been emphasized within
the inequality literature. In general, these studies find that the distribution of
consumption is substantially more equal than that of income (Cutler and Katz, 1991;
Krueger and Perri, 2006; and Johnson, Smeeding, and Torrey, 2005). Krueger and Perri
(2006) note that in recent years significant increases in income inequality have not been
accompanied by a substantial rise in consumption inequality. Similarly, Johnson,
Smeeding, and Torrey (2005) find that consumption inequality increased less than
income inequality between 1981 and 2001. They also show that conclusions regarding
the relative well-being of different demographic groups are sensitive to whether wellbeing is measured using income or consumption.
Some past work has argued that consumption data should not be used to analyze
the well-being of the worst off because patterns for income and consumption poverty are
similar and because consumption data are of low quality at the bottom of the distribution
(Bavier, 2007). We show that Bavier’s conclusions regarding differences between
income and consumption are based on a narrow set of results. Moreover, his analysis of

4

nonresponse ignores item nonresponse, and his analysis of attrition relies on an
inappropriate, non-representative sample.

III.

Data

The Consumer Expenditure Survey
Our main consumption data come from the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview
Survey, which is a rotating panel survey of approximately 7,600 addresses (5,000 prior to
1999) where spending is collected for four consecutive quarters. Expenditures are
reported for each consumer unit (CU), which consists of individuals related by blood or
marriage or who share resources. See the U.S. Department of Labor (various years) for
more details on the CE Survey.
Our analyses will examine both expenditures and consumption. To capture total
out of pocket spending, we define expenditures as all spending reported in the CE Survey
plus principal payments on home mortgages and financed vehicles less the purchase price
for financed vehicles. This measure, sometimes called outlays, follows Rogers and Gray
(1994). To convert reported expenditures into a consumption measure, we make a
number of adjustments. First, to smooth lumpy vehicle expenditures, we convert vehicle
spending to a service flow, following the procedure outlined in Meyer and Sullivan
(2007). Second, we deduct spending on education, health care and outlays for retirement
including pensions and social security which are investments rather than consumption.
Third, we measure housing consumption as the reported rental equivalent of the home for
homeowners and use reported rent payments for non-homeowners. For CUs living in

5

government or subsidized housing, we impute a rental value using geographic
information and the characteristics of the living unit (see Meyer and Sullivan, 2007).
The Current Population Survey
Our main source of income data is the Annual Social and Economic (ASEC)
Supplement, formerly called the Annual Demographic File (ADF), to the CPS which
includes approximately 100,000 households (60,000 prior to 2002). With these data, we
construct two different measures of income: after-tax income plus food stamps and aftertax income plus noncash benefits, which includes food stamps (See the Data Appendix
for more details). The first measure captures the resources available for spending, and is
therefore the measure we use when comparing income and expenditures. Our second
measure, which is more comprehensive, also includes imputed values for housing
subsidies and the school lunch program.2 We use this measure when comparing income
and consumption. The CPS also provides imputed values for other noncash benefits such
as health insurance and the net return on home equity. However, there are a number of
important limitations with these imputed values. For example, the procedure for
imputing Medicare and Medicaid implies that public health insurance has no value for
families with very low resources, which surely understates the value of public health
insurance for this group.3

2

The CE Survey is better designed for imputing values for most noncash benefits. For example, with
detailed information on the characteristics of the living unit, the CE Survey is better suited to impute
housing subsidies. Also, the reported rental equivalent in the CE Survey better captures the value of owner
occupied housing than does the CPS’ imputed net return on equity, which is very sensitive to interest rate
changes (Meyer and Sullivan, 2006a).
3
It is important to note that omitting the imputed value for health insurance cannot reconcile differences
between consumption and income measures because our consumption measure does not include the value
of health insurance.

6

Panel Study of Income Dynamics
The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is a panel survey that has followed
a sample of families, their offspring, and coresidents annually from 1968-1997, and
biennially since 1997. The survey provides detailed economic and demographic
information for both families and individuals for a sample of about 7,000 families each
year. The PSID collects data on a number of different income sources as well as data on
food and housing expenditures at the family level.

IV.

Recent Changes in Income and Consumption at the Bottom
Income and consumption reveal different pictures of how the well-being of the

worst off has changed. In some cases, income and consumption move in opposite
directions in recent years, and often this is the case for the most disadvantaged. Income
and consumption do not differ in all cases or in every time period. However, similarities
for aggregate measures can hide important differences for subgroups.
Some of the sharpest differences in recent years are for families headed by a
single mother. Single mothers are an important group because they were the focus of
recent welfare reforms and tax credit expansions, particularly the Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC). In addition, single mother families account for just under 30 percent of
the poor and nearly 50 percent of all children in poverty.4 Moreover, these families are
the primary recipients of many means-tested transfer programs.
In Figure 1 we report the change in mean consumption and mean income for all
families headed by a single mother by decile between 1993-1995 (before welfare reform)

4

These figures are based on the authors’ calculations using the official definition of poverty and data from
the 1994-2003 CPS ADF/ASEC Supplements.

7

and 1997-2000 (after welfare reform). We report consumption from the CE Survey,
after-tax income plus food stamps from the same survey, this same income measure from
the CPS, and after-tax income plus noncash benefits.5 Two patterns are evident in this
figure. First, there is a sharp difference between changes in consumption and changes in
income over time. In each decile, consumption rises between 6 and 10 percent. In
contrast, income falls sharply, however measured, in the first decile and rises by 5
percentage points more than consumption in deciles 3, 4, and 5. The differences between
the consumption and income changes (for all measures of income) are statistically
significant in deciles 1, 3, 4 and 5. These patterns show that the implications of
consumption and income in evaluating how material well-being changed after welfare
reform are sharply different. Second, there is a striking similarity between changes in
CE Survey and CPS income, measured on a comparable basis. The changes never differ
by more than a few percentage points, and usually the difference is quite a bit smaller.6
These patterns are also evident when we examine changes at each percentile, as
shown in Figure 2. Again, we see that the patterns for CPS and CE income are
remarkably similar. They show the same negative pattern in the low percentiles and the
same peak at the 30th percentile.7 We should reiterate that these are from different
datasets. On the other hand, changes in consumption differ significantly from changes in
comprehensive income.
5

We restrict our CE Survey sample to those designated as “complete income reporters” (see U.S.
Department of Labor, various years).
6
Several studies note that income from the CE Survey is, on average, well below comparable CPS numbers
(Cutler and Katz, 1991; Bavier, 2007). A key reason for this is that a large share of CPS income is
imputed, whereas, prior to 2004, all missing CE Survey income components are set to zero. Figure 1
shows that even without income imputation in the CE Survey, changes in the percentiles of income line up
fairly closely for single mothers. While this is not a broad validation of CE Survey income, it indicates that
income data for certain subgroups of the population are reasonably comparable across surveys.
7
These patterns for income are similar to those in Blank and Schoeni (2003) and Murray and Primus
(2005).

8

We have performed extensive robustness checks that validate the findings in
Figures 1 and 2. We have shown that our conclusions about changes in income and
consumption during the 1990s for single mothers are not sensitive to the inclusion of
incomplete income reporters in the CE Survey; do not change if we use only the first
interview that an address is in the sample for the CE Survey; and are very similar for
broadly defined samples of single parents. The results in Figures 1 and 2 are calculated
using the NAS recommended equivalence scale, but we verify that these patterns are very
similar using the scale implicit in the official poverty thresholds.
The characteristics of the single mother population are changing over time, and
these changes may affect both income and consumption. To address this concern, we
estimate quantile regressions of the following form:
ln(Ziq) = β1 + β21{year=(1997-2000)} + β31{year=(2001-2003)} + Xiq β4 + εiq

(1)

where the dependent variable is the log of equivalence scale adjusted consumption or
income for family i in quarter q; 1{year=(1997-2000)} and 1{year=(2001-2003)} are period dummies;
Xiq is a vector of demographic characteristics including a cubic in the age of the head, the
number of children less than 18, the number of girls age 2-15, the number of boys age 215, education and race of the head, and region; and εiq is a household-quarter error term.8
Columns 1 and 3 of Table 1, report estimates at various quantiles for β2 and β3 when no
demographic controls are included (β4 = 0). As expected, these estimates are in close
agreement with those plotted in Figure 2. The estimates for the specifications including
demographic controls are reported in Columns 2 and 4. Adding controls has little effect
on the trend for consumption, although changes between the 1993-1995 and 2001-2003

8

We calculate bootstrap standard errors, resampling at the household level, rather than at the householdquarter level in order to allow for within household dependence.

9

periods shift downward somewhat. Estimates for income that account for changes in the
characteristics of single mothers no longer exhibit large increases above the bottom
quintile. In fact, these income trends mirror those for consumption very closely above
the 15th percentile. However, the addition of demographic controls has little effect on
changes in income at the bottom. Income still falls between 1993-1995 and 1997-2000
by 19 percent at the 5th percentile and by 8 percent at the 10th percentile and the former
change is significant. We also estimated Equation 1 for the sample of single mothers in
the CPS (not reported). Consistent with the pattern for CE Survey income, in the CPS we
find that much of the significant rise in income above the bottom decile reported in
Figures 1 and 2 disappears with the addition of demographic controls. However, as in the
CE Survey, we still see a sharp drop in income in the bottom decile.
Table 1 also presents estimates for changes in income and consumption relative to
two comparison groups: single women without children and married mothers. These
comparison groups provide an indication as to whether the changes we observe are part
of a larger pattern of change for other groups due to survey changes or macroeconomic
conditions, or other sources. In particular, for a sample including single mothers and a
comparison group we estimate specifications similar to Equation 1 that also include
interactions of a single mother indicator with each of the three period indicators.
Columns 5 through 8 report, for various percentiles, the difference between the
coefficient on this interaction with the first period and this interaction with each of the
later periods. These results are consistent with the pattern for the absolute changes. At
percentiles below the 25th, consumption for single mothers rises modestly, but in many
cases significantly, relative to both comparison groups. At percentiles above the 25th, the

10

change in relative consumption is very small. Changes in relative income mirror those
for consumption above the 25th percentile. However, we again see noticeable differences
at the bottom, where relative income falls for single mothers at the 5th and 10th
percentiles, and this drop is significant for the all mothers sample.
If recent macroeconomic changes affect these three groups similarly, then the
trends in Columns 5 through 8 suggest that recent changes in welfare and tax policy had a
modest positive effect on consumption for single mothers in the bottom quartile, and a
very small effect on both consumption and income at higher percentiles.9
Figure 3 reports income and consumption measures from the PSID. PSID food
consumption exhibits little change during this period. This is similar to the pattern for
food consumption in the CE Survey, although for the CE Survey food falls in the bottom
half of the distribution. While the PSID does not provide data on total consumption, data
are available for housing spending. Together, food and housing account for more than
seventy percent of total consumption for single mothers (Meyer and Sullivan, 2006b).10
The trend for food and housing in the PSID is fairly similar to the trend for total
consumption in the CE Survey shown in Figure 2. These results show that the
consumption changes are not an anomaly due to some aspect of the CE Survey. The
trends for PSID income show increases over most percentiles. These trends are quite
similar to those for the CPS and the CE Survey except in the bottom quintile. Other

9

These three groups of women have similar wages, and this similarity is especially strong for the two
groups of single women and when one conditions on educational attainment. Previous research has shown
that employment for single women without children responds in a similar way to changes in aggregate
unemployment as does employment for single mothers (Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001).
10
Housing in the PSID includes rent for renters, a service flow based on the market value of the home for
owners, and a reported rental equivalent for non-homeowners that do not pay any rent. Unlike the CE
housing measure, it does not include utilities. See Data Appendix for more details.

11

research indicates that this rise at the bottom in the PSID is due to unusually low levels of
reported income in the PSID during the 1993-1995 period.11
In a separate study we compare the recent patterns for consumption and income
poverty (Meyer and Sullivan, 2006a). Differences in income and consumption trends are
less evident for measures of overall poverty. For example, the pattern for consumption
based poverty is quite similar to the pattern for poverty based on after-tax income plus
noncash benefits for the years from 1984-2000, although these measures move in
opposite directions in recent years. Similarities for overall head count poverty mask
important differences between income and consumption for key poverty statistics for the
entire population. For example, the fraction of people below half the poverty line (or
deep poverty) measured using income has risen in the last 20 years, while deep poverty
measured using consumption has fallen sharply. Sharp differences are also evident for
measures of the poverty gap, or the cumulative amount needed to raise the resources of
poor families up to the poverty line.
For children we find that income poverty falls more than consumption poverty.
On the other hand, the fall in income poverty for those 65 and older in recent decades is
sharply smaller than the decline in consumption poverty (Meyer and Sullivan 2006a,
2007). 12 It is not surprising that some of the biggest differences between income and
consumption would appear for the elderly. For this group, current income is likely to be
11

Gouskova and Schoeni (2002) compare PSID and CPS income between 1970 and 2001 for many points
in the distribution. They show that below the 20th percentile PSID income exceeds CPS income for the
years prior to 1990. In the early 1990s, however, PSID income at low percentiles falls sharply relative to
CPS income, and after 1997 PSID income at these low percentiles grows at a much faster rate than does
CPS income.
12
This pattern is consistent with Bavier (2007) who shows that between 1984 and 2004, consumption
poverty for those 65 and over fell by more than sixty percent, while income poverty actually increased.
Despite these clear differences, Bavier concludes that “comprehensive income and consumption poverty
rates are similar for all age groups.”

12

a poor measure of the resources available for consumption, because the elderly are more
likely to be drawing down saving and enjoying the benefits of previous purchases of
homes and cars.
The results presented here show that income and consumption measures often tell
very different stories about how the well-being of disadvantaged households has changed
over the past two decades. These findings are consistent with previous research that has
also shown that there are important differences (Cutler and Katz, 1991; Slesnick 1993,
2001; Johnson, 2004). However, these findings contrast sharply with Bavier (2007) who
argues that there are not large differences between income and consumption at the
bottom.

V.

Data Quality Issues
In order to assess whether the patterns for income or consumption more

accurately capture the well-being of the disadvantaged, we investigate measurement
issues for income and consumption at the bottom of the distribution, examining underreporting, survey and item nonresponse, the precision of consumption estimates, and
attrition.
Under-reporting of Income and Consumption
Concerns regarding income under-reporting are well documented (Moore et al.,
2000; Coder and Scoon-Rogers, 1996; Roemer, 2000; Meyer and Sullivan 2006b, Meyer,
Mok, and Sullivan, 2007). One concern that is particularly relevant for disadvantaged
households is the extent of under-reporting of transfer income. We compare weighted
micro-data from several national surveys to administrative aggregates for several transfer

13

programs and the EITC. These ratios, which are reported in Figure 4, provide a
reasonable estimate of the fraction of dollars received that are reported in the CPS.13 This
analysis indicates that the reporting rate for most transfer programs is quite low, and for
some programs, such as AFDC/TANF and food stamps, the reporting rate has been
falling sharply over time. In the most recent year the share of TANF dollars reported in
the CPS was 54 percent, and the fraction of food stamps dollars reported was 57 percent.
The corresponding shares for unemployment insurance, Supplemental Security Income
(SSI), workers’ compensation, and the EITC were 63, 78, 48 and 74 percent. Meyer,
Mok, and Sullivan (2007) also report sharp under-reporting of transfers in the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP).
The potential effect of changes in under-reporting on recent income trends is
unclear. On the one hand, sharp increases in under-reporting of transfer income could
lead to a significant downward bias in changes in measured income. On the other hand,
for some of these programs, such as AFDC/TANF, true receipt also declined significantly
in recent years. Consequently, the number of dollars not reported rose slowly between
1993 and 2000. Thus, at least for AFDC/TANF, it is possible that declining true receipt
could reverse much of the effect of a lower reporting rate. In addition, the shift from
welfare to work could bias income trends upward as labor market earnings replace
welfare income, because this change represents a shift from a source that is significantly
under-reported to one that is typically well-reported (Roemer, 2000). Nevertheless, in

13

False positive reporting by nonrecipients would lead the ratio to overstate reporting by true recipients.
Some differences in the sample universe, such as the exclusion of those living abroad and in institutions,
leads to some understatement of reporting.

14

Meyer and Sullivan (2006b) we conclude that under-reporting of transfers can explain
more than half of the decline in income in the bottom decile that we report in Figure 1.
Strong evidence that income is under-reported at the bottom of the distribution is
that expenditures exceed income. In Table 2 we report percentiles of the income
distribution from the CPS, and percentiles of the income and expenditure distributions
from the CE Survey. 14 We examine expenditures rather than consumption, because the
former should equal after-tax income in the absence of saving or dissaving. For all
families (Panel A), the 5th percentile of the CE Survey expenditures distribution is 44
percent higher than the 5th percentile of the CPS income distribution, which is close to the
mid point of the distribution for the poor. A difference is also evident, but much less
extreme, at the 10th percentile where CE Survey expenditures exceed CPS income by 8
percent. Average expenditures for families below the 5th percentile of expenditures are
more than three times greater than the average income for all families below the 5th
percentile of income (compare Rows 2 and 7).
We should note that the CE Survey expenditure numbers that we report should
really be scaled up in comparison to the CPS numbers because they are four times a
quarterly number, whereas income is annual. The quarterly numbers will be more
variable compared to annual numbers leading low percentiles to be lower than they
would be with annual expenditure numbers. By examining observations where we have
both four quarterly numbers and annual numbers, we find that the 5th percentile should be

14

We use after-tax income plus food stamps rather than a more comprehensive income measure, because
the former is more comparable to expenditures. See the data section for more details.

15

adjusted upward by 11 percent and the 10th percentile by 10 percent.15 Thus, the true
discrepancies between income and consumption at the bottom are even larger than those
reported in Table 2.
By looking at income and expenditures within the CE Survey, we can compare
these measures for the same families in the bottom of the income distribution (compare
Rows 4 and 8) or the bottom of the expenditure distribution (compare Rows 5 and 7).
Expenditures exceed income by a factor of 7.12 in the bottom five percent of the income
distribution, while income exceeds expenditures by only a factor of 1.55 in the bottom
five percent of the expenditure distribution. Bavier (2007) is critical of such
comparisons, because they rely on CE Survey income, which he claims is inferior.
However, as evident from comparing Rows 1 and 3, the 5th and 10th percentiles of CE
Survey income are fairly similar to the corresponding percentiles of the CPS income
distribution. The 5th percentile differs by 3 percent and the 10th by 9 percent.16 CPS
income exceeds CE Survey income at higher percentiles which is not surprising given
that the CPS imputes missing values of income components while the CE Survey sets
them to zero.
Similarities between CE Survey income and CPS income are even stronger for the
sample of all single mothers (Panel B). For this group, the percentiles of CPS income
exceed those of CE Survey income by only a few percent through at least the median.
The 5th percentile of CE Survey income even exceeds that from the CPS. Moreover, we

15

These adjustment factors are based on the results in Appendix Table A.1 which compares the distribution
of expenditures based on annualized quarterly expenditures to that based on annual expenditures using
those observations where we have both four quarterly numbers and annual numbers.
16
We do not interpret the similarity between CE Survey income and CPS income as indicating that CE
income is of high quality. Rather, these similarities suggest they we should be concerned about the quality
of income at the bottom in both surveys.

16

showed in Figures 1 and 2 that changes in income for single mothers are very similar
across the two surveys. For this group, expenditures exceed income by a factor of 3.8 for
those in the bottom income decile (Rows 12 and 16) and by a factor of 2.4 for those in the
bottom income quintile. Again, there is evidence that CE Survey expenditures exceed
CPS income (Rows 9 and 14). Expenditures are nearly 50 percent greater than CPS
income when comparing the 5th percentiles, and spending exceeds income by more than
25 percent at the 20th percentile.
In addition to the reasons discussed above, we have focused on single mothers in
some of our previous work because it allows us to examine a disadvantaged group
without conditioning on low income or low consumption. For example, an alternative
interpretation of the finding that expenditure percentiles exceed income percentiles is that
households are able to draw down assets (that saving and dissaving explain the
difference). This pattern would be consistent with the permanent income hypothesis.
Based on the very low asset holdings of single mothers (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003,
2006b), we do not think the permanent income hypothesis is the key explanation for this
group. Thus, we conclude that for this large group of the poor, the explanation for the
difference is likely to be under-reporting.
Another potential explanation for the differences between income and
consumption shown in Table 2 is that expenditures are over-reported. However, there is
little evidence of over-reporting of expenditures. Rather, past work (Gieseman, 1987;
Slesnick, 1992; Garner et al., 2006; Attanasio et al., 2006; Hassett et al., 2007) has
emphasized concerns about under-reporting of expenditures in the CE Survey. This
literature has compared CE Survey aggregates with Personal Consumption Expenditure

17

(PCE) data from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), noting that the
CE/PCE ratio is about 0.62 in recent years. Some of this evidence is easily
misinterpreted and is less applicable to the current analyses than it may seem for several
reasons. First, many published comparisons are based on the integrated data that
combine CE Diary and CE Interview data rather than the Interview data used exclusively
here. Second, the poor consume a different bundle of goods than non-poor families, so
that aggregate analyses do not reflect the composition of consumption for the poor.
Third, the PCE numbers cover a different population, are defined differently from the CE,
and are the product of a great deal of estimation and imputation that is subject to error.
One should not expect expenditures weighted by the population to match PCE
aggregates. The Bureau of Economic Analysis reported that in 1992 more than half of
the difference between PCE and CE Survey consumer spending was due to coverage and
definitional differences (summarized in GAO, 1996).
In Table 3 we report comparisons of CE Interview Survey values weighted by
population to corresponding categories of PCE data, focusing on categories of
expenditures that are a large share of spending by the poor: food and rent. These
comparisons show that reporting rates for components of consumption that are
particularly important to poor families are higher and steadier than the rates for
expenditures as a whole. Between 1984 and 2002, the CE/PCE ratio for food at home
was, on average, about 0.80, and for rent plus utilities the ratio was about 0.95. The ratio
for rent plus utilities remained virtually unchanged between these two years.

18

Survey and Item Nonresponse
Measures of nonresponse are often used to evaluate the quality of data from a
survey (Atrostic et al., 2001; Atrostic and Kalenkoski, 2002). Nonresponse can bias
statistical analyses if those who do not respond are different from those who do.
Nonresponse is often divided into survey nonresponse and item nonresponse. Survey
nonresponse includes cases where no information is obtained for a sample household for
reasons such as inability to contact any person in the household or a refusal to respond by
those contacted. Item nonresponse occurs when a respondent provides some information,
but does not provide valid information on a given item. In the case of item nonresponse,
the CPS ADF/ASEC imputes values for income based on the individual’s or household’s
characteristics. Similarly, the CE Survey provides imputed values for expenditures.
In Table 4 we report the survey nonresponse rate and the fraction of dollars
imputed for income in the CPS and for expenditures in the CE Interview Survey from
1993 through 2003.17 Survey nonresponse is similar in the early 1990s, but the survey
nonresponse rate for the CE Survey has risen to about 5 percentage points higher in the
most recent years. The evidence in Columns 3-6 indicates that imputation is much more
prevalent in the CPS. We calculate imputation rates as the fraction of income or
expenditures that are imputed. For pre-tax money income, CPS imputation rates start out
5 percentage points higher than CE Survey rates in 1993, and this difference has
increased in recent years. We also examine after-tax income plus Food Stamps, which is
a better measure of the resources available to the family and is more comparable to

17

We have adopted the convention that when a person responds to the monthly CPS survey but not to the
ADF/ASEC supplement (the source of annual income data) we treat that situation as survey nonresponse
and do not include it in the imputation rates (even though all income data are imputed in this case). This
convention insures that we do not double count such cases as both survey nonresponse and imputation.

19

expenditures.18 We consider two ways of handling the tax imputations even though, in
fact, all taxes are imputed in the CPS. First, we consider taxes to be imputed if more than
half of pre-tax income is imputed. Second, we consider all taxes to be imputed. Under
the first assumption (Column 4), imputation rates for the CPS are between 15 and 27
percentage points higher than the CE Survey rates. Under the second assumption, when
all taxes are considered to be imputed (Column 5), imputation rates in the CPS range
from 34 to 47 percentage points higher than the CE Survey. While it is unclear which is
the preferred measure to use, it should be evident that imputation rates are much higher in
the CPS. A total measure of nonresponse can be calculated as: Total nonresponse =
survey nonresponse + (1-survey nonresponse)*imputation rate. Such a measure shows
much higher total nonresponse in the CPS than the CE Survey.19 A complete discussion
of nonresponse would analyze the nonrandomness of nonresponse and the accuracy of
imputations, but such analyses are beyond the scope of this paper.
Our results for nonresponse are in sharp contrast to a recent study that argues that
nonresponse is more problematic in the CE Survey than in the CPS (Bavier, 2007). This
argument, however, ignores item nonresponse, which we have shown above to be greater
for CPS income than for CE Survey expenditures. In addition, the discussion of survey
nonresponse in Bavier (2007) is inaccurate and misleading.20

18

Alternatively, one could compare consumption to a more comprehensive measure of income, both of
which include additional imputed components. Typically, these additional components are added to both
income and consumption, such as the value of owner occupied housing or the value of housing subsidies.
19
This measure of total nonresponse treats survey and item nonresponse equally. A more sophisticated
measure would reflect the degree of nonrandomness in the two sources of nonresponse and the imputation
error in the case of item nonresponse.
20
First, in choosing survey nonresponse rates for the CPS to compare to the CE, Bavier reports the rates
for the monthly CPS (which is a ten minute long survey that does not include the income questions) rather
than the rates for the ASEC (a lengthy survey which includes the income questions). Later, Bavier reports
a survey nonresponse rate for the CE Survey of 27.5 percent and a “comparable” rate for the CPS of 14.4
percent. As shown in Column 1 of Table 3, the latter rate is at the bottom of the range of survey

20

The Precision of Poverty Measures and the Lower Variability of Consumption
One advantage of the CPS ADF/ASEC relative to the CE Survey as currently
designed is that the former survey has a much larger sample, which provides more
precise estimates of certain statistics. The CPS ASEC currently includes approximately
100,000 households, while the CE Interview Survey includes approximately 7,600
households. A given household in the CE Survey provides up to four consumption
observations over the year which narrows the gap in sample size. This smaller sample
size suggests that current survey data for examining consumption at the state or local
level, and changes from one year to the next may be fairly imprecise. For statistics such
as the head count poverty rate where precision is roughly proportional to the square root
of the sample size, this smaller sample size is especially important. For other statistics,
the lower variability of consumption may outweigh the small sample size.
Past work has argued that smaller sample sizes in the CE Survey necessarily
imply that consumption is less precise (Citro and Michael 1995; Bavier 2007). These
arguments are overstated, because they omit the fact that the variance of income is much
larger than that of consumption and income is less predictable, which negatively affects
the precision of income based statistics. The lower variability of consumption means that
fewer consumption observations than income observations are needed to obtain a given
level of precision or significance in some common types of analyses.

nonresponse rates for the CPS between 1993 and 2003. More importantly, the nonresponse rate Bavier
reports for the CE Survey is incorrect. It is not the fraction of eligible interviews that are not completed.
Rather, this statistic counts as noninterviews those cases where an interview was not intended because the
residence was vacant, under construction, demolished, etc. (Reyes-Morales, 2005, Tables 1 and 2). These
ineligibles account for nearly half of all noninterviews used to compute the statistic that Bavier reports.
The true rate is much closer to the CPS rate. Comparing the average survey nonresponse rate in Table 3
across surveys we find that survey nonresponse for the CE Survey exceeds that for the CPS ADF/ASEC by
4.4 percentage points—or less than half the difference reported in Bavier (2007).

21

To demonstrate this point, we estimated a typical regression that is used to
determine the change over time for one group relative to a comparison group. For
example, we regress income or consumption on time period indicators interacted with
demographic group indicators while controlling for other demographic characteristics.
Results from these regressions, reported in Table 5, indicate that consumption can
provide more precise estimates. The mean ratio of the income based standard errors to
the consumption based standard errors, depending on the dataset and comparison group
used, ranges from 1.66 to 2.07.21 The lower consumption based standard errors were due
to a sharply lower variance of consumption and a much higher predictability of
consumption (higher R2 ) as can be seen in the last two rows of each panel of Table 5.
Since the standard error is proportional to the inverse of the square root of the sample
size, these ratios indicate that each consumption observation is worth about 3 or 4 income
observations in terms of precision and the ability to test hypotheses. Thus, even a
relatively small consumption dataset may be as useful as a larger income dataset for
certain common analyses. Nevertheless, the sample size of the CE Survey would need to
be increased in order to obtain estimates of consumption based poverty rates for small
geographic areas or for very narrow demographic groups.
Attrition and Other Robustness Issues
We verify that the consumption patterns for disadvantaged families from the CE
Survey, such as those presented in Section IV or Table 2, are not biased due to
nonrandom attrition in the CE Survey or sample restrictions such as the exclusion of
incomplete income reporters. We show in Table 6 that differences in spending between
21

The number of observations with nonmissing income data is slightly smaller than those with
consumption data, but this difference accounts for only a tiny share of the difference in these comparisons.
Significantly larger standard errors for income are also evident in the results presented in Table 1.

22

complete income reporters and incomplete income reporters is not large enough to
change substantially the distribution of consumption for the bottom half of the
distribution (compare Rows 1 and 2 for each sample). For all families, the percentiles of
consumption for the samples that include only complete income reporters (our base
sample) never differ by more than 2 percent from the percentiles for the full sample. For
specific disadvantaged groups, the differences are typically less than 2.5 percent.22 None
of the analyses of consumption or expenditures that we present in this paper are sensitive
to the inclusion or exclusion of incomplete income reporters.23
To examine how attrition might bias our analyses of consumption, Table 6 also
reports various percentiles for a sample that only includes data from second quarter
interviews. Second quarter interviews are the first for which the full survey is
administered for each sampling unit (the first interview just gathers baseline information).
The CE Survey is a sample of addresses, not consumer units (CUs). Those who move
away from their sample address between interviews are dropped from the survey, while
those moving into a sample address are included in the survey after being screened for
eligibility (U.S. Department of Labor, various years). These first full interviews for
housing units (second quarter interviews) are close to a random sample of housing units
as is intended in the survey. As is evident by comparing Rows 2 and 3 for all families,
and within each demographic group, the bottom part of the distribution for the second
22

A similar analysis for expenditures indicates that the differences for these percentiles are never greater
than five percent.
23
This contradicts claims by Bavier (2007) that “Expenditures of CE ‘complete income reporters’ are not
representative of all consumer units.” Bavier argues that average expenditures for complete income
reporters exceed those of other consumer units. However, most of the difference is due to differences in
spending on insurance and pensions, which is typically excluded from measures of consumption.
Moreover this difference arises because income data are used to impute this insurance component.
Whether income data are complete matters crucially for this imputation. When insurance is excluded,
spending for complete income reporters is only slightly higher than spending for incomplete income
reporters.

23

quarter interview sample is remarkably similar to that of the full sample. This suggests
that including data from interviews beyond the second quarter does not bias analyses of
consumption, even within demographic groups.
Bavier (2007) examines attrition by restricting his sample to the first reported
interview for each consumer unit (not housing unit). For this sample, he compares
consumption across CUs that differ in the number of quarters of reported expenditures.
Thus, he is comparing samples that have different shares of CUs that have just moved
residences. For example, the four quarter sample will be CUs who never move during
the sample period, while movers will be over-represented in the one quarter sample.
These samples are all non-representative and should differ from each other even when
attrition is random. Comparisons of consumption across these non-representative
samples lead Bavier to conclude mistakenly that “sample loss is negatively related to
economic status.” The fourth row of each panel in Table 6 reports consumption
percentiles for Bavier’s unconventional sample of first reported interview for each CU. It
is not surprising that expenditures for this sample that over-represents movers are lower
than for other samples.

VI.

Consumption and Income as Predictors of Well-Being
The relative quality of income and consumption data at the bottom can be

investigated by determining whether low consumption or low income is more closely
associated with other bad outcomes (Meyer and Sullivan, 2003). We examine whether
low values of income or consumption are more closely related to poor health, disability,
and worse values of measures of material well-being such as the size of the residence,
number of cars, whether the family took a vacation, and whether the family has access to
24

certain appliances within the dwelling unit. Table 7 examines how outcomes differ for
families in the bottom five percent of the consumption and income distributions
compared to all other families using CE Survey and PSID data. Column 1 reports the
mean value of each outcome for those in the bottom five percent of the income
distribution, while Column 2 reports the mean for those in the top ninety-five percent of
the income distribution. If higher values of the outcome are better, as we expect given
the way all outcomes are defined in the table, the difference in Column 3 should be
negative if those at the bottom of the income distribution fare worse than others.
Similarly, in Columns 4 through 6 we report the same statistics for groups defined by
their place in the consumption distribution. Column 7 reports the key difference-indifferences summary measure, which should be negative if low consumption is a better
indicator of bad outcomes than is low income.
The results in this table indicate that low consumption is usually a better indicator
of hardship than income. For the CE Survey, the negative values in Columns 3 and 6
indicate that in all cases, those in the bottom 5 percent of income or consumption
experience worse material conditions than those above the bottom 5 percent. Column 7
indicates that in all cases low consumption is a clearer indicator of worse outcomes than
low income. Moreover, in all but three of these cases, the statistic in Column 7 is
significantly different from zero.
The PSID results are less strong, but still favor consumption. Seven of the ten
statistics in Column 7 are negative, which favors consumption, and four of these are
significant. Surprisingly, low income seems to be significantly more closely associated
with low automobile ownership than is low consumption in the PSID. We should note

25

that consumption is handicapped in the PSID, where we believe the income data are of
higher quality than the consumption data, while the reverse is true in the CE Survey.
Also, the results are likely biased towards favoring income in the PSID due to the longer
reference period for income (the previous calendar year) than food expenditures (a typical
week).
We also examine the relationship between low consumption, low income, and the
same outcomes listed in Table 7 for a number of disadvantaged groups such as all single
mother headed families, families with a head age 65 and over, and families with a
disabled head. We summarize the results of these analyses in Table 8, by reporting the
number favoring income (the difference-in-differences statistic is positive) and the
number favoring consumption (the difference-in-differences statistic is negative). The
evidence from the CE Survey again strongly favors consumption, and in most cases this
evidence is statistically significant. For the PSID, we also see more of these outcomes
favoring consumption than income within each of these disadvantaged groups. However,
due to small sample sizes for these groups, the results from the PSID are not very precise.
Charles et al. (2006) perform a similar analysis to ours for a sample of those 53
and over using the 2001 Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS) of the Health
and Retirement Study (HRS). For the full sample, they find that income is more strongly
associated with measures of well-being than their measure of consumption. However, for
the bottom decile (roughly those who are poor) the evidence strongly favors consumption
for physical health and wealth measures. The evidence is mixed for housing and
neighborhood measures, and strongly favors income for measures of mental health in the
past week and food hardship. It is somewhat surprising to find even modest support for

26

consumption given that the HRS focuses on income while the consumption data come
from a supplement mailed to a subsample of HRS households.
Using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), Bavier
(2007) indicates that income is more strongly correlated with material hardship than is
expenditures. However, his measure of expenditures from the SIPP is inappropriate for
this analysis because it includes components that may indicate worse well-being, such as
out of pocket medical expenses, child care, and work expenses, and because consumption
of owner-occupied housing is measured using mortgage payments—an approach most
researchers examining consumption have rejected (Cutler and Katz, 1991; Slesnick,
1993; Meyer and Sullivan, 2003, 2004). Using an alternative consumption measure that
is as good as one can do with the limited information in the SIPP, we find that its
correlation with the various hardship measures is the same or higher than that of
income.24 This result is especially striking because the SIPP provides probably the best
measure of income available in any standard household dataset (Citro and Michael, 1995;
Meyer, Mok and Sullivan, 2007), while the consumption data are based on a little used
supplement that provides only about half of total spending and misses key components
such as food consumption.

VII.

Discussion and Conclusions
This paper shows that recent changes in income and consumption differ sharply

for some disadvantaged groups and measures of poverty. For example, following welfare
reform, reported income for the bottom decile of single mothers fell as some past authors

24

Specifically, we sum utilities, rent, and the flow values of homes and vehicles, which are calculated
based on the reported values of these durables.

27

have emphasized, but we show reported consumption rose. In many cases where income
and consumption patterns diverge, consumption measures show greater improvements
than income measures. However, the reverse is true for child poverty. This paper also
addresses standard criticisms of the quality of consumption data. These criticisms
usually focus on sample size, measurement error, and the declining share of NIPA
consumption captured by the CE Survey. We present substantial evidence that
consumption data are measured better than income data at the bottom of the distribution.
This empirical evidence supports conceptual arguments that generally favor consumption.
The bottom deciles of expenditures exceed those for income suggesting under-reporting
of income. There is a high and rising under-reporting rate for government transfers, a
source of income that is particularly important at the bottom. In addition, the
nonresponse and imputation rates are similar or higher in our source of official income
data than in our main source of consumption data. Finally, low consumption for the
worst off among the disadvantaged seems to be more closely associated with other bad
outcomes than is low income. The results favoring consumption are strongest when
examining the bottom 5 or 10 percent of the distribution; the evidence is more mixed
higher up in the distribution, particularly for those 65 and over. The evidence favors
consumption, or is mixed, in surveys such as the PSID, SIPP, and HRS-CAMS. Given
that these surveys focus on income or have incomplete measures of consumption, this
evidence is even a stronger endorsement of consumption.
The findings in this paper are in sharp contrast to Bavier (2007). We show that
these differences arise because Bavier draws broad conclusions based on a narrow set of
results and employs inappropriate procedures for studying data quality. For example,

28

Bavier (2007) claims that “there is no huge discrepancy in federal surveys between
income and expenditures near the bottom of the distribution.” This conclusion is based
on results for overall poverty only, ignoring large differences between income and
consumption for key demographic groups, as well as divergent trends in poverty gaps and
deep poverty, and other differences. Bavier (2007) also suggests that income data are of
higher quality than consumption data. However, we show that Bavier’s conclusions
regarding nonresponse are flawed because he reports non-comparable numbers for survey
nonresponse and he completely ignores item nonresponse. In addition, his analysis of
sample attrition is based on an unconventional, non-representative sample. Finally, we
show that Bavier’s analysis of the correlation between hardship measures and income or
consumption depends on an expenditure measure that heavily weights items such as child
care, work expenses, and out of pocket medical expenses that are conventionally left out
of consumption. Using the same dataset, we find that a more conventional and
appropriate consumption measure reverses his result.
Although the evidence presented here indicates that greater attention should be
given to consumption when studying the well-being of disadvantaged households and the
effects of anti-poverty programs, there are some important limitations of consumption
data. For example, income data are easier to collect for determining individual program
eligibility. Also, the sample sizes in the best consumption datasets currently available are
too small to measure precisely poverty for small geographic areas or to measure year to
year changes.
Differences between income and consumption at the bottom remain a puzzle. The
relative importance of unreported income and saving or dissaving is not clear, especially

29

for groups besides single mothers. Further research is needed to examine the reasons for
these differences. In addition, more research is needed on how to obtain a reasonable
consumption measure from a small set of questions, as examined in Browning et al.,
2003, and on how to synthesize questions about expenditures and durable holdings into
consumption measures.

30

References
Atrostic, B.K. and Kalenkoski, C., 2002, “Item Response Rates: One Indicator of How
Well We Measure Income.” In proceedings of the annual meetings of the
American Statistical Association (ASA), August 11-15.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin, and Andrew Leicester. 2006. “From Micro to
Macro, from Poor to Rich: Consumption and Income in the UK and the US,”
working paper, University College London.
Bavier, R. (2007), “Income and Expenditure Data in Poverty Measurement.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, forthcoming.
Blank, Rebecca and Robert Schoeni, “Changes in the Distribution of Child Well-Being
Over the 1990s, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2003,
93(2): 304-308.
Browning, M., Crossley, T. F. and Weber, G., 2003. "Asking Consumption Questions in
General Purpose Surveys." Economic Journal, 113 (November), F540-F567.
Burtless, G. and Smeeding, T. 2001. “The Level, Trend, and Composition of Poverty.”
In S. Danziger and R. Haveman, eds., Understanding Poverty, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 27–68.
Charles, K. K., Danziger, S., Pounder, L., and Schoeni, R.F. 2006. “Consumption,
Income, and Well-Being Among the Mature Population,” National Poverty Center
working paper, April 2006.
Citro, C. F. and Michael, R. T. (1995). Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Coder, J. and Scoon-Rogers, L. 1996. “Evaluating the Quality of Income Data Collected
in the Annual Supplement to the March Current Population Survey and the
Survey of Income and Program Participation.” Housing and Household Economic
Statistics Division. Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Cutler, D. M. and Katz, L.F. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.
Edin, K. and Lein, L. 1997. Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive Welfare
and Low-Wage Work. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
General Accounting Office. 1996. “Alternative Poverty Measures,” GAO/GGD-96183R. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Gieseman, R. 1987. “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: quality control by
comparative analysis,” Monthly Labor Review, 8-14.
Gouskova, Elena, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2002. “Comparing Estimates of Family
Income in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and March Current Population
Survey, 1968-1999.” Working paper, Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan.
Gruber, J.. (1997). The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.
American Economic Review, 87(1), 192-205.
Jencks, C., S. E. Mayer, and J. Swingle. 2004. “Who Has Benefitted from Economic
Growth in the United States Since 1969? The Case of Children.” in E. N. Wolff,
ed. What Has Happened to the Quality of Live in the Advanced Industrial
Nations? Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

31

Joint Economic Committee Democrats (JEC). 2004. “Reduction in Poverty Significantly
Greater in the 1990s than Official Estimates Suggest,” Policy Brief, August.
Johnson, D. S., Smeeding, T. M., and Torrey, B.B. 2005. Economic Inequality Through
the Prisms of Income and Consumption. Monthly Labor Review. April, 11-24.
Krueger, D. and Perri, F. 2006. “Does Income Inequality lead to Consumption
Inequality? Evidence and Theory” Review of Economic Studies 73, pp. 163-193.
Marquis, K. H. and Moore, J. C. 1990. “Measurement Errors in SIPP Program Reports.”
In Proceedings of the 1990 Annual Research Conference, 721-745. Washington,
DC.: U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CXVI, 1063-1114.
Meyer, B. D., Mok, W. K. C. and Sullivan, J. X. 2007. “The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in household Surveys: Comparisons to Administrative Aggregates”
working paper, April.
Meyer, B. D., Sullivan, J. X.. 2007. "Consumption and Income Poverty for those 65 and
Over,” working paper, July.
----. 2006a. "Three Decades of Consumption and Income Poverty,” working paper,
September.
----. 2006b. "Consumption, Income, and Material Well-Being After Welfare Reform,”
NBER Working Paper 11976, January.
----. 2004. "The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material Well-Being of Single
Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s," Journal of Public Economics, 88, July, 13871420.
----. 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.”
Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.
Moore, J. C., Stinson, L.L. and Welniak, E. J. Jr. 2000. “Income Measurement Error in
Surveys: A Review.” Journal of Official Statistics, 14:4, 331-361.
Murray, Kasia O’Neill and Wendell E. Primus 2005. “Recent Data Trends Show
Welfare Reform to Be a Mixed Success: Significant Policy Changes Should
Accompany Reauthorization” Review of Policy Research, 22:3, 301-324.
Rogers, J. M. and Gray, M. B. 1994. “CE Data: Quintiles of Income Versus Quintiles of
Outlays.” Monthly Labor Review 117(12): 32-37.
Roemer, M. I. 2000. “Assessing the Quality of the March Current Population Survey
and the Survey of Income and Program Participation Income Estimates, 19901996.” Staff Papers on Income, Housing and Household Economic Statistics
Division. Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Sawhill, I. (1988), “Poverty in the U.S.: Why Is It So Persistent?” Journal of Economic
Literature, 26, September, 1073-1119.
Slesnick, D. T. 1993. “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States.” Journal
of Political Economy 101(1): 1-38.
-----. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2006 Edition. USGPO:
Washington, DC.
----. various years. “Current Population Survey, 2004 ASEC Technical Documentation.”
Washington, DC.

32

U.S. Department of Labor (various years), “Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey
Public Use Microdata Documentation,” U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, Division of Consumer Expenditure Surveys.

33

DATA APPENDIX
After-Tax Money Income Plus Food Stamps (CE Survey, CPS, and PSID) adds to
money income the value of tax credits such as the EITC, and subtracts state and federal
income taxes and payroll taxes, and includes capital gains and losses, and adds the face
value of Food Stamps.
After-Tax Income Plus Noncash Benefits (CPS) adds to After-tax Money Income Plus
Food Stamps the imputed cash value of housing subsidies, and school lunch programs.
Expenditures (CE Survey) start with the BLS measure of total expenditures. We add
principal payments on home mortgages and financed vehicles, and subtract the purchase
price for financed vehicles. This measure, sometimes called outlays, follows Rogers and
Gray (1994). Expenditures are reported for three-month periods. We scale these
quarterly expenditures to an annual level.
Consumption (CE Survey) subtracts from the BLS measure of total expenditures
spending on health care, education, pension plans, and cash contributions. In addition,
housing and vehicle expenditures are converted to service flows. The rental equivalent
for owned dwellings is used instead of spending on mortgage interest, property taxes, and
spending on maintenance, repairs, and insurance. For those in public or subsidized
housing, we impute a rental value. We subtract spending on vehicle purchases and add a
vehicle service flow. See Meyer and Sullivan (2006a) for more details.
Food Consumption (PSID) includes expenditures on food at home and away from home
and dollars of food stamps received.
Housing (PSID) does not include utilities or other housing costs because they are not
available throughout our sample period in the PSID. It includes rent for renters and the

34

reported rental equivalent for those who neither rent nor own. For homeowners, we
calculate a service flow of housing consumption based on the value of the home. This
flow is calculated as a constant fraction (r) of the reported property value. This is the
service flow for a durable with an after-tax interest rate r and with no depreciation. The
results reported in Figure 3 are for r = 0.07, but we verify that the results do not change
when we use values of r between 0.05 and 0.1. In addition, within the CE Survey this
flow matched up fairly well with reported rental equivalent of the home.
Equivalence Scales are used to adjust resource measures for differences in family size.
In most cases we use the equivalence scale recommended by the National Academy of
Sciences panel (Citro and Michael 1995): (Adults + 0.7*Children)0.7. As a robustness
check, we verify that the trends are similar using the equivalence scale implicit in the
official poverty definition.

35

Figure 1
Changes in Mean Consumption and Income by Decile, 1993-1995 to 1997-2000, All
Single Mother Headed Families, CPS and CE Survey
25%
20%

% Change

15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%
-15%

1

2
3
4
5
Top Half
Consumption (CE Survey)
After-Tax Money Income Plus Food Stamps (CE Survey)
After-Tax Money Income Plus Food Stamps (CPS)
After-Tax Income Plus Noncash Benefits (CPS)
Deciles of Consumption or Income

Notes: The samples include all unmarried female headed families/consumer units living with at least one child
under 18. The changes are in real terms and outcomes are adjusted for differences in family size using the
NAS recommended equivalence scale. Each outcome is sorted by itself. See the Data Appendix for definitions
of income and consumption. The CE Survey sample excludes those designated as incomplete income
reporters. See text for more details.

Figure 2
Changes in Income and Consumption at Each Percentile, 1993-1995 to 1997-2000, All Single Mother
Headed Families, CPS ADF/ASEC and CE Interview Survey
40%
After-tax Money Income Plus Food Stamps (CPS)
After-tax Income Plus Noncash Benefits (CPS)
After-tax Money Income Plus Food Stamps (CE Survey)
30%
Consumption (CE Survey)

% Change

20%

10%

0%
5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95

-10%

-20%
Percentile
Notes: See notes to Figure 1.

Figure 3
Changes in Income and Food Consumption at Each Percentile, 1993-1995 to 19972000, Single Mothers, Panel Study of Income Dynamics
40%

After-Tax Money Income + Food Stamps
Food + Housing
30%

Food Expenditures

% Change

20%

10%

0%
5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95

-10%

-20%
Percentile
Notes: Data are from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, waves 1993 through 2001. Housing spending from the PSID includes
rent, a service flow from owned property, and the rental equivalent for non-owners that do not pay for housing. The changes are in
real terms and outcomes are adjusted for differences in family size.

Figure 4
Reporting Rates for Transfer and Anti-Poverty Programs, CPS, 1987-2004
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

AFDC/TANF
EITC

Food Stamps
UI

SSI
Workers’ Comp
2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

0.3

Notes: Data are from Meyer, Mok, & Sullivan (2007). Reporting rates for each year are calculated as the ratio of the
total weighted dollars reported for each program in the CPS divided by the respective administrative aggregate.
Sources for administrative numbers are reported in Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2007).

Table 1
Quantile Regressions for Changes in Consumption and Income, Single Mothers and Comparison Groups, Consumer
Expenditure Survey, 1993-2003
Single Women
Mothers
Single Mothers Only
Consumption Income
Consumption Income
Consumption
Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Quantile Regression:
5th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.056
0.047
-0.250 -0.190
0.104
-0.181
0.055
-0.387
(0.047) (0.044)
(0.088) (0.085)
(0.064)
(0.156)
(0.057)
(0.174)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.050
-0.037
-0.250 -0.188
0.114
-0.043
0.045
-0.601
(0.053) (0.046)
(0.104) (0.109)
(0.066)
(0.179)
(0.060)
(0.175)
10th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.086
0.066
-0.118 -0.079
0.118
-0.079
0.085
-0.188
(0.032) (0.031)
(0.060) (0.068)
(0.052)
(0.112)
(0.041)
(0.090)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.075
0.016
-0.084
0.002
0.151
0.090
0.084
-0.272
(0.035) (0.036)
(0.053) (0.069)
(0.052)
(0.107)
(0.046)
(0.090)
15th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.087
0.066
-0.018 -0.007
0.074
-0.003
0.079
-0.110
(0.030) (0.031)
(0.042) (0.054)
(0.041)
(0.067)
(0.036)
(0.080)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.097
0.040
-0.001 -0.001
0.096
0.095
0.108
-0.179
(0.032) (0.032)
(0.043) (0.054)
(0.045)
(0.075)
(0.038)
(0.086)
20th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.078
0.060
0.030
0.039
0.071
0.047
0.057
-0.081
(0.037) (0.027)
(0.047) (0.044)
(0.039)
(0.065)
(0.038)
(0.063)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.088
0.026
0.076
0.058
0.082
0.119
0.084
-0.152
(0.036) (0.027)
(0.053) (0.044)
(0.044)
(0.068)
(0.038)
(0.064)
25th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.074
0.050
0.079
0.040
0.030
0.026
0.045
-0.009
(0.031) (0.023)
(0.041) (0.042)
(0.030)
(0.056)
(0.032)
(0.068)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.075
0.024
0.129
0.078
0.062
0.098
0.064
-0.082
(0.034) (0.026)
(0.040) (0.043)
(0.033)
(0.063)
(0.033)
(0.060)
30th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.070
0.042
0.110
0.045
0.025
0.005
0.053
0.004
(0.030) (0.024)
(0.038) (0.043)
(0.030)
(0.052)
(0.032)
(0.056)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.068
0.017
0.148
0.053
0.063
0.091
0.065
-0.084
(0.033) (0.024)
(0.041) (0.043)
(0.035)
(0.055)
(0.032)
(0.057)
35th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.062
0.033
0.139
0.043
0.013
-0.003
0.035
-0.025
(0.036) (0.024)
(0.034) (0.037)
(0.029)
(0.045)
(0.028)
(0.046)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.071
0.019
0.175
0.037
0.051
0.078
0.049
-0.093
(0.038) (0.024)
(0.040) (0.037)
(0.029)
(0.055)
(0.029)
(0.046)
40th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.045
0.041
0.153
0.030
0.011
0.017
0.023
-0.012
(0.033) (0.020)
(0.039) (0.034)
(0.027)
(0.042)
(0.032)
(0.043)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.050
0.015
0.188
0.021
0.030
0.082
0.023
-0.091
(0.033) (0.021)
(0.037) (0.035)
(0.027)
(0.048)
(0.028)
(0.039)
45th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.050
0.036
0.146
0.021
0.008
0.017
0.024
-0.010
(0.033) (0.022)
(0.051) (0.032)
(0.029)
(0.043)
(0.030)
(0.045)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.042
0.006
0.166
0.023
0.022
0.080
0.025
-0.072
(0.027) (0.023)
(0.058) (0.032)
(0.029)
(0.044)
(0.029)
(0.044)
50th Percentile
(1997-00) - (1993-95)
0.049
0.033
0.111
0.043
0.011
0.018
0.024
0.019
(0.027) (0.021)
(0.044) (0.028)
(0.026)
(0.047)
(0.028)
(0.041)
(2001-03) - (1993-95)
0.024
0.000
0.144
0.052
0.015
0.062
0.021
-0.055
(0.026) (0.020)
(0.047) (0.031)
(0.028)
(0.046)
(0.028)
(0.043)
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Controls Included
11,610 11,610
11,610 11,610
26,368
26,368
26,368
26,368
N
Notes: Controls include a cubic in the age of the head, number of children less than 18, number of girls age 2-15, number of
boys age 2-15, education of the head, race, and region. For the models that include married mothers we also include the
number of earners in the family and the education of the spouse. Columns 1 through 4 report the coefficients on the 2nd
and 3rd period dummies in quantile regressions where the first period dummy is excluded. Columns 5 through 8 report the
difference between the coefficients on single mother*period interaction terms. All standard errors are bootstrapped and
corrected for within family dependence. See text for more details.

Table 2
Percentiles of Real Income and Expenditures, CPS and CE Survey, 1993-2003
Percentiles
20th
30th

40th
50th
Panel A: All families
Total Family Income (CPS)
(1) Percentile of income
8,151 13,890 20,655 26,749 33,149 40,048
(2) Mean below given percentile of income
2,620
7,006 12,209 16,035 19,505 22,913
Total Family Income (CE)
(3) Percentile of income
7,904 12,625 18,559 23,611 29,019 35,299
(4) Mean below given percentile of income
3,441
6,943 11,351 14,596 17,515 20,430
(5) Mean below given percentile of expenditures 13,236 15,238 18,360 21,006 23,520 26,046
Total Family Expenditures (CE)
(6) Percentile of expenditures
11,771 15,058 20,343 25,220 30,206 35,581
(7) Mean below given percentile of expenditures 8,550 11,016 14,392 17,190 19,812 22,418
24,514 23,135 23,257 24,663 26,372 28,248
(8) Mean below given percentile of income
Panel B: All single mother headed families
Total Family Income (CPS)
(9) Percentile of income
3,971
7,129 10,941 14,713 18,629 22,409
(10) Mean below given percentile of income
1,260
3,470
6,299
8,465 10,525 12,530
Total Family Income (CE)
(11) Percentile of income
4,774
7,103 10,786 14,136 17,873 21,240
(12) Mean below given percentile of income
2,641
4,315
6,637
8,560 10,420 12,250
(13) Mean below given percentile of expenditures 9,087
9,921 11,091 12,314 13,709 15,099
Total Family Expenditures (CE)
(14) Percentile of expenditures
8,496 10,532 13,707 16,710 20,221 23,676
(15) Mean below given percentile of expenditures 6,649
8,116 10,125 11,834 13,491 15,180
(16) Mean below given percentile of income
17,495 16,330 15,669 16,304 17,253 18,416
Notes: The samples in Panel B include all unmarried female headed consumer units or families living with
at least one child under 18. Expenditures are measured as outlays (following Rogers and Gray, 1994) and
income is after tax and includes food stamps as explained in the text. These family level outcomes are
expressed in real terms (2005 dollars) and adjusted for differences in family size using the NAS
recommended equivalence scale and normalized to a family with one adult and two children. Samples from
the CE Survey include only those designated as complete income reporters (U.S. Department of Labor,
various years). See text for more details.
5th

10th

Table 3
Comparison of CE Survey Expenditure Measures to National Aggregates, 19842004
Food at homea
CE
PCE
Ratio

1984

1987

1992

1997

2002

2004

205.1
260.6
0.787

236.4
290.7
0.813

324.9
366.8
0.886

376.2
431.3
0.872

400.2
540.1
0.741

477.4
603.4
0.791

Food away from homeb
CE
98.9
120.1
136.4
164.9
176.9
217.8
PCE
123.6
154.9
212.3
262.7
339.4
388.2
Ratio
0.801
0.775
0.643
0.628
0.521
0.561
Total food
CE
304.1
356.4
461.4
541.1
577.1
695.2
PCE
384.2
445.6
579.1
694.0
879.5
991.6
Ratio
0.791
0.800
0.797
0.780
0.656
0.701
Rent plus Utilitiesc
CE
202.3
235.1
306.7
380.7
401.6
485.1
PCE
209.9
250.0
315.0
387.7
469.6
504.5
Ratio
0.964
0.940
0.974
0.982
0.855
0.961
Notes: PCE numbers come from National Income and Product Account Table 2.5.5: Personal
Consumption Expenditures by Type of Expenditure.
a
Food at home is food purchased for off-premise consumption minus alcoholic beverages
b
Food away from home is purchased meals and beverages minus other alcoholic beverages.
c
Rent plus utilities is rent on tenant-occupied nonfarm dwellings plus utilities excluding telephone.

Table 4
Survey Nonresponse and Imputations Rates, CPS and CE Interview Survey,
1993-2003
Survey Nonresponse
CPSASEC/ADF
CE Survey

Imputation Rates

CPS-ASEC/ADF
CE Survey
Pre-tax
After-tax
After-tax
Total
Money
Expenditures
Incomeb
Income
Incomea
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1993
0.154
0.156
0.152
0.251
0.444
0.104
1994
0.154
0.167
0.156
0.259
0.456
0.104
1995
0.154
0.194
0.180
0.295
0.496
0.104
1996
0.157
0.211
0.190
0.316
0.518
0.125
1997
0.144
0.199
0.204
0.344
0.548
0.128
1998
0.161
0.201
0.218
0.373
0.573
0.129
1999
0.144
0.202
0.216
0.381
0.587
0.149
2000
0.159
0.200
0.247
0.426
0.625
0.154
2001
0.162
0.220
0.254
0.432
0.627
0.163
2002
0.150
0.220
0.261
0.421
0.603
0.179
2003
0.160
0.214
0.253
0.388
0.564
0.184
Notes: Survey nonresponse rates are from U.S. Census Bureau (various years) for the CPS and
from U.S. Department of Labor (various years) for the CE Survey. Imputation rates are
calculated as the fraction of the total dollars of income or expenditures that are imputed. Aftertax income includes pre-tax money income, food stamps, taxes, and capital gains and losses.
The expenditures measure used here is the BLS measure of total expenditures. CPSASEC/ADF results are reported by reference year for annual income, rather than by the survey
year.
a
If more than half of pre-tax income is imputed, then taxes are considered to be imputed.
b
Taxes are always considered to be imputed.

Table 5
OLS Estimates for Consumption and Income, Single Mothers and Comparison Households, High School Degree or Less, CE and PSID
1984 - 2000

Consumption
(1)

Single Women
Ratio of Standard
Errors:
(2) / (1)
Income
(2)
(3)

Mothers

Consumption
(4)

Income
(5)

Ratio of Standard
Errors:
(5) / (4)
(6)

CE
Single Mother*1984-1990
Single Mother*1991-1993
Single Mother*1994-1995
Single Mother*1996-2000

0.0744

0.0323

(0.0675)

(0.1083)

0.1094

0.1235

(0.0696)

(0.1152)

0.1623

0.1169

(0.0775)

(0.1340)

-0.4311

-0.6296

1.605

(0.0234)

(0.0444)

-0.3984

-0.6041

1.655

(0.0281)

(0.0523)

-0.3648

-0.6612

1.729

(0.0331)

(0.0556)

-0.3253

-0.6578

1.636

(0.0250)

(0.0497)

0.2021

0.1425

(0.0688)

(0.1125)

N

17,511

14,761

53,457

45,434

R2

0.2338

0.1545

0.3750

0.1963

Variance of Dependent Variable

0.3394

0.7820

0.2935

1.0335

0.3810

0.3425

-0.2954

-0.5549

(0.0880)

(0.1492)

(0.0287)

(0.0623)

0.3902

0.2285

-0.2033

-0.7395

(0.0843)

(0.1542)

(0.0307)

(0.0672)

0.3849

0.6207

-0.1742

-0.5538

(0.0963)

(0.2098)

(0.0368)

(0.0564)

0.4304

0.2846

-0.1919

-0.5410

1.899
1.860
1.681
1.986

PSID
Single Mother*1984-1990
Single Mother*1991-1993
Single Mother*1994-1995
Single Mother*1996-1999

1.696
1.828
2.177

(0.0943)

(0.1702)

(0.0290)

(0.0689)

N

6,952

6,415

1.805

18,965

17,233

R2

0.2661

0.1367

0.2943

0.2853

Variance of Dependent Variable

0.3348

1.5504

0.2293

1.1548

2.170
2.188
1.533
2.374

Notes: For columns 1 and 4, the dependent variable is the log of total consumption (CE Survey) or log of food consumption (PSID). For columns 2 and 5, the
dependent variable is the log of after-tax family income. In addition to the variables reported above, all models include a full set of month dummies, flexible controls
for family size and composition, a cubic in age, and the race and education of the female head. The standard errors in parentheses are corrected for within household
dependence by using the conventional White estimator.

Table 6
Percentiles of Consumption for Various Samples, CE Survey, 1993-2003
5th

10th

Percentiles
20th
30th

40th

50th

All families
(1) Consumption --excluding incomplete income reporters
12,484 15,617 20,336 24,453 28,465 32,695
(2) Consumption --including incomplete income reporters
12,307 15,450 20,078 24,100 28,038 32,168
(3) Consumption --second quarter interviews only
12,383 15,562 20,190 24,203 28,197 32,352
(4) Consumption --first reported interview for each CU
11,350 14,540 19,264 23,311 27,292 31,455
All single mother headed families
(1) Consumption --excluding incomplete income reporters
9,516 11,361 14,125 16,761 19,480 22,321
(2) Consumption --including incomplete income reporters
9,230 11,109 13,823 16,358 18,985 21,803
(3) Consumption --second quarter interviews only
9,368 11,306 14,282 16,888 19,418 22,334
(4) Consumption --first reported interview for each CU
8,814 10,656 13,531 16,075 18,719 21,573
All families with head 65 or over
(1) Consumption --excluding incomplete income reporters
13,211 15,977 20,084 23,754 27,273 31,097
(2) Consumption --including incomplete income reporters
13,261 16,008 20,054 23,642 27,096 30,870
13,284 15,979 20,027 23,617 27,097 30,890
(3) Consumption --second quarter interviews only
(4) Consumption --first reported interview for each CU
13,107 15,832 19,863 23,437 26,874 30,692
All families with head that is disabled
(1) Consumption --excluding incomplete income reporters
9,784 11,636 14,293 16,710 19,055 21,658
(2) Consumption --including incomplete income reporters
9,732 11,683 14,433 16,936 19,280 21,975
(3) Consumption --second quarter interviews only
9,720 11,753 14,492 17,024 19,586 22,244
(4) Consumption --first reported interview for each CU
9,147 11,219 14,247 16,738 19,232 21,955
Notes: Single mother headed families include all consumer units (CUs) headed by an unmarried female who lives
with at least one child under the age of 18. The disabled sample includes all CUs with a head who did not work in
the previous year due to a disability. We use the BLS designation of complete income reporters (see U.S.
Department of Labor, various years). Rows 3 and 4 do not exclude incomplete income reporters. Row 3 in each
panel includes data from second quarter interviews only, which is the first quarter that the living unit is eligible to
report complete expenditure data. Following Bavier (2007), Row 4 in each panel includes all CUs reporting
complete expenditure data for the first time, which will include multiple responses from the same living unit if
different CUs reside in the living unit while the living unit is in the survey. See the notes to Table 2 for additional
details.

Table 7
Relative Outcomes for the Bottom Five Percent of Income and Consumption, All Families, CE Survey and PSID
Outcome

Percentiles of Income
5-100
Difference
0-5
(1)
(2)
(3) =(1) - (2)

Percentiles of Consumption
5-100
Difference
0-5
(4)
(5)
(6) =(4) - (5)

Diff in Diff
(7) =(6) - (3)

CE, 1991-1998
Have a stove in residence
0.885
0.989
-0.104
0.870
0.990
-0.119
-0.016
Have a microwave in residence
0.688
0.883
-0.195
0.597
0.887
-0.291
-0.096*
Have a refrigerator in residence
0.957
0.993
-0.036
0.949
0.993
-0.044
-0.008
Have a freezer in residence
0.217
0.325
-0.108
0.159
0.328
-0.169
-0.061*
Have a disposal in residence
0.264
0.428
-0.164
0.149
0.434
-0.286
-0.122*
Have a dish washer in residence
0.313
0.561
-0.248
0.135
0.570
-0.435
-0.187*
Have a clothes washer in residence
0.528
0.785
-0.257
0.424
0.791
-0.366
-0.109*
Have a clothes dryer in residence
0.448
0.745
-0.297
0.306
0.752
-0.446
-0.149*
Have a color television in residence
0.887
0.975
-0.088
0.871
0.976
-0.105
-0.017*
Have a computer in residence
0.312
0.424
-0.112
0.175
0.431
-0.256
-0.143*
Have a stereo in residence
0.573
0.678
-0.105
0.468
0.683
-0.215
-0.110*
Have a vcr in residence
0.639
0.830
-0.191
0.518
0.836
-0.318
-0.127*
Have central air conditioning
0.321
0.499
-0.178
0.207
0.505
-0.298
-0.120*
Total # of rooms in residence (scaled)
5.947
6.576
-0.628
4.552
6.638
-2.086
-1.458*
Have a car
0.617
0.876
-0.259
0.472
0.884
-0.411
-0.152*
Average number of cars
1.088
1.964
-0.876
0.707
1.984
-1.277
-0.401*
Took a trip or vacation
0.222
0.314
-0.092
0.109
0.320
-0.212
-0.120*
Took an overnight trip or vacation
0.199
0.282
-0.083
0.094
0.287
-0.193
-0.111*
Did not receive free food
0.962
0.986
-0.024
0.941
0.987
-0.045
-0.022
PSID, 1984-2003
Total # of rooms in residence (scaled)
5.293
6.419
-1.125
4.638
6.452
-1.814
-0.689*
Have central air conditioning
0.328
0.491
-0.164
0.289
0.493
-0.204
-0.040*
Have a car
0.530
0.905
-0.375
0.668
0.898
-0.229
0.145*
Average number of cars
0.841
1.707
-0.866
1.043
1.697
-0.654
0.212*
Mother does not report poor health
0.904
0.962
-0.058
0.894
0.963
-0.069
-0.011
Health does not limit mothers work
0.742
0.824
-0.082
0.696
0.826
-0.131
-0.049*
No other family members in bad health
0.950
0.959
-0.009
0.931
0.960
-0.029
-0.020
Not food insecure
0.760
0.929
-0.170
0.775
0.928
-0.153
0.016
Did not go hungry
0.950
0.981
-0.030
0.919
0.982
-0.063
-0.033
Have no children in poor health
0.994
0.995
-0.002
0.987
0.996
-0.009
-0.008*
Notes: Number of rooms is adjusted for family size using the NAS recommended equivalence scale. PSID data are from various
waves between 1984 and 2003 depending on the availability of outcome variables. We predict total consumption in the PSID based on
reported values in the PSID for food and housing, and housing flows for homeowners are calculated from reported housing values. We
also impute a value of housing for those in public or subsidized housing. This approach is a slightly updated version of that used in
Meyer & Sullivan (2003). * denotes significance at the 5% level, which is determined using bootstrapped standard errors that correct
for within family dependence.

Table 8
Summary of the Number of Relative Outcomes that Favor Income or Consumption,
CE Survey and PSID
Number
Favoring
Income
(1)

Number
Significantly
Favoring
Income
(2)

Number
Favoring
Consumption
(3)

Number
Significantly
Favoring
Consumption
(4)

CE Survey (19 Outcomes)
All single mother headed families
Comparing bottom 5% to top 95%
0
0
19
16
Comparing bottom 10% to top 90%
0
0
19
15
All families with head 65 or over
Comparing bottom 5% to top 95%
1
0
18
17
Comparing bottom 10% to top 90%
0
0
19
17
All families with head that is disabled
Comparing bottom 5% to top 95%
7
1
12
7
Comparing bottom 10% to top 90%
2
0
17
12
PSID (10 Outcomes)
All single mother headed families
Comparing bottom 5% to top 95%
2
0
8
2
Comparing bottom 10% to top 90%
3
1
7
0
All families with head 65 or over
Comparing bottom 5% to top 95%
3
0
7
1
Comparing bottom 10% to top 90%
5
3
5
1
All families with head that is disabled
Comparing bottom 5% to top 95%
2
0
8
0
Comparing bottom 10% to top 90%
5
0
5
0
Notes: The outcomes summarized here are the same as those listed in Table 7. Columns 2 and 4 refer
to statistical significance at the 5% level. See the notes to Table 6 for sample definitions and the notes
to Table 7 for additional details.

Table A.1
Annual Expenditures and Annualized Quarterly Expenditures, CE Survey 1998-2000
Annualized
Annualized
Annual
Quarterly
Annual
Quarterly
Expenditures Expenditures
Ratio
Consumption Consumption
Ratio
(1)
(2)
(3)=(2)/(1)
(4)
(5)
(6)=(5)/(4)
All Families
48,606
48,604
1.000
30,692
30,662
0.999
Mean
45,373
53,312
1.175
18,910
20,779
1.099
Standard Deviation
10,938
43,752
4.000
10,771
43,084
4.000
N
5th Percentile
8,307
7,477
0.900
9,765
9,092
0.900
10th Percentile
11,313
10,259
0.907
12,574
11,917
0.907
20th Percentile
16,497
15,312
0.928
16,655
16,159
0.928
30th Percentile
21,999
20,381
0.926
20,285
19,756
0.926
40th Percentile
28,220
26,060
0.923
23,721
23,221
0.923
50th Percentile
35,490
32,992
0.930
27,302
26,688
0.930
60th Percentile
44,519
41,441
0.931
31,242
30,885
0.931
70th Percentile
55,873
52,510
0.940
36,089
35,767
0.940
80th Percentile
73,168
69,744
0.953
42,073
42,101
0.953
90th Percentile
102,734
102,456
0.997
52,082
52,819
0.997
95th Percentile
131,529
141,700
1.077
61,917
64,065
1.077
Single Mother Families
36,184
36,129
0.998
22,598
22,637
1.002
Mean
28,789
34,339
1.193
11,841
12,746
1.076
Standard Deviation
429
1,716
4.000
426
1,704
4.000
N
5th Percentile
8,114
7,207
0.888
8,241
7,769
0.943
10th Percentile
10,864
9,605
0.884
10,165
9,816
0.966
20th Percentile
14,182
13,455
0.949
13,149
12,468
0.948
30th Percentile
19,406
17,987
0.927
15,206
14,838
0.976
40th Percentile
24,399
22,079
0.905
17,655
17,217
0.975
50th Percentile
28,660
26,350
0.919
19,836
19,557
0.986
60th Percentile
33,762
32,867
0.974
22,118
22,362
1.011
70th Percentile
42,258
39,918
0.945
25,668
25,973
1.012
80th Percentile
50,729
49,640
0.979
30,963
31,739
1.025
90th Percentile
73,770
68,082
0.923
38,804
39,072
1.007
95th Percentile
94,584
97,279
1.028
45,389
48,013
1.058
Notes: Samples include consumer units that remain in the survey for all four quarters. The single mother samples
include only lone single mothers.

