NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES OF VIETNAM-ERA CONSCRIPTION:
SCHOOLING, EXPERIENCE, AND EARNINGS
Joshua D. Angrist
Stacey H. Chen
Working Paper 13411
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13411

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

This study was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census
Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center. Research results and conclusions expressed are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened
to insure that no confidential data are revealed. Special thanks got to B.K. Atrostic, Jim Davis, and
Brian Holly for help with the data used in this study. Thanks also go to Brigham Frandsen and Simone
Schaner for outstanding research assistance and to David Autor, Mark Duggan, Amy Finkelstein, Jerry
Hausman, Whitney Newey, Sarah Turner, Steve Pischke, and participants in the Summer 2007 Labor
Studies Meeting for helpful discussions and comments. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the
National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Joshua D. Angrist and Stacey H. Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Long-term consequences of vietnam-era conscription: schooling, experience, and earnings
Joshua D. Angrist and Stacey H. Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 13411
September 2007
JEL No. I18,I22,J24,J31
ABSTRACT
This paper uses the 2000 Census 1-in-6 sample to look at the long-term impact of Vietnam-era military
service. Instrumental Variables estimates using draft-lottery instruments show post-service earnings
losses close to zero in 2000, in contrast with earlier results showing substantial earnings losses for
white veterans in the 1970s and 1980s. The estimates also point to a marked increase in schooling
that appears to be attributable to the Vietnam-era GI Bill. The net wage effects observed in the 2000
data can be explained by a flattening of the experience profile in middle age and a modest return to
the increased schooling generated by the GI Bill. Evidence on disability effects is mixed but seems
inconsistent with a long-term effect of Vietnam-era military service on health.
Joshua D. Angrist
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-353
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
angrist@mit.edu
Stacey H. Chen
412 NBER
1050 Mass Ave
Cambridge, MA 02138
USA
schen@albany.edu

1

Introduction

Economists had a pivotal role in formulating the intellectual case against the draft. The
core of this argument is that conscription amounts to a hidden tax on soldiers, with
the further disadvantage of uncertainty as to who will have to pay (see, e.g., Oi, 1967).
This negative view of the draft notwithstanding, WWII veterans typically have somewhat
better civilian outcomes than same-age non-veterans, while Vietnam era veterans do only a
little worse.1 A fundamental diﬃculty with these simple comparisons, however, is selection
bias. The process of screening for military service generates a pool of veterans that
diﬀers in important ways from non-veterans. For example, in a comparison of the civilian
mortality risk of WWII veterans with others from the same cohorts, WWII veterans had
lower death rates, primarily due to a reduced risk of deaths from disease (Seltzer and
Jablon, 1974). Although military service may impart some benefits, increased longevity
seems likely to be an artifact of health-related selection bias.
Although not as obvious as the selection bias inherent in mortality comparisons, selection bias is also a concern in studies of the economic eﬀects of the draft. The military
enlistment process selects soldiers on the basis of factors related to earnings potential in
at least two ways. On one hand, the military prefers high school graduates, and screens
out those with very low test scores. As a result, men with very low earnings potential are
unlikely to end up as soldiers.2 On the other hand, some potential recruits find military
service attractive precisely because their prospects in the civilian labor market are poor,
while those with the highest earnings potential probably find it worthwhile to work hard
to escape the draft. The net selection bias in this case is unclear.
The draft lottery provides an opportunity to overcome the problem of selection bias in
estimates of the consequences of Vietnam-era military service. From 1970-72, induction
priority was determined by a series of lotteries in which cohorts at risk of conscription
were assigned random sequence numbers (RSNs) from 1-365. Men were then called for
pre-induction processing from lowest-to-highest, up to a ceiling. Because draft lottery
numbers are highly correlated with veteran status, and probably uncorrelated with other
factors related to earnings, lottery RSNs can be used to construct instrumental variables
(IV) estimates of the causal eﬀect of Vietnam-era conscription on variables like civilian
1

See, for example, studies of veteran eﬀects cited in Angrist and Krueger (1994). Henderson (2005)
reviews the role of economists in ending the draft.
2
See, e.g., Eitelberg et al. (1984).

earnings, educational attainment, and health.
Angrist (1990) used the draft lottery to construct IV estimates of the eﬀect of compulsory military service on civilian earnings through 1984. These estimates show substantial
earnings losses for white veterans - as much as 15 percent of average civilian earnings in the
cohort.3 Angrist (1990) argued that the time series pattern of estimated earnings losses
is explained by lost labor market experience. In particular, estimates of a log-quadratic
potential-experience model suggest military service generates earnings losses equivalent
to roughly two years of lost experience, the period of service for draftees. An implication
of the loss-of-experience story is that Vietnam-era draftees should eventually catch up
with same-age non-veterans, though they had not done so by 1984, when the draft-lottery
cohorts were in their early-to-mid thirties.
The empirical analysis in this paper begins with new estimates of the long-term eﬀects
of Vietnam-era service. The 2000 Census long form, which collects information on exact
dates of birth, provides an opportunity to look at the economic and other consequences
of Vietnam-era conscription as the draft-lottery cohorts approach age 50.4 In addition
to earnings and other labor market variables, we look at schooling and disability status.
Schooling is especially interesting in this context because of the GI Bill, widely believed
to be a driving force in the expansion of American higher education. Vietnam veterans
had access to GI Bill benefits similar to those made available to veterans of WWII and
Korea. Disability status is important because Vietnam-era service may be linked to a
number of health problems, most notably Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and
conditions that have been related to the Agent Orange herbicide.
In addition to directly estimating the long-term impact of Vietnam-era conscription,
we oﬀer an interpretation of schooling and earnings eﬀects using a Mincer-style wage
equation. Our interpretation is motivated by two findings. First, the earnings results (and
the eﬀects on other labor market variables such as employment) are nearly zero, consistent
with the overtaking age of about 50 estimated for veterans in Angrist (1990). Second, the
2000 Census data show a marked impact of Vietnam-era conscription on schooling, with
eﬀects of a magnitude similar to those reported in studies of the WWII and Korean-era
GI Bills (Bound and Turner, 2002; Stanley, 2003). We argue that the net wage eﬀects
3

Angrist (1989) estimated larger though imprecise eﬀects on white veteran’s wages using a smaller
sample. Estimates for nonwhites are not significantly diﬀerent from zero in either the 1989 and or 1990
studies.
4
Although birthday information is not made publicly available, we have used it through an agreement
with the Census Bureau’s Center for Economic Studies.

2

observed in the 2000 data can be explained by a flattening of the experience profile in
middle age and a modest return to the post-service schooling paid for by veterans benefits.5
Adjusting the wage estimates for possible health consequences of military service matters
little for this story.

2

Data and First-Stage

2.1

The 2000 Census 1-in-6 File

The 2000 Census long form sample includes approximately one-sixth of US households.6
For the purposes of this study, we created an extract of US-born men residing in the 50
States and the District of Columbia, born between 1948 and 1953 or in subsets of these
birth years. The cohorts of 19-year-olds at risk of conscription in the draft lotteries were
born from 1950-52 so our analysis focuses on the sample of men in this group. This sample
includes about 700,000 whites and 96,000 nonwhites. There is a smaller but non-negligible
draft-lottery impact on men born in 1948 and 1949, so estimates are also reported for an
expanded sample of men born 1948-52.

The 1948-52 sample includes more than 1.14

million whites and about 155,000 nonwhites. Finally, although no one born after 1952
was drafted, men born in 1953 were assigned RSNs and a few volunteered in anticipation
of possible conscription. We therefore report first-stage estimates for the 1953 cohort.
Roughly 24 percent of men born 1950 to 1952 served in the Vietnam era and about
38 percent were draft-eligible. These and other descriptive statistics appear in Table 1,
which reports means by veteran status and race for the 1950-52 sample. White veterans
from these cohorts have lower employment rates and earnings than white non-veterans,
while the pattern is reversed for nonwhites. For example, the annual 1999 earnings of
white veterans was about $39,500, while white non-veterans earned $48,500 that year.
5

The first attempt to estimate the returns to veterans post-service schooling is Griliches and Mason
(1972), who report results for a sample of WWII veterans from the 1964 CPS.
6
The 1-in-6 long form sample is the basis for the publicly available PUMS files. These files, documented
in US Census Bureau (2005), are simple random samples drawn from the 1-in-6 file, though the 1-in-6
file is not a simple random sample from the census sampling frame. Rather, the Census Bureau reduces
the sampling rate in more densely populated areas. Adjustment for variation in sampling rates is made
here by using the weighting variables that are included in the long-form file. These weights adjust for
non-response as well as for non-random sampling, and are designed to match external population totals
by age, race, sex and Hispanic origin. In practice, weighting matters little for our results. We also
confirmed that the means from publicly available data from the 1-in-6 file are close to those from the 5
percent file distributed through IPUMS. The original 2000 long form sample includes Puerto Rico and
island territories; residents of these areas are omitted from our study.

3

Unemployment rates are low in both the veteran and non-veteran groups, but many men,
especially nonwhites, were out of the labor force.
Overall, the average schooling level in the sample is 13.8 years for whites and 12.6
years for nonwhites.
7

whites.

The average years of college is 1.73 for whites and 1.02 for non-

The contrast in average educational attainment by veteran status parallels that

in earnings, with white veterans obtaining less schooling and non-white veterans obtaining more schooling than their non-veteran counterparts. On the other hand, although
white veterans are less likely to have attended or completed one or more years of college,
they are more likely than non-veterans to be high school graduates. For non-whites, the
schooling diﬀerential by veteran status changes in favor of non-veterans at the BA level
or higher.
A large number of men born in 1950-52 report having a work-related disability —
about 12 percent of whites and 21 percent of nonwhites. The proportion reporting other
disabilities, but no disability related to work, is 7 percent for whites and 12 percent for
nonwhites. The work and non-work disability variables used here are mutually exclusive.
Thus, a total of 19 percent of whites and 33 percent of nonwhites are aﬀected by some
kind of disability (i.e., the sum of work and non-work disability rates).8 White veterans
have somewhat higher disability rates than non-veterans, while disability rates diﬀer little
by veteran status for nonwhites.
Veterans below the age of 65 are eligible for two types of disability payments, servicerelated veterans disability compensation (VDC) and means-tested military disability pensions (MDP) for disabled low-income veterans. We therefore examine the eﬀects of
Vietnam-era service on two disability-related income variables: an “other income” variable
7

Highest grade completed (HGC) was imputed from the categorical Census schooling variable using Jaeger (1997).
Years of college ranges from 0-4 and was constructed from imputed HGC as
Min(Max(HGC-12,0), 4), similar to Bound and Turner (2002).
8
The disability variables used here come from two questions on disabilities by type. Respondents were
asked: [Question 17] “Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition lasting 6 months or more,
does this person have any diﬃculty in doing any of the following activities: (a) learning, remembering or
concentrating (b) dressing, bathing or getting around inside the home (c) going outside the home alone
to shop or visit a doctor’s oﬃce (d) working at a job or business?” The previous question [16] asks “Does
this person have any of the following long-lasting conditions: (a) Blindness, deafness, or a severe vision or
hearing impairment (b) A condition that substantially limits one or more basic physical activities such as
walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying?” We coded a work-related disability for those who
answered yes to (17d). Other disabilities were coded as follows: (16a) vision or hearing; (16b) physical;
(17a) mental; (17b) self-care; (17c) mobility. Respondents can have more than one disability. We coded
a non-work disability for anyone who responded yes to 16a, 16b, 17a, 17b, or 17c, i.e., they indicated
some disability, but no work-related disability (17d). We define the presence of any disability by the sum
of the work-related and non-work disability indicators.

4

that includes VDC, and a non-Social-Security (SSA) "retirement and disability pension"
variable that includes MDP and regular military pensions.9 Table 1 shows much higher
amounts of disability-related income for veterans. This is almost certainly due to veterans
receiving VDC and MDP. In contrast, diﬀerences in SSDI and SSI amounts by veteran
status (not reported) are much smaller.
Table 1 focuses on men born 1950-52 because these cohorts were most aﬀected by the
draft lottery. As noted above, however, we also present results for an expanded sample
of men born 1948-52. Descriptive statistics for the 1948-52 sample and means by single
year of birth appear in Appendix Tables A1 and A2. The 1948 and 1949 cohorts were
more likely to serve in the Vietnam era than the 1950-52 group, with Vietnam-era service
rates peaking at 45 percent for whites born in 1948. Men born in 1953 were less likely to
serve, though many still did (14 percent of whites and 18 percent of nonwhites).

2.2

The Draft-Lottery First Stage

The first draft lottery, held in December 1969, aﬀected men born in 1944-50 who were
at risk of conscription in 1970, while subsequent draft lotteries aﬀected 19-year-olds only.
Men born in 1951 were at risk of conscription in 1971 and men born in 1952 were at risk
of conscription in 1972. Men born in 1953 were assigned lottery numbers in 1972, but
there were no draft calls in 1973. Although men as old as 26 could have been drafted as
a result of the 1970 lottery, the risk of conscription for all cohorts aﬀected by a lottery
was limited to a single year.
Each lottery was associated with a draft-eligibility ceiling or cut-oﬀ. Those with an
RSN below the ceiling were draft-eligible while those with an RSN above the ceiling were
draft-exempt. Draft-eligibility ceilings were 195 in the 1970 lottery, 125 in the 1971 lottery
and 95 in the 1972 lottery. Draft eligibility is highly correlated with Vietnam-era veteran
status, but the link is far from deterministic. Many men with draft lottery numbers
below the ceiling were able to avoid conscription (through an occupational or educational
deferment, or because of poor health or low test scores) while many with lottery numbers
above the ceiling volunteered for service. Throughout the Vietnam era (1964-1975), most
9

The Census question regarding non-SSA retirement and disability income states “Do not include
Social Security,” while military pensions are presumably included. The “other income” question explicitly
mentions “VA payments,” which presumably includes VDC. In practice, veterans may confuse VDC and
MDP payments though they could not receive both before 2003. Another diﬀerence is that VDC is not
taxable while disability pensions are.

5

soldiers were volunteers.
In the sample of men born 1950-52, the eﬀect of draft eligibility on Vietnam-era veteran
status is .145 for whites and .094 for nonwhites. These and other draft-eligibility eﬀects
are reported in the first rows of Table 2 (Panel A for whites and Panel B for nonwhites).
The table also shows draft-eligibility eﬀects for the pooled sample of men born 1948-52.
These eﬀects are somewhat smaller than in the younger subsample (.11 for whites and
.072 for nonwhites) because the draft-eligibility first-stage is smaller for men born in 1948
and 1949 than for men born in 1950. This is not surprising since many of those who
served in the older cohorts had entered the military before the 1970 draft lottery. Table 2
also documents a small draft-eligibility first stage for the 1953 cohort (about .031), where
draft-eligibility status was coded using the 1972 lottery cutoﬀ of 95. Because the eﬀect on
men born in 1953 is small, we omit this cohort from the empirical analysis that follows.
Draft-eligibility eﬀects for men born 1944-47 (not reported here) are smaller than those
for men born 1953 so we omit these cohorts as well.
The most important feature of the relationship between lottery numbers and military
service is the drop in the probability of service at the draft-eligibility cutoﬀ. This can be
seen in Figure 1, which plots nonparametric estimates of the conditional probability of
service given lottery numbers for men born 1950-53. The figure shows estimates smoothed
across 5-RSN cells by single year of birth, but the smoothing does not straddle the drafteligibility cutoﬀ in each cohort.10 The figure also documents modest variation in the
probability of service within draft-eligibility groups. Part of this variation is due to higher
voluntary enlistment rates among men with low lottery numbers — men who volunteered
could expect more choice regarding terms of service (e.g., choice of branch of service),
while draftees mostly served in the Army. Another important feature of Figure 1 is the
muted relationship between veteran status and lottery numbers for nonwhites. Angrist
(1991) shows that this can be explained by the fact that nonwhites were more likely than
whites to consider military service an attractive career option.
2.2.1

Additional Instrument Sets

In addition to just-identified estimates using a dummy for draft-eligibility status as the
single instrument, we also constructed instruments from a set of five lottery-group dummies. These were chosen to match draft-eligibility cutoﬀs for each cohort, with allowance
10

Estimates were smoothed using lowess with a bandwidth of .4 and a standard tricube weighting
function.

6

for additional draft-motivated enlistment as high as RSN 230. The 5z instrument set for
individual i is {z1i , z2i , z3i , z4i , z5i } where
z1i = I[RSNi ≤ 95],
z2i = I[95 < RSNi ≤ 125],
z3i = I[125 < RSNi ≤ 160],
z4i = I[160 < RSNi ≤ 195],
z5i = I[195 < RSNi ≤ 230],
and I[·] is the indicator function. This allows for kinks at each draft-eligibility cutoﬀ,
while breaking the set of lottery numbers up into roughly equal-sized groups between
RSN 95, the lowest cut-oﬀ, and RSN 230, beyond which the eﬀect of lottery numbers on
enlistment is negligible. Note that a draft-eligibility dummy (eligi ) can be constructed
from the elements of 5z as follows
eligi = z1i + I[Y OBi ≤ 51](z2i ) + I[Y OBi ≤ 50](z3i + z4i )
where Y OBi is i’s year of birth. This shows that eligi is a function of both lottery-number
main eﬀects and interactions with year of birth.
The first two columns in each panel of Table 2 report estimates of the 5z first stage
in pooled samples.11 These estimates are from models without year-of-birth interaction
terms. For example, column 1 shows that men born 1950-52 with RSNs up to 95 were
.16 more likely to serve than men with RSNs above 230 (the reference group). The next
group, with RSN 96-125, was .091 more likely to serve than the reference group; the next
group was .059 more likely to serve; the next group after that was .04 more likely to
serve; and the last group with RSN 196-230 was .0065 more likely to serve. All of these
first-stage eﬀects are precisely estimated and significantly diﬀerent from zero. As with
the draft-eligibility eﬀects, estimates of 5z eﬀects are consistently smaller for nonwhites
than for whites. F-statistics in the pooled 1950-52 and 1948-52 samples range from 134
for nonwhites to over 2400 for whites.
The 5z instrument set without year of birth interactions does not produce more precise
2SLS estimates than eligi alone. We therefore report estimates using an instrument set,
labeled 5zx, that interacts 5z with year of birth. The 5zx set includes 15 instruments
11

The estimates in Table 2 and the second-stage estimates that follow control for year of birth, State
of birth, and month of birth.

7

for the 1950-52 sample and 25 instruments for the 1948-52 sample. The 5zx first stage
appears in columns 3-7 of Table 2. This first stage documents a modest role for draftmotivated enlistment. For example, even though the 1971 draft-eligibility cutoﬀ was 125,
men born in 1951 with lottery numbers between 126 and 160 were .05 more likely to serve
than men with lottery numbers above 230.
Finally, when estimating the returns to schooling, we tried an instrument set (called
7zx) that adds two RSN dummies plus year-of-birth interactions to 5zx. The additional
instruments are dummies for RSN 1-30 and RSN 31-60. Most of our substantive conclusions, however, are based on just-identified models or models estimated with a low degree
of over identification.12

2.3

Sample Selection Issues

A final issue before turning to the second-stage estimates is the possibility of selection
bias due to excess mortality among draft-eligible men. There are two likely channels
for this. The first is war-related deaths, since civilian samples are limited to those who
survived the war. The second is elevated post-service mortality due to physical injury,
PTSD, or other long-term consequences of military service such as an increased likelihood
of cigarette smoking (as suggested by Bedard and Deschenes, 2006, for WWII veterans).
Roughly 47,000 men died as a result of hostile action in the Vietnam Era (1964-75)
while 8.7 million personnel served in the military during this period. Overall casualty
rates among Vietnam-era veterans were low in part because less than half of active duty
personnel served in Indochina, and many served in positions not exposed to combat.
Although causality rates among draftees were higher than the overall death rate (because
most draftees served in the Army), draftees accounted for a minority of combat deaths.
Moreover, over 80 percent of combat deaths occurred before 1970.13 It therefore seems
unlikely that war-related deaths have a large eﬀect on the composition of the sample used
in our study.
An increase in civilian mortality for veterans seems more likely than combat deaths
12

As it turns out, 7zx adds little to the precision obtained with 5zx, so we use the larger instrument set
only for the Mincer equation. Likewise, a non-parametric first stage using the fitted values from Figure
1 fails to generate a meaningful gain in precision relative to 5zx.
13
Service and casualty statistics are from Table 583 in the 2000 Statistical Abstract, available on-line at
http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/statab/sec11.pdf. Data on casualties by year are available from
the national archives: http://www.archives.gov/research/vietnam-war/casualty-statistics.html#year.
Statistics on service in Indochina and exposure to combat are from Hearst, Newman and Hulley (1986).

8

to aﬀect the composition of post-Vietnam samples, especially in view of Hearst, Newman
and Hulley’s (1986) findings of elevated civilian mortality for draft-eligible men. The
excess deaths in the Hearst, Newman and Hulley study are due to suicide and motor
vehicle accidents, possibly related to PTSD.
As a simple check on the possibility of mortality-related selection bias, we compared
the actual and expected number of draft-eligible men in the 2000 Census by race and year
of birth. Following Hearst, Newman, and Hulley (1986), the expected ratio is computed
assuming birthdays (and hence lottery numbers) are uniformly distributed. Overall, drafteligible men are represented in the census sample almost exactly as predicted assuming
a uniform distribution of lottery numbers. Among whites, the predicted proportion eligible is .40553, while the empirical proportion eligible is .40539. Among nonwhites, the
proportion eligible is more than predicted, .4085 versus .4038.
Comparisons by single year of birth for white men born 1948-53, reported in detail in
Appendix Table A3, show draft-eligible men slightly over-represented in three cohorts and
slightly under-represented in 3 cohorts (one of these is the 1953 cohort, with no draftees).
Some of these diﬀerences are significant, though all are small. Only one out of six cohortspecific contrasts is significant for nonwhites, with slightly more eligibles than predicted
for nonwhites born in 1950. Given the size and sign pattern of these comparisons, it seems
unlikely that excess civilian mortality has a substantial eﬀect on the composition of the
2000 Census sample. This analysis also weighs against the view that Vietnam-era service
led to elevated civilian mortality. We return to this point in Section 5.

3

Labor-Market Eﬀects

We look first at employment and earnings. The results reported here are 2SLS estimates
of the parameter α in the equation
Yi = wi0 β + αvi + εi ,

(1)

where Yi is an outcome variable; vi is veteran status; and wi is a vector of covariates that
includes year of birth dummies, state of birth dummies, and month of birth dummies.
Year of birth is a necessary control in models identified by the exclusion of draft-eligibility
since older men were more likely to be eligible. Month of birth adjusts for any bias arising
from the fact that the 1970 lottery, the only one to use physical randomization, resulted
in an RSN sequence correlated with month of birth (in practice this does not appear to
9

be important). State of birth is a natural pre-treatment control, inclusion of which might
increase the precision of second-stage estimates. As a benchmark, ordinary least squares
(OLS) estimates of equation (1) are also reported.
As discussed in Angrist (1990), 2SLS estimates of equations like (1) capture the eﬀect
of service on those who were drafted or who volunteered in the face of draft risk. These men
are draft-lottery compliers in the sense of Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996): they served
in the Vietnam era because they were assigned a low lottery number but would not have
served otherwise. The average causal eﬀect for compliers is the local average treatment
eﬀect (LATE) captured by draft-lottery instruments (Imbens and Angrist, 1994).
Most soldiers from the Vietnam period were not compliers; rather, they were true
volunteers because they were not drafted and because they did not volunteer to avoid
conscription.14 Estimates using draft-lottery instruments need not generalize to the population of true volunteers. Nevertheless, the eﬀects of military service on those compelled
to serve against their will reflect the historical consequences of conscription. These estimates are also relevant for contemporary discussions of military manpower policy since
compliers in the future are likely to be similar to those from the draft-lottery period.15
Moreover, given an economic mechanism that explains the eﬀects of Vietnam-era service
(such as lost experience), we might draw broader conclusions as to how conscription affects soldiers, though these conclusions require stronger assumptions than an analysis of
the causal eﬀect of Vietnam-era conscription per se.
Draft-lottery estimates constructed using the 2000 Census show little evidence of an
eﬀect of Vietnam-era conscription on the labor market outcomes of whites. This can be
seen in Panel A of Table 3, which reports estimates of eﬀects on labor market status
and earnings using diﬀerent instrument sets. For example, 2SLS estimation using drafteligibility status as an instrument in the sample of white men born 1950-52 generates
14

The proportion of veterans who were compliers can be calculated as follows: let v1i denote i’s veteran
status if i is draft eligible (eligi = 1) and v0i denote i’s veteran status if i is ineligible (eligi = 0). Random
assignment makes eligi independent of {v1i , v0i }. Veteran status is vi = v0i +eligi (v1i −v0i ) and compliers
have v1i − v0i = 1. Given monotonicity, v1i ≥ v0i , so the proportion of draft-eligibility compliers is given
by the draft-eligibility first stage, P [v1i − v0i = 1] = E[v1i − v0i ] = E[vi |eligi = 1] − E[vi |eligi = 0]. The
proportion of veterans who are draft-eligibility compliers is P [v1i − v0i |vi = 1] = P [vi = 1|v1i − v0i =
1]P [v1i − v0i = 1]/P [vi = 1] = P [eligi = 1]P [v1i − v0i = 1]/P [vi = 1]. For white men born 1950-52, this
is .376(.145/.236) = .231.
15
The Selective Service System web site indicates that "if a draft were held today," it would involve a
lottery over 19-year olds. There would be few deferments, as in the Vietnam-era lottery, with at most
a one-semester deferment for enrolled students. And it seems likely that any future draft would come
in wartime. Finally, as in the Vietnam era, those conscripted would be men who do not find GI Bill
education benefits enough of an inducement to volunteer. See http://www.sss.gov/viet.htm.

10

eﬀects of -.0043 (s.e.=.0072) on employment and -517 (s.e.=1240) on earnings. The corresponding estimates in the sample of white men born 1948-52 are -.0047 (s.e.=.0072)
and -115 (s.e.=1243). Estimates of eﬀects on log weekly wages, computed for the sample of men with positive earnings, are similarly small. In contrast, the OLS estimates
in columns 2 and 6 show that veteran status is associated with substantially worse labor
market outcomes and lower employment rates. The OLS estimates, about -7,900 to -8,600
for annual earnings and -11 percent to -12 percent of weekly wages, are outside the 2SLS
confidence intervals.
The pattern of OLS estimates is reversed for nonwhites, with veterans more likely to
be working and earning more than non-veterans. But the 2SLS estimates in Panel B of
Table 3 oﬀer no evidence of a causal eﬀect on the employment or earnings of nonwhites
- the estimated earnings eﬀects for nonwhites are positive but insignificant. It should
be noted, however, that the 2SLS estimates for nonwhites are considerably less precise
than those for whites due both to a smaller sample and a weaker first-stage. Using draft
eligibility as an instrument, the estimated eﬀect of Vietnam-era service on the log weekly
wages of nonwhites born 1950-52 is -.037 with a standard error of .067.

Some of the

estimated eﬀects on weeks and hours worked by nonwhites are positive and significantly
diﬀerent from zero, e.g., an increase of 3.7 hours per week in column 7 (s.e.=1.7). There
is also some evidence of reduced unemployment for nonwhites in the 1948-52 sample. On
the other hand, there is little evidence of a corresponding increase in employment while
the estimated eﬀects on weeks worked by nonwhites are positive but insignificant. On
balance, therefore, the results for nonwhites seem inconclusive, though perhaps leaning
towards positive long-run eﬀects.
Finally, it’s noteworthy that the 5zx instrument set incorporating 5 lottery-number
dummies with a full set of year-of-birth interactions produces only slightly more precise
estimates than eligi alone. The most noticeable precision gains appear in the 1948-52
sample.

For example, the standard error for the eﬀect on earnings in the sample of

whites born 1948-52 falls from 1243 to 1133, with similar coeﬃcient estimates.

The

standard error for the eﬀect on log wages changes by only .01 in this sample, from .16 to
.15.

11

3.1

Experience and Earnings

The 2SLS estimates in Table 3 contrast with the earnings losses reported for white veterans
in Angrist (1990), which range from 10-15 percent of FICA-taxable earnings in 1981-84.
The results from the 2000 Census can be reconciled with these earlier results if the costs
of conscription are due primarily by lost labor market experience. By 2000, the draft
lottery cohorts had reached middle age, when experience profiles are fairly flat, so the
veteran penalty should have faded. The empirical support for this argument comes from
a Mincer-style wage equation, which can be written as
yi = β 0 + β 1 xi + β 2 x2i + ρsi + ui ,

(2)

where yi is the log weekly wage, si is years of schooling, xi is potential work experience,
and ui is a random component in the human capital earnings function. Potential work
experience is assumed to vary with veteran status, vi , according to
xi = agei − si − 6 − vi = xi − vi ,
where xi is potential experience for non-veterans. In other words, veterans have

(3)
fewer

years of experience than non-veterans of the same age and with the same educational
attainment.
Equations (2) and (3) lead to a model with an additive veteran eﬀect and an interaction
term between vi and xi . Re-arranging, we have
yi = β 0 + β 1 xi + β 2 x2i + ρsi + π xi vi + ui ,

(4)

where π xi = π1 + π2 xi and
π 1 = −[β 1 − β 2 2 ]

(5a)

π 2 = −2β 2 .

(5b)

Fitting this model to log earnings from 1978-1984, Angrist (1990) estimated =2.08
(s.e.=.38), with an experience profile such that π 1 = −.225, and π 2 = .011. In other

words, veterans start out at a -.225 wage disadvantage, but the gap closes by .011 each
year.

The veteran earnings gap is zero when xi ≈ 20.5 or agei ≈ 39 for high school

graduates (older for those with more education).

The pure loss-of-experience model generates a restriction linking π 1 and π 2 .

An

unrestricted model allows the linear potential experience term to vary with veteran status
12

according to β 1i = β 10 +β 11 vi , where β 11 is most likely negative. This can be rationalized
by the Ben-Porath (1967) model of human capital investment with a finite horizon, since
military service shortens the period of return on investment. The relationship between
equation (4) and the human capital earnings function then becomes
π 1 = −[(β 10 + β 11 ) − β 2 2 ]

(6a)

π 2 = −[2β 2 − β 11 ].

(6b)

Since β 11 is an additional free parameter, equations (6a) and (6b) impose no restrictions
on (4). The unrestricted estimates are =1.84 (s.e.=.43), π1 = −.189, and π 2 = .006. In

this case, the veteran earnings gap disappears when xi = .189/.006 = 31.5 or agei ≈ 50
for those with a high school diploma.

A key implication of both the restricted and unrestricted loss-of-experience models
is that by the time of the 2000 Census, the veteran earnings gap should have largely
closed and perhaps even reversed. This is illustrated in Figure 2, which plots the profiles
estimated from equation (4) assuming veteran status operates to reduce experience as in
(3). The upper panel of the figure, based on the unrestricted model allowing veterans
to have a profile with lower slope, shows veteran and non-veteran profiles converging by
about 2000, while the restricted model has veterans converging sooner. In both cases,
however, the broad picture is of a shrinking veteran wage penalty.16 A second force that
appears to have contributed to the closing veteran wage gap is schooling, discussed in the
next section.

4

Eﬀects on Schooling

Compulsory military service appears to have increased the educational attainment of
Vietnam-era veterans, a result documented in Table 4a. For example, the 2SLS estimates using eligi in the 1950-52 sample suggest that white veterans got .33 more years of
schooling than nonveterans. The corresponding results are slightly lower in the 1948-52
sample, but change little when estimated with an expanded instrument list. Both samples
generate precise estimates, with standard errors on the order of .05. In contrast with the
results for whites, however, the estimates for nonwhites are smaller, mostly below .2, and
not significantly diﬀerent from zero.
16

Imbens and van der Klaauw (1995) report an estimated earnings loss of about 5 percent for Dutch
conscripts ten years after their service. This is consistent with the earnings penalty that might be expected
from lost experience given the short period of service in Holland.

13

The remainder of Table 4a shows that the increase in highest grade completed for
white veterans is primarily the result of more years of college, with precisely estimated
eﬀects ranging from .24-.27. More specifically, veterans were more likely to attend college
(including partial years) or to earn an associate’s degree. These eﬀects are on the order of
.06-.08. The increase in the likelihood of completing a BA degree is smaller though still
marked, at around .05. Perhaps surprisingly, there is also a small eﬀect on high school
completion (roughly 2 percentage points) and a very small eﬀect on upper secondary
grade completion. These eﬀects may be due to GEDs obtained by veterans without a
high school diploma. In addition, since the 1990s, many states have oﬀered Vietnam-era
veterans honorary high school diplomas solely on the basis of their military service.17
The 2SLS estimates are summarized in Figure 3, which plots the coeﬃcient estimates
for the 1948-52 sample reported in Table 4a (as well as some not reported in the table),
along with pointwise confidence bands. There is a clear jump in the eﬀects on post-high
school schooling levels, with a drop at the BA level. The figure also highlights the much
smaller and mostly insignificant shift in the schooling distribution for nonwhite veterans.
The single (marginally) significant eﬀect on nonwhites’ education is for the likelihood of
obtaining some college (but less than a full year). Finally, unlike the 2SLS estimates, OLS
estimates with controls for state, month, and year of birth (reported in columns 2 and 6)
show white veterans with fewer years of schooling and less post-secondary education. In
view of the 2SLS estimates, this would seem to be an artifact of selection bias.

4.1

GI Bill Benefits vs. Draft Deferments

The schooling shifts documented in Table 4a and Figure 3 are most likely a consequence of
the Vietnam-era GI Bill, which oﬀered stipends similar in generosity to those available to
veterans of WWII and Korea.18 Vietnam veterans were especially likely to have used the
GI Bill for education and training. Data from the 2001 Survey of Veterans (SOV) show
17

Angrist and Krueger (1992) look at the relation between lottery numbers and education using data
from the 1979-85 CPS’s. These results are too imprecise to detect eﬀects on schooling of the size reported
here. Moreover, some of the veteran schooling advantage seems likely to have accumulated after Angrist
and Krueger’s (1992) sample period.
18
The WWII GI Bill included a 500 tuition benefit and a monthly stipend. In the 1970s, the Vietnamera GI Bill paid full-time students a stipend almost identical in value to the WWII package (adjusting
for inflation) and more generous than the Korean-era full-time stipend. These benefit levels were almost
double the average cost of tuition, room, and board at 4-year public universities in this period. The real
value of the Vietnam-era GI Bill declined in the 1980s, but remained above the cost of tuition, room, and
board (Data from authors’ tabulations and Bound and Turner, 2002).

14

that among whites, 44 and 42 percent of WWII and Korean-era veterans used benefits
for education and training, while the usage rate was 50 percent for Vietnam-era veterans.
Vietnam-era veterans were also more likely than earlier cohorts to have used their benefits
for college course work: 63 percent of Vietnam-era GI Bill beneficiaries used benefits for
college courses, while the corresponding figures for WWII and Korean-era benefit users
are 53 and 56 percent.19
The notion that the GI Bill increased schooling is supported by a number of earlier
studies. For example, Bound and Turner’s (2002) preferred IV estimates of the eﬀects
of WWII service on college completion by white men are around 5-6 percentage points
while their preferred estimates of eﬀects on years of college range from .23-.28. Stanley’s
(2003) estimates of the eﬀects of the Korean-era GI Bill eligibility on college completion
are also on the order of 5-6 percentage points while his estimates of eﬀects on years of
college range from .20-.33. The college completion eﬀects reported in Table 4a are a little
over 5 points for whites and range from .24-.27 for years of college, remarkably similar
to the Bound and Turner (2002) and Stanley estimates. The estimates in Table 4a also
echo Turner and Bound (2003) in that they show larger eﬀects of the GI Bill on whites
than nonwhites. Finally, Lemieux and Card (2001) report eﬀects of a similar magnitude
in cohorts that benefitted from the Canadian GI Bill, while Angrist (1993) finds large
post-service schooling increases associated with the use of the Vietnam-era GI Bill.20
The leading alternative explanation for schooling eﬀects estimated using draft-lottery
instruments is draft-avoidance behavior through education-related draft deferments. In
the 1960s, college students could delay and eventually escape conscription by staying in
school. Men with low draft lottery numbers may therefore have been more likely to stay
in college or to enroll in college, hoping to avoid service through an educational deferment.
Weighing against this possibility is the fact that the importance of educational deferments
19

The pattern for nonwhite veterans is similar, though the levels are lower. GI Bill statistics in this
paragraph are from the authors’ tabulation of responses to the 2001 SOV. For purposes of this comparison,
samples of veterans were limited to the principle birth cohorts who served in each era (years of birth with
at least 100 observations in the SOV).
20
The BEOG program (Pell grants) also played an important role in expanding college attendance for
adult students in the 1970s (see, e.g., Seftor and Turner 2002), but Vietnam veterans were not especially
likely to have received Pell grants. Among male Vietnam veterans aged 35-39 in the SOV of 1987 (roughly
the cohorts of the 2000 Census), 54 percent had used the GI Bill, while only 7.4 percent reported having
received any federal (non-Veteran) aid, and only 2.3 percent received federal grants (including Pell grants).
The overlap with Pell grants is small because Pell was means-tested while the GI Bill was not and because
half of the GI Bill benefit amount was counted as income when determining Pell grant eligibility (U.S.
Congressional Budget Oﬃce 1978, p.24).

15

declined sharply during the draft-lottery period.21

4.2

Additional Evidence on the GI Bill Hypothesis

Estimates of schooling eﬀects by single year of birth, reported in Table 4b, also weigh
against draft deferment as the primary force behind the schooling eﬀects in Table 4a. In
particular, Table 4b shows that in spite of the decreasing availability of college deferments
from 1970 onwards, the estimated eﬀects on highest grade completed and years of college
are substantial for white men born in 1951 and 1952. The largest eﬀects of military service
on these two schooling variables are for the 1951 cohort, few of whom would have been
deferred for long. Estimates of eﬀects on highest grade completed and years of college for
the 1952 cohort (which had no access to college deferments) are smaller, but similar in
magnitude or larger than the estimated eﬀects on white men born from 1948-50.
Diﬀerences across cohorts in the 2SLS estimates of eﬀects on some-college dummies
mirror the diﬀerences in estimates of eﬀects on highest grade completed and years of
college. For example, the estimated eﬀect on a dummy variable indicating one or more
years of college falls from .105 for the 1951 cohort to .068 for the 1952 cohort. On the
other hand, the BA eﬀect is larger for the 1952 cohort than for the 1950 cohort, in spite of
the latter’s wider access to college deferments. It’s also worth noting that the estimates
by single year of birth for nonwhites, though imprecise, are typically larger for younger
cohorts than old. On balance, therefore, Table 4b points away from draft deferment as
the primary explanation for the results in Table 4a.
Schooling Trends in the CPS
A second piece of evidence supporting the GI Bill explanation of increased schooling
among Vietnam veterans comes from the Current Population Surveys (CPS). This evidence is based on a model that divides total educational attainment into three parts:
pre-service schooling for veterans or schooling completed as of the typical entry age for
B
non-veterans ( sA
i ); schooling acquired between the typical entry and discharge ages (∆si );

and the diﬀerence between completed schooling and the schooling completed at the typical
21

The decline in the role played by college deferments is reflected in the cohort- and sex- specific
enrollment rates analyzed by Card and Lemieux (2001). Their analysis shows no deviation from trend
in the male-to-female college graduate ratio or the proportion with some college in cohorts born 1950 or
later. For institutional background related to draft deferments, see the chronology in Selective Service
System Oﬃce of Public Aﬀairs (1986) and Semiannual Reports of the Director of the Selective Service
System from the early 1970s.

16

discharge age (∆sC
i ). Completed education is the sum of these components:
B
C
si = sA
i + ∆si + ∆si ,

(7)

A
B
We think of sA
i as schooling at age 20, si +∆si as schooling at age 24, and si as schooling

at around age 40 when GI Bill eligibility expired for the cohorts studied here.
C
A
Military service has a causal eﬀect on ∆sB
i and ∆si , while si is a "pre-treatment"

variable. To make this explicit, let ∆sB
i (v) denote the potential schooling acquired during
the service period, where v = 0, 1 indexes veteran status. Similarly, let ∆sC
i (v) denote the
potential schooling acquired in the post-service period. Veteran and non-veteran potential
schooling increments are defined for all i regardless of veteran status.
Most soldiers get no schooling in the military (∆sB
i (1) = 0), so that
B
∆sB
i = ∆si (0)(1 − vi ).

We also assume that non-veterans complete their education by the time most veterans
are discharged, so that ∆sC
i (0) = 0. Therefore,
C
∆sC
i = ∆si (1)vi .

Combining these two assumptions with the decomposition in (7), the causal eﬀect of
B
veteran status on an individual veteran’s schooling is [∆sC
i (1) − ∆si (0)]. The average

causal eﬀect of military service on veterans’ schooling is

B
C
B
E[∆sC
i (1) − ∆si (0)|vi = 1] = E[∆si (1)|vi = 1] − E[∆si (0)|vi = 1].

(8)

Military service increases average education when post-discharge increases in schooling
are enough to overcome the education lost while serving.
B
We measure E[∆sC
i (1)−∆si (0)|vi = 1] directly using CPS data from 1964-1991. This

covers the period from the beginning of the Vietnam era to just beyond the expiration
of Vietnam-era GI Bill entitlements in 1989. Under the assumptions given here, the
veteran/nonveteran diﬀerence in schooling growth from entry age to completion is
A
C
B
E[si − sA
i |vi = 1] − E[si − si |vi = 0] = E[∆si (1)|vi = 1] − E[∆si (0)|vi = 0].

(9)

B
Assuming E[∆sB
i (0)|vi = 0] = E[∆si (0)|vi = 1], that is, the schooling veterans would

have obtained during their service years had they not served is equal to the schooling
17

non-veterans obtained at the same ages, equation (9) is the average causal eﬀect of veteran status on schooling expressed in equation (8). However, the schooling non-veterans
obtained during the service period, E[∆sB
i (0)|vi = 0], probably exceeded the schooling
veterans lost while in the military, E[∆sB
i (0)|vi = 1]. Thus, the empirical counterpart of
(9) is an underestimate of (8).
In line with this reasoning, CPS data show that the educational attainment of Vietnam veterans born 1948-52 increased relatively little when these men were in their early
twenties, while the schooling of non-veterans the same age was rising sharply. On the
other hand, while the age-schooling profile of non-veterans flattened relatively early, the
schooling of Vietnam veterans continued to increase when these men were in their thirties. This can be seen in Figure 4, which plots educational attainment by age and veteran
status. A drawback of the CPS for our purposes is that most active duty soldiers are not
in the sampling frame so we miss many veterans. The figure therefore shows two panels,
constructed with and without those active duty soldiers who are included in the CPS (this
includes soldiers stationed in the US, living oﬀ-base or with their families). The schooling
profiles in both versions exhibit a similar pattern.22
As a comparison, Figure 4 also shows schooling profiles for veterans and non-veterans
from Korean-war cohorts. These are similar to the Vietnam-era profiles at the same ages.
Interestingly, however, while Vietnam veterans had less schooling than Korea veterans
around the time Vietnam veterans were discharged, by the end of the period covered
in the figure, Vietnam veterans were more educated than Korean-era veterans and had
largely closed the gap with non-veterans their same age.
The empirical counterpart of equation (9) appears in Figure 5. Panel A plots the
diﬀerence in average education by veteran status at each age. The diﬀerences for single
years of age were smoothed using either a two-year or three-year moving average. The
figure highlights the rapidly increasing and then shrinking veteran/non-veteran schooling
diﬀerential.23
Panel B plots the veteran/nonveteran diﬀerence in the moving average of schooling,
relative to the average over the first two or three years of age in Panel A. We think of this
22
A detailed description of the data and methods used to construct Figures 4 and 5 appears in the
appendix.
23
The sample used here includes active-duty CPS respondents. The absence of most active-duty soldiers
probably tends to bias the average schooling for veterans upwards at young ages since some of those
counted as veterans may have returned to school while active-duty soldiers have not yet had the chance
to do so.

18

as the veteran/nonveteran diﬀerence in schooling growth, i.e., after subtracting the average
of sA
i for each group This plot shows that relative to each group’s entry-period schooling
level, veterans’ schooling grew more than nonveterans’. The corresponding diﬀerence-indiﬀerences estimates using (9) are on the order of .1-.3 years of schooling depending on
the moving average window and the width of the age range in the terminal group. Thus,
our analysis of CPS data on schooling trends comes down remarkably close to the 2SLS
estimates of the eﬀect of veteran status on schooling using draft lottery instruments. These
estimates can be explained by Vietnam veterans’ relatively large increase in educational
attainment after their service.

5

Other outcomes

Changes in health provide an additional channel whereby military service may have affected earnings. Health eﬀects are especially a concern in view of Hearst, Newman and
Hulley’s (1986) pioneering draft-lottery study, which found elevated civilian mortality
risk among draft-eligible men. As noted in Section 2, however, we found no evidence
that draft-eligible men are disproportionately missing in the 2000 Census, as might be
expected if Vietnam veterans suﬀered excess mortality. A number of recent studies using
the draft lottery also report less evidence of adverse health consequences than appear in
Hearst, Newman, and Hulley (1986).24
The mixed evidence for health consequence of Vietnam-era service notwithstanding,
the possibility that military service aﬀected health is a clear concern in principle. Veterans
may have been injured in combat, either physically or as a result of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). Many Vietnam veterans have also been concerned about exposure to
the Agent Orange defoliant used by American forces. Finally, the loss of earnings associated with Vietnam-era conscription may itself have been debilitating. We therefore look
directly at disability outcomes in the Census. As detailed in the discussion of Table 1,
24

Goldberg, Richards, Anderson, and Rodin (1991) found no evidence of increased alcohol consumption
among draft-eligible men. Dobkin and Shabani (2006), using draft-lottery instruments, conclude that
there is no clear evidence for eﬀects of Vietnam-era service on a range of health outcomes. Hearst,
Buehler, Newman and Rutherford (1991), using draft-lottery instruments, found no increase in AIDS
among Vietnam-era veterans. Bedard and Deschenes (2006) suggest that WWII service increased smoking
and smoking-related disease, probably because WWII veterans were given free cigarettes. This was not
true in the Vietnam era, however. Eisenberg and Rowe (2007), using draft-lottery instruments, find some
evidence of increased smoking in the immediate post-Vietnam period, but the eﬀects are imprecise and
disappear in later data. They also find no evidence of eﬀects on other health outcomes.

19

the Census disability variables include self-reported disability status and disability-related
income.
The 2SLS estimates of eﬀects on disability outcomes in Table 5 suggest that Vietnamera conscription increased self-reported disability rates among white veterans. The estimated eﬀects on the likelihood of reporting a non-work disability in the 1948-52 sample,
reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, are around .013 for whites.25 Both of the 2SLS
eﬀects are significantly diﬀerent from zero, with standard errors on the order of .005.
Among individual disability categories, the largest eﬀects are on mobility-related disabilities. On the other hand, the 2SLS estimates show no evidence of an impact on work-related
disability rates, as can be seen in the first row of Table 5. There is also little evidence
of an eﬀect on disability for nonwhites, with (marginally) significant estimates for one
outcome only (vision or hearing).
The 2SLS estimates also suggest that compulsory military service increased the amount
of disability-related income received by white veterans. The estimates for whites range
from about $270-300 for the Other Income variable that includes VDC, with a .04 increase
in the likelihood of receipt, to $480-560 for the Retirement and Disability income variable
that includes MDP, with a .03 increase in the likelihood of receipt. All of these estimates
are reasonably precise. The 2SLS estimates of eﬀects on disability-related income variables
for nonwhites are roughly double those for whites but considerably less precise and only
marginally significant.
The increased receipt of disability-related income reported in Table 5 is partly a mechanical phenomenon since only veterans are eligible for VDC and MDP. On the other
hand, the higher disability rates reported in Table 5 may reflect a negative causal impact on health for white veterans. Weighing against this is the absence of an eﬀect of
Vietnam-era service on work-related disability, a seeming inconsistency. A second finding
inconsistent with an adverse long-term health impact of service is the absence of an eﬀect
on employment outcomes: the disability increase reported in Table 5 for whites does not
appear to translate into lower employment rates, higher unemployment, or reduced hours
and weeks worked, as would usually be expected for disabled workers (see Table 3). Especially striking is the fact that nonwhite veterans have more disability-related income,
while also appearing to work more.
Given these inconsistencies, the estimated impact on disability rates for veterans may
25

Estimates for the sample of men born 1950-52 are similar.

20

reflect, at least in part, the financial incentives in the veterans’ compensation system. As
Autor and Duggan (2007) have noted, veterans have a strong incentive to claim benefits
because VDC is not taxed to oﬀset earnings (though MDPs are means-tested). Moreover,
Duggan, Rosenheck and Singleton (2007) show that enrollment in the VDC program
seems highly sensitive to small changes in eligibility criteria and to the unemployment rate.
Claims for civilian Social Security Disability Insurance have similarly been linked to labormarket conditions for low-skilled men (Autor and Duggan, 2003). The growth in VDC
claims has been large enough to raise questions about the VA’s disability determination
process. A recent VA study investigates the growth in VDC claims from 1999-2004 and
the large variation in these claims across states.26
Disability Trends in the CPS
To get an independent look at trends in veterans health and disability income, we tabulated the amount and proportion receiving income from the VA (including VDC) and the
amount and proportion receiving non-Social-Security disability income (including MDP)
in the CPS. The results are plotted by year and veteran status for Vietnam and Korea
cohorts in Figures 6 and 7. Few nonveterans have income in either the VA or disability
categories while both Korea and Vietnam-era veterans have substantial amounts. Importantly, the proportion of Vietnam-era veterans with VA and disability income appears to
jump in the late 1990s, a striking change in comparison with the flatter or declining trend
for Korea veterans.
Direct measures of self-reported disability rates and the likelihood of fair-to-poor
health, plotted in Figure 8, also show a jump for Vietnam veterans around the same
time that disability income went up. This might signal a deterioration in the health
of Vietnam veterans, but the suddenness of the recent increase in both disability rates
and the receipt of disability income suggests that policy or regulatory changes may play
a role. It is also worth noting that the causality between self-reported disability and
26

Among other things, the success rates and the amount awarded to VDC claimants appear to be
associated with the likelihood that claimants used power-of-attorney representatives from veterans service
organizations (VA, 2005). Also related is the fact that diabetes claims for Vietnam veterans jumped
sharply after a 2001 VA ruling allowing diabetes to be treated as service-related (based on evidence
linking diabetes to Agent Orange; see Autor and Duggan, 2007). This ruling is unlikely to aﬀect disability
outcomes in the 2000 Census. On the other hand, PTSD claims by Vietnam veterans grew 18 percent
from 1999 to 2001, before the events of September 11 (Veterans Benefits Administration, 2000 and 2002).
In 2001, PTSD was the second-largest category of Vietnam-era claims and three-quarters of all PTSD
claims were by Vietnam veterans.

21

disability income can run in both directions; a deterioration in cohort health may have
increased claims, but increases in VDC awards may also increase the likelihood that veterans categorize themselves as disabled or as suﬀering from poor health in government
surveys (the disability question in the CPS is a screener for questions about disability
income). On balance, therefore, it seems fair to interpret the data on disability outcomes
as inconclusive.

6

Schooling, Experience and Earnings

Here, we bring the experience and schooling channels together in a Mincer-style wage
equation.

We are especially interested in the economic return to the extra schooling

veterans received as a consequence of the GI Bill. In view of the disability eﬀects reported
in the previous section, we also explore models that allow for higher disability rates among
Vietnam-era veterans.
The empirical framework in this section is similar to that outlined in equations (2) and
(3), with additional exogenous covariates (month of birth and state of birth). Veteran
status is assumed to aﬀect wages by reducing potential experience xi and increasing
schooling si , but with no direct eﬀects. The loss of experience associated with veteran
status is fixed at 2 years, as estimated in Angrist (1990) and consistent with the terms
of service for draftees. The equation of interest has three endogenous variables: xi , x2i
and si . Age and cohort eﬀects are assumed to be captured by the potential-experience
quadratic so that age or year of birth is available as an instrument.27
Estimates of equation (2) are reported in Table 6 for the sample of white men born
1948-52. We focus on whites because the estimated impact of military service on the
schooling of nonwhites is much smaller. The 1948-52 sample is more useful than the 195052 sample in this context because the wider age range helps to pin down the experience
profile. As a benchmark, column (1) reports OLS estimates treating all variables as
exogenous. With potential experience defined as in equation (3), the returns to schooling
are about .12. The estimated experience profile in this case does not have the usual
concavity, reflecting the fact that the profile in this age range is essentially flat (the
experience derivative is small, about .009 (s.e.=.0006)). The implicit veteran eﬀect on
earnings, constructed from (5a) and (5b), gives the predicted earnings loss due to veterans’
27

This corresponds to the pure loss of experience model. 2SLS estimates of schooling coeﬃcients in a
model allowing the linear experience term to vary with veteran status are similar but less precise.

22

lost experience. This is equal to -.016 (s.e.=.0011).28
Instrumental variables estimates of the return to schooling are considerably smaller
than the corresponding OLS estimates. This can be seen in columns 2-8 of Table 6,
which report 2SLS and LIML estimates of (2). In over-identified models, LIML provides
a check on finite-sample bias in 2SLS.29 As shown in column 2, estimates from a justidentified model using agei , age2i and draft-eligibility (eligi ) as instruments for the three
endogenous variables xi , x2i and si generate a return of .07 (s.e.= .035). Swapping year-ofbirth dummies for agei and age2i generates a 2SLS estimate of .078 (s.e.=.034), reported
in column 3.
The F-statistic for all excluded instruments in column 3 is large (93.3), but this is
misleading since age and year of birth serve as instruments for potential experience more
than for schooling. The F-statistic for RSN-instruments only (in this case, a single drafteligibility dummy) is 39.4 in column 3, roughly the square of the t-statistic for the justidentified schooling model in Table 4a. Most relevant is an F-statistic that explicitly
takes account of multiple endogenous variables in the 2SLS procedure. This statistic,
which adjusts for the fact that all the instruments predict all the endogenous variables,
is smaller still (a value of 15 in column 3), but still outside the range where bias in
2SLS estimates is usually a concern.30 The LIML estimates in column 4 are close to the
corresponding 2SLS estimates, as expected since the degree of over-identification for the
28

Estimates using linear potential-experience controls (i.e., dropping the quadratic term), not reported
to save space, are almost identical to those reported in Table 6 (linear experience coeﬃcients are close to
the average experience derivatives in the quadratic model).
29
The finite-sample behavior of LIML is discussed in, e.g., Anderson, Kunitomo, and Sawa (1982).
30
The multivariate first-stage F is constructed as follows. Assume covariates have been partialled out
of the instrument list and that there are two endogenous variables, W1 and W2 with coeﬃcients δ 1 and
δ 2 . We are interested in the bias of the 2SLS estimator of δ 2 when W1 is also treated as endogenous.
In matrix notation, the instrument vector is Z, with projection matrix Pz = Z(Z 0 Z)−1 Z 0 . The second
stage equation is
y = Pz W1 δ 1 + Pz W2 δ 2 + [ + (W1 − Pz W1 )δ 1 + (W2 − Pz W2 )δ 2 ],
where is the vector of structural errors. The 2SLS estimator of δ 2 can be seen to be the OLS regression
on Pz [M1z W2 ], where M1z = [I − Pz W1 (W10 Pz W1 )−1 W10 Pz ]. This is also 2SLS using Pz to instrument
M1z W2 . In other words, the endogenous variable of interest is M1z W2 , itself the residual from a 2SLS
regression of W2 on W1 . Note that the 2SLS estimator of δ 2 can be written
δ 2 + [W20 M1z Pz M1z W2 ]−1 W20 M1z Pz .
The explained sum of squares (numerator of the F-statistic) that determines bias is therefore the expectation of [W20 M1z Pz M1z W2 ], as can be shown formally using the group-asymptotic sequence in Bekker
(1994) and Angrist and Krueger (1995).

23

model reported in column 3 is two.
In an attempt to increase the precision of the estimated schooling coeﬃcients, we
used the 5zx and 7zx instrument sets constructed from 5 and 7 RSN dummies interacted
with year of birth. The resulting 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling, reported
in columns 5 and 7 of Table 6, are indeed more precise than the estimates in columns
2 and 3, though they are also smaller. For example, the estimated returns to schooling
using the 5zx and 7zx instrument sets are .043 (s.e.=.03) and .051 (s.e.=.028). The
multivariate first-stage F-statistics for both of these models are low, about 3.6 in column
5 and 2.9 in column 7. This is a consequence of that fact that many of the interaction
terms included in the expanded instrument lists have little predictive power. Also of
concern in the heavily over-identified specifications is the fact that the LIML estimates
fall to zero with standard errors almost twice as large as those for the corresponding 2SLS
estimates. Interestingly, the precision of the LIML estimates decreases with the degree of
over-identification.

Overall, therefore, the low degree-of-overidentification estimates in

columns 2 and 3 appear more reliable.31
Finally, we estimate a model that allows disability rates to increase with Vietnam-era
service:
yi = β 0γ + β 1γ xi + β 2γ x2i + ργ si + γdi + ui ,

(10)

where di indicates non-work disability status (the disability variable that is most aﬀected
by veteran status in Panel A of Table 5), with coeﬃcient γ. The addition of di to the list
of endogenous variables generates highly imprecise results, but we can get a sense of the
consequences of higher disability rates for 2SLS estimates of equation (10) by inserting
plausible values of γ = γ ∗ in the following model
yi∗ ≡ yi − γ ∗ di = β 0γ + β 1γ xi + β 2γ x2i + ργ si + i .

(11)

As a benchmark, we set γ ∗ = −.2, slightly larger in magnitude than the OLS estimate of
the wage loss associated with non-work disabilities using equation (10).

Adjusting for disability status in this manner increases the 2SLS estimates of the
returns to schooling by .005-.007, as Panel B of Table 6 shows. Variations on these results
31

The standard errors reported for both the LIML and 2SLS estimates in Table 6 are heteroscedasticityconsistent. LIML is motivated by a homoscedastic normal model but can be understood as a k-class estimator in either case. The collapse of LIML in columns 5 and 7 may be explained by the group-asymptotic
inconsistency of LIML under some forms of heteroscedasticity. Hausman, Newey, and Woutersen (2006)
report a heteroscedastic simulation in a many-weak IV scenario where the bias of LIML is away from
OLS.

24

for alternative choices of γ ∗ can be obtained by observing that b
ργ , the 2SLS estimate of the

schooling coeﬃcient in equation (11), is related to b
ρ, the 2SLS estimate of the schooling
coeﬃcient imposing γ ∗ = 0, as follows:

b ∗,
b
ργ = b
ρ − λγ

b is the 2SLS estimate of the coeﬃcient on si in a regression of di on the variables
where λ
b
on the right-hand side of (11), again, treating all variables as endogenous. Because λ

in this adjustment is only about .03, the diﬀerence between b
ργ and b
ρ is small for any

plausible value of γ ∗ .

A low economic return to GI-Bill-subsidized schooling is not a universal finding. Using

the Canadian WWII-era GI Bill as a source of exogenous variation, Lemieux and Card
(2001) report IV estimates larger than the corresponding OLS estimates. But attenuated
returns to post-service schooling are broadly in line with a number of earlier investigations
of the returns to schooling for Vietnam veterans. For example, Schwartz (1986) estimated
the returns to schooling to be .025 lower for Vietnam veterans than for comparably-aged
non-veterans, while Angrist (1993) reported a return to Vietnam veterans’ post-service
schooling of .043 using the 1987 survey of veterans. Moreover, as noted by Berger and
Hirsch (1983), low returns to GI-Bill schooling can be explained by the large subsidies
provided through the Bill.32

7

Summary and Conclusions

Consistent with a flattening of age-earnings profiles in middle age, the adverse economic
consequences of Vietnam-era military service appear to have faded. At the same time,
2000 census data show a strong positive connection between schooling and military service.
This schooling gain is very likely due to the Vietnam-era GI Bill. Overall, the schooling
eﬀects estimated here are similar to those reported in earlier studies of the WWII and
Korean-era GI bills.
Seen through the lens of a Mincer-style wage equation, the near-zero veteran wage
penalty can be explained by the combination of lost experience and the economic return
to additional schooling. The net eﬀect of GI-Bill funded schooling on earnings in the
32

Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2005) estimate the impact of tuition and taxes on the internal rate of
return to schooling under alternative assumptions. They find that tuition reduces the internal rate of
return to college completion for whites in the 1990 Census by about one quarter.

25

1948-52 sample is on the order of 2.3 percent in the 2000 data — the result of a .294
increase in highest grade completed times a .078 return (estimated using a single drafteligibility instrument). The loss in earnings to veterans due to lost experience amounts to
about 1.3 percent. Veterans may also have suﬀered a small earnings loss due to increased
disability rates, though there are no corresponding eﬀects on employment or work-related
disabilities.
Finally, it is noteworthy that 2SLS estimates of the returns to post-service schooling
are considerably smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates. This is unusual in the
literature using instrumental variables to estimate the returns to schooling, but it is
consistent with optimal schooling choices based on a comparison of marginal costs and
marginal benefits. The low economic returns to GI-Bill funded schooling may reflect the
unusually large subsidies for schooling available to veterans.

26

Table 1. Basic descriptive statistics, by race and veteran status, for men born 1950-52
Whites
Nonwhites
All
Vietnam veteran Non-veteran
All
Vietnam veteran
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Draft eligibility (by RSN)
.376
.532
.327
.382
.482
Veteran status (served in Vietnam Era)
.236
1
0
.244
1
Post-Vietnam service
.038
.064
.030
.068
.078
Now in military
.0027
.0065
.0015
.0029
.0067
Now in school
.028
.031
.027
.046
.053
Age
48.2
48.4
48.2
48.2
48.3
A. Labor market variables
Employment
.861
.844
.866
.665
.702
Unemployment
.027
.030
.026
.056
.053
Not in labor force
.112
.126
.108
.279
.245
Usual hours worked
41.5
40.7
41.7
32.8
34.3
Weeks worked
44.8
44.1
45.0
35.9
37.5
Wage and salary income
46406
39472
48553
27584
28505
Log weekly earnings (positive values)
6.75
6.65
6.78
6.41
6.43
Self employment income (positive values)
5261
3123
5923
1709
1230

Work disability
Non-work disability
Mobility disability
Self-care disability
Physical disability
Mental disability
Vision or hearing disability
Other income (includes VDC)
Other income >0
Retirement and disability pensions (includes MDP)
Retirement/Dis. income >0
Imputed highest grade completed
Years of college (0-4)
9th grade +
10th grade +
11th grade +
12th grade (no diploma) +
High school graduate +
Some college (less than 1 year) +
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
Associate's degree +
Bachelor's degree +
Master's degree +
Professional degree +
N

B. Disability and disability income variables
.123
.136
.118
.070
.084
.066
.082
.103
.075
.021
.023
.021
.051
.055
.050
.044
.049
.042
.036
.042
.034
392
754
279
.054
.107
.037
691
1445
458
.043
.091
.028
C. Education variables
13.8
13.3
13.9
1.73
1.34
1.85
.977
.988
.974
.965
.978
.961
.948
.962
.943
.931
.949
.926
.910
.927
.904
.655
.616
.667
.582
.519
.601
.411
.313
.441
.333
.204
.373
.135
.071
.155
.051
.017
.061
696530
166652
529878

Note: Sampling weights are used in all estimates and statistics.

Non-veteran
(6)
.350
0
.065
.0016
.043
48.2
.654
.057
.290
32.3
35.4
27287
6.41
1863

.210
.116
.132
.040
.121
.073
.045
566
.072
848
.065

.207
.120
.145
.036
.111
.072
.045
1085
.134
1622
.118

.211
.114
.128
.041
.124
.073
.045
398
.052
598
.047

12.6
1.02
.948
.923
.882
.832
.770
.468
.400
.226
.160
.057
.018
96217

13.0
1.10
.981
.970
.950
.923
.881
.585
.486
.243
.136
.042
.0094
23246

12.4
.988
.938
.908
.860
.802
.735
.431
.372
.221
.168
.062
.021
72971

Draft-eligibility effect

Table 2. First-stage, by race and year of birth
Pooled cohorts
By single year of birth
1950-52
1948-52
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A. Whites
.145
.112
.058
.074
.133
.138
.168
(.0013)
(.0010)
(.0010) (.0025) (.0024) (.0023) (.0022)

.031
(.0024)

.160
(.0015)
.091
(.0023)
.059
(.0020)
.040
(.0020)
.0065
(.0019)

.128
(.0013)
.082
(.0019)
.058
(.0017)
.044
(.0017)
.0059
(.0017)

.065
(.0031)
.060
(.0047)
.054
(.0045)
.044
(.0044)
.0043
(.0043)

.088
(.0031)
.077
(.0046)
.061
(.0043)
.054
(.0043)
.0062
(.0042)

.154
(.0029)
.131
(.0044)
.126
(.0041)
.102
(.0041)
.013
(.0038)

.155
(.0026)
.128
(.0040)
.050
(.0036)
.024
(.0034)
-.0012
(.0032)

.173
(.0026)
.023
(.0034)
.0084
(.0031)
-.0013
(.0030)
.0077
(.0031)

.032
(.0022)
.0002
(.0031)
.00002
(.0029)
.0017
(.0029)
.0008
(.0029)

2403

2294

111

202

731

861

1028

50.3

.094
(.0034)

B. Nonwhites
.072
.031
.049
(.0028)
(.0069) (.0065)

.090
(.0059)

.096
(.0060)

.096
(.0063)

.027
(.0058)

.100
(.0041)
.062
(.0061)
.044
(.0057)
.022
(.0055)
-.0031
(.0054)

.081
(.0034)
.058
(.0050)
.041
(.0047)
.021
(.0046)
.0007
(.0046)

.039
(.0086)
.027
(.013)
.027
(.012)
.012
(.012)
-.004
(.012)

.059
(.0081)
.072
(.012)
.042
(.012)
.027
(.011)
.018
(.011)

.101
(.0074)
.089
(.011)
.093
(.011)
.066
(.010)
.008
(.010)

.101
(.0072)
.090
(.011)
.034
(.010)
-.0047
.0092
-.010
.0093

.099
(.0070)
.016
(.0095)
.0052
(.0092)
.0055
(.0092)
-.0055
(.0088)

.029
(.0064)
.0043
(.0093)
.0018
(.0086)
.0023
(.0087)
.0021
(.0090)

138

134

4.98

14.3

48.9

55.1

47.3

4.51

1953
(8)

RSN effects (5z):
RSN 1-95
RSN 96-125
RSN 126-160
RSN 161-195
RSN 196-230
F-statistics

Draft-eligibility effect
RSN effects (5z):
RSN 1-95
RSN 96-125
RSN 126-160
RSN 161-195
RSN 196-230
F-statistics

Note: Draft-eligibility effects and RSN group effects are from separate regressions. Robust standard errors in parentheses. All models
include a full set of dummies for years of birth, states of birth, and month of birth. Sampling weights are used in all estimates and
statistics.

Table 3. Effects on labor market variables
1950-52
2SLS
Mean
OLS
elig
5zx
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. Whites
Work variables in 1999
Employment

.861

Unemployment

.027

Not in labor force

.112

Usual hours worked

41.5

Weeks worked

44.8

Earnings variables in 1999
Wage and salary income

46406

Log weekly wage

6.75

Self employment income

5261

-.020
(.0012)
.0043
(.0005)
.016
(.0011)
-.888
(.054)
-.752
(.054)

-.0043
(.0072)
.0028
(.0033)
.0014
(.0066)
-.101
(.334)
-.133
(.330)

-.0026
(.0070)
.0017
(.0032)
.0009
(.0064)
-.230
(.325)
-.192
(.321)

-8616
(161)
-.121
(.0026)
-2772
(77.8)

-517
(1240)
-.0038
(.016)
855
(616)

-873
(1209)
-.0094
(.016)
867
(606)

.855
.027
.118
41.2
44.5

46595
6.75
5285

1948-52
2SLS
OLS
(6)

elig
(7)

5zx
(8)

-.010
(.0009)
.0028
(.0004)
.0074
(.0008)
-.544
(.040)
-.243
(.040)

-.0047
(.0072)
.0022
(.0033)
.0025
(.0066)
.055
(.335)
-.120
(.331)

-.0033
(.0066)
.0014
(.0030)
.0019
(.0060)
-.137
(.305)
-.175
(.301)

-7936
(128)
-.110
(.0019)
-2846
(62.3)

-115
(1243)
.009
(.016)
487
(616)

-548
(1133)
-.0030
(.015)
668
(567)

.063
(.0030)
-.0063
(.0014)
-.057
(.0029)
2.33
(.129)
2.73
(.141)

.0013
(.040)
-.027
(.019)
.026
(.039)
3.68
(1.73)
2.41
(1.88)

.020
(.037)
-.036
(.018)
.016
(.035)
3.76
(1.57)
2.71
(1.70)

2109
(239)
.042
(.0057)
-511
(82.4)

1006
(3255)
-.0090
(.067)
1750
(1167)

3314
(2968)
.019
(.060)
1115
(1077)

B. Nonwhites
Work variables in 1999
Employment

.665

Unemployment

.056

Not in labor force

.279

Usual hours worked

32.8

Weeks worked

35.9

Earnings variables in 1999
Wage and salary income

27584

Log weekly wage

6.41

Self employment income

1709

.049
(.0040)
-.0035
(.0019)
-.045
(.0039)
1.97
(.171)
2.14
(.186)

.018
(.040)
-.047
(.019)
.029
(.039)
3.58
(1.71)
2.84
(1.86)

.033
(.039)
-.048
(.019)
.015
(.038)
4.12
(1.68)
3.15
(1.82)

1324
(313)
.028
(.0074)
-616
(108)

3476
(3231)
-.037
(.067)
328
(1177)

4969
(3199)
.012
(.065)
436
(1147)

.662
.054
.284
32.6
35.7

27711
6.43
1708

Note: All regressions include a full set of dummies for state of birth, year of birth and month of birth. Columns 3-4 and 7-8 report
2SLS estimates with the instrument sets listed. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Estimates computed using
sampling weights.

Table 4a: Effects on education, by race and by year of birth
1950-52
2SLS
Mean
OLS
elig
5zx
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. Whites
Years of schooling (imputed)
13.8
-.551
.332
.336
13.8
(.0074)
(.053)
(.052)
Years of college
1.73
-.512
.265
.261
1.76
(.0050)
(.035)
(.034)
9th grade +
.977
.015
.0056
.0061
.975
(.0004) (.0031) (.0030)
10th grade +
.965
.018
.0080
.0083
.963
(.0005) (.0037) (.0036)
11th grade +
.948
.021
.012
.013
.946
(.0007) (.0045) (.0044)
12th grade (no diploma) +
.931
.024
.015
.016
.930
(.0008) (.0051) (.0049)
High school graduate or higher +
.910
.025
.023
.023
.908
(.0009) (.0057) (.0056)
Some college (less than 1 year) +
.655
-.050
.079
.079
.659
(.0015)
(.009)
(.0093)
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
.582
-.082
.090
.089
.588
(.0016)
(.010)
(.010)
Associate's degree +
.411
-.126
.081
.079
.419
(.0015)
(.010)
(.010)
Bachelor's degree +
.333
-.168
.053
.051
.341
(.0014)
(.010)
(.0094)
Master's degree +
.135
-.082
.016
.017
.140
(.0009) (.0070) (.0068)
Professional degree+
.051
-.043
.0047
.0037
.052
(.0005) (.0045) (.0044)
(Continued)

1948-52
2SLS
OLS
(6)

elig
(7)

5zx
(8)

-.550
(.0057)
-.534
(.0038)
.020
(.0003)
.025
(.0004)
.029
(.0005)
.033
(.0006)
.034
(.0006)
-.048
(.0011)
-.083
(.0012)
-.133
(.0011)
-.176
(.0010)
-.090
(.0007)
-.046
(.0004)

.294
(.053)
.238
(.034)
.0021
(.0031)
.0042
(.0038)
.0071
(.0045)
.009
(.0050)
.017
(.0057)
.064
(.0094)
.074
(.010)
.074
(.010)
.051
(.010)
.019
(.0070)
.010
(.0045)

.314
(.049)
.248
(.032)
.0040
(.0028)
.0062
(.0034)
.010
(.0041)
.013
(.0046)
.020
(.0052)
.070
(.0086)
.080
(.0090)
.076
(.0091)
.051
(.0088)
.018
(.0064)
.0057
(.0041)

Table 4a: Estimates of effects of military services in Vietnam era on education, by race and by year of birth, continued
1950-52
1948-52
2SLS
2SLS
Mean
OLS
elig
5zx
Mean
OLS
elig
5zx
(1)
(2)
(3)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(10)
B. Nonwhites
Years of schooling (imputed)
12.6
.512
.203
.190
12.6
.643
.184
.196
(.020)
(.230)
(.226)
(.016)
(.235)
(.211)
Years of college
1.02
.118
.192
.173
1.02
.150
.159
.162
(.0116)
(.118)
(.115)
(.0088)
(.119)
(.108)
9th grade +
.948
.043
.0013
.0003
.944
.055
-.009
-.0018
(.0016)
(.019)
(.019)
(.0013)
(.020)
(.018)
10th grade +
.923
.063
-.0056
-.0044
.918
.079
-.015
-.0050
(.0019)
(.023)
(.022)
(.0015)
(.023)
(.021)
11th grade +
.882
.090
.019
.019
.876
.110
.016
.025
(.0023)
(.027)
(.027)
(.0018)
(.028)
(.025)
12th grade (no diploma) +
.832
.122
-.0021
-.0027
.826
.144
-.014
.0039
(.0027)
(.032)
(.031)
(.0021)
(.032)
(.029)
High school graduate or higher +
.770
.147
.055
.055
.766
.170
.045
.058
(.0032)
(.035)
(.034)
(.0024)
(.035)
(.032)
Some college (less than 1 year) +
.468
.158
.080
.083
.468
.171
.094
.092
(.0042)
(.041)
(.040)
(.0031)
(.041)
(.037)
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
.400
.117
.070
.068
.400
.132
.054
.065
(.0042)
(.040)
(.040)
(.0032)
(.041)
(.037)
Associate's degree +
.226
.024
.055
.051
.228
.031
.042
.051
(.0036)
(.035)
(.034)
(.0027)
(.035)
(.032)
Bachelor's degree +
.160
-.032
.028
.019
.163
-.026
.012
.010
(.0030)
(.031)
(.030)
(.0023)
(.031)
(.028)
Master's degree +
.057
-.020
.0080
.0067
.060
-.021
.020
.011
(.0018)
(.019)
(.019)
(.0014)
(.020)
(.018)
Professional degree+
.018
-.012
-.0028
-.0026
.019
-.012
.0086
.0018
(.0010)
(.011)
(.011)
(.0008)
(.011)
(.010)
Note: All regressions include a full set of dummies for state of birth, year of birth and month of birth. Columns 3-5 and 8-10 report 2SLS
estimates with the instrument sets listed. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Estimates computed using sampling weights.

Table 4b: 2SLS Estimates of effects on schooling, by race and single year of birth
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A. Whites
Years of schooling (imputed)
.179
.132
.233
.455
.314
(.231)
(.173)
(.098)
(.093)
(.085)
Years of college
.050
.200
.219
.354
.215
(.147)
(.111)
(.063)
(.061)
(.054)
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
.005
.019
.088
.105
.068
(.041)
(.031)
(.018)
(.017)
(.016)
Associate's degree +
.004
.080
.072
.102
.067
(.042)
(.032)
(.018)
(.018)
(.016)
Bachelor's degree +
.015
.061
.038
.075
.044
(.041)
(.031)
(.018)
(.017)
(.015)
Master's degree +
.030
.021
-.004
.029
.024
(.031)
(.023)
(.013)
(.012)
(.011)
B. Nonwhites
1.129
(1.139)
Years of college
.109
(.584)
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
.015
(.198)
Associate's degree +
.018
(.172)
Bachelor's degree +
-.073
(.152)
Master's degree +
.112
(.107)
Years of schooling (imputed)

-.238
(.708)
-.023
(.352)
.040
(.119)
.031
(.104)
-.087
(.091)
.022
(.060)

.006
(.397)
.065
(.203)
.003
(.069)
-.004
(.060)
.021
(.052)
.023
(.034)

.338
(.383)
.072
(.198)
.052
(.068)
.050
(.058)
-.0220
(.051)
-.029
(.032)

.028
(.416)
.257
(.207)
.122
(.072)
.066
(.061)
.0330
(.054)
.027
(.032)

Note: The table reports 2SLS estimates of schooling effects by single year of birth using the 5z instrument set.
All regressions include a full set of dummies for state of birth, year of birth, and month of birth. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Estimates were computed using sampling weights.

Table 5: Effects on disability status and disability-income variables, for men born 1948-52
Whites
Nonwhites
2SLS
2SLS
Mean
OLS
elig
5zx
Mean
OLS
elig
5zx
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A. Disability variables
Work disability
.124
.013
-.0005
-.0007
.212
-.010
-.045
-.054
(.0008) (.0066) (.0061)
(.0026) (.034)
(.031)
Non-work disability
.074
.011
.013
.014
.120
-.0013 -.016
-.0062
(.0006) (.0053) (.0048)
(.0021) (.028)
(.026)
Mobility
.086
.018
.0085
.012
.139
.0055
-.028
-.030
(.0007) (.0057) (.0051)
(.0023) (.029)
(.026)
Self care
.022
.00002
.0074
.0077
.042
-.0085
.011
-.0011
(.0004) (.0030) (.0028)
(.0013) (.017)
(.016)
Physical
.052
.0013
.0050
.0046
.122
-.014 -.0080
-.0080
(.0005) (.0045) (.0042)
(.0021) (.028)
(.025)
Mental
.045
.0033
.0069
.0055
.076
-.0066
.015
.011
(.0005) (.0043) (.0039)
(.0017) (.023)
(.021)
Vision or hearing
.038
.0050
.011
.012
.048
-.0032
.039
.036
(.0005) (.0039) (.0035)
(.0014) (.018)
(.016)
B. Disability-income variables
628
764
Other income (incl. VDC)
440
499
302
266
743
540
(320)
(9.14)
(69.2)
(62.6)
(29.3)
(273)
Other income >0
.059
.072
.042
.040
.078
.087
.034
.040
(.0007) (.0047) (.0042)
(.0020) (.022)
(.020)
Retirement/Dis. income (incl. MDP)
855
947
563
475
973
956
1015
847
(18.1)
(129)
(109)
(51.6)
(590)
(458)
Retirement/Dis. income >0
.051
.057
.030
.031
.071
.067
.063
.052
(.0006) (.0044) (.0039)
(.0019) (.021)
(.019)
Note: All regressions include a full set of dummies for state of birth, year of birth and month of birth. Columns 3-4 and 7-8
report 2SLS estimates with the instrument sets listed. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Estimates computed
using sampling weights.

Table 6. Wage equations for white men born 1948-52
Instrumental variables estimates
Elig+age
Elig+yob
5zx
OLS
2SLS
2SLS
LIML
2SLS
LIML
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
First stage F-statistics
All instruments
RSN instruments
Adjusted multivariate F
Second Stage Estimates
Years of schooling (imputed)
Veteran-adjusted potential experience
=age-educ-6-2*vet
Potential experience squared
Experience derivative
Implicit veteran effect

-

155
38.8
24.5

.118
(.0007)
-.057
(.0048)
.0011
(.0001)
.0090
(.0006)
-.016
(.0011)

.070
(.035)
-.0036
(.031)
.0002
(.0005)
.0069
(.0019)
-.013
(.0038)

93.3
39.4
15.0

-

16.8
2.45
3.61

-

A. Without non-work disability controls
.078
.075
.043
.0066
(.034)
(.037)
(.030)
(.047)
-.015
-.015
.011
.010
(.040)
(.040)
(.038)
(.040)
.0004
.0004
-.0001 .000001
(.0007) (.0007)
(.0007) (.0007)
.0066
.0067
.0082
.010
(.0018) (.0020)
(.0017) (.0025)
-.013
-.013
-.017
-.020
(.0038) (.0040)
(.0033) (.0048)

7zx
2SLS
(7)

LIML
(8)

12.7
1.95
2.89

-

.051
(.028)
.017
(.038)
-.0002
(.0007)
.0078
(.0016)
-.016
(.0032)

.0025
(.054)
.015
(.040)
-.0001
(.0007)
.010
(.0028)
-.021
(.0054)

B. Using disability-adjusted log wage
Years of schooling (imputed)
.116
.077
.084
.082
.048
.014
.056
.012
(.0007)
(.035)
(.034)
(.037)
(.030)
(.047)
(.028)
(.053)
Reduced-form veteran effect
-.017
-.014
-.013
-.013
-.017
-.020
-.016
-.021
(.0011)
(.0037)
(.0037) (.0040)
(.0033) (.0048)
(.0032) (.0054)
Notes: The table reports estimates of the structural wage equation described in the text. The average experience in the sample is 28.85 and
average schooling is 13.8.

.35
.25
.15
.05

P(Veteran|RSN)

.45

A. Whites

1

50

100

150

200
RSN

250

300

365

300

365

Year of Birth
1950

1951

1952

1953

.05

P(Veteran|RSN)
.15
.35
.25

.45

B. Nonwhites

1

50

100

150

200
RSN

250

Year of Birth
1950

1951

1952

1953

Figure 1. First-stage plots (bandwidth = 4) . The relation between probability
of military service and draft lottery numbers. Data from the 2000 Census.

Estimated Log Earnings
9
8.5
9.5
10 10.5

A. Unrestricted

1970

Born 1952
Born 1951

Born 1950

1980

Year

1990

Non-Veterans

2000

Veterans

Estimated Log Earnings
9
10 10.5
8.5
9.5

B. Restricted

1970

Born 1952
Born 1951
Born 1950

1980

Year

Non-Veterans

1990

2000

Veterans

Figure 2. The Effect of Veteran Status on Experience Profiles

So

Pr
of

lle

ge

ad

(<
1

th

th

h

ua
te

om
a)

11

10

9t

8t
h

pl

gr

di

h-

es
si
on
M
.A
al
.
D
eg
re
e
Ph
.D
.

B.
A.

ye
ar
(>
)
=
so
1
ye
ci
at
ar
e’
)
s
de
gr
ee

co

As

e

ol

o

ge

ho

(n

lle

sc

th

co

h

e

ig

m

m

So

H

12

7t

-.05
0

.05

.1

.15

So
co
lle

ge

ad

(<
1

th

th

h

ua
te

om
a)

11

10

9t

8t
h

pl

gr

di

h-

Pr
of

es

si

on

al

M
.A
.
D
eg
re
e
Ph
.D
.

B.
A.

ye
ar
(
>=
As
)
1
so
y
ci
ea
at
r)
e’
s
de
gr
ee

e

ol

o

ge

ho

(n

lle

sc

th

co

h

e

ig

m

m

So

H

12

7t

0

.02 .04 .06 .08 .1

A. Whites

B. Nonwhites

Figure 3. 2SLS Estimates of the Effects of Vietnam-era Military Service
on Education – Men Born 1948-1952

10

Mean Years Education
11
12
13

14

A. Includes Active Duty

20

30

Age

40

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

50

10

Mean Years Education
11
12
13

14

B. Excludes Active Duty

20

30

Age

40

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

50

Figure 4. Average Schooling by Age, Veteran Status, and Service Era - Whites

-1

Diff in MA of Mean Years Edu
-.8
-.6
-.4
-.2

0

A. Difference in Moving Average of Education by Veteran Status

20

25

30
35
First year of age interval

3 Year MA, Unweighted

40

2 year MA, Unweighted

-1

Diff in MA of Mean Years Edu
-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4

B. Difference Relative to Base Period

20

25

30
35
First year of age interval

3 Year MA, Unweighted

40

2 Year MA, Unweighted

Figure 5. Schooling Differentials by Veteran Status - White Men Born
1948-1952

0

Veterans' Compensation
500
1000
1500
2000

A. Average VA Income

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

0

Veterans' Compensation
.02 .04 .06 .08
.1

B. Share With VA Income

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

Figure 6. VA Income (Including VDC) by Year and Service Era - Whites

0

Disability Income
200
400

600

A. Average Disability Income

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

0

Share With Disability Income
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05

B. Share With Disability Income

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

Figure 7. Non-SSA Disability Income (Including MDP) by Year and
Service Era - Whites

.05

Share with Disability
.1
.15
.2

.25

A. Share with a Disability

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

Share with Fair-Poor Health
.04 .06 .08
.1
.12 .14

B. Share With Fair-Poor Health

1996

1998

2000

Year

2002

2004

2006

Vietnam vets, born 1948-52

Korea vets, born 1929-33

Non-vets, born 1948-52

Non-vets, born 1929-33

Figure 8. CPS Disability and Health Status by Year and Service Era - W hites

Appendix
A. Figures 4 and 5
Figures 4 and 5 use data from the 1964, 1965, and 1967-1991 CPS March Demographic
Supplements (the 1966 supplement does not contain veteran status). All data were downloaded from the Minnesota Population Center’s Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,
accessible at www.ipums.org. We include Vietnam veterans and non-veterans born 19481952 in both figures, as well as Korea veterans and non-veterans born 1929-1933 in Figure
4. Year of birth was imputed assuming men were born after the survey date. We categorized Vietnam veterans as all men born between 1948-1952 who were either veterans, as
reported by the variable VETSTAT, or currently serving in the military, as reported by
the variable EMPSTAT. Use of VETSTAT instead of period-of-service recodes adds a few
veterans with post-Vietnam service, including some still in the military. Korea veterans
were identified in an identical manner, except we used the 1929-1933 birth cohort.
Figure 4 reports mean years of education, derived from the variable HIGRADE, for
veterans and non-veterans. Unlike CPS supplements from 1992 or later, the earlier supplements in our sample report years of education instead of highest degree obtained. The
data are weighted using the person level weight PERWT, and collapsed over age rather
than year, so at any given age, the average is derived from multiple years of data. We
selected the sample so that at least three birth cohorts (i.e., 3 years of data) contribute to
any given age-education observation. Figure 5 collapses the education data by age in the
same way described above. We then constructed two and three year moving averages of
mean years of education. The moving averages are unweighted in that each age-education
observation enters with equal weight in the moving average. Panel A reports the diﬀerence between the value of the moving average for veterans and non-veterans. The X-axis
reports the first year of the age interval included in each moving average observation. (For
example, the age 20 three-year moving average observation is the educational attainment
of those aged 20, 21 and 22.) The same data were used to construct panel B, except that
this panel shows the diﬀerence between the moving average at age 19 and subsequent
values.

B. Figures 6, 7, and 8
Figures 6, 7, and 8 use data from the 1990-2006 CPS March Demographic Supplements,
also from IPUMS. We constructed birth year and selected birth cohorts in the same way
as described for Figures 4 and 5. Here, however, instead of assigning service era based
on birth year, we used the variable VETLAST, which reports an individual’s most recent
period of service. Active duty servicemen were excluded from this sample.
The disability-related income variables most relevant for veterans in the CPS are Income from Veteran Benefits (INCVET) and Income from Disability Benefits (INCDISAB).
INCVET captures any income from the VA., including service related disability payments
(VDC), non-disability pension payments, and educational allowances. INCDISAB information is collected only for respondents who indicate the presence of a household member with a disability. This variable includes U.S. military retirement disability pensions
(MDP) but excludes disability payments from the VA or Social Security. It also covers
worker’s compensation, company, union, federal government civil service, state, or local
government disability programs, U.S. Railroad Retirement disability, private accident or
disability insurance, black lung miner’s disability, and state temporary sickness payments.
Amounts are in 2005 dollars.
Men who reported a disability that limits or prevents work were identified from the
variable DISABWRK. This is the screening variable for INCDISAB. Men with fair or
poor health were identified using the variable HEALTH, which gives self-reported health
status. This variable is only available from 1996-2006.
All plots show weighted means collapsed by year using PERWT. Since income amounts
refer to the previous year in the March CPS, Figures 6 and 7 run from 1989-2005. Disability and health measures refer to the time of the survey, so Panel A of Figure 8 runs from
1990-2006 and Panel B from 1996-2006. Finally, all figures discussed in this appendix
include both imputed and non-imputed values.

Draft eligibility (by RSN)
Veteran status (served in Vietnam Era)
Post-Vietnam service
Group quarters
Now in military
Now in school
Age
Employment
Unemployment
Not in labor force
Usual hours worked
Weeks worked
Wage and salary income
Work disability
Other disabilities
Non-work disabilities
Any disabilities
Mobility
Self care
Physical
Mental
Vision or hearing
Other income (e.g.,VA, UI, child support,
alimony; incl. VDC)
Other income >0
Retirement/Dis. income (Retirement, survivor,
disability pensions; incl. MDP)
Retirement income >0
Imputed highest
grade completed
g
Years of college
9th grade +
10th grade +
11th grade +
12th grade (no diploma) +
High school graduate +
Some college (less than 1 year) +
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
Associate's degree +
Bachelor's degree +
Master's degree +
Professional degree +
N (log earnings)
N (all other variables)

Table A1. Descriptive statistics for white cohorts
1950-52 1948-52 1948-53
1948
1949
.376
.437
.405
.530
.536
.236
.305
.276
.446
.384
.038
.034
.037
.027
.030
.016
.015
.015
.014
.014
.0027
.0024
.0026
.0019
.0022
.028
.026
.027
.023
.024
48.2
49.2
48.7
51.3
50.2
A. Labor market variables
.861
.855
.857
.843
.850
.027
.027
.027
.026
.027
.112
.118
.116
.131
.124
41.5
41.2
41.3
40.5
40.9
44.8
44.5
44.6
43.9
44.2
46406
46595
46521
46830
46957
B. Disability and disability income variables
.123
.124
.123
.128
.125
.143
.149
.146
.163
.153
.070
.074
.072
.082
.077
.193
.198
.196
.211
.202
.082
.086
.084
.097
.090
.021
.022
.022
.024
.022
.051
.052
.052
.055
.053
.044
.045
.045
.048
.047
.036
.038
.037
.043
.041
392
.054
691
.043
13.8
1.73
.977
.965
.948
.931
.910
.655
.582
.411
.333
.135
.051
573728
696530

Note: Sampling weights are used in all estimates and statistics.

440
.059

420
.057

546
.070

855
800
1223
.051
.048
.068
C. Education variables
13.8
13.8
13.9
1.76
1.74
1.82
.975
.976
.971
.963
.963
.958
.946
.946
.942
.930
.930
.927
.908
.908
.906
.659
.654
.667
.588
.582
.599
.419
.413
.433
.341
.335
.358
.140
.137
.151
.052
.051
.054
934666 1134983 178349
1141905 1382708 220891

1950
.538
.300
.033
.015
.0024
.026
49.2

1951
.339
.221
.037
.016
.0026
.028
48.2

1952
.260
.193
.044
.016
.0030
.030
47.2

1953
.259
.139
.050
.017
.0032
.031
46.2

.855
.027
.118
41.2
44.4
46293

.861
.027
.112
41.5
44.8
46592

.865
.027
.107
41.7
45.0
46331

.867
.028
.105
41.8
45.1
46176

.125
.149
.074
.199
.087
.022
.053
.046
.038

.122
.142
.070
.192
.082
.021
.051
.044
.035

.121
.138
.068
.189
.077
.020
.050
.042
.034

.119
.133
.065
.184
.074
.020
.049
.042
.032

486
.064

444
.058

377
.053

357
.050

328
.048

1007
.059

787
.049

673
.043

621
.038

541
.036

13.8
1.80
.974
.961
.943
.928
.907
.667
.598
.428
.350
.145
.053
182315
224130

13.8
1.77
.975
.963
.945
.930
.908
.662
.591
.420
.342
.139
.051
183435
223984

13.8
1.73
.978
.966
.948
.932
.910
.657
.584
.411
.333
.135
.051
191559
232348

13.7
1.70
.978
.966
.949
.932
.910
.646
.571
.402
.324
.131
.050
198734
240198

13.6
1.63
.979
.966
.948
.930
.907
.629
.551
.387
.309
.122
.047
200267
240736

Draft eligibility (by RSN)
Veteran status (served in Vietnam Era)
Post-Vietnam service
Group quarters
Now in military
Now in school
Age
Employment
Unemployment
Not in labor force
Usual hours worked
Weeks worked
Wage and salary income
Work disability
Any other disabilities
Non-work disabilities
Any disabilities
Mobility
Self care
Physical
Mental
Vision or hearing
Other income (e.g.,VA, UI, child support,
alimony; incl. VDC)
Other income >0
Retirement income (Retirement, survivor,
disability pensions; incl. MDP)
Retirement income >0
Imputed highest grade completed
Years of college
9th grade +
10th grade +
11th grade +
12th grade (no diploma) +
High school graduate +
Some college (less than 1 year) +
1 or more years of college (no degree) +
Associate's degree +
Bachelor's degree +
Master's degree +
Professional degree +
N (log earnings)
N (all other variables)

Table A2. Descriptive statistics for nonwhite cohorts
1950-52 1948-52 1948-53
1948
1949
.382
.440
.408
.538
.537
.293
.293
.274
.404
.353
.058
.058
.066
.039
.042
.064
.064
.066
.056
.060
.0025
.0025
.0028
.0020
.0019
.043
.043
.044
.038
.039
49.2
49.2
48.6
51.3
50.2
A. Labor market variables
.665
.662
.663
.657
.654
.056
.054
.055
.047
.055
.279
.284
.282
.296
.291
32.8
32.6
32.7
32.1
32.3
35.9
35.7
35.7
35.4
35.4
27584
27711
27561
28395
27490
B. Disability and disability income variables
.210
.212
.211
.214
.216
.247
.254
.251
.267
.264
.116
.120
.118
.130
.125
.326
.332
.329
.343
.342
.132
.139
.135
.152
.147
.040
.042
.041
.046
.044
.121
.122
.122
.125
.124
.073
.076
.075
.080
.079
.045
.048
.047
.054
.052
566
.072
848
.065
12.6
1.02
.948
.923
.882
.832
.770
.468
.400
.226
.160
.057
.018
71045
96217

Note: Sampling weights are used in all estimates and statistics.

628
.078

609
.076

763
.091

973
929
1258
.071
.068
.085
C. Education variables
12.6
12.6
12.5
1.02
1.02
1.05
.944
.946
.936
.918
.920
.908
.876
.878
.865
.826
.828
.818
.766
.767
.759
.468
.467
.470
.400
.399
.406
.228
.227
.235
.163
.162
.170
.060
.058
.068
.019
.019
.021
113194 137938
20286
154810 188023
28272

1950
.544
.285
.050
.064
.0020
.045
49.3

1951
.343
.231
.071
.066
.0027
.044
48.2

1952
.265
.216
.083
.071
.0038
.048
47.3

1953
.265
.183
.101
.076
.0039
.050
46.2

.662
.053
.285
32.6
35.7
27569

.666
.056
.279
32.8
35.8
27508

.669
.057
.274
33.1
36.1
27670

.670
.059
.270
33.0
35.9
26874

.213
.252
.119
.331
.138
.041
.123
.073
.046

.210
.249
.115
.325
.135
.041
.122
.075
.046

.207
.241
.114
.321
.125
.038
.117
.072
.043

.205
.237
.110
.314
.118
.038
.119
.074
.044

708
.084

627
.075

559
.070

513
.070

520
.068

1117
.077

916
.068

867
.065

765
.062

731
.058

12.5
1.02
.936
.908
.866
.817
.758
.464
.398
.229
.164
.062
.019
21863
30321

12.6
1.03
.946
.920
.880
.829
.768
.466
.399
.231
.165
.061
.020
23383
31942

12.6
1.02
.948
.923
.882
.831
.771
.472
.404
.226
.162
.059
.019
23004
31162

12.6
.996
.951
.927
.884
.835
.772
.466
.397
.221
.154
.051
.017
24658
33113

12.6
.994
.953
.930
.887
.833
.770
.461
.392
.221
.156
.052
.017
24744
33213

Table A3. Theoretical and empirical proportions drafteligible
Differential
Theoretical
Cohort Eligibility
All
White
Nonwhite
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
1948
195/366
-0.0015
-0.0025
0.0048
[.533]
(.0011)
(.0012)
(.0022)
1949
195/365
0.0018
0.0017
0.0028
[.534]
(.0011)
(.0012)
(.0033)
1950
195/365
0.0049
0.0041
0.0097
[.534]
(.0011)
(.0012)
(.0032)
1951
125/365
-0.0025
-0.0030
0.0002
[.342]
(.0011)
(.0011)
(.0031)
1952
95/366
0.0008
0.00003
0.0055
[.260]
(.0010)
(.0010)
(.0028)
1953
95/365
-0.0002
-0.0011
0.0050
[.260]
(.0010)
(.0010)
(.0028)
F(6,∞)
N

5.07
1570310

4.37
1382287

3.24
188023

Notes: The theoretical proportion draft eligible is reported in column
1 for each cohort. Fractions appear in brackets. Columns 2-4 report
the difference between this and the empirical proportion drafteligible, with robust standard errors in parentheses. The F-statistic is
for a joint test of theoretical and empirical equality for all cohorts.

References
Anderson, T., N. Kunitomo, and T. Sawa (1982), “Evaluation of the Distribution
Function of Limited Information Maximum Likelihood Estimator,” Econometrica 59(4),
1009-1027.
Angrist, J. (1989), “Using the Draft Lottery to Measure the Eﬀects of Military Service on Civilian Earnings,” in Research in Labor Economics, vol. 10, edited by Ronald
Ehrenberg, Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Angrist, J. (1990), “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence
from Social Security Administrative Records.” American Economic Review 80(3), 313-36.
Angrist, J. (1991), “The Draft Lottery and Voluntary Enlistment in the Vietnam Era.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 86(415), 584-595.
Angrist, J. (1993), “The Eﬀect of Veterans Benefits on Education and Earnings,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(4), 637-652.
Angrist, J., G. Imbens and D. Rubin (1996), “Identification of Causal Eﬀects Using
Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 91(434), 444455.
Angrist, J. and A. Krueger (1992), “Estimating the Payoﬀ to Schooling Using the
Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working paper
4067.
Angrist, J. and A. Krueger (1994), “Why Do World War II Veterans Earn More than
Non-veterans?” Journal of Labor Economics 12(1), 74-97.
Angrist, J. and A. Krueger (1995), “Split-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates of
the Return to Schooling,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13(2), 225-235.
Autor, D. and M. Duggan (2003), “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
in Unemployment,” Quarter Journal of Economics 118(1), 157-206.
Autor, D. and M. Duggan (2007), “Distinguishing Income from Substitution Eﬀects
in Disability Insurance,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97(2).
Bedard, K. and O. Deschenes (2006), “The Impact of Military Service on Long-Term
Health: Evidence from World War II and Korean War Veterans,” American Economic
Review 96(1), 176-194.
Bekker, Paul (1994), “Alternative Approximations to the Distribution of Instrumental
Variable Estimators,” Econometrica 62(3), 657-682.

Berger, M. and B. Hirsch (1983), “The Civilian Earnings Experience of Vietnam-Era
Veterans,” Journal of Human Resources 18(4), 455-79.
Bound, J. and S. Turner (2002), “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War
II and the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?” Journal
of Labor Economics 20(4), pp. 784-815.
Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2001), “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended Legacy of the Vietnam War,” The American Economic Review 91(2), 97-102.
Dobkin, C. and R. Shabani (2006), “The Long Term Health Eﬀects of Military Service:
Evidence from the National Health Interview Survey and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery,”
University of California at SantaCruz, Department of Economics, mimeo.
Duggan, M., R. Rosenheck and P. Singleton (2006), “Federal Policy and the Rise in
Disability Enrollment: Evidence for the VA’s Disability Compensation Program,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working paper 12323.
Eisenberg, D. and B. Rowe (2007), “Eﬀects of Military Service in Vietnam on Smoking
Later in Life,” Department of Health Management and Policy, University of Michigan,
mimeo.
Eitelberg, M., J. Laurence, B. Waters and L. Perelman (1984), “Screening for Service: Aptitude and Education criteria for Military Entry,” Washington, DC: Oﬃce of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower, Installations and Logistics), September.
Goldberg, J., M. Richards, R. Anderson, and M. Rodin (1991), “Alcohol Consumption in Men Exposed to the Military Draft Lottery: A Natural Experiment,” Journal of
Substance Abuse 3, 307-313.
Griliches, Z. and W.M. Mason (1972), “Education, Income, and Ability,” Journal of
Political Economy 80(3, Part II), S74-S103.
Hausman, J., W.K. Newey, and T. Woutersen (2006), “IV Estimation with Heteroskedasticity and Many Instruments,” MIT Department of Economics, memo, November.
Hearst, N., J. Buehler, T. Newman, and G. Rutherford (1991), “The Draft Lottery
and AIDS: Evidence Against Increased Intravenous Drug Use by Vietnam Veterans,”
American Journal of Epidemiology 134(5), 522-525.
Hearst, N., T. Newman and S. Hulley (1986), “Delayed Eﬀects of the Military Draft
on Mortality: A Randomized Natural Experiment,” mimeo, New England Journal of
Medicine 314(10), 620-24.

Heckman, J.J, L. Lochner, and P. Todd (2005), "Earnings Functions, Rates of Return
and Treatment Eﬀects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond," IZA Discussion Paper No.
1700, August.
Henderson, D. (2005), “The Role of Economists in Ending the Draft,” Econ Journal
Watch 2(2), 362-376.
Imbens, G., and J. Angrist (1994), “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Eﬀects,” Econometrica 62(2), 467-475.
Imbens, G. and W. van der Klaauw (1995), “Evaluating the Cost of Conscription in
the Netherlands,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13(2), 207-215.
Jaeger, D. (1997), “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
Recommendations for Researchers,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 15(3),
300-309.
Lemieux, T. and D. Card (2001), “Education, Earnings And The Canadian G.I. Bill,”
Canadian Journal of Economics 34(2), 313-344.
Newey, W. (1990), “Eﬃcient Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Models,”
Econometrica 58(4), 809-837.
Oi, W. (1967), “The Economic Cost of the Draft,” American Economic Review 57(2),3962.
Schwartz, S. (1986), “The Relative Earnings of Vietnam and Korean-Era Veterans,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39(4), 564-72.
Seftor, N.S. and S.E. Turner (2002), “Back to School: Federal Student Aid Policy and
Adult College Enrollment,” Journal of Human Resources 37(2), 336-352.
Selective Service System, Oﬃce of Public Aﬀairs (1970), A Short History of the Selective Service System, Washington: USGPO.
Selective Service System, Oﬃce of Public Aﬀairs (1986), Semiannual Report of the
Director of Selective Service, Washington: USGPO.
Seltzer, C. and S. Jablon (1974), “Eﬀects of Selection on Mortality,” American Journal
of Epidemiology 100(5), 367-372.
Stanley, M. (2003), “College Education and the Midcentury GI Bills,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2), 671-708
Turner, S. and J. Bound (2003), “Closing the Gap or Widening the Divide: the Eﬀects
of the G.I. Bill and World War II on the Educational Outcomes of Black Americans,”
Journal of Economic History 63(1), 145-177.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (2005), Technical Documentation: Census of the Population, 2000: Public use Microdata Sample, Washington: US Bureau of the Census.
U.S. Congressional Budget Oﬃce (1978), the Congress of the United States “Veteran’s
Educational Benefits: Issues Concerning the GI Bill,” October.
VA Oﬃce of Inspector General (2005), “Review of State Variances in VA Disability
Compensation Payments,” Department of Veterans Aﬀairs Oﬃce of Inspector General,
Report No. 05-00765-137 Washington, DC.
Veterans Benefits Administration (2000), “Annual Benefits Report for Fiscal Year
1999,” Washington, DC: Veterans Benefits Administration.
Veterans Benefits Administration (2002), “Annual Benefits Report for Fiscal Year
2001,” Washington, DC: Veterans Benefits Administration.

