NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KEEP ON SCRAPPING:
THE SALVAGE DRIVES OF WORLD WAR II
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 13418
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13418

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

This is a revised version of a paper that was presented to the Siena College Conference on WWII (June
2000). I thank the participants in that session whose substantial criticisms have made this a much better
paper. I thank Joel Goldman of Admiral Scrap Metal Company in Phoenix, Arizona for discussing
the scrap business with me. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Keep on Scrapping: The Salvage Drives of World War II
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 13418
September 2007
JEL No. N42
ABSTRACT
During World War II Americans were called upon repeatedly to salvage raw materials for the war
effort, often during brief, highly publicized "drives." Stories about the salvage drives are a staple in
both popular and scholarly histories of the home front, and in film documentaries, because the drives
appear to demonstrate the potential importance of non-economic motives such as patriotism and community
spirit. Here I reexamine economic effects of five drives: aluminum, silk, cooking fat, and the two most
important, iron and steel, and rubber. The drives, it turns out, had a more limited impact on the economy
than might be imagined from some of the enthusiastic portrayals in the popular and historical literatures.
At most, the drives increased scrap collections by relatively small margins above what would have
been collected during a prosperous peacetime period. The impact of economic incentives on the supply
of scrap materials, and the impact of the maneuvering of special interests for advantage, moreover,
can be seen at every turn. If the drives were important it was through their impact on civilian morale.
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
Rutgers University
College Avenue Campus
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@fas-econ.rutgers.edu

Keep on Scrapping: The Salvage Drives of World War II1
Economics is a very unsatisfactory science. But it would have to be much more
unsatisfactory than it is if such an event as a war, however extensive and destructive,
sufficed to upset its teaching. (Joseph Schumpeter 1954, 1146)

I. The Conventional View of the Salvage Drives2
During World War II there were repeated calls on the public to salvage raw materials for the
war effort: tin cans, old phonograph records, copper, aluminum, iron and steel, paper, rubber, even
used silk and nylon stockings and waste cooking fat. In principle recycling scrap material would be an
ongoing process, but in most cases attention focused on a short-term campaign to "get in the scrap."
President Roosevelt and other important figures from government and the private sector provided
leadership. Propaganda campaigns run by the Office of War Information, and by private companies
and trade associations, stressed the importance scrap collection. In peacetime it was just the family
kitchen; now it was a combination "frontline bunker and rear-echelon miniature war plant" (Lingeman
1970, 254). Explaining the conversion factors between salvaged materials and the munitions that could
be produced from them drove the point home. As shown in Poster 1, Americans were told that 18
tons of scrap metal went into a medium tank; it was therefore imperative that Americans "get in the
scrap." One pound of fat, the public was also told, contained enough glycerine to make a pound of
black powder, enough for six 75-mm shells; Twenty three hundred used nylon stockings contained
enough nylon to make one parachute; and thirty thousand razor blades contained enough steel to make
1. An earlier version of this paper circulated with the title "Getting in the Scrap." But at that time I was
unaware of the paper by Kirk (1995).
2. I use the terms salvage drive and scrap drive to refer to the same events. I lean toward the term
salvage because it is, perhaps, a more dignified term suggesting the hard work that can go into the
recycling of materials, especially by the professionals who brought in most of the scrap. But I use both
terms to avoid biasing my case.

3

50 30-caliber machine guns (Lingeman 1970, 254-55).
Enthusiastic descriptions of the salvage drives occur frequently in popular histories of the war.
Film documentaries about the home front and school textbooks often draw attention to them.
Recently, pundits have contrasted World War II, when the public was asked to participate in the war
effort through the scrap drives – and in other ways such as by purchasing bonds or paying higher taxes
– with the War in Iraq, when no such demands have been made. The salvage drives also appear
frequently in scholarly histories.3 One of the best recent histories of the war is William L. O'Neill's A
Democracy at War. Although, O'Neill notes some problems in the scrap drives, he lavishes praise on
the Nebraska iron and steel scrap drive of July and August 1942. This drive made use of considerable
incentives. Prizes worth up to $2,000 in war bonds were given to individuals and organizations who
collected the most scrap, and competition was fostered among Nebraska counties to see which could
bring in the most scrap. The Nebraska drive was widely hailed as a great success. The newspaper that
organized the drive won a Pulitzer Prize and the Nebraska drive became the model for the national
drive (Kimble 2000). What historians find so attractive about the scrap drives can be seen in O'Neill’s
(1993, 135) attempt to distill the underlying meaning of the Nebraska drive.
The most successful state drive yet, the Nebraska model was widely copied,
demonstrating that the will was there and could be mobilized with inventive planning. If
the weakness of democracy was inefficient government, the strength was volunteerism,
especially when it exploited the national love of competition.
The stories about the drives seem to show that something happened that could only have happened

3. Taylor (1992, chapter 3, "The Great Scavenger Hunt," 71-100) is a superb collection of photographs of
the scrap drives. The best overall social history of the drives that I am familiar with is Strasser (1999,
229-264).

4

through voluntary community action. Market incentives were not important and government played
only an enabling role: community spirit was the key.
Such stories pose a familiar challenge to economic historians. Typically, the models we use
explain behavior as a rational response to (mainly) financial incentives. Non-economists often
challenge this approach, arguing that these models fail to take into account a wide variety of nonpecuniary motives. Wars provide a natural test. If non-pecuniary motives can override pecuniary
motives at any time, then surely this must be true during wars – especially World War II, when the
national consensus in favor of the war was overwhelming and people were constantly being asked to
lay aside their personal interests in the interest of patriotism.
Patriotism may have influenced decisions at many points in the war economy. Mulligan (1998),
for example, found evidence of the effects of patriotism on labor force participation. Here I look for
the effects of patriotism on the supply of raw materials. If patriotism was a potent force that revoked
ordinary economic constraints, then surely we should observe it in this case. The drives occurred in the
darkest hours of the war, when victory appeared far from inevitable. The Office of War Information
invoked patriotic feelings to encourage participation in the scrap drives. The posters it created have
helped to shape the social memory of the war.4 Government officials from the President on down and
business leaders lent their authority to the drives. Even after the formal drives ended, government
propaganda urged Americans to "keep on scrapping" (Poster 2).
Below I examine five drives in detail: for aluminum, used stockings, waste cooking fat, iron

4. The Office of War Information was created in June 1942, combining the functions of several
predecessor agencies. It was the subject of bitter internal and external criticism. Indeed, in 1943 a
number of prominent writers, including the historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. resigned in protest. One
complaint was that the Office's propaganda emphasized safe subjects, such as the campaign for scrap
iron, rather than the need to achieve the fundamental goals of the war (Weinberg 1968).

5

and steel, and rubber. This is not a complete list of materials salvaged during the war. As I noted at the
outset, the list was long and varied. But the drives discussed here include the two most important –
iron and steel, and rubber – and what are probably the best known drives for other materials. The
questions are straightforward. Why were patriotic salvage drives used? How were the drives
influenced by the economic and technical constraints faced by the participants? Finally, how successful
were the drives in increasing the supply of raw materials? The last question occurs naturally to an
economic historian. We always want to know the answer to the question that starts with – by how
much. By how much did the railroads increase real GDP? By how much did the stock market crash of
1929, or the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, or the banking crises lower real GDP? Typically, non-economic
historians are enthusiastic about the salvage drives, and they often cite statistics about how much was
collected (so many pounds or pounds per person), but they do not address the question of how much
in terms that an economic historian would consider crucial. One might take the additional, speculative
step and guess from the tone of the discussions that historians believe that the drives added
significantly to the supply of raw materials. But this paper is the first that I am aware of that addresses
the effect on the supply of raw materials in explicit quantitative terms. My conclusion is that the drives
increased the supplies of raw material at most by small amounts. In making this point, my purpose is
not to denigrate the spirit of self-sacrifice that motivated the drives, or to deny that they had any effect
on the supply of raw materials. But I do challenge the idea that the scrap drives made vast amounts of
additional materials available that would not have been available had normal sources of supply been
relied upon, and that the drives prove that conventional economic analysis needs to be jettisoned "for
the duration.

II. Aluminum

6

It was obvious to both the public and to policy makers from the start of American rearmament
in the late 1930s that aluminum would be a key raw material, although even so policy makers and
industry officials underestimated the increase in demand produced by the aircraft program.5 The price
of aluminum scrap rose rapidly, and it became one of the first prices formally fixed by the Office of
Price Administration. It issued its schedule of prices for aluminum scrap in March 1941 (Wall Street
Journal, March 24, 1941, p. 5). In July 1941, responding to concerns about the adequacy of the
supply of aluminum for the aircraft program that had produced spontaneous local scrap drives, Mayor
Fiorello H. LaGuardia of New York, who was serving as Roosevelt's Director of Civilian Defense,
announced a two-week national drive to collect aluminum cookware and other items. There was an
unforgettable response. Coffeepots, frying pans, skillets, stew pots, cocktail shakers, ice-cube forms,
artificial legs, cigar tubes, watchcases, and radio parts were piled in great scrap heaps. "In Lubbock,
Texas, a likeness of Adolph Hitler was placed in the middle of the courthouse square as a target for
the pots and pans hurled by citizens" (Goodwin 1994, 260).
Why use a "drive" with a time limit to get in the scrap? Why not simply ask people to bring in
the scrap as soon as possible? After all, sorting and distributing the scrap would be easier if it came in
slowly and steadily. In most cases, as we noted above, people were encouraged to "keep on
scrapping" after the official drive ended, but short drives had several advantages. First, the spirit of
competition could be invoked. It became a football game with town pitted against town, and state
against state, to see who could bring in the most scrap before the final whistle. A second reason for a
short drive was that it permitted the monitoring necessary to bring social pressures to bear. With
everyone going to the collection point at the same time people could see whether their neighbors were

5. Smith (1988, 214-49) describes the evolution of the industry during the war. Smith does not mention

7

participating: rewarding participants with a hearty pat on the back, and punishing non-participants with
a sharply arched eyebrow. A third reason for a short drive – one that was especially important, as we
will see, for rubber – was that it yielded information. A drive would tell policy makers how much was
out there and allow them to plan other measures – limitations on production for civilian markets, new
production facilities, and so on – to deal with conditions in the market for the raw material.
In announcing the aluminum campaign LaGuardia had called for 20,000,000 pounds of
aluminum scrap, enough to make 2,000 planes (New York Times, June 25, 1941, p.23). In truth, the
scrap collected in the drive would be, for the most part, unsuitable for the production of the high-grade
aluminum needed for warplanes. 6 Indeed, before the war it had been customary for dealers to sell
aluminum scrap in unsegregated bundles that was used only to produce lower grade products. After
Pearl Harbor an effort was made to force the dealers to separate aluminum scrap by quality to make
more high quality scrap available. It seems unlikely, however, that even with improved sorting much of
the scrap of sufficiently high quality for aircraft production would be found. And, as we will note
below, the junk dealers who might have separated the high-grade aluminum scrap were cut out of the
drive. The pots and pans collected in the drive, although few contributors were aware of it, were
destined to be made into products other than aircraft (New York Times, June 26, 1941, p. 25).
Conceivably, some of the families that participated enthusiastically in the aluminum drive by
contributing some of their old pots and pans eventually were forced to buy new ones made from the
those they had donated (O'Neill 1992, 131; Goodwin 1994, 260-61).
The aluminum drive and Mayor LaGuardia eventually came in for a great deal of criticism.
the aluminum drive, which as we will see, was unimportant for the supply of aluminum during the war.
6. The British had undertaken an aluminum drive in 1940 – this may have been one of the inspirations for
the American drive – with similar confusion about the actual value to the war effort of the material

8

There were long delays in moving the scrap to the refineries. People who were told that they had to
sacrifice their pots and pans to save the country watched and waited while the great heaps of scrap
created in the drives continued to stand. Richard Lingeman (1970, 16) put it this way: "it [the
aluminum drive] turned into a fiasco, with great piles of pots and pans languishing in collection points
because no one would cart the stuff away, and anyhow, its value in plane production was nonexistent."
About a year after the drive the War Production Board issued a report explaining why less scrap
aluminum was collected than expected and why there were long delays in getting the scrap to the
refiners. Part of the problem was that Mayor LaGuardia had cut the junk dealers out of the process
(Wall Street Journal, June 20, 1942, p. 5; New York Times, June 20, 1942, p. 7). LaGuardia did so
for the usual reason: they were simply middlemen who contributed nothing to the production process,
but profited from it by speculating on the price of scrap aluminum. Cutting out the middlemen,
LaGuardia thought, would save money and do no harm. But the refineries preferred to buy scrap that
had been sorted by the junkmen when they could get it, rather than the unsorted bundles provided by
the drive. To be sure, many of the dollar-a-year men who served with the War Production Board
were ideologically opposed to the New Deal mayor from New York, so a report blaming LaGuardia
would be to their liking. Any projections of the amount of scrap to be collected, moreover, would
have been highly problematic and would have been made, understandably, with an eye toward
generating enthusiasm for the drive. Nevertheless, cutting out the skilled junk men surely was a mistake
that reduced the efficiency of the sorting and distribution of the material collected.
The scrap drive brought it about 6,400,000 pounds of aluminum (Wall Street Journal, June
20, 1942, p. 5). As an isolated figure this sounds like a great deal, a mountain of aluminum. A
comparison with production in 1941, however, is revealing. The amount salvaged, was 6.75 percent
collected (New York Times, July 14, 1940, p. 29).

9

of total production from old scrap, 2.99 percent of total production from recycled aluminum (a larger
sum that also includes waste recycled within aluminum plants), and only .77 percent of total production
(Historical Statistics 2006, series Db88, Db89, and Db90). The amount collected was about 0.08
percent of total production during the war (1942-45). These figures would be lower still if adjusted for
the low quality of the scrap-drive aluminum. The real solution to the aluminum problem was maximizing
production in existing aluminum refineries and building of new ones. Overall, production of aluminum
almost tripled from 377,000 metric tons in 1941 to 1,120,000 metric tons in 1943 (Historical
Statistics 2006, series Db88).
The aluminum drive, although unimportant as a source of aluminum, may have been important
in shaping public opinion and mobilizing support for U.S. involvement in the war. This was important
before Pearl Harbor when many Americans were still strongly opposed to joining the war. According
to Doris Kearns Goodwin, what Roosevelt had accomplished with the aluminum drive "was nothing
less than an exhibition of the dormant energies of patriotic democracy" (Goodwin 1994, 261). Still,
one can question whether historians in other circumstances would view the same policy with the same
results so favorably. Suppose that in a later, less popular, war a president ordered a salvage drive that
turned out to be a fiasco, at least as far as many observers were concerned, with great heaps of scrap
left to weather in public squares. Would historians of this unpopular war view the decision to launch an
aluminum drive favorably? Alternatively, would they view it as further confirmation of the
incompetence of a government determined to manipulate public opinion and place ideology above
sound management?

10

III. Used Silk and Nylon Stockings7
Before the war silk came to the United States largely from Japan, with smaller amounts from
China and other countries. It had two military uses: parachutes and powder bags. Its lightweight,
strength, and the ease with which it could be folded and unfolded without leaving a crease made it
ideal for parachutes. When the War began experiments were just underway to make parachutes out of
nylon. Nylon proved superior and, as it turned out, almost all parachutes produced during the war
were made of nylon. Silk was also used for the bags that held powder behind artillery shells, especially
in large naval guns. Silk burned completely whereas bags made of other fibers left glowing embers.
Eventually, however, ways were found to make satisfactory bags from cotton, wool, and rayon.
Japan restricted shipments of silk to the United States in 1941, making it difficult to
accumulate stocks, and embargoed all shipments shortly before Pearl Harbor. With Japanese silk
embargoed, a drive to bring in used silk (and nylon) stockings seemed logical, and silk and nylon
stocking drives arose spontaneously, that is without encouragement from the government. One such
drive in Dallas, Texas yielded some 662 pounds of worn stockings. Unfortunately, when the war
began there were no processes available for reclaiming used silk or nylon. Experts at the War
Production Board felt that it was only a matter of time before such processes were developed. But
until proof was available, the military would not accept delivery of used stockings. All that the War
Production Board could do was write polite letters telling the collectors that they could not use the
stockings (Walton 1945, 177).
Eventually, as the War Production Board predicted, methods were developed for recycling
worn silk and nylon stockings. On November 15, 1942 the War Production Board launched an
7. This section is based largely on Walton (1945). Frank L. Walton was director of the Textile, Clothing,
and Leather Division of the War Production Board.

11

official drive that continued until March 15, 1943, when the supply appeared to have dried up. The
drive brought in an impressive amount of stockings, some 880,000 pounds, about one pair for every
2.7 women. This was about 3.26 percent of the peak annual rate of production of nylon (which
occurred in May 1944) of 27,000,000 pounds, before allowing for the material lost in the recycling
(Dewhurst and Associates 1947, 779). In other words, the amount collected, assuming a 100 percent
recovery rate, yielded the equivalent of about 12 day's of production at the peak rate.
It appears that the War Production Board's Textile Division, perhaps because they were
aware of these figures, did not consider used silk and nylon very important. One piece of evidence of
the Textile Division's attitude toward used silk can be read from its approach to the opened bales of
silk still in the hands of the mills when the war began. In the months leading up to the silk drive the
Textile Division encouraged the mills to make stockings from opened bales. Had the Textile Division
been convinced that silk was crucial to the war effort, and had it believed that ways would be found to
recover silk from opened bales or from completed stockings, it would have commandeered all
unopened bales at the mills, and all finished stockings.
On the first day of the national used stocking drive the Textile Division heard stories about
women turning in used stockings and then buying new ones (Walton 1945, 178). Whether true or not,
the Textile Division immediately issued a directive advising women to turn in only stockings that were
completely worn out, so that there would be no increase in the demand for new stockings. Since at
this time new stockings were made mainly from cotton and rayon, it is clear that the purpose of the
directive was not to maximize the supply of used silk and nylon, but rather to reduce the risk that some
consumers would face empty shelves for new non-silk-non-nylon stockings. If the textile division
considered used silk and nylon crucial to the war effort, they would have asked consumers to turn in
all stockings containing silk and nylon, whether usable or not.

12

The reason the Textile Division downplayed the significance of used silk and nylon was
probably the availability of large supplies of nylon. Dupont had developed nylon in the early 1930s.
The price of silk had been high in the late 1930s, and Dupont had gone full speed ahead toward largescale production. This contrasts with synthetic rubber, where low prices of imported natural rubber
discouraged mass production of synthetics. As early as January of 1940 an article in the Far Eastern
Survey outlined the potential threat to Japan's silk industry posed by nylon, even though actual
production at that time was limited (Farley 1940). The War delayed full-scale production of eagerly
awaited nylon stockings for the home front – a sentiment captured in "Fats" Waller and George
Marion Jr.'s "When the Nylons Bloom Again" – but it appears that the supply of nylon was adequate
for military purposes. The stocking drives, to sum up, did not play an important role in the production
of silk or nylon for the war effort.

IV. Cooking Fat
During the war women – in those days propaganda aimed at the home was aimed at women –
were asked to save cooking fat. The fat was then exchanged at butcher shops for red ration points
(for meat, fish, and dairy) and cash. Advertisements explained that the fat saved contributed to the war
effort because fat was the source of glycerine, a key ingredient in explosives. Poster 3, a striking
design by Henry Koerner, makes the point vividly. Another poster (not shown) spelled it out in simple,
hard-hitting language: "...fat makes glycerine. And glycerine makes explosives for us and our allies –
explosives to down Axis planes, stop their tanks, sink their ships" (Cohen 1991, 111).
In fact, the demand for glycerine to make explosives had little to do with the fat salvage drive.
Only a small proportion of the U.S. production of rendered animal fat was needed for this purpose,
and munitions makers operating on cost-plus contracts with the government could easily outbid rivals

13

for what they needed. Rather, the fat salvage drive was undertaken for the soap makers who
organized and financed the drive. Soap production was high during the war by prewar standards
(Russell 1947, 248). And fat supplies were also relatively abundant, especially later in the war. By
January of 1944, lard was so abundant that the government was having storage difficulties (Fantin
1947, 209). But price controls meant that there was excess demand for soap. Early in the war
(organizational meetings for the fat salvage campaign began in April 1942) soap makers feared that if
soap was rationed, then some of the consumers forced to cut their use of soap during the war would
learn that they could do with less. Rationing, in other words, would spoil postwar markets.8 As far as
the soap producers were concerned, anything that would avoid the need to ration soap was worth
doing. Hence the plan organized by the soap makers to offer consumers cash and red points in
exchange for fat.
From the beginning there was opposition to the plan. The Office of Price Administration was
concerned that the fat salvage plan would produce an excess supply of red ration points, undermining
the rationing program (Russell 1947, 239). Indeed, not all of the fat renderers favored the plan. The
Eastern Melter's Association opposed the plan perhaps because it was concerned about a decline in
the price of rendered fat that renderers in other parts of the country could offset with a larger volume,
but that its renderers could not. Despite these concerns, the Office of Price Administration agreed at a
meeting on November 22, 1943 to pay two red points and 2 cents for each pound of fat. The
program was announced in December 1943. Since the fat would be generated continuously in the
nation's kitchens it was by nature an ongoing program rather than a short-term campaign.
The advertising created by the American Fat Salvage Committee was financed by the soap
8. The preservation of postwar markets was a major preoccupation of the War Advertising Council, a
private organization that placed ads extolling the patriotism of firms that were producing munitions during

14

makers, although this was somewhat hidden from the public. Butcher shops could display a sign that
read “Official Fact Collecting Station.” These were prepared by the “Glycerine Producers and
Associated Industries with the Approval of the War Production Board.” War Production Board was
in large capital letters. The campaign was so aggressive in linking fat salvage to military uses that
Chester Bowles, the head of the Office of Price Administration, wrote to Lever Brothers complaining
about the misleading nature of the campaign (Russell 1947, 252). The campaign played no positive
role in the mobilization of resources for the war effort. It may have had a positive effect, however, on
the morale of people who could not otherwise find a way in their daily lives of contributing to the war
effort. It provided, moreover, a way of assuaging the anxieties of children about the war by giving
them a way of participating in the war. Nevertheless, one wonders what would have happened if a
similar plan had been adopted in other wars. Suppose that during an unpopular later war a president
had launched a fat salvage campaign that, as in World War II, was ostensibly about providing the raw
materials to make bombs, but in fact was about providing fat for soap makers so they could avoid
rationing. Suppose that in that unpopular later war the administrator in charge of price controls –
widely respected as an outstanding public servant – was troubled by the deception. The deception,
most likely, would be revealed during the war by an aggressive press and add to the public's
discontent with the war. Even if the deception went undetected during the war, a later generation of
historians, if they shared the public's disapproval of the war, would be more likely to condemn the
campaign as a cynical attempt to deceive the public and benefit private interests than to celebrate it as
a brilliant tactic for mobilizing public opinion.

the war but would be producing for the private sector after the war (Leff 1991).

15

V. Iron and Steel
In the late 1930s and early 1940s recovery from the 1937-38 recession, rearmament, and
European munitions purchases increased the demand for iron and steel, and iron and steel scrap. Iron
and steel scrap purchased from dealers rose 41.6 percent between 1939 and 1941 (Figure 1 and
Table 1, column 2). Increases in demand in turn produced increases in the prices of iron and steel
scrap. The price of No. 1 heavy steel melting scrap rose 17.4 percent between 1939 and 1941
(Figure 2 and Table 1, column 5). It was obvious at the time, moreover, that if the United States
entered the war scrap prices would go much higher.
To Leon Henderson, who was in charge of price stabilization for the National Defense
Advisory Commission, the forerunner of the Office of Price Administration, increases in scrap iron and
steel prices were an intolerable threat to the economy. In January 1941 he warned scrap dealers
repeatedly that if they did not voluntarily reduce prices of iron and steel scrap, "drastic steps" toward
price control would be taken (Wall Street Journal, January 10, 1941, p.2). And this proved no idle
threat. Iron and steel scrap prices were placed under control in April 1941, well before Pearl Harbor,
and were not freed until November 1946 (Barringer 1954, 51). Indeed, as shown in Figure 2, the
Office of Price Administration succeeded in keeping the nominal price of scrap flat during the war. As
a result, the real price of scrap fell as the general price level rose. Reported scrap prices, it is true, may
not be entirely accurate. There are convincing stories about "expediters" who could help find materials,
for a price, about individual firms paying more than the official price, and about low-grade scrap being
sold as high-grade scrap. But to judge from the frequency of such stories, the impression conveyed by
Figure 2, a sharp upward movement in prices cut short by controls, is probably broadly correct, at
least for the initial years of the war. The picture may be less reliable for the latter part of the war.
To a classically inclined economist the increase in scrap prices relative to the general price

16

level before controls were imposed was an important market response that would provide the
incentive to find more scrap and to economize on the use of scrap. Such an economist would not be
surprised to find steel companies complaining about a shortage of scrap during the first half of 1942.
Fixing the price of scrap, to this way of thinking, reduced the productivity of the war economy.
Inflation, to such an economist, would be a macro-economic problem that should be attacked with
monetary policy, or more likely given the professional consensus of the day, fiscal policy, not by fixing
the price of scrap iron and steel. Henderson and the Office of Price Administration, however, saw
things differently. In their view, the important fact was that the price of scrap was a component of the
price of steel, which in turn was a strategic price in the war economy. If scrap prices were allowed to
rise it would "start an inflationary price spiral whose consequences would have been disastrous for the
stabilization program" (Benes 1947, 8). This view, which some economists today might justify on the
grounds that price fixing was shaping expectations, was widely held by policy makers in the 1940s. To
put it somewhat differently, inflation to Henderson and the Office of Price Administration economists
was a kind of economic cancer: it could be controlled only by detecting it early and cutting it from the
body economic before it could spread.
The decision to fix the prices of iron and steel scrap, whatever its benefits in reducing
inflationary expectations nevertheless appears to have had negative consequences for the efficiency of
the industry. The small dealer who drove his wagon from house to house buying scrap was a familiar
figure in the Depression and earlier years.9 He was an important part of the mechanism for collecting
scrap. During the war, however, the number of small dealers "diminished sharply" (Benes 1947, 5).
Perhaps some loss in the number of small dealers was inevitable. Many were pulled into the war

9. They were often referred to as peddlers, but this was a term they rejected, especially when it had
anti-Semitic overtones.

17

industries where wages rose substantially. Indeed, many probably viewed the war as an opportune
moment to make a change they had long contemplated. But the falling real price for scrap, which
created losses that could be offset only by evading the law, must have helped push small dealers from
the field. The Office of Price Administration, moreover, had considerable difficulty formulating lists of
official prices for an industry characterized by a multitude of dealers, products, and shipping costs.
Early experiments with prices controlled at the point of delivery gave way over time to an elaborate
basing point system. In October 1944 a shortage of scrap loomed, and was met by eliminating many
restrictions on where, what, and to whom dealers could sell (Benes 1947, 19-30).
Given the steel industry's voracious appetite for scrap – scrap was a necessary ingredient for
the production of open-hearth steel – given the freezing of scrap prices, and given the history of drives
in earlier wars, it was nearly inevitable that there would be an iron and steel scrap drive. The first
initiatives came from the steel companies and from International Harvester. Then in the summer of
1942 the War Production Board backed these private sector efforts with a call for a national drive.
Lessing J. Rosenwald, the director of the Conservation Division of the War Production Board, was
the government’s chief spokesman. As with the other drives, the response was dramatic. In California
Walt Disney donated two iron deer (Bambi?) from his front lawn. The deer, it was said, contained
enough iron to make one 75-mm field piece or 10,000 incendiary bombs (New York Times, August
11, 1942, p. 22). In New York many towns donated the cannons on the town square, some dating to
the Civil War and earlier conflicts. At Fort Ticonderoga, the Revolutionary War action in which
General Henry Knox retrieved Ticonderoga’s cannons was reenacted, and the cannon were donated
to the scrap drive (Hoopes 1977, 146-47). Roosevelt chimed in, promising that any towns that
donated old cannons would get new World War II guns after the war. He also suggested, demurely,
that if statues of political figures were donated to the scrap drive, subjects could be found for new

18

ones after the war (New York Times, August 8, 1942, p. 9).
As shown in Poster 1 farm country was an especially inviting target for scrap collection
because farmers often held on to used farm machinery. International Harvester encouraged the
collection of farm scrap and its dealerships served as collection centers. Harvester’s involvement was
undoubtedly motivated mainly by patriotism. But it did say that improving the relationships between
farmers and Harvester dealers would pay postwar dividends. There was also, I should note, a direct
connection with postwar markets. Farmers normally cannibalized their junked farm machines for used
parts to keep older machines running. If the junked machines were scrapped during the war, it would
be harder to keep old machines running after the war, forcing farmers to buy new ones.
One might be tempted by stories about the dramatic response to the iron and steel scrap drive
to conclude that unprecedented amounts of scrap were collected. Stories about melting down old
cannons and about the great poundages collected, however, need to be viewed in relationship to the
statistical data on the supply of scrap. Historians, unfortunately, repeat the stories and bypass the
numbers. The numbers, however, are revealing. Figure 1 shows iron and steel scrap purchased from
American dealers for domestic consumption (Table 1, column 2) and for export (Table 1, column 3),
and the peak-to-peak (1937 –1948) trend. The plot of domestic consumption follows a strong
upward trend punctuated by recessions. Surprisingly, however, the war years do not stand out as
years of unprecedented consumption. Consumption does show a local peak in the 1942, but that peak
is lower than might be inferred from enthusiastic tales about the wartime scrap drives. Purchases in
1942 were 7.0 percent above the level in the rearmament year 1941, but they were 18.2 percent
below the first postwar peak in 1948.10 Purchases in 1942, as shown in Figure 1, were close to, if

10. Postwar salvage, however, was made somewhat easier because large amounts of scrap were
available in the form of surplus military equipment, ships, and industrial plant.

19

anything a bit below, the peak-to-peak trend.
Figure 1 also shows exports. In the late 1930s exports of scrap iron and steel to Japan
became controversial because, critics claimed, they were sustaining Japanese military expansion. For
this reason, and also because it was feared that the exports were driving up domestic prices of scrap,
exports of scrap iron and steel were embargoed in 1940: an embargo covering heavy melting steel,
which was thought to be important militarily, was put in place in August, followed by a total embargo
in October. The decline in exports, however, was not produced solely by the embargoes. Exports to
Japan had been falling before the embargoes, as a result of rising scrap prices and regulations imposed
by the Japanese government (Odell 1940, Newcomb 1940). As can be seen in Figure 1, as important
as the scrap exports may have been from a strategic or political point of view, eliminating them made
relatively small amounts available for domestic consumption. Banning exports, like the salvage
campaign, did not succeed in pushing domestic consumption above trend. Since banning exports
worked in the same direction as the patriotic drives – to make more scrap available to domestic
purchasers – the decision to ban exports leaves even less scrap to be explained by the patriotic drive.
An alternative to the peak-to-peak trend for estimating counterfactual consumption
(consumption of scrap in the absence of the drive) is a regression of the amount of scrap iron and steel
consumed on variables measuring the supply and demand for scrap iron and steel. The fitted values
from such an equation would show what might have been expected in a peacetime economy
experiencing a similar boom, and the differences between actual consumption and the fitted values
would measure the effects of the patriotic drives in bringing out additional scrap.
I first estimated an equation in levels. The dependent variable was total consumption of iron

20

and steel scrap (Table 1, column 1 plus column 2).11 The independent variables were consumption
lagged one period, contemporaneous industrial production, industrial production lagged one period,
and dummy variables for the war years. Industrial production was used as the demand measure
because it might capture some of the shift toward heavy industry during the war. I did not include
prices because they were distorted by controls during the war. Hence, the regression is a reduced
form that implicitly assumes peacetime price responses. This is the right way to go, given the questions
I am most concerned with, because it allows me to compare what did happen with what would have
happened in a prosperous peacetime economy that relied on normal market processes to bring in the
scrap. I examined equations with up to six of scrap consumption and industrial production. None of
the coefficients on higher order lags were significant, and adding additional lags did not improve the
overall fit of the equation, or alter the conclusions with respect to the war years. The results are shown
in Part A of Table 2. Although the coefficients on the war dummies are significant in 1943 and 1944,
they have the wrong sign. Patriotic scrap drives, if they were having a big effect, should have raised
consumption in those years above what it otherwise would have been. Conceivably, the desire to hold
on to iron and steel scrap because of an expectation of higher prices once price controls were lifted –
news stories did suggest that some scrap dealers were reluctant to part with stocks accumulated over
decades – more than offset the patriotic motive. But this may be reading too much into the results. I
also estimated the equation after taking natural logarithms of the variables. Taking natural logarithms
makes interpreting the coefficients easier (they are percentages) and experience shows that logarithmic
models often work well with time series data. But the results were similar: the coefficients on the

11. The results are similar if purchased scrap (Table 1 column 2) is made the dependent variable.
Intuitively, this series would be more likely to show the effects of the drives since producers purchased
scrap collected in the drives from dealers. Unfortunately, this series is available only after 1934.

21

wartime dummies had the “wrong” sign, but in this model they were not statistically significant.
Tests, such as an Augmented Dickey-Fuller, suggested that there could be a unit root in the
scrap consumption and industrial production series, so I also estimated the equation in first differences.
The results are reported in Part B of Table 2. In this model, again, all of the wartime coefficients are
negative, suggesting smaller increments in the consumption of reclaim than would have been expected,
rather than the larger increments. But the coefficients are not significant, and there remains evidence of
serial correlation in the estimated model. The safest conclusion from the regressions is that there is no
evidence of a large positive effect from patriotism. I also estimated the equation in first difference of
natural logarithms of the variables (percentage changes), with similar results.
Regressions cannot capture all of the costs of collecting scrap that were unique to the war
years. We should, therefore, also give some weight to estimates made at the time by experts with an
intimate knowledge of the market. Perhaps the estimate with the greatest claim to authority was made
by Edwin C. Barringer. Barringer (1954, 54) argued that the drives did bring in additional scrap, and
estimated that in 1942 and 1943 the salvage drives yielded about 4,000,000 additional tons of scrap.
This was about 8.33 percent of consumption of purchased scrap in 1942 and 1943 and 3.67 percent
of total consumption of scrap (Table 1, columns 1 and 2). He adds, "During the entire war perhaps
about 9,000,000 tons was brought out that would not have been available to dealers under normal
conditions." This was about 9.61 percent of purchased scrap and 4.21 percent of total scrap from
1942 through 1945 (Table 1, columns 1 and 2). Salvage-drive scrap was lighter than normal scrap,
and according to Barringer, the mills preferred normal scrap when they could get it (Wall Street
Journal, November 28, 1942, p. 1). These percentages, therefore, undoubtedly overstate the yield
of the scrap drive compared with a statistic in which the numerator and denominator were measured in
tons of scrap of constant quality. Barringer was a long-time official with the Institute of Scrap Iron and

22

Steel, a trade group representing the scrap dealers, and they sponsored his book. As a trade group
they had an interest in stressing the contribution of professional dealers. To my knowledge, however,
Barringer's book is the best-informed account of the industry during this period, and has a strong claim
to authority.
Altogether the evidence of the peak-to-peak trend, the regressions, and Barringer’s estimates
suggest that the drives added at most a few percentage points to the supply of scrap. How significant
was a "small" percentage increase in the supply of scrap? Measured in months of consumption at the
1941 rate, Barringer's estimate of 9,000,000 additional tons, the highest estimate that we have
discussed, was only about two months worth of consumption of scrap: without the drives it would
have taken two additional months for the private sector to produce and consume the same amount of
scrap.12 Measured against total steel production, Barringer's estimate would appear smaller. It
amounted to about 1.6 percent of total steel production during the war (Historical Statistics 2006,
series Dd399, Dd405 -407). To put it in more familiar terms, this was about 24 days of production.
Conceivably, the timing of scrap collection could be crucial. A great battle, one could imagine, could
turn on the deployment of a small amount of arms, so any slowdown in the flow of scrap that slowed
production and prevented these particular arms from reaching the crucial battlefield at the crucial
moment could be important (Kimble 2007, 95-96). “But for want of a nail …” But absent an
argument of this sort that magnifies the impact of the availability of scrap at a particular moment, it is
clear that even in the absence of the patriotic salvage drives the United States would have produced

12. In principle a large part of previously produced steel could have been salvaged and recycled at a
price because little steel is lost before an article made from it is scrapped. Potentially, the scrap heap
was, to simplify somewhat, the sum of previous production. Therefore, the danger of running out of
scrap was relatively small. When it comes to rubber, the situation was somewhat different, and I will
have to pay more attention to the size of the scrap heap.

23

enough scrap iron and steel to supply its steel industry and to equip its fighting forces

VI. Rubber
The Rubber drive was the most important. There was no question that given time the United
States could produce large quantities of aluminum, copper, steel, and most of the other materials
needed for the war because the United States produced the raw materials or could import them from
allies or neutrals. In most of the cases in which the United States had depended on sources that were
cut off by the war, it could make do with substitutes. In the case of tin, for example, the U.S.
developed sources in the New World. And in the case of silk, the United States made do with nylon.
But rubber remained a problem. Japanese military expansion in Southeast Asia cut off the United
States and her Allies from their major sources of natural rubber – sources that had supplied ninety
percent of U.S. raw rubber before the war. The United States was producing only small amounts of
synthetic rubber for specialty purposes Although the basic chemistry for producing general purpose
synthetic rubbers was understood, many technical hurdles had to be overcome. No one, in other
words, could be sure how long it would take to get a large-scale synthetic rubber industry going. The
fear that the United States would not have sufficient rubber to maintain its domestic transport system
and equip its fighting forces, to sum up, was based firmly in reality.13
Table 3, which shows the "rubber budget" of the United States during the war, demonstrates
that reclaimed rubber played an important role in closing the "rubber gap" during the first two years of
U.S. involvement. Nevertheless, it was only one of five ways in which the United States closed the
13. There was also the fear that the stock of rubber was vulnerable to sabotage. On October 11, 1941 a
fire at a Firestone plant in Fall River Massachusetts destroyed a large amount of the U.S. stockpile (New
York Times, October 13, 1941, p.1). Although the FBI investigated; the state fire marshal later attributed
the fire to spontaneous combustion (New York Times, Jan 4, 1942, p. 40).

24

rubber gap:
(1) Running down the stock of raw rubber. Sizeable imports in 1940 and 1941, based on the
fear that access to Asian sources would be disrupted, had built up America's stocks. The Rubber
Reserve Company, a federal agency founded in June 1940, had purchased much of this rubber.
Initially, according to Herbert Feis (1947), he and like-minded State Department officials had pushed
for an aggressive buying program, but were thwarted by Jesse Jones of the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation who set tight limits on the prices the Rubber Reserve would pay. Eventually, when the
private rubber companies found themselves desperately bidding against each other for raw rubber,
and outbidding the Rubber Reserve, the decision was reached to make the Rubber Reserve the sole
buyer. By the end of 1941 the United States had a stock of 533,000 long tons of rubber equal to over
eight months consumption at the 1941 rate; by 1945 the U.S. had a stock of about 45,000 long tons,
equal to about 5 months consumption at the much lower wartime rate (Table 3, column 3).
(2) Increasing production of natural rubber in areas controlled by the Allies. Sri Lanka
(Ceylon) was the major remaining producer after the Japanese thrust into Southeast Asia, and its
output increased substantially. Attempts were also made to increase production in Liberia, to buy wild
rubber in Latin America, and even to plant rubber producing crops such as guayule in the United
States. Together, however, these efforts produced only small amounts. Imports of natural rubber
during the war (Table 3, column 1) remained well below prewar levels. As late as 1945 the United
States imported only 139 thousand long tons, about 30 percent of imports in the depression year
1935.
(3) Building synthetic rubber plants. The technology for producing synthetic rubber, as noted
above, was available, but plants sufficient to supply the American markets did not exist. The
government launched a crash program to build new plants, financed through the Reconstruction

25

Finance Corporation, but no one could be sure how long it would take to get the new plants up and
running. The synthetic rubber program, however, proved a success, and was providing substantial
supplies by the fourth quarter of 1943. In 1944, their first full year of operation, the United States
consumed 567 thousand long tons (Table 4, column 3), matching or exceeding consumption of rubber
of all types in most prewar years. In 1945 the United States consumed 694 thousand long tons,
exceeding consumption in any prewar year.14
As it turned out, the United States finished the war with stocks of rubber that were adequate,
if barely so. Nevertheless, the sense of urgency at the beginning of the war was justified. The last line
of Table 3, *1943, is a counterfactual rate of consumption which assumes that the synthetic rubber
program was able to deliver only 50 percent more rubber in 1943 than in 1942, rather than the 10fold increase that actually occurred. On this plausible assumption, and given maintenance of the
wartime rate of consumption of rubber, the stock of rubber on hand would have been exhausted.
(4) Conserving rubber. The military changed its specifications to minimize the use of rubber.
Civilian production was limited and supplies were rationed. Civilian rationing began, John Kenneth
Galbraith (1981, 152-56) tells us, with his order, issued immediately after Pearl Harbor, prohibiting
the sale of new automobile tires. His fear was that a rush to buy the existing stock would leave dealer
shelves empty. Shortly afterwards, a rationing system was introduced that allowed people in essential
occupations – doctors, police officers, and after a political dustup, ministers – to buy tires. A series of
orders from the War Production Board prohibited the production of new tires for the civilian market
for the first nine months of 1942 (Wendt 1947, 216-17).
It is tempting to view the prohibition of tire production for the civilian market and related

14. See Herbert and Bisio (1985) for a detailed history of the synthetic rubber program.

26

orders as important in pushing the industry into production for the military, but there was a pull as well
as a push. Official government orders prohibiting production for the civilian market may have been
merely a useful excuse for producers who wanted to break relations with long-term customers and
concentrate on highly profitable military contracts. One part of the pull story is easy to verify; profits of
the tire companies rose substantially during the war. Net income of the tire companies rose from $54
million in 1940 (the best previous year was $51 million in 1927) to a wartime record of $312 million in
1943 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1950, 9). These figures are in nominal terms, but even if we
allow for the increase in the measured price level – the GDP deflator increased about 20 percent
between 1940 and 1943 (Historical Statistics, series Ca13) – and a substantial margin for hidden
prices increases, it is clear that there was a strong incentive to convert to war production.
(5) Increasing production and consumption of reclaim. Consumption of reclaim, which was
only about 0.3 percent of total consumption in 1939, when natural rubber prices were low, rose to
nearly 40 percent of total consumption in the key years 1943 and 1944.15 There was a precedent,
however, for heavy reliance on reclaim: as we will see below, reclaim had played an important role in
the rubber budget in the 1920s.
The flow of scrap rubber to the reclaimers fell precipitously after Pearl Harbor. Owners were
hoarding scrap on the reasonable speculation that prices would soon rise either because the Office of
Price Administration would be forced to raise legal maximum prices or because ways around controls
would be found. In response, the reclaimers, various government agencies, and the petroleum industry,
quickly reached an agreement to keep the reclaimers supplied by embarking on a high-profile scrap
drive. The drive lasted from June 15 to July 10, 1942. It was conducted throughout with much fanfare.

15. The percentages were derived by dividing consumption from reclaim (Table 3, column 4) by the sum
of consumption from natural rubber, reclaim, and synthetic rubber (Table 3, columns 2, 4, and 5).

27

President Roosevelt announced the initial plan for a two-week drive in a radio address delivered on
June 12, 1942 (New York Times, June 13, 1942, p. 16). His address stressed, as might be expected,
that reclaim would help tide the country over until synthetic rubber became available. It also stressed,
perhaps even more, the uncertainty about how much scrap was available. The only way to find out,
Roosevelt said, was "to get the used rubber in where it can stand up and be counted." Once we know
how much used rubber is available, Roosevelt told his listeners, "we will make our plans accordingly"
(New York Times, June 13, 1942, p. 16). There was an implicit warning here, and an implicit
incentive (from the point of view of business), to cooperate: if the scrap drive did not turn up much,
other measures, in particular gasoline rationing, which was widely touted as a way of conserving
rubber, would have to be more restrictive. Eric W. Johnston, the president of the U.S. Chambers of
Commerce, made this point in a circular letter urging his members to cooperate with the scrap rubber
drive: a successful drive would "weigh heavily against any compulsory conservation efforts on the part
of the government" (New York Times, June 13, 1942, p. 1). To frame it in a slightly different way, the
president's talk, although it explicitly assured the public that it was not about gasoline, was in fact
paving the way for gasoline rationing (Goodwin 1994, 357).
As with the other drives, the response was striking: Americans sacrificed their worn out tires,
hot water bottles, rubber bands, and rubber duckies. Government officials vied to show their
enthusiasm. The prominent New Dealer Harold Ickes, the Petroleum Administrator for War,
denounced "hoarders" and in a well-publicized contretemps ordered that the floor mats in the Interior
Department be scrapped. Unfortunately, it turned out that not all of them were his to donate. In the
end, the Public Buildings Administration, which did have custody, decided not to scrap some of the
more valuable mats (New York Times, July 3, 1942). A second problem was that the floor mats
probably contained a large percentage of reclaim, and if so, the material reclaimed from them would

28

be unsuitable except for making tires, the most important use of reclaim.16 According to some experts,
about the only thing you could make from rubber floor mats was more rubber floor mats (Wall Street
Journal, June 25, 1942, p.1).
Rubber was bought at a penny a pound ($20 per short ton) by filling stations.17 The Rubber
Reserve, in turn, reimbursed the Oil companies at the rate of $25 per ton. Profits were donated to
charity. At the same time, the major reclaimers entered into an agreement with the Rubber Reserve to
process the scrap with all costs reimbursed by the Rubber Reserve, and again, with any profits to be
donated to charity. Many people treated a penny a pound as a token price and refused to take it, a
way of underlining their patriotism. By historical standards, however, it was a high point-of-origin
price for scrap rubber, and this was important to people who made their living by collecting scrap.
Although exact figures are not available, one authority put the range of scrap prices between 1915 and
1940 at $15 to $30 per short ton delivered-at-Akron, with the typical price around $20 per short ton
(Ball 1947, 150). One reason for setting a high point-of-origin price for scrap may have been
recognition that incentives matter even in wartime. The high-point of origin price for scrap rubber may
have reflected the recognition that the aluminum drive had been spoiled in part by the decision to deny
the junk dealers an adequate incentive. An editorial in Time Magazine for June 8, 1942 made
precisely this point. But price incentives could have been used to a much greater extent. The same
article argued that the price of scrap rubber ought to be allowed to rise as high as $50 or $100 dollar

16. High quality reclaim could be used in combination with natural rubber to make tires. It was not
possible, however, to make satisfactory tires entirely from reclaim.
17. No one expected motorists to turn in new tires at a penny a pound; there was a limit to what could be
expected from patriotism. New, unmounted tires in the hands of the public were treated separately: it
was required that they be sold to the government. They were paid for through the "Idle Tire Purchase
Program."

29

per ton.18 The decision to control prices of scrap rubber, and to rely on scrap drives, backed up by
subsidies paid by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to the scrap brokers, rather than high prices
to bring in the scrap, was partly the product of the theory of inflation discussed in the preceding
section. Price increases in scrap rubber, policy makers believed, would produce increases in the
prices of products made from rubber, and contribute to the increase in the price level. The amount of
inflation passed through to a final product would be small if it was proportional to the share of scrap
rubber in the final product. The Office of Price Administration, however, believed that inflation could
grow in an irrational, cancerous fashion, hence the need to clamp down on inflation at its source.
The drive produced approximately 400,000 long tons of scrap. Although some criticisms were
made of the quality of the scrap procured, the oil industry took pride in the role it dealers had played,
and in the resulting donations to charity (Petroleum Industry War Council 1943). When the rubber
drive ended it was thought likely that more rubber drives would be undertaken, but this did not
happen. The Rubber Reserve maintained its buying price at $25 per short ton until May 1943 when it
lowered the price to $15 per short ton. This decision reflected the easing of the rubber situation,
especially in prospect, because of the success of the synthetic rubber program. On January 1, 1944
the industry supplying scrap rubber to the reclaimers was returned to private hands.
The interest of the users of reclaim in promoting a scrap drive was straightforward: since they
bought at fixed prices, more scrap and hence more reclaim was better. The interest of the oil
companies was indirect. Gasoline was abundant in most of the country, especially the Southwest, by
prewar standards, and there was little reason on that account to ration. The exception was part of the
Northeast where supplies brought by sea had been interrupted by German submarine activity. It was

18. Quoted in Wolf (1943, 56-7).

30

widely believed, however, that gasoline rationing and low driving speeds were crucial for conserving
tires. The U.S. Special Committee to Study the Rubber Situation (1942) –popularly known as the
Baruch Report – after its chair, Bernard Baruch, head of the War Industries Board in World War I –
pushed for nationwide gasoline rationing and a 35 mile per hour speed limit to conserve tires.19 Thus,
by promoting scrap rubber collection the oil companies hoped to increase the supply of rubber for
civilian tires and limit the extent of gasoline rationing. Not only would gasoline rationing reduce
consumption and profits during the war, it might also accustom some drivers to get along with less
gasoline and spoil postwar markets.
The most baffling positions, on the surface, were those of the reclaimers who agreed to donate
their profits to charity, and especially the major scrap brokers – four did most of the business – the
firms that bought scrap rubber from junk dealers, sorted it, and sold it to the reclaimers, who went
even further. An agreement between the Rubber Reserve Company, which became the sole buyer of
scrap, and the scrap brokers emphasized reimbursement only for costs (New York Times, Jul 14,
1942. p. 10). And a history of the industry financed by one of the major scrap rubber brokers and
published in 1943 described the deal, as being on an "out-and-out no profit basis" (Wolf 1943, 58).
But it is understandable that the brokers would want at least to be seen as working on a "no profit
basis." In the Aluminum drive undertaken in 1941, as noted above, Mayor LaGuardia had cut the junk
dealers out of the business while denouncing them as unpatriotic speculators. The scrap rubber
brokers wanted to avoid being placed in the same category, even if the public had developed some
grudging respect for junk men in the wake of the aluminum drive.
The scrap rubber brokers, however, did not succeed in avoiding the charge of profiteering.
Elliott E. Simpson, the counsel for the House subcommittee expediting the scrap rubber drive, charged
19. The Report, although issued shortly after the Rubber drive reflected opinion at the time of the drive.

31

that the brokers had reaped "enormous profits" (New York Times, June 29, 1942. p. 8; July 13,
1942. p. 17). A case could be made that much of the scrap collected in the drive would turn out to be
of low quality (some of the floor mats Ickes was keen on scrapping) and costly to sort, so costs may
have been high. But it would be difficult now to determine whether there were "excessive" profits, even
if it was possible to define the term.
The rubber drive and subsequent purchases of scrap by the Rubber Reserve brought in a
great deal of scrap, and production and consumption of reclaim was high during the war. But as with
the other drives, the wartime experience needs to be put in perspective. Numbers suggesting that
thousands of people contributed scrap, a long and varied list of objects were contributed, and
computations of the amount collected per person, do not tell us about the economic importance of
what was contributed. The key question is whether the drive increased the supply of scrap and the
production of reclaim to levels substantially above what would have been available in a comparable
peacetime period.
A number of considerations suggest that by this standard the additional scrap made available
by the drive was relatively small. One indication that wartime consumption of reclaim was close to
what might have been expected in peacetime in response to a strong market demand is the capacity of
the reclaimers. The Baruch Report placed the capacity of the reclaimers at the time of the rubber
drive at 350 thousand long tons per year, assuming intense utilization. The Report, in line with its
theme of pushing every source of rubber to the maximum, called for a 20 percent increase in the
capacity of the industry, and production of 400 thousand long tons in 1943. These projections were
not met. Peak production was 303,991 long tons in 1942 (Table 4, column 4) – an amount well within
the existing capacity of the prewar industry.
Figure 3 shows consumption of reclaimed rubber from 1919 to 1954 and a trend drawn

32

through the peaks in 1928 (the last peak before the depression) and the peak in 1947 (the first
postwar peak). Although the war period shows up as a period of high consumption the amounts do
not appear out of line with peacetime trends. Wartime consumption exceeds the peak-to-peak trend
in only one year during the war, 1943, and then only by 6.34 percent. The 1943 peak, moreover, was
only 2 percent above the peak in 1947, was 4 percent below the level reached in 1950, and was fully
17 percent below the level reached in 1951.20
Consumption of reclaim, which is the only series available before 1940, differs from
production because of imports, exports, and additions to and subtractions from stocks. The use of the
consumption figures, however, does not pose a major problem. The practice in the reclaim industry
was to maintain relatively low inventories of unprocessed and processed scrap. During 1942-1945
stocks of reclaim on hand at the end of the year averaged less than 2 months consumption, and
imports and exports were negligible. The Rubber Reserve reported the results of its operations in
1945 (U.S. Rubber Reserve Company 1945, 57). All told it purchased 990,944 long tons of scrap
and sold 828,288 to reclaimers. Thus, about 18 percent failed to go through the reclaiming mills,
although some of this was of low quality and some was purchased after the rubber situation eased.
Production figures, as we noted, are available beginning in 1940. The wartime peak for
production occurred in 1942, when it reached a level 10.3 percent above the level in 1940. By 1949,
however, current production exceeded the wartime peak by 2.9 percent, and in 1950 production
exceeded the wartime peak by 18.5 percent (Table 4, column 4). The production figures, like the
consumption figures, suggest that the accomplishments of the reclaiming industry during the war years

20. The latter were war years – the Korean War began in June 1950 – but patriotic pressures to salvage
scrap were probably much less important than in World War II because synthetic rubber was now a
reality, and because natural rubber producing areas were not immediately in danger.

33

were not far above what might have occurred in prosperous peacetime years in which access to
imported rubber was restricted.
As Figure 3 shows, there was also a surge in the consumption of reclaim during the 1920s.
This episode deserves a closer look because it provides another way to get a sense of what would
have happened during the World War II if the United States had relied more on the market and less
on patriotism to get in the scrap. The troubles in the rubber industry in the 1920s are usually
associated with the Stevenson Restriction Plan. 21 The goal of the Plan, which became British law on
November 1, 1922, was to boost raw rubber prices by limiting exports from British plantations in
Malaysia (Malaya) and Sri Lanka. It was a response to depressed rubber prices that growers had
tried to counteract unsuccessfully with voluntary restriction plans. The Plan imposed a prohibitive
export tax when planters exported more than 60 percent of the amount sold in the year ending
October 31, 1920. The allowable percent could be raised or lowered by 5 percent based on a scale
tied to the London price of crude rubber. Prices sagged during the first years under the Plan and the
amount that could be exported before the prohibitive tax kicked in was lowered. However, in 1925
heavy demand for rubber produced by the introduction of the rubber-intensive balloon tire ran into a
supply restricted (at least to some degree) by the Stevenson Plan and the result was a dramatic
increase in raw rubber prices (Figure 4).
Politicians and business leaders did invoke patriotism during the period of high rubber prices in
the 1920s, so we do not have a completely patriotism-free comparison with the war years. The
Stevenson Plan outraged Harvey Firestone, and his company's advertisements declared that "America
Should Produce its Own Rubber." Firestone lobbied his fellow Ohioan, President Warren G. Harding,

21. The Stevenson Plan is described in Knorr (1945), McFadyean (1944), and Whittlesey (1931).

34

for government support for American rubber plantations in the Western Hemisphere. Enthusiasm
waned, however, when raw rubber prices retreated in 1922 and 1923. But the rapid increase of
prices in 1925 led to new calls for a national response. In December 1925 Secretary of Commerce
Herbert Hoover appealed to the public and to the manufacturers for cooperation in beating back high
rubber prices through conservation and the creation of independent American supplies. Inevitably,
Congress launched and investigation of "The Means and Methods of Control of Production and
Export of Crude Rubber." When natural rubber prices broke in February 1926, Hoover took credit
(New York Times, February 16, 1926, p. 21).22 The patriotic appeals of Hoover and other leaders
for conservation may have motivated some people to turn in their scrap. Nevertheless, it seems
unlikely that in the 1920s patriotism could have functioned on the same scale as in World War II
because there was no threat to the nation's safety in the 1920s. Indeed, many people viewed Hoover's
actions as grandstanding designed to improve his prospects for the White House.
Figure 4, which shows the annual real prices of natural rubber and reclaim from 1919 to 1947,
puts the price gyrations of the 1920s into a long-term perspective. The picture is dramatic – a sharp
increase in the price of raw rubber in the 1920s produced a sharp increase in the demand for
reclaimed rubber, but a much smaller increase in the price of reclaimed rubber. Evidently, the supply
of reclaim proved highly elastic. During the early thirties the price of raw rubber tumbled and at its low
point was about equal to the price of reclaim. During World War II, however, the price of raw rubber
and the price of reclaim both fell in real terms. This was the result of the limits placed on the prices of
raw rubber and reclaim by the Office of Price Administration. As with steel, there were some hidden

22. Most sources attribute the ultimate failure of the Stevenson Plan, which was terminated on
November 1, 1928, to the effectiveness of the scrap drive, smuggling, and most important, the rapid
growth of output in Indonesia (the Netherlands East Indies).

35

price increases: money paid to "expediters," for example, to get supplies of rubber, and there were
substantial subsidies paid by the government to the collectors of scrap and the producers of reclaim.
As with steel, the official wartime prices may be misleading, particularly in the latter part of the war.
The amount of reclaim consumed annually during the World War II was higher than during the
1920s, but the available stock of discarded rubber – the "scrap heap" – was also larger, simply
because the rubber industry had grown substantially between the 1920s and the 1930s despite the
depression (Table 4, column 2).23 To judge whether wartime patriotism made a big difference, we
need to measure the amount of rubber reclaimed relative to the scrap heap. Unfortunately, estimates of
the scrap heap made at the beginning of the war differed widely: from 300,000 long tons to 2,000,000
long tons. In order to compare the two periods I have made my own estimate of the scrap heap based
on the figures for consumption of natural rubber, which would seem to be the most reliable starting
point. The assumptions were: (1) that products made from natural rubber, such as tires, were normally
scrapped after three years,24 (2) that 75 percent of the original rubber was available for reclaim in the
first year after scrapping, (3) that any rubber not reclaimed deteriorated another 25 percent each year
that it remained in the scrap heap, and (4) that scrapping at one half the normal rate took place in
1942 and 1943.25 These assumptions were chosen to produce estimates of the annual amount
scrapped that are close to estimates made by experts during the war, and estimates of the scrap heap
23. There was also some technological progress in the reclaiming industry – some of it stimulated by the
high prices for reclaim in the 1920s – that made reclaiming a better substitute for importing raw rubber in
World War II.
24. This might appear to be a high rate of scrapping. But tire mileage seems to have been much lower
before World War II. Davis (1931) discusses the low mileage for tires built before the improvements in
the highway system and the introduction of the balloon tire in the 1920s. Although not strictly accurate I
also assumed that reclaimed rubber was not reclaimed.
25. The last assumption reflects the idea that motorists tried to keep the existing stock of tires running as
long as possible during the dark days of the war.

36

that fall in the middle of the range of estimates made during the war (Ball 1947, 148).
Figure 5 shows consumption of reclaim in each year as a percentage of this estimate of the
scrap heap. The Figure suggests that the rate of consumption of scrap during World War II was
similar to what had occurred during the period of high consumption in the 1920s. Admittedly, any
attempt to infer the size of the "scrap heap" is highly speculative. I tried a variety of measures, based
on different assumptions about how fast products made from natural rubber were scrapped and how
fast these products deteriorated once they entered the scrap heap, and the results were similar. The
simple fact is that production from raw rubber in the late 1930s was higher than in the early 1920s and
the use of reclaim was much lower. As a result, most measures of the scrap heap that depend on
recent past production from natural rubber produce rates of consumption during the war, measured as
percentages of the scrap heap, similar to rates of consumption during the 1920s.
The peak-to-peak trend line and the comparison with the 1920s are the simplest ways to get
at what would have happened in a peacetime boom during the 1940s. To get an alternative that is
somewhat less dependent on subjective judgments, I regressed consumption of reclaim on lagged
values of reclaim and contemporaneous and lagged values of industrial production and then compared
actual and predicted values during the war. Industrial production was included as a proxy for demand.
As I noted in the case of steel, industrial production is not ideal because the structure of demand
changed dramatically during the war, but it appears to be the best alternative available because it is
likely to capture some of the tilt in production toward the industrial sector. I did not include prices
because, as discussed above, controls distorted prices. In effect, the regression is a reduced form that
assumes that price responses (of the own price of reclaim and the prices of close substitutes), to
determinants of demand and supply were "normal" during the war years. This assumption biases the
exercise in favor of finding an effect from patriotism because it makes no special allowance for the

37

increases in the prices of raw rubber and reclaim that would have occurred in a peacetime economy in
which prices were left free, and the supply of natural rubber was drastically reduced.
I began simply with contemporaneous industrial production and then added lagged values of
industrial production and lagged values of consumption of reclaim as long as they entered significantly.
I also included dummy variables for 1942, 1943, and 1944, the years when a patriotic effect might
have been operating. The results are shown in Table 5, part A. Only the 1943 dummy is positive.
Although the coefficient is not statistically significant, it does show excess consumption of about
12,800 tons, an increase of 4.57 percent. I examined equations with up to six lags even though the
coefficients on the additional lags were not significant, but additional lags did not improve the fit of the
equation, or alter the conclusions with respect to the war years. I also estimated the equation in natural
logarithms. Again, the only war year with a positive coefficient was 1943, and the coefficient, although
again not significant, indicated an even smaller effect, 0.8 percent.
Since several tests, such as an Augmented Dickey-Fuller, showed that there could be unit
roots in the reclaim and industrial production series when measured in levels, I also estimated the
equation in first differences, following the same procedure for establishing the lag length. Table 5, Part
B shows the results. The main findings of interest here are similar to those that emerge from Part A: the
dummy variables for 1942, 1943, and 1944 do not show reveal a strong positive effect from
patriotism. In fact, the coefficients were negative – the sign was always the opposite of what we would
expect if patriotism made additional supplies available. Only the 1944 coefficient, however, was
significant. 26 I also estimated the equation after taking first differences of the natural logarithms of the

26. In this regression the actual increase in consumption of reclaim did exceed the static forecast by
about 10.5 percent in 1941. Although there was a good deal of concern about the rubber situation in
1941, the drive, and the appeals to patriotism, came in the summer of 1942, so it would be hard to
attribute the surge in 1941 to patriotism.

38

variables. Again all the coefficients on the wartime dummies were negative, although in this case none
were significant. The safest conclusion, from the regression estimates, because it is consistent with the
other evidence, is that any additional amounts of scrap rubber produced by the patriotic drive over
and above what would have been forthcoming in a prosperous peacetime period in which the supply
of natural rubber was compromised, at best, must have been relatively small.

VII. What Can We Salvage from the Salvage Drives?
Enthusiastic stories about the scrap drives of World War II might lead one to believe that the
drives had an important impact on the supply of raw materials. This was not the case. To be sure, the
iron and steel drive and the rubber drive may have made some additional supplies available, but the
additional amounts were of a much smaller order of magnitude than popular stories about the drives
might suggest. Historians often describe the scrap drives as if the mobilization of large amounts of
scrap was unique to the war. Scrap collection, on the contrary, was an ancient, honorable, and
efficient business that functioned in peace as well as war. The amount of iron and steel salvaged in
1942 was only 9 percent above the amount salvaged in 1937, the prewar peak. By 1950 more iron
and steel scrap was being processed than during any year in World War II. The amount processed
during the war never rose above the peak-to-peak trend. The wartime rubber drive was similar to the
drive that occurred in the 1920s as a result of a sharp run-up in natural rubber prices. By 1950 more
rubber scrap was being processed than during any year in World War II. In only one year, 1943, did
consumption of reclaim rise above the peak-to-peak trend, and then only by a small amount. This and
other evidence discussed above shows that the scrap drives did not push collections to unprecedented

39

heights.27
The patriotism that surrounded the drives, moreover, did not erase the importance of
conventional economic incentives. The aluminum drive suffered because the junk dealers were
excluded. The rubber drive was more effective because this lesson was learned, and the traditional
brokers were brought into the program. The fat salvage program was unnecessary, the product of
special interests seeking a way around price controls and rationing. The lack of adequate price
incentives complicated the iron and steel scrap drive and made it less effective than it otherwise would
have been.
To be sure, the political and psychological effects of the drives, as many historians have
argued, may have been important. The prewar aluminum drive may have solidified support for active
U.S. involvement. And the wartime drives gave Americans on the home front a concrete way to
display their support for the war. Parents, moreover, could allay the anxieties of their children (and
themselves) by providing concrete ways that children (and adults) could participate in the war effort
(Kirk 1995). We should note, however, that historians celebrate Roosevelt's use of the drives to
influence public opinion partly because they approve of his end purposes. Suppose, to take one
example, that during a later less popular war a president had launched a "fat salvage" campaign that, as
in World War II, was ostensibly about providing a raw material to make bombs, but in fact was about
providing a raw material to make soap so that makers of soap could avoid rationing. Would historians
of this later less popular war be likely to praise the campaign as a brilliant way of mobilizing public
opinion, or would they be more likely to condemn it as a cynical attempt to deceive the public and

27. Strasser (1999, 262) focused on the social dimensions of the drives and did not offer any explicit data
on the quantity of scrap collected. However, she also concluded that "industrial salvage was simply of
much greater significance: more materials could be collected more efficiently."

40

benefit private interests?
Whatever the psychological effects of the drives, the economic effects were limited. Rather
than demonstrating the importance of non-pecuniary motives and non-market means of production,
the salvage drives demonstrate the limited ability of patriotism and community spirit to overcome
technical constraints or the tendency of individuals and interest groups to respond to economic
incentives.

41

Figure 1
Purchases of Iron and Steel Scrap
Gross Tons, 1935-1953
40,000,000
35,000,000
30,000,000
25,000,000
20,000,000
15,000,000
10,000,000
5,000,000
0
(5,000,000)
1935

1936

1937

1938

1939

1940

1941

1942

1943

Net Exports

1944
Total

Sources. Total: Table 1, column 2. Net exports: Table 1, column 3 – column 4.

42

1945

1946

1947

Peak to Peak Trend

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952

1953

Sources. Nominal: Table 1, column 5. Real: The nominal price in dollars per ton was deflated by the GDP deflator (Historical Statistics 2006,
series CA13) and set equal to the nominal price in 1929.

43

Sources. Consumption of Reclaimed Rubber: Table 4, column 1.

44

80

Figure 4
The Real Prices of Natural and Reclaimed Rubber, 1920-1947
(Cents per pound in 1929 dollars)

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947

Natural Rubber

Reclaimed Rubber

Sources. Prices of natural rubber and reclaimed rubber are from Table 4, columns (5) and (6). The nominal prices were deflated by the GDP
deflator (Historical Statistics 2006, series CA13). The GDP deflator would seem to be the most relevant series, of those readily available, to
the decisions being undertaken by the tire companies and other industrial users of rubber.

45

Figure 5
Consumption of Reclaim Relative to the "Scrap Heap," 1919-54

90
80
70

Percent

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1919

1924

1929

1934

1939

1944

Sources. Consumption of Reclaimed Rubber: Table 4, column 1. See the text for the computation of the scrap heap.

46

1949

1954

Poster 1: "Farm Scrap Builds Tanks & Guns:"
http://www.library.northwestern.edu/govpub/collections/wwii-posters/img/ww1646-65, accessed June
28, 2007.

47

Poster 2. Library of Congress. http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.pnp/cph.3g01669, accessed June 8, 2007.

48

Poster 3. "Save Waste Fats" by Henry Koerner. New Hampshire State Library.
http://www.nh.gov/ww2/ww14.html. Accessed July 29, 2008.

49

Table 1. Consumption of Iron and Steel Scrap, 1910-1953.
Consumption
(In House)

Long Tons
(1) a

Consumption
(Purchased)

Long Tons

Exports

Imports

Long Tons

Long Tons

Price
No. 1
Heavy
Melting Steel
Scrap
Dollars per
Long Ton

1910

13,100,000

(2) b
NA

1911

12,100,000

NA

77,918

17,272

NA
NA

1912

16,100,000

NA

105,965

23,612

NA

1913

15,300,000

NA

94,429

44,154

NA

1914

12,200,000

NA

33,134

34,839

NA

1915

18,600,000

NA

79,361

79,982

NA

1916

23,400,000

NA

212,765

116,039

NA

1917

26,800,000

NA

145,574

180,034

NA

1918

25,400,000

NA

2,160

63,730

$28.76

1919

20,700,000

NA

27,275

177,293

17.89

1920

26,000,000

NA

219,250

140,645

23.71

12,400,000

NA

37,592

41,469

12.61

1922

23,700,000

NA

67,784

142,969

15.83

1923

27,000,000

NA

65,980

162,066

19.05

1924

26,200,000

NA

97,748

66,841

17.15

1925

30,700,000

NA

82,573

99,815

17.12

1926

32,200,000

NA

104,838

86,725

15.48

1927

30,700,000

NA

239,209

60,207

14.00

1928

34,000,000

NA

516,148

63,314

14.29

37,600,000

NA

557,044

90,479

16.30

1930

26,600,000

NA

358,649

27,482

13.48

1931

18,300,000

NA

136,125

16,279

9.8

1932

10,000,000

NA

227,522

9,775

7.54

1933

17,400,000

NA

773,406

56,133

9.47

1934

18,800,000

NA

1,835,170

44,421

11.07

1921

1929

(3)

(4)

(5) c

25,825

72,764

50

Table 1. Consumption of Iron and Steel Scrap, 1910-1953.
Consumption
(In House)

Consumption
(Purchased)

Exports

Imports

1935

13,346,752

13,068,578

2,103,959

64,768

Price
No. 1
Heavy
Melting Steel
Scrap
11.85

1936

18,901,389

17,456,744

1,936,132

142,245

14.83

1937

19,871,033

18,135,239

4,092,590

81,640

18.03

1938

11,321,341

10,023,593

3,003,523

24,451

13.54

1939

17,519,550

14,914,857

3,577,427

42,125

16.39

1940

22,364,030

17,394,597

2,820,789

18,578

18.76

1941

30,272,035

22,599,622

792,760

86,684

19.50

1942

29,579,797

24,228,374

126,473

112,365

19.17

1943

31,283,116

23,762,379

48,957

147,601

19.17

1944

31,631,437

23,145,723

82,329

114,504

18.55

1945

27,643,486

22,527,126

73,262

59,385

19.15

1946

23,334,073

20,848,167

126,426

51,519

20.28

1947

28,195,000

26,148,000

152,078

63,108

36.65

1948

28,946,000

29,057,000

189,459

429,218

41.66

1949

26,041,000

22,475,000

266,603

1,018,182

27.56

1950

32,095,000

29,402,000

194,114

660,260

34.75

1951

34,693,521

33,813,709

196,219

339,404

43.15

1952

31,104,280

30,523,508

300,440

128,841

41.79

1953

37,411,159

31,614,817

265,985

153,722

39.52

a

Total through 1934, In House thereafter.

b

The sum of column's (1) and (2) is the same as the United States Geological Survey's "Apparent
Consumption" when both series are available (starting in 1935), except for differences resulting from
rounding (U.S. Geological Survey 2005).
c

Delivered at Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, and Chicago.

Source. Barringer (1954, 133, 135).

51

Table 2. Determinants of the Consumption of Iron and Steel Scrap, 1910-53.
Part A – Levels
Variable
Coefficient
Std. Error
t-Statistic
C
343,3408.0
1,315,697.
2.609574
STEELSCRAP(-1)
0.434
0.126311
3.43826
IP
149,149.8
13,333.3
11.18623
IP(-1)
-98,716.20.0
18,289.8
-5.39734
1942
-2,491,125.0
3,722,807.0
-0.66915
1943
-10,816,733.0
3,750,454.0
-2.88411
1944
-8,019,789.0
3,600,417.0
-2.22746
R-squared
0.965 Mean dependent var
Adjusted R-squared
0.960 S.D. dependent var
Log likelihood
-703.6006 F-statistic
Durbin-Watson stat
1.797131 Prob(F-statistic)
Breusch-Godfrey Serial Correlation LM Test:
F-statistic
0.477783 Prob. F(4,20)
Obs*R-squared
2.423356 Prob. Chi-Square(4)
Part B – First Differences
Coefficient
Std. Error
t-Statistic
C
-664850.8
757261.5
-0.877967
∆STEELSCRAP(-1)
-0.274926
0.164948
-1.666744
∆STEELSCRAP(-2)
-0.248061
0.164146
-1.511218
∆STEELSCRAP(-3)
-0.343551
0.155284
-2.212397
∆(IP)
161178.6
17804.19
9.052846
∆IP(-1)
35179.88
31312.33
1.123515
∆IP(-2)
17559.96
29590.36
0.593435
∆IP(-3)
56285.77
27578.75
2.040911
1942
-5724451.
4656669.
-1.229302
1943
-14583863
4805698.
-3.034702
1944
-10965298
5202546.
-2.107679
R-squared
0.783816 Mean dependent var
Adjusted R-squared
0.709270 S.D. dependent var
Log likelihood
4.59E+14 F-statistic
Durbin-Watson stat
1.816695 Prob(F-statistic)
Breusch-Godfrey Serial Correlation LM Test:
F-statistic
1.346106 Prob. F(4,20)
Obs*R-squared
7.088402 Prob. Chi-Square(4)

52

Prob.
0.0131
0.0015
0.0000
0.0000
0.5077
0.0066
0.0323

34,160,302
16,793,702
167.0401
0.000000
0.751740
0.658411
Prob.
0.3872
0.1063
0.1416
0.0350
0.0000
0.2704
0.5575
0.0505
0.2288
0.0050
0.0438
1343149.
7381682.
10.51451
0.000000
0.280744
0.131290

Table 3. The U.S. Rubber Budget, 1935-1945
(1000s of long tons [2,240 pounds])
Imports
Natural
Rubber

Consumption
Natural
Rubber

End of
Year
Stocks
Natural
Rubbera

Consumption
Reclaim

Consumption
Synthetic
Rubber

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1935

467

492

312 (7.6)b

118 (19%)c

0.2

1936

487

575

223 (4.7)

142 (20)

0.3

1937

598

544

262 (5.8)

162 (23)

0.5

1938

409

438

231 (6.3)

121 (22)

1.0

1939

497

592

125 (2.5)

170 (22)

1.9

1940

815

649

289 (5.3)

190 (23)

2.9

1941

1024

775

533 (8.3)

251 (24)

6.3

1942

277

377

422 (13.4)

255 (39)

17.6

1943

52

318

139 (5.3)

291 (37)

170.9

1944

107

144

96 (8.0)

251 (26)

566.6

1945

139

105

45 (5.1)

241 (23)

693.5

*1943

52

462

-6

291

26.4

a

The change in end of year stocks can differ from imports less consumption because of re-exports
and for some other minor reasons.
b

The term in parentheses is the stock in months of consumption at the current rate.

c

The term in parentheses is consumption of reclaim as a percent of the total.

Source. Feis (1947, 311). The import figures are the same as in Historical Statistics (2006, series
U302).

53

Table 4. Consumption, Production, and the Price of Reclaimed Rubber, and Related Data, 19191954.
Consumption of Rubber
(Long Tons)

Production
(Long
Tons)

Price of Rubber
(Cents Per Pound)

Reclaimed

Natural

Synthetic

Reclaimed

Natural

Reclaimeda

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1919

73,500

215,000

0

NA

48.7

16.2

1920

75.300

206,000

0

36.3

15.5

1921

41,400

177,800

0

NA
NA

16.4

11.3

1922

54,500

301,500

0

NA

17.5

9.1

1923

69,500

319,400

0

NA

29.5

9.6

1924

76,100

328,800

0

NA

26.2

9.0

1925

137,100

388,500

0

NA

72.5

10.1

1926

164,500

366,200

0

NA

48.5

11.7

1927

189,500

373,000

0

NA

37.7

9.4

1928

223,000

437,000

0

NA

22.5

8.3

1929

212,700

467,400

0

NA

20.6

8.0

1930

153,500

376,000

0

NA

12.0

6.8

1931

123,000

355,200

0

NA

6.2

5.5

1932

77,500

336,700

0

NA

3.5

4.1

1933

85,000

412,400

0

NA

6.0

4.5

1934

100,900

462,500

0

NA

13.9

5.2

1935

117,500

491,500

200

NA

13.4

5.3

1936

141,500

575,000

300

NA

16.4

5.3

1937

162,000

543,600

500

NA

19.4

6.1

1938

120,800

438,000

1,000

NA

14.6

6.1

1939
1940
1941

170,000
190,200
251,231

592,000
648,500
775,000

1,900
2,900
6,300

NA

15.6
20.1
22.4

6.0
6.0
6.3

274,202
285,114

54

Table 4. Consumption, Production, and the Price of Reclaimed Rubber, and Related Data, 19191954.
Consumption of Rubber
(Long Tons)

a

Production
(Long
Tons)

Price of Rubber
(Cents Per Pound)

Reclaimed

Natural

Synthetic

Reclaimed

Natural

Reclaimeda

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1942

254,820

376,800

17,600

303,991

22.5

6.5

1943

291,082

317,600

170,900

260,607

22.5

6.5

1944

251,083

144,100

566,600

243,309

22.5

6.6

1945

241,036

105,400

693,500

295,612

22.5

7.0

1946

275,400

277,600

761,700

291,395

22.5

7.3

1947

288,395

562,661

559,666

266,861

20.8

8.0b

1948

261,113

627,332

430,618

224,029

22.0

NAb

1949

222,679

574,522

397,139

313,006

17.6

NAb

1950

303,733

720,268

512,579

365,933

41.2

NAb

1951

346,121

454,015

748,650

273,386

57.7

NAb

1952

280,002

453,846

787,454

295,550

33.4

NA

1953

285,050

553,473

771,806

257,088

24.2

NA

1954

249,049

596,285

620,223

274,202

23.6

NA

First Quality.

b

According to the U.S. National Production Authority (1950, p. X-4), the price of first grade tire
reclaim rose from 8 cents in 1947, "to 9 cents in June 1950, and to 10 1/2 cents in September
1950, where it remained during the first half of 1951."
Sources. Consumption. 1919-1946: (Ball 1947, 204-05); 1947-1954: (U.S. Department of
Commerce 1954, 21, table 13). Prices 1919-1946: (Ball 1947, 206-07); 1947-54, natural only,
(U.S. Department of Commerce, 1955, 11, table 4).

55

Table 5. Determinants of the Consumption of Reclaimed Rubber, 1922-54
Part A – Levels
Dependent Variable: Reclaim
Variable
C
RECLAIM(-1)
RECLAIM(-2)
IP
IP(-1)
IP(-2)
1942
1943
1944

Coefficient
16952.03
0.885906
-0.354995
5,596.542
-7,011.596
4,028.217
-61,74.551
12,794.08
-42,857.58

R-squared
0.904632
Adjusted R-squared
0.872843
Log likelihood
-380.3048
Durbin-Watson stat
1.609342
Breusch-Godfrey Serial Correlation LM Test:
F-statistic
1.392266
Obs*R-squared
7.187558
C
∆RECLAIM(-1)
∆RECLAIM(-2)
∆ IP
∆IP(-1)
∆ IP(-2)
1942
1943
1944

Std. Error
12346.44
0.174271
0.178105
1407.204
2133.495
1647.816
30186.42
31486.13
30707.63

Prob.
0.1824
0.0000
0.0577
0.0006
0.0031
0.0222
0.8397
0.6881
0.1756

Mean dependent var
S.D. dependent var
F-statistic
Prob(F-statistic)

193037.6
80486.25
31.98094
0.000000

Prob. F(4,20)
Prob. Chi-Square(4)

0.272466
0.126302

Part B – First Differences
1197.910
5337.789
0.259137
0.170854
-0.375013
0.169725
7406.538
1554.208
-3813.767
1676.282
5126.820
1788.298
-38953.31
31014.03
-21918.98
33242.77
-76199.10
32356.37

R-squared
0.569587
Adjusted R-squared
0.426116
S.E. of regression
27629.11
Durbin-Watson stat
1.751119
Breusch-Godfrey Serial Correlation LM Test:
F-statistic
5.066774
Obs*R-squared
16.60945

t-Statistic
1.373030
5.083500
-1.993181
3.977066
-3.286437
2.444579
-0.204547
0.406340
-1.395666

0.224421
1.516718
-2.209528
4.765473
-2.275134
2.866872
-1.255990
-0.659361
-2.354995

0.8243
0.1424
0.0369
0.0001
0.0321
0.0085
0.2212
0.5159
0.0270

Mean dependent var
S.D. dependent var
Akaike info criterion
Prob(F-statistic)

6292.394
36471.62
23.56452
0.003712

Prob. F(4,20)
Prob. Chi-Square(4)

0.005512
0.002301

56

References
Ball, John M. Reclaimed Rubber: The Story of an American Raw Material. New York: Rubber
Reclaimers Association, Inc., 1947.
Barringer, Edwin C. The Story of Scrap. Washington D.C.: Institute of Scrap Iron & Steel Inc.,
revised edition, 1954.
Baruch, Bernard M. U.S. Special Committee to Study the Rubber Situation, Report. Washington
D.C.: GPO, 1942.
Benes, Robert J. "Iron and Steel Scrap." In Studies in Industrial Price Control. Historical Reports
on War Administration: Office of Price Administration, General Publication No. 6. Washington
D.C: G.P.O., 1947.
Cohen, Stan. V for Victory: America's Home Front during World War II. Missoula Montana:
Pictorial Histories Publishing Co., Inc., 1991.
Davis, Royal E. "Cycles in the Automobile Pneumatic Tire Renewal Market in the United States."
Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 26, No. 173, Supplement: Proceedings of the
American Statistical Association (March 1931): 10-19.
Dewhurst, J. Frederic and Associates. America’s Needs and Resources: a Twentieth Century Fund
Survey which Includes Estimates for 1950 and 1960. New York: The Twentieth Century Fund,
1947.
Fantin, Renee. "Fats and Oils and Dairy Products Rationing." In Studies in Food Rationing. General
Publication No. 13. Historical Reports on War Administration: Office of Price Administration.
Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1947.
Farley, Miriam S. "Nylon Prospective Threat to Japanese Silk." Far Eastern Survey, Vol. 9, No. 2
(January 1940): 18-19.
Feis, Herbert. Seen from E.A.: Three International Episodes. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1947.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. A Life in Our Times: Memoirs. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.
Goodwin, Doris Kearns. No Ordinary Time. Franklin & Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in
World War II. New York: Simon & Shuster, 1994.
Herbert, Vernon and Attilio Bisio. Synthetic Rubber: A Project that had to Succeed. Westport,
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1985.
Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial ed. Carter,

57

Susan B., et al., editors in chief. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Hoopes, Roy. Americans Remember the Home Front: An Oral Narrative. New York: Hawthorn
Books, 1977.
Kirk, Robert W. "Getting in the Scrap: The Mobilization of American Children in World War II."
The Journal of Popular Culture, vol. 29, no. 1 (Summer 1995): 223–233.
Knorr, Klaus Eugen. World Rubber and its Regulation. Stanford CA: Stanford University Press,
1945.
Leff, Mark H. "The Politics of Sacrifice on the American Home Front in World War II." The Journal
of American History, Vol. 77, No. 4, (March 1991): 1296-1318.
Lingeman, Richard R. Don't You Know There Is a War On?: The American Home Front, 19411945. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1970.
McFadyean, Sir Andrew, ed. The History of Rubber Regulation, 1934-1943. London: George Allen
& Unwin, Ltd., for the International Rubber Regulation Committee, 1944.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Pecuniary Incentives to Work in the United States during World War II." The
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 5 (Oct., 1998): 1033-1077.
Newcomb, Robinson. "Japanese-American Trade in Its Latest Phase." Far Eastern Survey, Vol. 9,
No. 23 (November 1940): 267-273.
Odell, Lawrence H. "Japan Forced to More Stringent Controls for Scrap Iron." Far Eastern Survey
Vol. 9, No. 6 (March 1940): 71-72.
O'Neill, William L. A Democracy at War: America's Fight at Home and Abroad in World War II.
New York: The Free Press, 1993.
Petroleum Industry War Council. "Penny a Pound:" The President's Rubber Drive. Washington
D.C.: Petroleum Industry War Council, 1943.
Russell, Judith. "The Fat Salvage Campaign." In Studies in Food Rationing. General Publication No.
13. Historical Reports on War Administration: Office of Price Administration. Washington, D.C:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1947.
Smith, George David. From Monopoly to Competition: the Transformations of Alcoa, 1888-1986.
Cambridge [England] and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Strasser, Susan. Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash. New York: Henry Holt and Company,
1999.

58

Schumpeter, Joseph A. History of Economic Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press, 1954.
Taylor, Robert. New England Homefront, World War II. Yankee Books, 1992.
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. National Production Authority. Materials Survey: Rubber.
Washington D.C.: GPO, 1950.
U.S. Department of Commerce. Rubber, Sixth Annual Report. Washington D.C.: GPO, 1954.
U.S. Department of Commerce. Rubber, Seventh Annual Report. Washington D.C.: GPO, 1955.
U.S. Geological Survey, Kelly, T.D., and Matos, G.R., comps. Historical Statistics for Mineral and
Material Commodities in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Data Series 140, available
online at http://pubs.usgs.gov/ds/2005/140/. (Accessed: August 1, 2007).
U.S. Rubber Reserve Company. Report on the Rubber Program, 1940-1945. Washington D.C.:
GPO, 1945.
Walton, Frank L. The Thread of Victory: The Conversion and Conservation of Textiles, Clothing
and Leather for the World's Biggest War Program. New York: Fairchild Publishing Co., 1945.
Weinberg, Sydney. "What to Tell America: The Writers' Quarrel in the Office of War Information."
The Journal of American History, Vol. 55, No. 1 (June 1968): 73-89.
Wendt, Paul. "The Control of Rubber in World War II." The Southern Economic Journal 13 (January
1947): 203-27.
Whittlesey, Charles R. Governmental Control of Crude Rubber, the Stevenson Plan. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1931.
Wolf, Howard. The Story of Scrap Rubber. Akron, Ohio: A. Schulman, Inc., 1943.
Wolf, Howard and Ralph Wolf. Rubber: A Story of Glory and Greed. New York: Covici, Friede,
1936.

59

