NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REASSESSING THE INS AND OUTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
Robert Shimer
Working Paper 13421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13421

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

My title borrows from Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1986). I am grateful for comments from Fernando
Alvarez, Gadi Barlevy, Francesco Belviso, Tito Boeri, Steven Davis, Jason Faberman, Robert Hall,
David Laibson, Gary Solon, and Randall Wright and from seminar participants at the Bank of Italy,
Bocconi University, the Chicago Fed, Harvard University, the St.\ Louis Fed, and the University of
Texas-Austin on an earlier version of this paper. This paper is supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation and the Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment
Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 13421
September 2007
JEL No. J6,E24,E32
ABSTRACT
This paper uses readily accessible data to measure the probability that an employed worker becomes
unemployed and the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job, the ins and outs of unemployment.
Since 1948, the job finding probability has accounted for three-quarters of the fluctuations in the unemployment
rate in the United States and the employment exit probability for one-quarter. Fluctuations in the employment
exit probability are quantitatively irrelevant during the last two decades. Using the underlying microeconomic
data, the paper shows that these results are not due to compositional changes in the pool of searching
workers, nor are they due to movements of workers in and out of the labor force. These results contradict
the conventional wisdom that has guided the development of macroeconomic models of the labor market
during the last fifteen years.
Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

This paper measures the probability that an employed worker becomes unemployed and
the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job. Using United States data from 1948
to 2007, I find that there are substantial fluctuations in unemployed workers’ job finding
probability at business cycle frequencies, while the probability a worker exits employment is
comparatively acyclic. This is particularly true in the last two decades, during which period
the employment exit probability has steadily declined despite two spikes in the unemployment
rate. Ninety-five percent of the increase in the unemployment rate during the 1991 and 2001
recessions was a consequence of a reduction in the job finding probability. This suggests that
if one wants to understand fluctuations in unemployment, one must understand fluctuations
in the transition rate from unemployment to employment, the ‘outs of unemployment’. This
conclusion is in opposition to the conventional wisdom, built around research by Darby,
Haltiwanger, and Plant (1985) and (1986), Blanchard and Diamond (1990), and Davis and
Haltiwanger (1990) and (1992), that recessions are periods characterized primarily by a high
exit rate from employment.
I base my conclusion on novel but simple measures of the job finding and employment exit
probabilities. These measures rely on two strong assumptions: workers neither enter nor exit
the labor force but simply transit between employment and unemployment; and all workers
are ex ante identical, and in particular in any period all unemployed workers have the same
job finding probability and all employed workers have the same exit probability. Given these
assumptions, I show that the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job during a
period can be expressed as a function of the number of unemployed workers at the start of
the period, the number of unemployed workers at the end of the period, and the number
of unemployed workers at the end of the period who were employed at some point during
the period (‘short-term unemployment’). The probability that a worker exits employment to
become unemployed can be found using the same data and the number of employed workers
at the start of the period. Calculations using these data give me my preferred measures
of the job finding probability and employment exit probability, shown in Figure 1. I find
that movements in the job finding probability account for 75 percent of fluctuations in the
unemployment rate since 1948, rising to 95 percent during the last two decades.
It is not surprising that strong assumptions deliver strong results, so this paper also explores what happens if I relax these assumptions. Consider first the restriction that workers
neither enter nor exit the labor force. Once I relax this assumption, I can no longer use publicly available aggregate data on employment, unemployment, and short-term employment
to construct the job finding and exit probabilities. Instead, I follow a standard methodology
(Abowd and Zellner, 1985; Poterba and Summers, 1986; Blanchard and Diamond, 1990) and
use microeconomic data on individuals’ employment status in consecutive months from 1967
1

to 2007 to construct time series for the gross flow of workers between employment, unemployment, and inactivity (out of the labor force). I then compute the job finding probability for
unemployed workers and the probability of exiting employment for unemployment from these
data. Although this changes the level of the job finding and exit probabilities, I find it scarcely
affects their fluctuations. Fluctuations in the unemployment-to-employment transition rate
are more than twice as important as fluctuations in the employment-to-unemployment transition rate for explaining movements in both the unemployment rate and the employmentpopulation ratio.1
I then relax the restriction that all workers are homogeneous. The first question that arises
is what exactly the job finding probability measures if different workers have a different
job finding probability. I show that my methodology measures the probability that the
average worker who is unemployed at the start of period t finds a job during period t. Other
alternatives would give an identical measure of the job finding probability if workers were
homogeneous, but have a predictable bias if workers are heterogeneous. United States data
are consistent with the predicted bias.
Another issue that arises when workers are heterogeneous is whether that heterogeneity
can explain fluctuations in the job finding probability. Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1985)
and (1986) argue that the job finding probability declines during recessions because workers
who are unemployed during recessions are different than workers who unemployed during
expansions. According to this theory, recessions are periods when prime-age workers suffer
permanent job loss in particularly large numbers. Such workers have a low probability of
finding a job, but they would have had a low job finding probability regardless of when
they became unemployed. Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant argue that this compositional
effect drives down the measured job finding probability during recessions, a possibility that
Baker (1992) labeled the “heterogeneity hypothesis.” I test this hypothesis by examining
the compositional variation of the unemployment pool along several different dimensions and
find scant evidence in support of it.
Many previous authors have measured the cyclicality of the job finding and employment
exit probabilities, but this paper offers several contributions to the existing literature. First,
I use data from the long booms of the 1980s and 1990s, during which period the employment
exit probability has become noticeably less cyclical. Second, I use publicly available data
whenever possible, making it easy for others to verify my results, extend them as more data
1

A related assumption, which I do not relax in this paper, is that workers only separate from their employer
to become unemployed or exit the labor force. Using United States data from 1994 to 2003, Fallick and
Fleischman (2004) find that employer-to-employer transitions are “markedly procyclical.” If this is correct,
the total separation rate, either out of employment or directly to another employer, may be acyclic or even
procyclical. See Shimer (2005) for more discussion of this point. Previous version of this paper referred to
the ‘exit rate’ as the ‘separation rate’; the change in nomenclature is intended to reduce confusion.

2

becomes available, and examine their consistency both within the United States and across
countries.2 Third, I emphasize the importance of time aggregation throughout the paper,
working explicitly in a continuous time model in which data are available at discrete intervals.
I argue that ignoring time aggregation will bias a researcher towards finding a countercyclical
employment exit probability, because when the job finding probability falls, a worker who
loses her job is more likely to experience a measured spell of unemployment. Fourth, I
stress heterogeneity throughout my analysis, arguing that changes in the composition of the
unemployed population do not drive my results.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 proposes new measures of the job
finding and employment exit probabilities that use readily accessible data and avoid the
time aggregation bias. I then discuss the behavior of the job finding and employment exit
probabilities in the United States from 1948 to 2007. Section 2 relaxes the assumption that
workers never enter or exit the labor force. I use gross flow data to measure the probability
that a worker who is in one employment state at the beginning of the month (employed,
unemployed, or inactive) switches to another employment state by the end of the month.
Since workers can go through multiple states within a month, I then adjust these measures
for time aggregation to get the instantaneous transition rates between employment states.
I find strong correlations between this measure of the unemployment-employment transition probability and the job finding probability and between the employment-unemployment
transition probability and the employment exit probability.
Section 3 examines the role of heterogeneity. First I show that the job finding probability
which I construct in Section 1 measures the mean job finding probability for an unemployed
worker. Alternative measures of the job finding probability would be identical if workers
were homogeneous, but with heterogeneous workers these correspond to a weighted average of the job finding probability for unemployed workers, over-weighting certain groups of
workers, e.g. the long-term unemployed. I then address Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant’s
(1986) heterogeneity hypothesis. I confirm that the unemployment pool switches towards
‘job losers not on layoff’ during recessions, and that these workers always have an unusually
low job finding probability. Nevertheless, this explains little of the overall fluctuations in the
job finding probability. Other dimensions of heterogeneity—age, sex, race, marital status,
education, and geographic region—contribute virtually nothing to explaining fluctuations in
the job finding probability.
Section 4 discusses the conventional wisdom on the cyclicality of the job finding and
employment exit probabilities, especially the evidence presented by Davis and Haltiwanger
2
The main time series I construct in this paper and the programs I use to construct them are available
online at http://robert.shimer.googlepages.com/flows/.

3

(1990) and (1992). I argue that this evidence has frequently been misinterpreted and may
shed little light on the question of interest in this paper. This misinterpretation has profoundly influenced the development of macroeconomic models of the labor market during
the past 15 years, including such well-known papers as Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) and
Caballero and Hammour (1994). Subsequent research has focused on the cause of job loss
during recessions rather than the difficulty of finding a job. Section 5 concludes.

1

A New Measure of Transition Probabilities

In this section, I develop novel measures of the job finding probability for unemployed workers
Ft and the exit probability for employed workers Xt . I then use publicly available data
from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to measure the two transition probabilities in the
United States from 1948 to 2007. I find that the job finding probability is strongly procyclical
while the employment exit probability explains only one-quarter of the fluctuations in the
unemployment rate, and less during the last two decades.
To obtain simple measures of the job finding and employment exit probabilities, it is
necessary to make strong assumptions. Throughout this section, I ignore movements in and
out of the labor force, so workers simply transition between employment and unemployment.
I also assume that all unemployed workers find a job—become employed—with probability Ft
and all employed workers lose a job—become unemployed—with probability Xt during period
t, ignoring any heterogeneity or duration dependence that makes some unemployed workers
more likely to find and some employed workers less likely to lose a job within the period.
Sections 2 and 3 argue that these assumptions do not qualitatively affect my conclusions.

1.1

Theory

I model a continuous time environment in which data are available only at discrete dates.
For t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}, refer to the interval [t, t + 1) as ‘period t.’ The goal is to recover the job
finding probability Ft ∈ [0, 1] and employment exit probability Xt ∈ [0, 1] during period t
from commonly available data. I assume that during period t, all unemployed workers find a
job according to a Poisson process with arrival rate ft ≡ − log(1 − Ft ) ≥ 0 and all employed
workers lose their job according to a Poisson process with arrival rate xt ≡ − log(1 − Xt ) ≥ 0.
Throughout this paper, I refer to ft and xt as the job finding and employment exit rates and
to Ft and Xt as the corresponding probabilities, i.e. Ft is the probability that a worker who
begins period t unemployed finds at least one job during the period and similarly for Xt .
Fix t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .} and let τ ∈ [0, 1] be the time elapsed since the last measurement

4

date. Let et+τ denote the number of employed workers at time t + τ , ut+τ denote the number
of unemployed workers at time t + τ , and ust (τ ) denote ‘short term unemployment’, workers
who are unemployed at time t + τ but were employed at some time t′ ∈ [t, t + τ ]. Note that
ust (0) = 0 for all t. It is convenient to define ust+1 ≡ ust (1) as the total amount of short term
unemployment at the end of period t.
For t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .} and τ ∈ [0, 1), unemployment and short term unemployment evolve
according to
u̇t+τ = et+τ xt − ut+τ ft

(1)

u̇st (τ ) = et+τ xt − ust (τ )ft .

(2)

Unemployment increases when workers exit employment, at an instantaneous rate xt , and
decreases when unemployed workers find jobs, at an instantaneous rate ft . Short term unemployment increases when workers exit employment and decreases when short term unemployed workers find jobs.
To solve for the job finding probability, eliminate et+τ xt between these equations, giving

u̇t+τ = u̇st (τ ) − ut+τ − ust (τ ) ft

for τ ∈ [0, 1). By construction, ust (0) = 0, so given an initial condition for ut , this differential
equation can be solved for ut+1 and ust+1 ≡ ust (1):
ut+1 = (1 − Ft )ut + ust+1 .

(3)

The number of unemployed workers at date t + 1 is equal to the number of unemployed
workers at date t who do not find a job (fraction 1 − Ft = e−ft ) plus the ust+1 short term
unemployed workers, those who are unemployed at date t + 1 but held a job at some point
during period t. Invert this,
ut+1 − ust+1
Ft = 1 −
,
(4)
ut
to express the job finding probability as a function of unemployment and short term unemployment.
One can also solve the differential equations (1) forward to obtain an implicit expression
for the employment exit rate:
ut+1


1 − e−ft −xt xt
=
lt + e−ft −xt ut ,
ft + xt

5

(5)

where lt ≡ ut + et is the size of the labor force during period t, which I assume is constant
since I do not allow entry or exit from the labor force. Since lt > ut , the right hand side of
this expression is increasing in xt . Given the job finding probability from equation (4) and
data on unemployment and employment, equation (5) uniquely defines the employment exit
probability Xt .
To understand equation (5), note first that if unemployment is constant during period t,
the unemployment rate is determined by the ratio of the employment exit rate to the job
t
, a standard formula. More generally, it helps to compare equation (5)
finding rate, ultt = xtx+f
t
with a discrete time model in which there is no possibility of both finding and losing a job
within a period. In this case,
ut+1 = Xt et + (1 − Ft )ut

(6)

A fraction Xt of employed workers lose their job and a fraction Ft of unemployed workers find
a job during period t, determining the unemployment rate at the start of period t + 1. When
the time period is sufficiently short, or equivalently xt + ft is sufficiently small, equation (5)
converges to this simple expression. But with longer time periods, equation (5) allows workers
to lose a job and find a new one, or vice versa, within the period.
The distinction between equations (5) and (6) is quantitatively important for measuring
both the level of the employment exit probability and its cyclicality. When the job finding
rate ft is high, equation (5) captures the fact that a worker who loses her job is more likely
to find a new one without experiencing a measured spell of unemployment. These exits are
missed in equation (6), so the latter formula yields fewer exits and, more importantly for this
paper, a bias in the measured cyclicality of the employment exit rate. Because the probability
of losing a job during the month it is found is comparatively small, time aggregation causes
relatively little bias in the job finding rate.

1.2

Measurement

Since 1948, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has published monthly data on employment,
unemployment, and unemployment duration based on the CPS, downloadable from the BLS
web site.3 The measures of the number of employed and unemployed workers are standard,
and I use these to quantify et and ut . The survey also asks unemployed workers how long
they have been unemployed and the BLS tabulates the number of unemployed workers with
zero to four weeks duration. I use this as my measure of short term unemployment ust from
January 1948 to December 1993. Unfortunately, the redesign of the CPS instrument in 1994
introduced a significant discontinuity in the short term unemployment series (Abraham and
3

http://www.bls.gov/cps/

6

Shimer, 2001); Appendix A describes how I measure the short-term unemployment rate after
1994.
Figure 1 shows the time series for the job finding probability Ft and the employment
exit probability Xt constructed according to equations (4) and (5) from January 1948 to
June 2007. Several facts stand out. First, the job finding probability is high, averaging 45
percent over the post-war period. Second, it is variable, falling by about forty log points
from peak to trough during recent decades. Third, the employment exit probability averaged
3.4 percentage points during the same period and was somewhat less volatile, particularly in
recent years.
To examine the cyclicality of the job finding and employment exit probabilities, recall
that if unemployment were constant, ut = ut+1 , equation (5) implies that the unemployment
t
t
. In fact, xtx+f
is a very good approximation to the end-of-month
rate would be ultt = xtx+f
t
t
t+1
t
unemployment rate; in monthly data, the correlation between ult+1
and xtx+f
is 0.99. I use this
t
strong relationship to distinguish between the importance of fluctuations in the job finding
and employment exit rates for fluctuations in unemployment. Let f¯ and x̄ denote the average

values of ft and xt during the sample period and compute the hypothetical unemployment
x̄
rates x̄+f
and xtx+t f¯ as measures of the contributions of fluctuations in the job finding and
t
employment exit rates to overall fluctuations in the unemployment rate.4
The top panel in Figure 2 shows that a decline in the job finding rate ft contributed to
every increase in the unemployment rate during the post-war period. The bottom panel shows
that from 1948 to 1985, the employment exit rate tended to move with the unemployment,
although it rarely explained more than half the fluctuation in unemployment. In the last two
decades, however, the exit rate has varied little over the business cycle.
One way to quantify this is to look at the comovement of detrended data.5 Over the entire
x̄
t+1
post-war period, the covariance of the cyclical components of ult+1
and x̄+f
accounts for about
t
ut+1
t+1
three-quarters of the variance of the cyclical component of lt+1 , while the covariance of ult+1
and xtx+t f¯ accounts for the remaining quarter (Table 1, column 1).6 The next three columns

of Table 1 show that the relative importance of the job finding rate has increased steadily
4

Pissarides (1986) constructs similar objects using UK data on inflows and outflows from registered unemployment. He finds that most of the secular increase in the unemployment rate during the 1970s was due
to a decrease in the job finding rate.
5
I time-aggregate the underlying monthly data to get quarterly averages, removing substantial lowfrequency fluctuations that likely reflect measurement error in the CPS. I then detrend the quarterly data
using an HP filter with smoothing parameter 105 . This is a much lower-frequency filter than is commonly
used in business cycle analyses of quarterly data. A standard filter seems to remove much of the cyclical
volatility in the variable of interest. I use this same filter throughout the paper.
x̄
t+1
6
or xtx+t f¯ on detrended ult+1
. Since this is not an
I obtain these numbers by regressing detrended x̄+f
t
exact decomposition, the columns do not sum to 1. For this exercise, however, the sum of the contributions
of the job finding and employment exit rates in each column of Table 1 lies between 0.99 and 1.01. See Fujita
and Ramey (2007) for a similar exercise.

7

over time. During the last two decades, including the recessions in 1990–1991 and 2001, the
job finding rate accounted for virtually all fluctuations in the unemployment rate. During
the same period, the standard deviation of the cyclical component of the unemployment rate
fell from 0.20 to 0.14. The statistical procedures in this paper cannot explain whether this
aspect of the “the great moderation” is a cause or consequence of the decline in the relative
importance of the employment exit rate.
Although not the main topic of this paper, it seems worth commenting on the secular
decline in the employment exit probability since the early 1980s (Figure 1). This finding
would appear to contradict a sizable literature that finds evidence for a constant or even
increasing employment exit rate during the 1980s and early 1990s. For example, Gottschalk
and Moffitt (1999) write, “Almost all studies based on the various Current Population Surveys
(CPS) supplements . . . show little change in the overall separation rates through the early
1990s.” Much of the difference appears to be due to differences in samples. Gottschalk and
Moffitt study married men age 20–62, while I examine the entire population. During the last
two decades, the labor force has aged; since younger workers have the highest employment
exit rates, this has reduced the exit rate. In addition, women have become increasingly
attached to the labor force, further reducing turnover. Consistent with that view, Figure 3
indicates almost no trend in the employment exit probability for 25 to 54 year old men
since 1976.7 Table 1 shows that fluctuations in the job finding rate are more than twice as
important as fluctuations in the employment exit rate for prime-age men. This is particularly
interesting since entry and exit from the labor force is likely to be less important for this
group of workers, a topic I turn to next.

2

Entry and Exit from the Labor Force

This section relaxes the restriction that all workers are either unemployed or employed by
examining the gross flow of workers between three labor market states, employment (E),
unemployment (U), and inactivity (I).

2.1

Theory

As with the job finding and employment exit probabilities, I account for time aggregation
bias by modelling a continuous time environment in which data are available only at discrete
dates t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}. Let λAB
denote the Poisson arrival rate of a shock that moves a worker
t
7

See Abraham and Shimer (2001) for a further discussion of the impact of demographic change on unemployment duration.

8

AB

from state A ∈ {E, U, I} to state B 6= A during period t. ΛAB
≡ 1 − e−λt
t

is the associated

full-period transition probability.
I cannot measure the transition probabilities directly since workers may move through
multiple states within a period. Instead, I have ‘gross flow’ data measuring the number of
workers who were in state A at date t and are in state B at date t + 1. To see how this
is useful, let NtAB (τ ) denote the number of the workers who were in state A ∈ {E, U, I} at
date t and are in state B ∈ {E, U, I} at time t + τ ; I will say these workers are in state AB
N AB (τ )
P t AC
at time t + τ . Also define nAB
, the associated share of workers who were in
t (τ ) ≡
(τ )
C Nt
AB
AB
state A at t. Note that Nt (0) = nt (0) = 0 for all A 6= B. Then for all A 6= B, nAB
t (τ )
evolves according to a differential equation:
ṅAB
t (τ ) =

X

CB
nAC
− nAB
t (τ )λt
t (τ )

C

X

λBC
t .

(7)

C

It increases when a worker in some other state AC transitions to AB and decreases when a
worker in state AB transitions to AC.
Given initial conditions and the restriction that nAE
+ nAU
+ nAI
= 1, the differential
t
t
t
equation system (7) can be solved for the six fractions nAB
t (1), A 6= B, as functions of the six
AB
transition rates λt , A 6= B. The resulting equations are messy and apparently cannot be
solved analytically for the λ’s.8 Nevertheless, given data on the gross flow of workers from
state A to state B between dates t and t + 1, NtAB (1), it is possible to compute the shares
nAB
t (1) and then invert these equations numerically to recover the instantaneous transition
rates λAB
and hence the transition probabilities ΛAB
t
t .

2.2

Measurement

To measure the gross flows NtAB (1), I follow an approach adopted by many previous authors,
perhaps most prominently by Blanchard and Diamond (1990).9 The CPS is a rotating panel,
8

In the two-state case with only employment and unemployment, the state equations can be written as
!
AB
BA
1 − e−λt −λt
AB
AB
nt (1) = λt
λAB
+ λBA
t
t

for A 6= B, so both instantaneous transition rates affect both gross flows. This can be inverted analytically
to give

BA
− log 1 − nAB
t (1) − nt (1)
AB
λAB
=
n
(1)
t
t
BA
nAB
t (1) + nt (1)
for A 6= B. In the three-state case, I cannot prove that the instantaneous transition rates are uniquely defined
by gross flows, but for the values of nAB
in United States data, this does not appear to be a numerical issue.
t
9
See Abowd and Zellner (1985) and Poterba and Summers (1986) for discussions of measurement problems
in gross flows data.

9

with each household in the survey for four consecutive months. This makes it feasible to
match as many as three-quarters of the survey records in the microdata files across months.
Using these matched records, one can construct the gross flows.
Before 1976, I do not have access to the microdata and so I use Joe Ritter’s tabulation
of the gross flows from June 1967 to December 1975.10 For the later period, the monthly
CPS public-use microdata are available from the NBER website.11 Starting with about 35
gigabytes of raw CPS data files, I match individual records from consecutive months using
rotation groups, household identifiers, individual line numbers, race, sex, and age. I obtain 27
million matched records during the sample period, 75,000 in an average month. Using these,
I compute the sample-weighted transition probabilities between employment states during
the relevant month and seasonally adjust the time series using a ratio-to-moving average
technique. This gives me series for the six gross flows NtAB (1).12 Finally, I adjust for time
aggregation bias using the technique described in the previous subsection and recover time
series for the instantaneous transition rates λAB
and the transition probabilities ΛAB
t
t .
The top panel in Figure 4 compares the job finding probability Ft , computed according
to equation (4) from publicly available data on unemployment and short term unemployment, with the UE transition probability ΛUt E , computed using the procedure described
here. Although the two series are constructed from entirely different data, their behavior
is remarkably similar. They are equally volatile and their correlation is 0.94 in quarterlyaveraged data. On the other hand, the job finding probability is consistently about 32 log
points higher than the UE transition probability. This is probably because the former measure presumes that all workers exiting unemployment do so in order to take a job while the
latter measure recognizes that some unemployment spells end when a worker exits the labor
force. In any case, the level difference between the two probabilities is inconsequential for
the cyclical behavior of the job finding probability. Gross worker flow data from the CPS
confirm this paper’s thesis that the job finding probability is strongly procyclical.
The bottom panel in Figure 4 shows the analogous comparison between the employment
exit probability Xt and the EU transition probability ΛEU
t . The correlation between the
two series is 0.86 in quarterly-averaged data, with Xt averaging 58 log points higher than
ΛEU
t . Moreover, the amplitude of the fluctuations in both series at low frequencies is simi10

I am grateful to Hoyt Bleakley for providing me with that data.
<http://www.nber.org/data/cps basic.html>. Unfortunately, there are a few gaps in the series due
to changes in the household identifiers in the public-use files. It is impossible to match data for Dec.
1975/Jan. 1976, Dec. 1977/Jan. 1978, Jun. 1985/Jul. 1985, Sep. 1985/Oct. 1985, Dec. 1993/Jan. 1994, and
May 1995/Jun. 1995 to Aug. 1995/Sep. 1995.
12
Hoyt Bleakley also provided me with his independent estimates of gross flows from January 1976 to May
1993. During the overlapping period, the two series are virtually identical; the standard deviation of the log
of the ratio of the two sets of series is less than 1 percent.
11

10

lar, although the EU transition probability tends to fluctuate a bit more at business cycle
frequencies. Notably, while the exit probability scarcely budged during the 1991 and 2001
recessions, the EU transition probability increased modestly.
I next try to quantify the importance of changes in the six transition rates for fluctuations
in the unemployment rate. In steady state, the flows in and out of employment are equal, as
are the flows in and out of unemployment:
(λEU + λEI )e = λU E u + λIE i and (λU E + λU I )u = λEU e + λIU i,
where e, u, and i are the number of employed, unemployed, and inactive individuals. Manipulate these equations to get
e = k λU I λIE + λIU λU E + λIE λU E
u = k λEI λIU + λIE λEU + λIU λEU






i = k λEU λU I + λU E λEI + λU I λEI ,

where k is a constant set so that e, u, and i sum to the relevant population.
t
In Section 1 I argued that ftx+x
is almost identical to the unemployment rate. Analogously,
t
if the economy were in steady state at some date t, the unemployment rate in a three-state
system would equal

IU
λEI
t λt

IU
IE EU
EU
λEI
+ λIU
t λt + λt λt
t λt

.
EU
EU
IU U E
UE
+ λIE
+ λIU
+ λUt I λIE
+ λIE
t λt
t λt
t + λt λt
t λt

This is also a good approximation. In quarterly-averaged data, the correlation between this
steady state measure and next month’s unemployment rate is 0.99.
This suggests a method for calculating the contribution of changes in each of the six
transition rates to fluctuations in the unemployment rate. To be concrete, focus on the UI
transition rate. Define
eUt I = λUt I λ̄IE + λ̄IU λ̄U E + λ̄IE λ̄U E
uUt I = λ̄EI λ̄IU + λ̄IE λ̄EU + λ̄IU λ̄EU

(8)

iUt I = λ̄EU λUt I + λ̄U E λ̄EI + λUt I λ̄EI ,
where λ̄AB is the average AB transition rate from 1967 to 2007. That is, only λUt I is permitted
to vary over time, with the other five transition rates fixed at their average values. Then
the contribution of fluctuations in the unemployment-inactivity transition rate to changes in

11

uU I

t
the unemployment rate is uU I +e
U I , the hypothetical unemployment rate if there were only
t
t
fluctuations in the unemployment-inactivity transition rate. Calculate the contribution of

the other five transition rates in a similar fashion.
Figure 5 shows the resulting time series, with the actual unemployment rate plotted for
comparison. The first column of Table 2 decomposes the contribution of each of the transition rates by reporting the coefficient from a regression of each detrended hypothetical
unemployment rate on the detrended actual unemployment rate.13 Fluctuations in the UE
transition rate (middle left panel of Figure 5) account for about half of the movement in
the unemployment rate, while the EU transition rate accounts for less than a quarter. The
third most important factor is a decrease in the UI transition rate, which tends to raise
the unemployment rate during downturns. This suggests that unemployed workers are more
attached to the labor force during downturns than they are during expansions, a possibility
I return to in Section 3 when I examine cyclical changes in the composition of the unemployed population. The remaining three transition rates have a quantitatively minor effect
on fluctuations in the unemployment rate. The second column in Table 2 shows that the
relative importance of fluctuations in the UE transition rate has grown and the importance
of fluctuations in the EU transition rate has shrunk during the last two decades. Although
less overwhelming than the comparable numbers in column 3 of Table 1, the UE transition
rate is now four times as volatile as the opposing flow.
An advantage to looking at a system in which workers move in and out of the labor
t
force is that I can distinguish between fluctuations in the unemployment rate etu+u
and
t
et
fluctuations in the employment-population ratio et +ut +it . Following the same methodology,
Figure 6 graphs the contribution of each of the six transition rates to fluctuations in the
employment-population ratio. This picture is more muddled than Figure 5. For example, the
low frequency trend in the employment-population ratio is driven primarily by a decline in the
EI transition rate, which reflects an increase in women’s labor force attachment (Abraham
and Shimer, 2001). At business cycle frequencies, the third column in Table 2 shows that
a 1 percentage point cyclical increase in the employment-population ratio is associated with
eU E
a 1.04 percentage point increase in eU E +utU E +iU E , so UE fluctuations are critical for changes
t
t
t
in the employment-population ratio. The second most important determinant is the IE
transition rate (regression coefficient 0.66), which reflects the lower likelihood that an inactive
worker finds a job during a downturn. Turning to measures of the employment exit rate, the
EU transition rate tends to rise when the employment-population ratio falls (0.42), but this
is mostly offset by a decline in the EI transition rate (-0.32). In net, the probability of leaving
13

This is again not an exact decomposition but turns out to be quantitatively close. The sum of the entries
in each column range from 0.96 to 1.03

12

employment scarcely affects the employment-population ratio at business cycle frequencies,
while fluctuations in the probability of finding a job drive both the unemployment rate
and the employment-population ratio. The final column in Table 2 shows that all of these
associations have become more exaggerated in the last two decades, so fluctuations in the
UE transition rate explain significantly more than one hundred percent of the fluctuations in
the employment-population ratio, while fluctuations in the two exit rates from employment
actually in net reduce the volatility of the employment-population ratio.

3

Heterogeneity

This section relaxes the assumption that all workers are homogeneous. I first show that if
some workers are more likely to find a job than others, Ft measures the mean job finding
probability among unemployed workers. Using other moments of the unemployment duration
distribution, one can construct other weighted averages of the job finding probability for
unemployed workers, all of which co-move with the job finding probability. I then ask why
the job finding probability declines during recessions. Is it because all unemployed workers
are less likely to find a job or because the type of workers who becomes unemployed during a
recession is somehow different, less likely to find a job regardless of the stage of the business
cycle, as Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1985) and (1986) suggest? I find no evidence to
support the latter ‘heterogeneity hypothesis’ (Baker, 1992).

3.1

Accounting for Heterogeneity

Suppose unemployed workers are heterogeneous. For example, long term unemployment may
diminish a worker’s prospect of finding a job. Alternatively, some time-invariant characteristic
may affect the job finding probability, so a dynamic selection process makes it appear that
the long term unemployed are less likely to find a job. In its most general form, one can
model heterogeneity in the job finding probability by indexing the ut unemployed workers
at time t by i ∈ {1, . . . , ut} and letting Fti denote the probability that worker i finds a job
during month t. Equation (3) generalizes to the case where Fti varies with i:
ut+1 =

ut
X

(1 − Fti ) + ust+1 ,

i=1

where I assume for simplicity that the randomness in the outcome of the job finding process
cancels out in the aggregate so ut+1 is not a random variable. End-of-month unemployment
is equal to the number of unemployed workers who fail to obtain a job within the month,
13

Put

i=1 (1 −

Fti ), plus the number of workers who are unemployed at the end of the month but

held a job at some time during the month, ust+1 . Rearrange to get
Put

i=1

Fti

ut

=1−

ut+1 − ust+1
.
ut

Comparing this with equation (4) gives
Ft =

Put

i=1

ut

Fti

,

so Ft is the mean job finding probability among workers who are unemployed at date t.
If unemployed workers were homogeneous, there would be other valid methods of constructing the job finding probability. Mean unemployment duration in month t + 1, dt+1 ,
would be a weighted average of the mean unemployment duration of previously-unemployed
workers who failed to get a job in month t and the unemployment duration of newlyunemployed workers,
dt+1


(dt + 1)(1 − Dt )ut + ut+1 − (1 − Dt )ut
,
=
ut+1

(9)

where Dt is the job finding probability for a worker who is unemployed in month t, a mnemonic
device for the fact that it is constructed using mean unemployment duration data. There are
(1 − Dt )ut unemployed workers, with mean unemployment duration dt , who fail to get a job
in month t. The mean unemployment duration for these workers increases by one month to
dt + 1. In addition, there are ut+1 − (1 − Dt )ut newly unemployed workers in month t + 1,
each of whom has an unemployment duration of one month. This equation can be solved
for the job finding probability as a function of the current and future mean unemployment
duration and the number of unemployed workers,
Dt = 1 −

(dt+1 − 1)ut+1
.
dt u t

(10)

In steady state, ut = ut+1 and dt = dt+1 , so equation (10) reduces to D = 1/d, a familiar
relationship for a variable with a constant arrival rate.
Heterogeneity throws this calculation off. Again index the ut unemployed workers in
month t by i ∈ {1, . . . , ut }. Suppose worker i has unemployment duration dit and finds a
job with probability Fti . By definition, mean unemployment duration in month t is dt ≡
Put i
1
i=1 dt . Generalizing equation (9) to allow for heterogeneous workers, we find that mean
ut
14

unemployment duration in month t + 1 will be
dt+1 =

Put

i
i=1 (dt

or equivalently,

+ 1)(1 − Fti ) + ut+1 −
ut+1

P ut

i=1 (1

− Fti )



.

Put i i
(dt+1 − 1)ut+1
i=1 dt Ft
P
=
1
−
.
ut
i
dt u t
i=1 dt

Comparing this with equation (10) yields Dt =
Fti ,

P ut i i
i=1 dt Ft
P
ut
i ,
i=1 dt

a weighted average of the individual

job finding probabilities
where the weight accorded to individual i is her unemployment
i
duration dt . Compared to the mean job finding probability Ft , this measure over-weights the
long term unemployed. Since in practice the job finding probability falls with unemployment
duration, one would expect that Dt to be smaller than Ft .
Hall (2005) proposes a third measure of the job finding probability. Let um
t denote the
number of medium term unemployed workers, defined because of data limitations as workers
who have experienced 5 to 14 weeks (1 to 2 months) of unemployment. This is equal to the
number of short term unemployed in previous months who have failed to find a job:

s
s
um
t+1 = ut + ut−1 (1 − Mt−1 ) (1 − Mt ).

(11)

This is a first order difference equation for M, where ‘M’ is a mnemonic for medium term
unemployment. With a reasonable initial guess, e.g. that Mt , ust , and um
t were constant
before 1948, one can solve this equation forward for M. If all unemployed workers have the
same job finding probability at every point in time, this will uncover that probability. But
if workers are heterogeneous, this measure captures only the job finding probability of the
short term unemployed and hence is likely to yield an estimate that exceeds the mean job
finding probability Ft .
Figure 7 examines these predictions empirically using publicly available BLS time series
constructed from the CPS. I use standard time series for the number of employed and unemployed workers; multiply mean unemployment duration, published in terms of weeks, by
12
to convert it to months; and adjust short and medium term unemployment for the effects
52
of the CPS redesign, as discussed in Appendix A. Even though each series is constructed
from different moments of the unemployment duration distribution, their cyclical behavior
is similar and their levels line up as predicted. The mean value from 1948 to 2007 of Ft is
45 percent, in between the corresponding means for Mt (55 percent) and Dt (34 percent). I
conclude that while heterogeneity complicates the definition of ‘the’ job finding rate, it does
not alter the conclusion that the job finding rate is procyclical.

15

3.2

The Heterogeneity Hypothesis

There are two distinct explanations for why the job finding probability is procyclical: either
the job finding probability declines for each worker or the unemployment pool shifts disproportionately towards workers with a low job finding probability. Darby, Haltiwanger, and
Plant (1985) and (1986) advance the second possibility in their exploration of the cyclical
behavior of unemployment duration. They argue that there are two types of workers. The
first type experiences frequent short spells of unemployment. The second type, including
prime-aged workers and those on layoff, experiences unemployment infrequently and takes a
long time to find a new job. If recessions are periods when disproportionately many of the
second type of worker lose their job, then the measured job finding probability will fall even
if Fti does not change for any particular worker. Following Baker (1992), I refer to this as
the ‘heterogeneity hypothesis’.14
To assess whether this argument is quantitatively important, I assume that workers can
be divided into J different groups, indexed by j ∈ {1, . . . , J}. For example, the groups may
correspond to different reasons for unemployment: job losers, job leavers, re-entrants, or new
entrants. I assume that all workers within a group are identical. More precisely, let ut,j be the
number of unemployed workers with characteristic j in month t and Ft,j be the job finding
probability of those workers, computed using a type-dependent analog of equation (4). If
Darby, Haltiwanger, and PPlant’s heterogeneity hypothesis is correct, fluctuations in the job
j ut,j Ft,j
, are due primarily to changes in the shares ut,j rather than
finding probability, Ft = P
j ut,j
in the type-specific job finding probability Ft,j .
To quantify this, one can construct two hypothetical measures. Let Ftcomp denote the
change in the job finding probability due to changes in the composition of the work force and
Ftreal denote the “real” changes due to changes in the job finding probability for each type
of worker:
P
P
j ut,j F̄j
j ūj Ft,j
comp
Ft
≡ P
and
Ftreal ≡ P
,
j ut,j
j ūj
P
where F̄j ≡ T1 Tt=1 Ft,j is the time-averaged job finding probability for type j workers and
P
ūj ≡ T1 Tt=1 ut,j is the time-averaged number of unemployed type j workers. If the het-

erogeneity hypothesis is correct, Ftcomp should be strongly procyclical and Ftreal should be
14

Dynarski and Sheffrin (1990) and Baker (1992) show that unemployment duration is strongly countercyclical, and so the job finding probability is strongly procyclical, for all workers conditional on a broad set
of characteristics, including the reason for unemployment, census region, sex, race, education, and previous
industry. This leads Baker (1992, p. 320) to conclude that “the heterogeneity explanation of aggregate variation sheds little light on the nature of unemployment dynamics.” Based on this type of evidence and on the
fact that there is simply not enough measurable variation in the composition of the unemployed population to
generate large movements in unemployment duration, van den Berg and van der Klaauw (2001) and Abbring,
van den Berg, and van Ours (2002) reach a similar conclusion in their detailed analyses of French data.

16

acyclical. Note that in order to generate large fluctuations in Ftcomp , there must be large differences in the average job finding probability of groups with substantially different cyclical
fluctuations in their unemployment rates. If average job finding probabilities are too similar,
composition effects will not generate substantial fluctuations in the aggregate job finding
probability. If the composition of the unemployed population is not sufficiently cyclical, the
weights will not change.
I construct measures of the number of short term unemployed workers and total unemployed workers in different demographic groups from the public-use monthly CPS microdata
from January 1976 to June 2007.15 I use these to measure the type-specific job finding probabilities Ft,j . I consider seven different dimensions of heterogeneity: seven age groups (16–19,
20–24, 25–34, 35–44, 45–54, 55–64, and 65 and over), sex, race (white or nonwhite), four
marital status categories (spouse present, spouse absent or separated, widowed or divorced,
never married), five reasons for unemployment (job loser on layoff, other job loser, job leaver,
re-entrant, and new-entrant), nine census regions, and five education categories (high school
dropouts, high school diploma, some college, bachelor’s degree, some postgraduate education,
only for workers age 25 and over). I analyze each dimension of heterogeneity in isolation.
The best case for the heterogeneity hypothesis is made by looking at changes in the
fraction of workers reporting different reasons for unemployment, the focus of Figure 8. The
top panel shows that in an average month between 1976 and 2007, a job loser not on layoff
found a job with 31.7 percent probability, much lower than the probability for all other
unemployed workers, which averaged 48.2 percent. The bottom panel shows the share of job
losers not on layoff in the unemployed population. The correlation between this share and the
job finding rate for this group is -0.71. This pattern has the potential to generate fluctuations
in the composition component of the job finding probability. In fact, this measure of Ftcomp
averaged 41.2 percent in 1992, rose to 43.5 percent in 2000, and then fell back to 41.3 percent
in 2003. But although these changes are noticeable and systematic, they explain little of the
overall change in the job finding probability. By comparison, Ftreal rose from 36.5 percent in
1992 to 50.0 percent in 2000 and fell to 37.0 percent in 2003.
Figure 9 shows my measure of the real (Ftreal , solid lines) and compositional (Ftcomp , dashed
lines) changes in the unemployment rate for the seven different dimensions. Each figure shows
that virtually all of the change in the job finding probability is “real.” I conclude that changes
in the composition of the unemployed population explain little of the overall fluctuations in
the job finding probability.16
15

Following Appendix A, I use only the incoming rotation groups after 1994.
Changes in the age distribution also lead to some variation in the job finding probability, particularly at
low frequencies. This appears to be because older workers are more likely to be ‘other job losers’, a fact that
is already picked up in the panel on ‘Reason for Unemployment.’
16

17

4

The Conventional Wisdom

This section serves two purposes: first, to describe the conventional wisdom on the cyclicality of the job finding and the employment exit probabilities; and second, to explain the
consequences of the conventional wisdom for the development of macroeconomic models of
the labor market.

4.1

Review of the Existing Evidence

The facts that I describe in this paper may appear to contradict the conventional wisdom.17
From their analysis of gross worker and job flows, Blanchard and Diamond (1990, p. 87)
conclude that “The amplitude of fluctuations in the flow out of employment is larger than that
of the flow into employment. This, in turn, implies a much larger amplitude of the underlying
fluctuations in job destruction than of job creation.” In their 1996 book, Davis, Haltiwanger,
and Schuh, building on research by Davis and Haltiwanger (1990) and (1992), conclude that
evidence from the United States manufacturing sector indicates that “job destruction rises
dramatically during recessions, whereas job creation initially declines by a relatively modest
amount.” (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh, 1996, p. 31) The conventional wisdom based on
this type of evidence is eloquently summarized by the title of Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant
(1986): “The Ins and Outs of Unemployment: The Ins Win.”
Figure 10 shows Davis and Haltiwanger’s quarterly data from 1972 to 1993, with job
creation defined as the net increase in employment at expanding business establishments and
job destruction as the net decrease in employment at contracting business establishments.
Clearly job destruction is more volatile than job creation in this data set, rising during each
of the major recessions in the 1970s and 1980s.18 But while this finding is interesting, it does
not say much about the cyclicality of the job finding and employment exit rates.
To understand why, recall that there are important differences between job flows and
worker flows. Using the two-state model in Section 1, I found that the monthly employment exit probability averages 3.4 percent. In the three-state model in Section 2, the sum
of monthly employment-unemployment and employment-inactive flows averages 5.0 percent.
Accounting for employer-to-employer transitions adds another 2.6 percent to these employ17

Sider (1982) studies the cyclicality of unemployment incidence and duration. If workers are homogeneous
and the economy is in steady state, unemployment incidence is equivalent to the exit rate and unemployment
duration is the inverse of the job finding probability. He concludes that “changes in duration play a very
important role in explaining . . . fluctuations and trends in total unemployment.” (Sider, 1982, p. 461) This
paper therefore argues for a return to this older wisdom.
18
In a recent working paper, Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2006) construct a measure of job creation
and job destruction back to 1947 (see their Figure 5). Although job destruction is more volatile than job
creation in the 1960s, curiously they find that job creation and destruction were equally volatile in the 1950s.

18

ment exit numbers (Fallick and Fleischman, 2004). The quarterly job destruction rate, which
one might expect to be three time as large as the monthly worker flows, is instead just 5.5
percent. This reflects the fact that many worker flows are not matched by a corresponding
job flow. For example, when a worker quits her job to look for or accept another job or
to drop out of the labor force, a firm may hire a replacement within the quarter and hence
record neither job creation nor job destruction.
An important implication of this is that firms can destroy jobs either by firing workers
or by not hiring to replace workers who leave for other reasons. The former represents an
increase in employment exits while the latter leads to a decrease in the job finding probability.
One way to distinguish these alternatives is to look at establishments that shut down, when it
is clear that firms have fired workers. Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996, p. 34) conclude
that “shutdowns do not account for an unusually large fraction of job destruction during
recessions.” This means that spikes in job destruction are consistent with the view advanced
in this paper that there are only small increases in the employment exit probability during
downturns. Many contractions in employment are achieved by firms choosing to hire fewer
workers, which reduces workers’ job finding probability.
In addition, Davis and Haltiwanger focus exclusively on manufacturing establishments, a
shrinking portion of aggregate employment. Foote (1998) uses Michigan data to show that
job destruction is more volatile than job creation only in the manufacturing sector and argues
that Davis and Haltiwanger’s measures are biased by underlying trend employment growth.
A new BLS survey, Business Employment Dynamics (BED), extends the Davis-Haltiwanger
methodology to cover the entire labor market and provides some confirmation for Foote’s
theory. Figure 11 indicates that there was a brief spike in job destruction during the 2001
recession, but this was quickly reversed. Job creation fell immediately and has subsequently
remained somewhat lower than normal.19
There are also shortcomings in the existing literature on gross worker flows, starting with
its failure to address time aggregation. To my knowledge, none of the previous research using
matched CPS data to measure gross worker flows between employment, unemployment, and
inactivity has accounted for the fact that a decrease in the job finding probability indirectly
raises the measured transition rate from employment to unemployment.
Another distinction between this paper and much of the gross flows literature is that
while I measure the probability that an unemployed worker finds a job or a worker exits
employment, e.g. ΛEU
t , Abowd and Zellner (1985), Poterba and Summers (1986), Blanchard
and Diamond (1990), and much subsequent research has measured the number of workers
19

On the other hand, Faberman (2004) extends the BED survey back to 1990 and argues that job destruction was more volatile than job creation in the 1991 recession.

19

who switch employment status in a given month, NtEU (1). In fact, even after accounting
for time aggregation, the decline in the job finding probability almost exactly offsets the
increase in the number of unemployed workers at business cycle frequencies, so the number
of unemployed workers who find a job in a month shows little cyclicality.
Without the guide of a model, it is impossible to say which of these measures is more
interesting. I focus on the job finding probability because the notion of how difficult it is
for an unemployed worker to find a job is a key input into models of job search such as
those described in Pissarides (2000). According to these models, the job finding probability
should depend directly on the vacancy-unemployment ratio via the matching function. The
vacancy-unemployment ratio, in turn, depends only on exogenous variables. I am unaware
of any coherent theory which predicts that the number of workers finding a job should be so
closely linked to exogenous variables. In that sense, the link between the theory and data
for the job finding probability is particularly close and hence this measure is particularly
interesting. Still, it is most important point to recognize the differential behavior of the job
finding probability and the number of workers finding jobs; a good model of the labor market
would ideally be consistent with both observations.

4.2

Implications for Theoretical Models

The belief that employment exits drive unemployment fluctuations has dominated the recent development of macroeconomic models of the labor market. Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994) extend Pissarides’s (1985) model of an endogenous job finding probability to allow for
idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Under reasonable conditions, an adverse aggregate shock
raises the idiosyncratic threshold for maintaining an employment relationship, leading to the
termination of many job matches. As a result, the model predicts that the time series of
employment exits should be significantly more volatile than that of the number of workers
finding jobs. Nevertheless, Mortensen and Pissarides (1994, pp. 412–413) are cautious, noting that “although empirical evidence on the cyclical issue is inconclusive, these results are
consistent with Davis and Haltiwanger’s (1990, 199[2]) findings.” Over time, this caution has
been lost. For example, Cole and Rogerson (1999) accept Davis and Haltiwanger’s job creation and job destruction facts at face value in their reduced-form analysis of the implications
of the Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) model.
Caballero and Hammour’s (1994) model of creative destruction shows that if firms face
a linear adjustment cost in hiring, fluctuations in the job finding probability will account
for all of employment fluctuations. But because this contradicts the Davis-Haltiwanger and
Blanchard-Diamond evidence, Caballero and Hammour (1994, p. 1352) argue that there must
be strong convexities in hiring costs, and so conclude that recessions are “times of ‘cleansing,’
20

when outdated or relatively unprofitable techniques and products are pruned out of the
productive system. . . .”20 Koenders and Rogerson (2005) reason similarly in their analysis of
‘jobless recoveries’ that employment reductions during recessions are due to firms postponing
organizational restructuring until the end of an expansion. The longer the expansion, the
more jobs that must be destroyed during the subsequent reorganization, resulting in a jobless
recovery after prolonged expansions. In particularly, their model counterfactually predicts a
surge of employment exits during 1991 and 2001 recessions.
Hall (1995) builds on the Davis-Haltiwanger and Blanchard-Diamond evidence to argue
that spikes in employment exits can generate persistent employment fluctuations: “Brief,
sharp episodes of primary job loss are followed by long periods of slowly rebuilding employment relationships over the business cycle. Although the case is far from complete, I
believe that these events in the labor market play an important part in the persistence of
high unemployment and low output long after the initial shock that triggers a recession.”
(Hall, 1995, p. 221)21 Following this logic, Pries (2004) develops a model in which workers
go through numerous short-term jobs before returning to a long-term employment relationship. This results in a persistent rise in the employment exit probability and gradual decline
in the unemployment rate after a recession. Ramey and Watson (1997) propose a model
of the business cycle with two-sided asymmetric information in which a transitory adverse
shock induces a persistent rise in exits. Den Haan, Ramey, and Watson (2000) examine how
fluctuations in the employment exit probability can propagate and amplify shocks in a real
business cycle model augmented with search frictions in the style of Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994).

5

Conclusion

This paper measures the job finding and employment exit probabilities in the United States
from 1948 to 2007. Throughout the time period, fluctuations in the job finding probability
explains three-quarters of the volatility in the unemployment rate. In the last two decades,
the employment exit probability has been virtually acyclic through two downturns in the
labor market. These findings contradict the conventional wisdom that fluctuations in the
employment exit probability (or in job destruction) are the key to understanding the business
20

More recently, Caballero and Hammour (2005) have argued that job destruction falls after a recession so
that “cumulatively, recessions result in reduced rather than increased restructuring.”
21
But Hall has since recanted, writing more recently, “...in the modern U.S. economy, recessions are not
times of unusual job loss. New data on separations show them to be remarkably constant from peak to
trough. Bursts of job loss had some role in earlier recessions, but are still mostly a side issue for the reason
just mentioned—a burst is quickly reabsorbed because of high job-finding rates.” (Hall, 2004).

21

cycle.
The goal of this paper was to develop simple but robust measures of important moments in
aggregate labor market data. While the observation that the job finding rate is more cyclical
than the employment exit rate suggests that papers seeking to understand the cyclicality
of the unemployment rate should focus primarily on the job finding rate, I have not sought
to establish causality; to so without a theoretical framework seems futile. Moreover, the
observed fluctuations in the employment exit rate may be important for reasons that I do
not capture in this paper, e.g. because of the substantial costs of displacement (Jacobson,
LaLonde, and Sullivan, 1993). With these caveats, these measures of the job finding and
employment exit rates should provide a target for research that seeks to explain the causes
and consequences of cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.

Appendix
A

Measurement of Short-Term Unemployment

To measure short term unemployment, I rely on workers’ self-reported duration of an inprogress unemployment spell. Unfortunately, the CPS instrument was redesigned in January
1994, changing how the unemployment duration question was asked (Abraham and Shimer,
2001).22 Recall that the CPS is a rotating panel. Each household is in the CPS for four
consecutive months (rotation groups 1 to 4), out for eight months, and then in again for
four more months (rotation groups 5 to 8). This means that in any month, approximately
three-quarters of the households in the survey were also interviewed in the previous month.
Until 1994, unemployed workers in all eight rotation groups were asked how long they
had been unemployed. But since then, the CPS has not asked a worker who is unemployed
in consecutive months the duration of her unemployment spell in the second month. Instead,
the BLS calculates unemployment duration in the second month as the sum of unemployment
duration in the first month plus the intervening number of weeks. Thus prior to 1994, the CPS
measure of short term unemployment should capture the total number of unemployed workers
who were employed at any point during the preceding month, while after the redesign, short
term unemployment only captures workers who transition from employment at one survey
date to unemployment at the next survey date.23
22

See Polivka and Miller (1998) for a thorough analysis of the redesign of the CPS instrument.
The post-1994 methodology also prevents respondents from erroneously reporting short unemployment
duration month after month.
23

22

There is no theoretical reason to prefer one measure to the other; however, the method
I use to measure the job finding and employment exit probability in Section 1 relies on
the pre-1994 measure of short term unemployment. In any case, the goal of this paper is to
obtain a consistent time series for the job finding probability. To do this, note that one would
expect that the redesign of the CPS instrument would not affect measured unemployment
duration in rotation groups 1 and 5, the ‘incoming rotation groups’, since these workers
are always asked their unemployment duration, but would reduce the measured short term
unemployment rate in the remaining six rotation groups.
To see this empirically, I measure short term unemployment using CPS microdata from
January 1976 to June 2007.24 In an average month from January 1976 to December 1993,
short term unemployment accounted for 41.6 percent of total unemployment in the full CPS
and 41.7 percent in the incoming rotation groups, an insignificant difference. From January
1994 to June 2007, however, short term unemployment accounted for 37.9 percent of unemployment in the full sample but 44.2 percent in the incoming rotation groups, an economically
and statistically significant difference. Put differently, the short term unemployment rate in
the full CPS fell discontinuously in January 1994, while it remained roughly constant in the
incoming rotation groups.
In this paper I use short term unemployment from the full sample from 1948 to 1993
and then use only the incoming rotation groups in the later period.25 More precisely, I
first use the CPS microdata to compute the fraction of short term unemployed workers in
the incoming rotation groups in each month from 1976 to 2007. I seasonally adjust this
series using the Census’s X-12-ARIMA algorithm with an additive seasonal factor. I then
replace the standard measure of short-term unemployment with the product of the number
of unemployed workers in the full CPS sample and the short-term unemployment share from
1994 to 2007.26 This eliminates the discontinuity associated with the redesign of the CPS.27
I use a similar method to construct medium term unemployment and mean unemployment
duration in Section 3. The only drawback to these procedures is that the reduced sample
makes these measures slightly noisier than those using the full sample, an issue that is
discernible in many of the figures in this paper.
24

<http://www.nber.org/data/cps basic.html>
In January 1994, all unemployed workers were asked their unemployment duration, the last month in
which this occurred. I start my adjustment a month earlier than necessary, using only the incoming rotation
groups on and after January 1994, to coincide with the date of the CPS redesign.
26
I multiply the number of unemployed workers from the full sample by the unemployment share from the
incoming rotation groups to avoid another issue with the CPS. From 1976 to 2007, the unemployment rate
in the first rotation group averaged 0.4 percentage points more than in the full sample. See Solon (1986) for
a detailed discussion of rotation group biases in the CPS.
27
I have also tried multiplying the standard series for short-term unemployment by a constant, 1.1, after
1994. This delivers very similar results.
25

23

References
Abbring, Jaap, Gerard van den Berg, and Jan van Ours (2002): “The Anatomy
of Unemployment Dynamics,” European Economic Review, 46(10), 1785–1824.
Abowd, John, and Arnold Zellner (1985): “Estimating Gross Labor-Force Flows,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 3(3), 254–283.
Abraham, Katharine, and Robert Shimer (2001): “Changes in Unemployment Duration and Labor-Force Attachment,” in The Roaring Nineties, ed. by Alan Krueger, and
Robert Solow, pp. 367–420. Russell Sage Foundation and Century Foundation.
Baker, Michael (1992): “Unemployment Duration: Compositional Effects and Cyclical
Variability,” American Economic Review, 82(1), 313–321.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Peter Diamond (1990): “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross
Flows of U.S. Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 85–143.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Mohamad Hammour (1994): “The Cleansing Effect of Recessions,” American Economic Review, 84(5), 1350–1368.
(2005): “The Cost of Recessions Revisted: A Reverse-Liquidationist View,” Review
of Economic Studies, 79(2), 313–341.
Cole, Harold, and Richard Rogerson (1999): “Can the Mortensen-Pissarides Matching Model Match the Business-Cycle Facts?,” International Economic Review, 40(4), 933–
959.
Darby, Michael, John Haltiwanger, and Mark Plant (1985): “Unemployment
Rate Dynamics and Persistent Unemployment under Rational Expectations,” American
Economic Review, 75(4), 614–637.
(1986): “The Ins and Outs of Unemployment: The Ins Win,” NBER Working Paper
1997.
Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger (1990): “Gross Job Creation and Destruction:
Microeconomic Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications,” in NBER Macroeconomics
Annual, ed. by Olivier Blanchard, and Stanley Fischer, pp. 123–168. MIT Press.
(1992): “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 818–863.

24

Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996): Job Creation and Destruction. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger (2006): “The Flow
Approach to Labor Markets: New Data Sources Micro-Macro Links, and the Recent Downturns,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3), 3–24.
Den Haan, Wouter, Garey Ramey, and Joel Watson (2000): “Job Destruction and
Propagation of Shocks,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 482–498.
Dynarski, Mark, and Steven Sheffrin (1990): “The Behavior of Unemployment Durations over the Cycle,” Reveiw of Economics and Statistics, 72(2), 350–356.
Faberman, Jason (2004): “Gross Job Flows over the Past Two Business Cycles: Not all
“Recoveries” are Created Equal”,” BLS Working Paper 372.
Fallick, Bruce, and Charles Fleischman (2004): “Employer-to-Employer Flows in
the U.S. Labor Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows,” Federal Reserve
Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper 2004-34.
Foote, Christopher (1998): “Trend Employment Growth and the Bunching of Job Creation and Destruction,” Quarterly Economic Review, 113(3), 809–834.
Fujita, Shigeru, and Garey Ramey (2007): “Reassessing the Shimer Facts,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 07-2.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt (1999): “Changes in Job Instability and
Insecurity Using Monthly Survey Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 17(4 part 2), S91–
S126.
Hall, Robert (1995): “Lost Jobs,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 221–256.
(2004): “The Labor Market is Key to Understanding the Business Cycle,” Stanford
Mimeo, September 23, 2004.
(2005): “Employment Efficiency and Sticky Wages: Evidence from Flows in the
Labor Market,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3), 397–407.
Jacobson, Louis S, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan (1993): “Earnings
Losses of Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review, 83(4), 685–709.

25

Koenders, Kathryn, and Richard Rogerson (2005): “Organizational Dynamics Over
the Business Cycle: A View on Jobless Recoveries,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review, 87(4), 555–579.
Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397–415.
Pissarides, Christopher (1985): “Short-Run Equlibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
Vacancies, and Real Wages,” American Economic Review, 75(4), 676–690.
(1986): “Unemployment and Vacancies in Britain,” Economic Policy, 1(3), 499–559.
(2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, second
edn.
Polivka, Anne, and Stephen Miller (1998): “The CPS After the Redesign,” in Labor
Statistics Measurement Issues, ed. by John Haltiwanger, Marilyn Manser, and Robert
Topel, pp. 249–289. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Poterba, James, and Lawrence Summers (1986): “Reporting Errors and Labor Market
Dynamics,” Econometrica, 54(6), 1319–1338.
Pries, Michael (2004): “Persistence of Employment Fluctuations: A Model of Recurring
Job Loss,” Review of Economic Studies, 1(71), 193–215.
Ramey, Garey, and Joel Watson (1997): “Contractual Fragility, Job Destruction, and
Business Cycles,” Quarterly Economic Review, 112(3), 873–911.
Shimer, Robert (2005): “The Cyclicality of Hires, Separations, and Job-to-Job Transitions,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 87(4), 493–507.
Sider, Hal (1982): “Unemployment Duration and Incidence: 1968–1982,” American Economic Review, 75(3), 461–472.
Solon, Gary (1986): “Effects of Rotation Group Bias on Estimation of Unemployment,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 4(1), 105–109.
van den Berg, Gerard, and Bas van der Klaauw (2001): “Combining Micro and
Macro Unemployment Duration Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 102(2), 271–309.

26

x̄
x̄ + ft
xt
xt + f¯

1
all workers
1948–2007

2
all workers
1967–2007

3
all workers
1976–2007

4
all workers
1987–2007

5
men 25–54
1976–2007

0.76

0.83

0.85

0.95

0.70

0.25

0.18

0.15

0.05

0.31

Table 1: Decomposition: Job finding and employment exit rates. The first row shows the
x̄
t+1
t+1
and x̄+f
divided by the variance of ult+1
, i.e. the coefficient in a regression
covariance of ult+1
t
ut+1
ut+1
x̄
of x̄+ft on lt+1 . The second row shows the covariance of lt+1 and xtx+t f¯ divided by the variance
t+1
of ult+1
. All series are quarterly averages of monthly data and detrended using an HP filter
with smoothing parameter 105 .

27

1
2
3
4
unemployment rate
employment-population ratio
1967–2007 1987–2007 1967–2007
1987–2007
λEU
t

0.23

0.13

0.42

0.24

λEI
t
UE
λt
λUt I
λIE
t
λIU
t

-0.04

-0.04

-0.32

-0.31

0.50

0.56

1.04

1.26

0.18

0.20

-0.52

-0.64

0.07

0.07

0.66

0.66

0.09

0.08

-0.28

-0.25

Table 2: Decomposition: entry and exit from the labor force. The first row, first and second
uEU
ut+1
columns are the covariance of ut+1ut+1
and uEU t+eEU divided by the variance of unt+1
+et+1
+et+1
t
t
for different time periods. The first row, third and fourth columns are the covariance of
eEU
et+1
et+1
and uEU +et+1
for different time peEU +iEU divided by the variance of u
ut+1 +et+1 +it+1
t+1 +et+1 +it+1
t+1
t+1
t+1
riods. The remaining rows show decompositions from fluctuations in the other five transition
rates. All series are quarterly averages of monthly data and detrended using an HP filter
with smoothing parameter 105 .

28

Job Finding Probability Ft

0.07

0.6

0.06

0.5

0.05

0.4

0.04

0.3

0.03

0.2

0.02

0.1

0.01

0
1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

Employment Exit Probability Xt

0.7

0

Figure 1: Job Finding and Employment Exit Probabilities, 1948Q1–2007Q1, quarterly average of monthly data. The job finding probability is constructed from unemployment and
short term unemployment according to equation (4). The employment exit probability is
constructed from employment, unemployment, and the job finding probability according to
equation (5). Employment, unemployment, and short term unemployment data are constructed by the BLS from the CPS and seasonally adjusted. Short term unemployment data
are adjusted for the 1994 CPS redesign as described in Appendix A.

29

Job Finding Rate

0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04

Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

0.02
0

Employment Exit Rate

0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04

Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

0.02
0
1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 2: Contribution of Fluctuations in the Job Finding and Employment Exit Rates to
Fluctuations in the Unemployment Rate, 1948Q1–2007Q1, quarterly average of monthly data.
The job finding rate ft is constructed from unemployment and short term unemployment according to equation (4). The employment exit rate xt is constructed from employment,
unemployment, and the job finding rate according to equation (5). The top panel shows
the hypothetical unemployment rate if there were only fluctuations in the job finding rate,
x̄/(x̄ + ft ), and the bottom panel shows the corresponding unemployment rate with only fluctuations in the employment exit rate, xt /(xt + f¯). Both panels show the actual unemployment
rate for comparison. Employment, unemployment, and short term unemployment data are
constructed by the BLS from the CPS and seasonally adjusted. Short term unemployment
data are adjusted for the 1994 CPS redesign as described in Appendix A.

30

Job Finding Probability

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

All Workers
Men Age 25–54

0.1
0
0.06

Employment Exit Probability

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
All Workers
Men Age 25–54

0.01
0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 3: Job Finding and Employment Exit Probabilities, Prime Age Men, 1976Q1–2007Q1,
quarterly average of monthly data. The job finding probability is constructed from unemployment and short term unemployment according to equation (4). The employment exit
probability is constructed from employment, unemployment, and the job finding probability
according to equation (5). Employment, unemployment, and short term unemployment data
are constructed by the BLS from the CPS and seasonally adjusted. Short term unemployment
data are adjusted for the 1994 CPS redesign as described in Appendix A.

31

Job Finding Probability

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2
0.1

0.1

0
0.030

0.05
0.025
0.04

0.020

0.03

0.015

0.02

0.010

0.01

0.005

EU Transition Probability

Employment Exit Probability

0

UE Transition Probability

0.7

0
0
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Figure 4: Alternative Measures of the Job Finding and Employment Exit Probabilities,
1967Q2–2007Q1, quarterly average of monthly data. The job finding probability is constructed from unemployment and short term unemployment according to equation (4). The
employment exit probability is constructed from employment, unemployment, and the job
finding probability according to equation (5). Employment, unemployment, and short term
unemployment data are constructed by the BLS from the CPS and seasonally adjusted. The
gross flows are computed from matched CPS microdata files by Joe Ritter (1967Q2–1975Q4)
and by the author (1976Q1–2007Q1), seasonally adjusted using a ratio to moving average,
and then used to infer the transition probabilities following the procedure described in Section 2.1. Short term unemployment data are adjusted for the 1994 CPS redesign as described
in Appendix A.

32

Employment-Unemployment Transition Rate
0.12

Employment-Inactivity Transition Rate

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

0.02

Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

0
Unemployment-Employment Transition Rate
0.12

Unemployment-Inactivity Transition Rate

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

0.02

Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

0
0.12

Inactivity-Employment Transition Rate

Inactivity-Unemployment Transition Rate

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1965

Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate
1975

1985

1995

Hypothetical Unemployment Rate
Actual Unemployment Rate

2005

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 5: Contributions of Fluctuations in the Instantaneous Transition Rates to Fluctuations
in the Unemployment Rate, 1967Q2–2007Q1, quarterly average of monthly data. The gross
flows are computed from matched CPS microdata files by Joe Ritter (1967Q3–1975Q4) and
by the author (1976Q1–2007Q1), seasonally adjusted using a ratio to moving average, and
then used to infer the transition rates following the procedure described in Section 2.1. The
contributions to the unemployment rate are inferred as in equation (8). Each panel shows
the actual unemployment rate for comparison.

33

Employment-Unemployment Transition Rate
0.66

Employment-Inactivity Transition Rate

0.64
0.62
0.60
0.58
0.56
Hypothetical Employ-Pop Ratio
Actual Employ-Pop Ratio

0.54

Hypothetical Employ-Pop Ratio
Actual Employ-Pop Ratio

0.52
Unemployment-Employment Transition Rate
0.66

Unemployment-Inactivity Transition Rate

0.64
0.62
0.60
0.58
0.56
Hypothetical Employ-Pop Ratio
Actual Employ-Pop Ratio

0.54

Hypothetical Employ-Pop Ratio
Actual Employ-Pop Ratio

0.52
0.66

Inactivity-Employment Transition Rate

Inactivity-Unemployment Transition Rate

0.64
0.62
0.60
0.58
0.56
0.54

Hypothetical Employ-Pop Ratio
Actual Employ-Pop Ratio

0.52
1965

1975

1985

1995

Hypothetical Employ-Pop Ratio
Actual Employ-Pop Ratio

2005

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

Figure 6: Contributions of Fluctuations in the Instantaneous Transition Rates to Fluctuations
in the employment population Ratio, 1967Q2–2007Q1, quarterly average of monthly data.
The gross flows are computed from matched CPS microdata files by Joe Ritter (1967Q3–
1975Q4) and by the author (1976Q1–2007Q1), seasonally adjusted using a ratio to moving
average, and then used to infer the transition rates following the procedure described in
Section 2.1. The contributions to the employment-population ratio are inferred as in equation (8). Each panel shows the actual employment-population for comparison.

34

Job Finding Probability

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1945

Ft
1955

1965

Dt
1975

Mt
1985

1995

2005

Figure 7: Three Measures of the Job Finding Probability, United States, 1948Q1–2007Q1,
quarterly average of monthly data. The job finding probability Ft is constructed from unemployment and short term unemployment according to equation (4). The alternative measures
Dt and Mt are constructed from mean unemployment duration data (equation 10) and short
and medium term unemployment data (equation 11), respectively. All data are constructed
by the BLS and seasonally adjusted. Mean unemployment duration and short and medium
term unemployment data are adjusted for the 1994 CPS redesign as described in Appendix A.

35

J o b F in d in g P ro b a b ility

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

O th e r U n e m p lo y e d W o rk e rs
J o b L o se rs n o t o n L a y o ff

0.1
0

J o b L o se rs n o t o n L a y o ff a s a F ra c tio n o f U n e m p lo y m e n t
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
19 7 5

19 8 0

19 8 5

19 9 0

19 9 5

2000

2005

F ig u re 8 : F lu c tu a tio n s in th e J o b F in d in g P ro b a b ility a n d U n e m p lo y m e n t S h a re o f J o b
L o se rs n o t o n L a y o ff , U n ite d S ta te s, 19 7 6Q 1– 2007 Q 1, q u a rte rly a v e ra g e o f m o n th ly d a ta . T h e
u n d e rly in g d a ta a re c o n stru c te d fro m th e m o n th ly C P S , se a so n a lly a d ju ste d a n d a d ju ste d fo r
th e 19 9 4 C P S re d e sig n a s d e sc rib e d in Ap p e n d ix A, a n d a v e ra g e d w ith in q u a rte rs.

36

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Age

Sex

Ftcomp

Ftreal

Ftreal

Race

Ftreal

Ftcomp

Marital Status

Ftcomp

Ftreal

Census Region
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
comp
Ft
Ftreal
0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Ftcomp

Reason for Unemployment

Ftreal

comp

Ft

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Education
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Ftcomp
Ftreal
0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Figure 9: Seven measures of the ‘compositional’ and ‘real’ component of changes in the job
finding probability, Ftcomp and Ftreal , respectively, United States, 1976Q1–2007Q1, quarterly
average of monthly data. Each figure uses different characteristics: age (7 groups), sex, race
(white or nonwhite), marital status (married spouse present, spouse absent or separated,
divorced or widowed, never married), census region (9 regions), reason for unemployment
(job loser on layoff, other job loser, job leaver, re-entrant, or new entrant), and education
(5 groups, age 25 and over). The underlying data are constructed from the monthly CPS,
seasonally adjusted and adjusted for the 1994 CPS redesign as described in Appendix A, and
averaged within quarters.

37

0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
Job Creation
0
1970

1975

1980

Job Destruction
1985

1990

1995

Figure 10: Job Creation and Job Destruction in Manufacturing, United States, 1972Q2–
1993Q4. The raw data are constructed by Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh and are available
from http://www.econ.umd.edu/~haltiwan/download/8993/RZTM.DAT. They are seasonally adjusted using the Census X-12-ARIMA algorithm with an additive seasonal factor.

38

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02
Job Creation
0
1992

1994

1996

1998

Job Destruction
2000

2002

2004

2006

Figure 11: Job Destruction and Job Creation, United States, 1992Q3–2006Q3. The data are
constructed by the BLS as part of the BED and are seasonally adjusted.

39

