                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE ROLES OF THE TERMS OF TRADE
                    AND NONTRADED-GOOD—PRI CES
                    IN EXCHANGE RATE VARIATIONS


                         Alan C. Stockman
                          Harris Delias


                      Working Paper No. 13142




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 198)4




The authors wish to thank Bernard Dumas and Bruno Solnick for
helpful comments. Stockman gratefully acknowledges research
support from the National Science Foundation, grant number
SES—83O9516. The research reported here is part of the NBER'S
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                    NBER Working Paper #1342
                                    May 1984



The Roles of the Terms of Trade and Nontraded-Good-prices
               in Exchange Rate Variations


                         ABSTRACT


     This paper demonstrates that disturbances to supplies or

demands for internationally traded goods affect exchange—rates

differently   than do disturbances in markets for nontraded
goods. The paper develops a stochastic two-country equilibrium
model of exchange rates, asset prices, and goods prices, with
two internationally traded goods and a nontraded good in each
country. Optimal portfolios differ across countries because of

differences in consumption bundles. Changes in exchange—rates,

asset prices, and goods prices occur in response to underlying

disturbances to supplies and demands for goods. We examine the

ways in which responses of the exchange—rate are related to

parameters of tastes and production shares, and we discuss

conditions under which these exchange—rate responses are

"large" compared to the responses of ratios of nominal price

indexes.

                                        Alan C. Stockman
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of Rochester
                                        Rochester, NY 14627
                                        (716) 275—4427


                                        Harris   Dellas
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of Rochester
                                        Rochester, NY 14627

                                        (716)   275—5252
                                                                                1

                          The Roles of the Terms of trade
                            and Nontraded-Good-Prices
                            in Exchange Rate Variations*

I.    Introduction

     The observation that exchange rate variability exceeds the variability of

many ratios of nominal goods prices has evoked two types of explanations.

First, the traditional explanation has been that the exchange rate, as an

asset price, adjusts rapidly to new information that changes expectations of

future nominal and real variables that are important in exchange rate

determination. Nominal goods prices are viewed as less flexible and hence

less responsive to this information. While many models have been developed

with these characteristics, two important examples are Dornbusch (1976) and

Mussa (1982). Second, recent work on equilibrium (flexible-price) models of

exchange rates has indicated that real disturbances to the economy can lead to

exchangerate changes that exceed changes in ratios of nominal prices of
goods. Obstfeld and Stockman (1983) discuss this issue in a flexible-price
version    of a Mundell-Fleming model (Section 2) and in the context of Lucas's

(1982) model.        Analyses of the effects of real disturbances in these

equilibrium models has, however, been limited to models that ignore nontraded

goods (Stockman (1980), Lucas (1982)), or that ignore the terms of trade.

Helpman and Razin (1982) include both nontraded goods and two imperfectly-

substitutable traded goods in their model, but they limit their discussion to

a specific (Cobb-Douglas) utility function and to a nonstochastic model.


     This paper builds on Lucas (1982) and develops a stochastic rational-

expectations maximizing model of a two-country world with two traded goods and
                                                                                2

a nontraded good in each country.      The model includes a full array of

financial assets, so optimal-portfolio problems and asset-pricing problems can

be addressed with the model. The model is used to examine the effects of

disturbances to supplies of goods or demands for goods on the exchange rate,

the terms of trade, the relative prices of nontraded goods, asset prices, and

nominal price levels. We examine the conditions under which exchange rate

changes, that occur in response to realized values of the underlying

stochastic disturbances, exceed changes in ratios of nominal goods prices. We

develop implications of disturbances for a wider range of variables than have

been considered in previous models of this type. The model reveals that the

effects of real disturbances on exchange rates and ratios of goods prices

depend on parameters of tastes and production shares.


II. The Model


   Consider a world economy with two countries 1 and 2, each populated with

an equal number of infinitely-lived representative households. Households in

each country have the same tastes but receive different endowments of

nonstorable consumption goods. At the beginning of period t a household in

country 1 receives an endowment of x units of good X and z units of good Z,

while a household in country 2 receives y. units of good Y and z units of

good Z .   Goods X and Y are costlessly traded internationally, while Z and Z

are only traded domestically.     We assume that                   follows a

stationary stochastic process.


   Each country has a national currency, and nominal money supplies (in own-

country per-capita terms) are m and     after being augmented at the beginning

of the period by transfer payments, rM to households in country one and
                                       t                                        t
                                                                                      3

to households in country 2.          We assume that {tM ,tN )   follows a stationary
                                                       t    t
stochastic process.1 Other assets available to households are discussed below.


    The outcome of the stochastic process      s =                         is known

at the beginning of period t.           The representative household in country 1

chooses consumption and asset stocks to maximize

                t ddd
     E £ 6 U(x ,y ,z)                                                      (1)
         t= 0

where the expected value operator E indicates integration with respect to the

conditional probability distribution of          and d d and         are demands for

the two traded and (country 1) nontraded good. We assume that U13 =     = 0,
                                                                    U23
till <    0, U22 < 0, and U33 < 0.

    Maximization of (1) is subject to both a budget constraint and finance

constraints of the kind previously used in                 Stockinan (1980), Lucas

(1980, 1982), Helpman (1981), and Helpman and Razin (1982, 1983).                These

require goods purchased in period t to be paid for with money that is either

carried over from t-1 or is acquired in period t from dividends or sales of

assets. Money acquired from sales of endowments in period t is not collected

until the end of the period and cannot be used for purchases until t+l. We

also assume that all purchases of goods must be paid for with the seller's

currency.       This assumption is altered in Section V, where we extend the

analysis of Helpman and Razin (1983) on the role of different monetary
mechanisms. 2



    Formally,     let m and           denote the quantities of money that the

representative household in country one obtains during trading in t from one

of three sources: (1) the money carried over from t-l, (2) the money received
                                                                                               4

as a "dividend" or "interest payment" on an asset the household owns, or (3)

the money received from selling an asset that th household owned at the

beginning of t.             Let           denote the vector of (noncurrency) assets the

household owns at the beginning of period t, q the vector of these asset

prices in t measured in units of good X, and                        the vector of dividends or

interest payments measured in units of X that these assets pay in t. Also let

      and p be the nominal prices of X and Z in terms of the money of country
 t          t
                                                                            *
one, let P          and P           be the money--two prices of Y and Z and let e be the
          yt
price of money two in terms of money one. Then the household's balance sheet

(in country one) is


            + e             -
                                         -e        —   + a(q+ó) -      =0       (2)



where


                -
                    Px' P       -             0,                                         (3)



            n - P7                  0,                                                    (4)



and, in the absence of asset trades, the household would own two assets: its

endowment from nature and a stream of transfers (taxes) from the home

government, which pay in t for all t,


                                                                                           (5)
      ' t-l
         x._1 + r'z
                 t-l
                     z1

and


                                                                                           (6)
      tM
        t

      Equation (2) describes the asset transactions of the household at t. The

first two terms show money held but not spent in t-l; the second two terms
                                                                                                                     5

were defined above, and represent money that can be used to buy goods in

period t, as required by (3) and (4). The last two terms in (2) give the

value of initial assets plus dividends or interest, and the assets chosen in t

that the household will have in t+l.


      We follow Helpman (1981) and Lucas (1982) in restricting our attention to

an equilibrium in which the (default-free) one-period nominal interest rate in

each currency is positive. Then there is an interest-cost to choosing m and

      larger than expenditures P x + 'z z and                                          while there is no
                                                         t             t          t
corresponding benefit.3 So                           =            0,   and (2) becomes simply
                              P                           P
                                  z
                                                                   d
      x(q+ó) -         x 'Z - e   xt                          t
                                                                       -        =0              (2t)



As a consequence,



      MtPxxt+Pzzt
          t    t
                                                                                                                    (7)


and


           =         +                                                                                         (8)
      Nt                 Pztzt

      Maximization of (1) subject to (2') yields the first-order conditions

           ddd           =                                                                                    (9)


                               P
           d d d
      U2(x,y,z) =            X— e                                                                      (10)



                               P
           d d d =
                                                                                                       (11)
                             Xç        t



                     1•t+1                 =
               qit           >'t+l             X1;
                                                         (for all 1)                               (12)
                                                                                                 6


where q. and X, are the 1th elements of q and 6.                      (12) takes the form of the

Euler equations estimated by Hansen and Singleton (1982, 1983).


         The equilibrium of the economy requires that total world demand for assets

and traded goods equal their supplies and that demands and supplies for the
                       *
nontraded goods Z and Z be equated within each country. There are obviously
many possible equilibria, depending on the initial distribution of wealth (as

well as the set of available assets). We follow Lucas (1982) in discussing an

equilibrium in which wealth is equal in the two countries and any assets can

be traded as long as they pay dividends or interest, physically, in currencies

rather than goods (which would introduce barter and undermine the assumed

monetary economy).


         This economy has an equilibrium with the following characteristics.
                                xt yt
Consuxnptions are —,                ---, and z. There is an asset         that is a claim to

          units of money one in period t, I x41 units of money one in t+1, and
                                                           t+1
so on forever. The interest payment on this asset in terms of X is thus


     t x.
      =              An asset           pays P,, y units of money two in period t, for all t,
                                               t
                     P
                 e
            =
so
                              yt.
                         t
         Finally, there are assets                 and       that are claims to infinite streams

of money one and money two, respectively, in the amounts                         and        so


            zt                               Pz*t *
6z
     t
         =Vx z
             t
                             and 6 =
                                    t
                                         e   ,     z.    The representative household in


country one owns assets                       a,        cxi, and u, while the representative

household in country two owns a,                         a,1 and a.

         Equilibrium prices are determined by substituting these allocations in

(7)-(12). Prices of goods are
         x

             t.-.   Th




         x               *




                    x




                                  Th




-y

                             **
     4
                    x
                                                                                              8

The vector of asset prices              =                         had th element




   qft =    !
                             U
                                 1'     ____
                                            2

                                                                                       (18)
           3=1
                                   t    t
                             U1(r,r ,z)
                      .th           =
where 6it is the            of


   To verify that this is an equilibrium, note that the first order

conditions for utility maximization with these prices are satisfied at the
           xt Yt           *
           —, j—, and z. (z for households in country two), and asset
consumptions

holdings                    and a ( for country two). Demands and supplies of
            a,.      a),
goods are equated, since supplies are x,                         z,   and z. Demands and

supplies for assets are also equated. The asset a pays as interest each

period just enough money •one to purchase x goods. The asset aZ pays each

period just enough money one to purchase z goods. By (7), these assets pay

Mt, exactly the supply of money (per capita) each period. Thus a is a claim

to a share of the money stock equal to the share of X, in GNP of country one,

while a is a claim to the rest of M. Similarly, assets a, and a. together

pay N each period.


   Each household in country one owns exactly enough assets to finance

consumption out of his interest payments.                      Interest from -a finances

                xt                 1                   't                          *
consumption —,       that   from            finances        and a(a*) finances z(zt).
From the budget constraint, then, each household can just afford to maintain

its asset holdings over time.


   Portfolios differ across countries because of the existence of nontraded

goods. Each household attempts to eliminate risk of changes in prices and
                                                                                        9

endowments, but the world economy as a whole cannot eliminate it. Instead,

asset prices reflect the risk. However, no household in country one has an

incentive to either buy or sell asset              (and vice versa), as can easily be

verified from the first-order conditions and the budget constraint.                If a
household in country one owned some               and less of another asset, it would

incur unnecessary risk in consumption.


       Note that (17) implies that the exchange rate equals the ratio of money

supplies multiplied by the (inverse) ratio of gross national products,

measured in terms of the same good. Since GNPs do not consist of the same

bundle of goods, a change in relative goods prices changes the exchange rate

for any given levels of money supplies and GNPs.


       Nominal prices of goods are each equal to the ratio of money supplies to

GNP measured in terms of that good, reflecting the unit-velocity result. Note

that the equilibrium collapses to that of Lucas (1982) when outputs of

nontraded goods are identically zero.


III.    Characteristics of the Equilibrium

       The       probability       distribution    on    the      stochastic    process

                                induces a probability distribution on the exchange

rate.        Given the realizations of the other random variables, a higher

realization of x. changes the exchange rate by


             =
                 2uu2E5yU12Ul
                                  SU11U2] -   S                                 (19)


where a hat (') denotes percentage change, where               is the share of Y in the

GNP of country two, s is the share of X in the GNP of country one, and the
                                                                                            10

functions U1, U2, U11 and U12 are evaluated at                            Note that (19)

involves not only properties of the utility function that affect elasticities

of demands for goods (as in the traditional "elasticities" approach to

exchange rates) but also production shares.


   We can rewrite (19) as


                            +
      aIi =
                  sx(l4t)        st2                                                      (20)


where c is the elasticity of marginal utility of X with respect to consumption
       U11
of X, —           and       is the elasticity of the marginal utility of Y with respect
                        2
       U1

to consumption of X,                         The relative price of X in terms of Y, the
                                         2
terms of trade, falls by


                             -                                                            (21)

This change in the terms of trade occurs partly through a change in the

exchange rate and partly through changes in the domestic nominal price of X,


             =                   +   £                                                    (22)
                   sx(l4E)

and in the foreign nominal price of Y,


      P/ = (1-s)s2                                                                        (23)



Nominal prices of domestic and foreign nontraded goods change by


              =                                                                           (24)
                  _s(l+c)
and


              =
                   -sf2                                                                   (25)
                                                                                           11

    Random fluctuations in output of X can produce changes in the exchange

rate that are larger in magnitude (in percentage terms) than changes in the

ratio of national price levels. This tendency of exchange rates to vary more

than ratios of nominal goods prices has been one of the most persistent

regularities observed under flexible exchange rates.


    Let


                    -           -
    V1                  IPx/k       P/kI                                              (26)


be the absolute percentage change in the exchange rate in excess of the

absolute percentage change in the ratio of export r'ices when the output of X

rises. We wish to examine the circumstances under which V1 is positive, which

would imply greater variability in exchange rates, as x fluctuates over time,

then in                 It is easy to verify, using (21), that if (20) is negative,

then V1 < 0.        If (20) is positive, however, V1 can be positive. If (20) is

positive, which requires


    C   < c2   —
               sy
                  — 1,                                                              (27)
               sx

and if also


         l-s   s>
         —+----------<
    t                                                                        (28)
        2 l-s l-s>
then V1 >   0.      In that case, (22) exceeds (23). Alternatively, if (27) holds,
   > 1 and also


               l-2s+ 2s                                                    (29)
            2 l-2s l-2s
then V1 > 0.        In Lucas' (1982) model, £2        0, s = 1, so the conditions (27)
and (29) reduce to £            < -2,   in which case V1 > 0.   Finally, if (27) holds,
                                                                                             12


s <            and (29) does not hold, then V1 > 0.             The point is that various

combinations of output shares and demand elasticities are consistent with

greater variability in exchange rates than in ratios of nominal goods prices.


   These calculations can also be made easily with price indexes.


   Define GNP price deflators by



      _xz  —       sx l-sx

                     1-s
           =
               PPz*
                                                              = 0.
It is easy to see that /ic =               -s   while                Then, in absolute value

terms, the percentage response of e to a rise in x exceeds the percentage

response of                  if either (20) is negative and

      S
                                                                                      (31)
       x

or if (20) is positive and

           sy
          <—           - 2.                                                           (32)
               sx

Similar calculations can be performed for consumer price indexes, and for

changes in the output of nontraded goods. Note that


               =                                                                        (33)
                   _(1_sx)(l+t3)

where               U33Z/U3, so that the sign of the effect on the exchange rate of a

change in the output of nontraded goods depends on the size of                     A related

condition, for a model with money introduced through the utility function, is

discussed in Obstfeld and Stockman (1983).
                                                                                                  13

IV. Changes in Demands for Goods


   Although we have discussed changes in supplies of goods, certain changes

in demand can be analyzed easily. Suppose that one or both governments impose

lump-sum taxes on their own households and use the proceeds to buy

                                 units of the goods (X,Y,Z,Z*). Let       follow a stationary

stochastic process. Moreover, suppose that government spending either does

not enter household's utility functions or that it enters in an additively-

separable way               (i.e.     household    utility in     country one            would be
       d
               d.1                  flrj-p tri-1           i-if o-ririv Kti v
                                                                                     t   +
                                                                                             x'
            +               If    governments buy only goods produced in their own
countries, then the government in country one levies a tax in t of
   =                 + P g on households in country one.              Since          remains the
           t    t      zt                                                        t
gross transfer payment TM -      (which may be negative) is the net transfer
                         t
payment in (6). Also, with this new notation, (5) becomes
       T         T          .                                 .
'xt-l x1 + Pt-1 z1. Then it is
                                           .
                                                   easy to verify that the equilibrium

                                                                                             *
described above is unaffected. Consumptions of xt Yt                     and
                                                                                z (or z)
now refer to half (or all) of the net supplies remaining after government

spending has been subtracted.                  The description of asset stocks held by

households in each country is also unaffected, though the interpretation is

now different because the terms x,                         etc.   refer to net supplies.

Intuitively, households faced with stochastic taxes and government spending

diversify away this additional risk to the extent it is possible. So when the

government of country one raises spending on X, the effects are borne equally

in both countries.' When that spending is on the nontraded good, however, the

full cost is borne by domestic residents. The effects on prices (including

the exchange rate) of an increase in government spending on any good are
                                                                                   14

identical to the effects of a decrease in supply, so all the results derived

above can be applied to these demand disturbances.5


V.     Alternative Asset Trades

      The assets u, a' az and a could be replaced by another, equivalent,

set of assets. Note that          is a claim to a payment of money one in every

period, where the payment in t is the share of X in country one's GNP at t

times the supply of money one at t. This equals the receipts from selling X

and Z in period t-1, P '.-1 + P z_1, plus the current tranfer payment
                          t-l           t-l
       minus the receipts that will be obtained at the end of period t from

selling z., z z. In Lucas' (1982) model without nontraded goods P z = 0
                  t                                                           tt
so that equities (e.g. a claim to P> Xtl units of money one paid in period
                                        t-l
t) combined with a single indexed nominal claim (to transfer payments) were

the only assets that households need to trade in equilibrium. Here, however,

this menu of assets would have to be supplemented with an additional asset

that pays P z. in period t, so that it is indexed not to the price P but to
              t                                                          zt
receipts P z. The set of assets {a,uy,a,aJ z could, therefore, be

replaced by assets that pay in t, (P X1,                     t4t t t'           Z_]
                                         t-l       t-l                  PZ
                                                                             t-1
      *            *
P. z, P z, P z.}. The last two assets are futures contracts on the
     't-l     t       t
dividends paid by the equities on nontraded goods: they pay, in t, the

dividends that those equities will pay in t+l.           If this menu of assets

replaces the menu of assets a then the equilibrium can be replicated with
         1111111 1 for country one households and shares
asset shares
 111111 11 for country two households. With this asset   .




structure an increase in tM           is paid to households in both countries.
                                  t
Households in country one will pay the greater "inflation tax" because the
                                                                                               15
                                                                                           *
price      of domestic nontraded goods rises but the (money-two) price of Z is

unchanged. However, the other assets assure that this increase in                   does not

result in a redistribution of wealth.                    Similarly, this asset structure

prevents wealth redistribution from changes in outputs of traded or nontraded

goods.        Obviously, there are many other asset structures that could also

duplicate .


VI.     Buyers'     Currencies

      We   have assumed that all purchases are made with seller's currencies. We

now follow Helpman and            Razin   (1983) and examine how the equilibrium differs if

buyers' currencies are used for all purchases. If we let x and y denote

the traded-good demands of the country one household, and                  *d         *d
                                                                          x and y
those of the country two household, (3) and (4) are replaced by


                      + ePyy +                                                       (34)

for the former and


                     *d
                          +
              ett
                                    + Pz:.d                                  (35)


for the latter. The analogues to (5') and (6')


      rn1 =                   +      +                                                 (36)


                    Px
      ftt+l
              =
                          x                                                         (37)


so (2') becomes
                                                                                                                 16

      At_i
                                  P., Z
                                  'it-i
                                                          T,4
                                                           Lit
                                                                           t A1
                                                                          eP., x t
                             +                    +                  +               +
           Xti                                                            2e_iP
                                                                                                           (38)
                                  P                   P
                             d            d                      d
                     -
                             x -ç z e ____    -                      -
                                                                         u1q = 0.
                                      t t
As Helpman and           Razin    note, the arbitrage conditions now have the form


         =               S                                                                                 (39)
             e+i
Where        is the price of X in money two. Since (34) and (35) hold as

equalities when short-term nominal interest rates are positive,




                     xt+ U2Yt U3 *
                                          +j Z
           = Mt _____________________
     e+i     N
                 t
                                                                                                          (40)


                     xt+ U2Yt +U3
                                 -ç
                                          —
                                                           ,
where all the U. are evaluated at (yyzt) except U3,. which is evaluated
     xtyt *
at


     In the absence of nontraded goods, (40) would collapse to the ratio of

money supplies because spending in the two countries would be equal. Nominal

goods prices, previously given in (13)-(16), now become ratios of money to

spending rather than to income.

                                                                 xtyt                xtyt *
     Equilibrium consumptions of                                              and
                                                                                     (j,r,zt)    are

maintained with four nonnioney assets, a, a, a, and                                  a where    each asset is

a claim to an infinite stream of payments of the receipts from selling the

corresponding good in t-l (e.g. x._1P>    ),                               paid in t. Thus, the assets are
                                      t-l
all pure equities.                    The country one household chooses to own                            shares
             while the country two household chooses                                                   Since
                                                                                                          17

households in country one sell, on average, half of their endowments of X to

households in country two for money two, they begin each period t with
 t    l 1         units of money two.                     Similarly, households in country two


begin period t with
                                             Y1e         units of money one. The nonmoney assets
                                             2                       P
                                                                   xt Xti
commit each country one household to pay                                    units of money two to
                                                                     2
                                                                      e
country two households in t and entitle it to receive
                                                                                    Y_1e   units
                                                                                    2

of money one. It is straightforward to verify that this an equilibrium.


      An increase in output of the country one export good in t affects nominal

goods prices in t and the exchange rate in t+l:


            =                   -                 + c,                                               (41)


      PY/X -            - w*(1+t)        -
                                                                                                   (42)

            =         -w(l+t)   -
                                        y2                                                           (43)


                  =   w*(l+t)       -
                                        wE2                                                        (44)



and
                                                           *
      ...   ..'          *                                wx
      e+i/x = (w-w)(l+c)
                                              -
                                                                                               (45)
                                                  Wy(l_

The variation in the exchange rate may exceed the variation in ratios of goods

prices as x varies, though with different timing.                                   For example, any
combination of elasticities and shares for which (45) is positive (such as

                             auid        = 0)       will result in a larger impact of a change in

output of X on the exchange rate than on the ratio of export prices, P/P.

The relative responses of the exchange rate and other price ratios can be

computed as in Section 3. Similarly, it is straightforward to calculate the
                                                                           18

responses of the exchange rate and nominal goods prices to changes in the
                                                                            -

output of nontraded goods.


VII.   Conclusions


   This paper has discussed a stochastic rational expectations model of a

2-country world equilibrium with two traded goods that are imperfect

substitutes and a nontraded good., in each country. Disturbances to supply and

demand for any of these goods lead to changes in relative prices: the

contemporaneous terms of trade, the relative price of nontraded goods, and

intertemporal relative prices (real interest rates). These disturbances also

cause changes in exchange rates, which under certain conditions are "large"

relative to the responses of some other prices.


   The model permits a wide array of financial assets, though it implies a

unit velocity of money. Svensson (1983) has made some progress in relaxing

that assumption while maintaining tractability. As in Lucas (1982) there are

no wealth redistributions from any disturbances. Whether one views this as a

substantial cost depends on whether one thinks that these redistributions are,

in the real world, large and important for prices. The absence of wealth

redistributions means that, as in Helpman (1981) and Lucas (1982), pegged and

flexible exchange rate systems lead to identical allocations (though, perhaps

trivially, different prices).


   The conditions under which an increase in supply or decrease in demand for

the domestic exportable good appreciates or depreciates domestic currency

depend on parameters of preferences and on production shares. The conditions

under which exchange rates vary more than various price ratios in response to
                                                                         19

real disturbances also depend on these parameters and shares, but often the

conditions require inelastic demands for goods or asymmetries across

countries. Although higher variability of exchange rates than price ratios

can be explained by this model, the unit income elasticity of the demand for

money in the (buyer's currency) model remains restrictive, working against

higher exchange rate volatility (compare, e.g., Section 2.1 of Obstfeld and

Stockman (1984)).   Further work on the roles of the terms of trade and

nontraded goods prices in exchange rate changes should proceed with models

which, like Svensson's (1983), can relax this assumption.
                                                                            20

                                    Footnotes


1.   The stochastic process is restricted so that money supplies are always

     positive. Similarly, endowments are strictly positive.

2.   Helpman and Razin also consider investment and a nonstationary

     equilibrium, which we do not consider here. However, they consider a

     model with only one good.

3.   In contrast, planned expenditure is uncertain when asset decisions are

     made in the model proposed in Stockman (1980), and money holdings are

     ,—hrcn   tr crr'Dr s-h Avr tr1 up1nc nf vrnrl4tiir
4.   The effects on utility may differ if government spending affects (in an

     additively-separable way) utility only in the home country.

5.   The analysis is easily extended to a case in which the domestic

     government purchases the foreign export good.


     The effects  of demand disturbances that originate in disturbances to
     preferences can be analyzed easily only if shocks to preferences affect
     the   marginal utility of the nontraded good but leave the mrginal utility

     of the traded goods unchanged.
                                                                             21

                                      References


Dornbusch, R., 1976, Expectations and the exchange rate dynamics, JPE 84,
      1161—1176.

Helpman, E., 1981, An exploration in the theory of exchange rate regimes, JPE

      89, 865-890.

_________ and A. Razin, 1982, Dynamics of a floating exchange rate regime,
      JPE    90,   728-754.

__________     and __________ ,   1983,   The role of savings and investment in

      exchange rate determination under alternative monetary mechanisms,

      forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Hansen, L. and K. Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables

      estimation of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica,

      1269-1286.

_________ and _________ , 1983, Stochastic consumption, risk aversion and the
      temporal behaviour of asset returns, JPE 91, 249-265.

Lucas, R., 1980, Equilibrium in a pure currency economy, Economic Inquiry 18,

      203-220.

__________     1982, Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world,

      JME 10, 335-359.

Nussa, M., 1982, A model of exchange rate dynamics JPE 90, 74-104.

Obstfeld, M. and A. Stockinan, 1984, Exchange rate dynamics in R. Jones, P.

      Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam, North

      Holland.

Stockinan, A., 1980, A theory of exchange rate determination, JPE 88, 673-698.

Svensson, L., 1983, Currency prices, terms of trade, and interest rates: A

      general equilibrium asset-pricing cash-in-advance approach, working
                                                                22

paper, University of Stockholm Institute for International Economic

Studies.
