                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MARKET VALUE OF PATENTS AND R&D:
                           EVIDENCE FROM EUROPEAN FIRMS

                                           Bronwyn H. Hall
                                             Grid Thoma
                                           Salvatore Torrisi

                                         Working Paper 13426
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13426


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




We thank Rishab Ghosh and the participants in the EC DG IT study on "The effects of allowing patents
claims for computer-implemented inventions" for discussing with us several issues concerning patents
and IPR. Moreover, we would like to thank Armando Benincasa from Bureau Van Dijk, Elvio Ciccardini,
and Gianluca Tarasconi from CESPRI - Bocconi University for their valuable assistance in data collection.
Colin Webb has provided us with data on citations to EPO patents. Comments from seminar and conference
participants at CESPRI-Bocconi University, NBER, the Dept of Management of Carlos III University,
the Department of Management of Bologna University, and the OECD have also been helpful in producing
the current revision. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Grid Thoma, and Salvatore Torrisi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The market value of patents and R&D: Evidence from European firms
Bronwyn H. Hall, Grid Thoma, and Salvatore Torrisi
NBER Working Paper No. 13426
September 2007
JEL No. D24,G32,L86,O31,O34

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper provides novel empirical evidence on the private value of patents and R&D in European
firms during the period 1991-2004. We explore the relationship between firm's stock market value,
patents, and "quality"-weighted patents issued by the European Patent Office (EPO) and the US Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO). We find that Tobin's q is positively and significantly associated with
R&D and patent stocks, but that only those patents taken out in both patent offices or at the USPTO
alone seem to be valued. Either forward citations or a composite quality indicator based on forward
citations, family size and the number of technical fields covered by the patent are modestly informative
for value. Software patents account for a rising share of total patents in the USPTO and EPO. Moreover,
some scholars of innovation and intellectual property rights argue that software and business methods
patents on average are of poor quality and that these patents are applied for merely to build portfolios
rather than for protection of real inventions. We found that such patents are considerably more valuable
than ordinary patents, especially if they are taken out in the U.S. However their quality indicators are
no more valuable than those of other patents, suggesting that their primary purpose may be to increase
the size of the patent portfolio.

Bronwyn H. Hall                                    Salvatore Torrisi
Department of Economics                            Department of Management
549 Evans Hall                                     University of Bologna
UC Berkeley                                        Via Capo di Lucca 34
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            40126 Bologna, Italy
and NBER                                           CESPRI- Bocconi University, Milan
bhhall@nber.org                                    torrisi@unibo.it

Grid Thoma
University of Camerino, Camerino and
CESPRI, Bocconi University
Via Sarfatti 25
20136
Milano
Italy
grid.thoma@unibocconi.it
                  The market value of patents and R&D:
                     Evidence from European firms
                Bronwyn H. Hall, Grid Thoma, and Salvatore Torrisi
                                            August 2007

1.     Introduction
       Measuring the private returns to investment in innovation or knowledge assets is
important both to firms and to economists who wish to assess and compare firm performance in
this area. At the aggregate firm level, the primary methods for obtaining quantitative measures of
these returns relate profits, revenue, or the market value of the firm to observable measures of
innovation investment such as R&D or patents. This paper contributes to this literature by
providing novel empirical evidence on the value of a number of different measures based on the
patenting activities of European firms, both in Europe and in the United States.
       In addition to the goal of measuring innovative assets in European firms, our
investigation is motivated by an interest in several issues related directly to the patents
themselves. First, we hope to gain a deeper understanding of the ‘patent paradox’, that is, the fact
that the number of patent applications to the USPTO and the EPO continues to grow despite the
weakness of patents as an instrument for protecting innovation, documented in various surveys
of innovators in a number of different industries and countries (Levin et al 1987; Cohen, Nelson
and Walsh, 2000; Arundel 2001, 2003). Previous studies have demonstrated that the distribution
of patent technical and economic value is very skewed with only a few patents yielding a
significant value to their owners (Harhoff et al. 1999). Some argue that the lower barriers to
patenting are responsible for an increasing number of low quality patents, that is, patents that
have a low inventive step, overly broad claims, or that should not have been issued under
existing legal frameworks. If so, it is desirable to explore whether this is reflected in indicators of
individual patent value. In this paper we look at how a firm’s stock of patents and different
indicators of its ‘quality’ are priced by the financial markets. We use a number of indicators of
technical and economic value: forward citations adjusted for citation truncation, technological
scope, measured by the number of technological fields, and family size (the number of different
patent systems in which protection for a single invention is sought).


                                                       2
       Another motivation of this paper arises from the differences between the US and the
European patent systems. Unlike the US system, the European system is very fragmented.
Applicants to the EPO systems have to specify the EU countries where the inventions should be
protected. If granted, the patent must be defended in national courts because there is at present no
European-wide court dealing with patent litigation. The same patented invention then may yield
varying private values to its owner depending on the enforcement power offered by the national
courts in which the invention is protected. Recently the European Commission (EC) has
proposed a new treaty, the European Patent Litigation Agreement (EPLA) that would establish a
new European Patent Court. It is unclear whether such a move would represent a significant step
towards a “community-wide” patent. However, the proposal testifies to the great concern of the
EC about the costs of patenting in Europe and the application of uniform standards in patent
examination and enforcement.
       In theory the absence of a centralized European patent system, which increases both the
application and enforcement costs of EPO patents as compared with US patents, should
discourage patent applications to the EPO. However, the EPO examination system appears to be
more rigorous than the USPTO (see, for example, Quillen et al. 2002) and this should reduce the
expected post-grant litigation costs, especially given the availability of the lower cost opposition
system for challenges to newly-issued patents. On the other hand, until the year 2000, patent
applications to the USPTO were not published until (and if) they were granted. New applicants
then could not know whether their patents were infringing a pending patent. After the year 2000,
the US system adopted a variation of the EPO system rule and patent applications are now
published after 18 months unless the applicant has sworn not to file in any other jurisdiction.
Other differences between the two patent systems pertain to citation of prior art and patentable
subject matters. These differences may affect the economic value of patents in the two systems.
       This paper looks carefully at the implications of these differences for the economic value
of patents by comparing the market value of patents granted by the USPTO and by the EPO.
Some European firms protect their inventions in both patent systems and some rely on only one
patent system. The choice to protect in one or the other system or in both systems can result from
at least two sources: patents on more valuable inventions may be taken out in more jurisdictions
(Lanjouw et al. 1998) and firms may differ in their patenting strategies or exposure to
international competition. Although we cannot distinguish these two hypotheses precisely in the
absence of an appropriate instrument for the choice, we are able to determine whether patents

                                                     3
from different jurisdictions yield significantly different consequences for the market value of the
firm, or indeed whether measures based on the different patents from the two different systems
have different predictive power.
         In the last part of the paper, we focus on a specific technological field, software, so that
we can distinguish the differences between the two systems from other factors specific to the
patent system. Software is of particular interest because it is treated differently in the EPO and
the USPTO. A few key decisions taken by the Courts of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC)
in 1994-1995 led the USPTO to release new guidelines for software patentability in 1996 which
allowed the patenting of any software embodied in physical media. In 1998 an important
decision of the US Federal Circuit removed most of the exceptions to the patentability of
software ‘as such’, i.e., independently of its links with a physical device. Not surprisingly, the
number of software patents granted by the USPTO has increased dramatically during the 1990s.
         The treatment of software in the EPO is different. According to the European Patent
Convention (EPC) (Art 52) computer programs “as such” are excluded from the patentable
subject-matter. The EPO recognizes the patentability of computer-implemented inventions (CII),
that is “inventions whose implementation involves the use of a computer, computer network or
other programmable apparatus, the invention having one or more features which are realized
wholly or partly by means of a computer program” (EPO, 2005:3). A further test applied by the
EPO relates to the subject matter of any CII, effectively excluding those related to business
methods or otherwise “nontechnical” in nature. This distinction has proved difficult to make in
practice, but it does lead to rejection of a number of patent applications whose equivalents are
granted at the USPTO. The European Commission released a proposed Directive on the
Patentability of CIIs in 2002 which effectively codified EPO practice in this area, but the
Directive was rejected by the European Parliament in 2005 after considerable amendment of
various kinds.
         As a preliminary test of the consequences of the different legal treatment of software in
the two patent systems we have analyzed EPO patents and found an increasing number of
software-related patents during the 1990s.2 This suggests that, despite the different legal
environment, barriers to software patents have fallen somewhat in Europe as well. It is important



         2
           For a detailed analysis of software-related patent applications and the search methodology used to identify
this category of patents, see Thoma and Torrisi (2005)

                                                               4
to note, however, that the majority of software patents in the EPO are probably ‘software-related’
patents, that is patents granted to computer programs that are implemented in physical devices,
rather than “pure” software patents.3
        Our examination of the market value of patents draws on a body of studies which have
addressed the issue of measuring the private returns or value of innovation investments using
data on the firm’s valuation in public financial markets. Most of these studies use R&D
expenditures and patent counts as measures of technological activity (e.g., Griliches 1981; Hall
1993). More sophisticated indicators of technological assets such as citation-weighted patents
have also been experimented with in the literature to account for the great dispersion in the value
distribution of patents (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005). In the absence of more direct
measures of the economic value of patents, these studies provide a useful methodological setting
to explore the relationship between technological importance and the profitability of patented
inventions. These studies have mostly used data for US firms and UK firms.
        Research that compared indicators of individual patent value such as citations with
survey-based direct measures of profits from the associated invention has found a positive and
significant association between them (Harhoff et al. 1999). More recently, Gambardella et al.
(2005) have adopted the same approach as Harhoff et al., but using a new survey of European
inventors and found similar results. However, to our knowledge, there are only few studies
focusing on European firms which analyze the economic value of R&D or patents using firm
market value and most of these are for the UK only: Blundell et al. (1995), Toivanen et al.
(2002), Bloom and Van Reenen (2002), and Greenhalgh and Rogers (2006). The only exception
is Hall and Oriani (2006), who look at the market value of R&D (but not of patents) for three
continental European countries: France, Germany, and Italy.
        Several of these market valuation studies rely on measures of R&D expenditure, which is
usually considered a measure of innovation input rather than innovation output or ‘success’ of
innovative activities. However, in the case of European firms, data on R&D expenditures are
often missing because reporting these expenditures is not required by accounting and fiscal
regulations across most European countries. The UK is probably the only European country
where an explicit recommendation of accounting practice encourages firms to disclose their


        3
          This assertion has been confirmed by Bergstra and Klint (2007), who looked closely at 32 of the patents
defined as software using the union of the two methods described later in the paper and concluded that only two
were “pure” software.

                                                             5
R&D expenditures.4 Nevertheless in this paper we rely on a sample of European firms for which
R&D data is available, covering about 70 per cent of European business sector R&D in the year
2000, and then augment this panel with patent data. Patents as a measure of innovation have their
own drawbacks but, as Griliches (1990: 1661) has remarked, ‘in this desert of data, patent
statistics loom up as a mirage of wonderful plenitude and objectivity.’
         The paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the method for estimating
the private value of R&D and patents using financial data. Section 3 presents the data and
describes the main variables while Section 4 reports the main results. Section 5 discusses the
results and closes the paper.

2.       Estimating the economic value of innovation assets
         There are two streams of the literature that attempt to evaluate the economic returns to
innovative activities.5 The first relates innovation as proxied by R&D and patents to total factor
productivity or profitability, in most cases capturing a measure of private returns, although in
principle the productivity approach can also yield social returns if prices are properly accounted
for. The second, into which the present paper falls, measures the private returns to innovation
using a forward looking measure of firm performance, its valuation in the stock market. Each of
the two approaches has both merits and weaknesses.
         Total factor productivity (TFP) is simply the ratio of outputs to inputs both expressed in
real terms. Assuming only two inputs (capital K and labor L) and taking the natural logs of all
variables the TFP of a firm can be expressed as follows:
         log(TFP) = log(S) − α·log(L) − β·log(K)                                                               (1)
This is an appropriate measure of productivity under conditions of constant returns to scale and
competition in the markets for inputs and outputs.6 Several studies have showed the importance
of technology, measured by R&D expenditures, for the growth of total factor productivity at the
firm level (e.g., Mansfield 1968, Gold 1977, and Griliches 1980).

         4
             This recommendation dates from 1989 (see Toivanen et al., 2002).
         5
          See Hall (2006) for an analytical overview of econometric approaches to measuring the returns to R&D.
Mairesse and Sassenou (1991) and Hall (2000) provide surveys of empirical results using the first and second
methodologies respectively.
         6
           Note that it is possible to relax the assumptions of constant returns and perfect competition in the output
market and derive a version of this equation that will still yield a measure of productivity (or profitability) that can
be related to innovation inputs.

                                                                 6
       Besides the strong assumptions necessary for TFP estimation, a major problem with this
approach is the fact that the lag between R&D and its impact on productivity or profits is usually
long and difficult to predict. Since this gives rise to serious measurement problems when the data
are not available in long time series and when the process relating input and output is not
stationary, much empirical work turns to alternative methods of measurement. In addition, the
productivity approach that relies on accounting data often fails to allow for the effects of
differences in systematic risk, temporary disequilibrium effects, tax laws and accounting
conventions.
       Some of these limitations are less important with the market value approach, which
combines accounting data with measures of the value of the firm on the financial markets
(Lindenberg and Ross, 1981; Montgomery and Wernerfelt, 1988). The market value approach
draws on the idea, derived from the hedonic price models, that firms are bundles of assets (and
capabilities) that are difficult to disentangle and to price separately on the market. These assets
include plants and equipment, inventories, knowledge assets, customer networks, brand names
and reputation. The assumption is that financial markets assign a valuation to the bundle of
firms’ assets that is equal to the present discounted value of their future cash flows. This
approach has been used in several studies to calculate the marginal shadow value of knowledge
assets across a range of firms (Griliches 1981; Griliches et al. 1991; Hall 1993; Hall et al. 2005;
Hall 2006).
       The general functional form of the value function for an intertemporal maximization
program with several capital goods is difficult to derive and does not have a closed form in most
cases (Wildasin, 1985). In most econometric studies this difficulty has been tackled by assuming
that the market value equation takes a linear or log-linear (Cobb-Douglas) form. The typical
linear market value model, which we use here, relies on the assumption that a firm’s assets enter
additively:
       Vit(Ait, Kit)= qt(Ait, + γtKit)σt                                                       (2)
where A represents the physical assets and K the knowledge assets of firm i at time t. Under
constant returns to scale (σt=1) equation (2) in log form can be written as
       logVit = logqt + logAit, + log(1+γtKit /Ait)                                            (3)
or
       logQit = logVit/Ait = logqt + log(1+γtKit /Ait)
       (4)

                                                         7
        The left hand side of equation (4) is the log of Tobin’s q, defined as the ratio of market
value to the replacement cost of the firm, which is typically measured with the replacement value
of firm’s physical assets. On the right hand side, γt is the marginal or shadow value of the ratio of
knowledge capital to physical assets at a given point in time. It measures the expectations of the
investors over the effect of the knowledge capital relative to physical assets on the discounted
future profits of the firm. The intercept (log qt) represents the average logarithm of Tobin’s q for
the sample firms while qtγt is the absolute hedonic price of the knowledge capital.
        As in Hall et al. 2005, equation (4) will be estimated by non-linear least squares. Most
earlier research, beginning with Griliches (1981), have approximated the log(1+γtKit /Ait) with
γtKit /Ait and have estimated the market value equation by ordinary least squares; as the ratio of
knowledge assets to ordinary assets has increased over time in many firms, this approximation
has become less and less appropriate.7 To ease interpretation of coefficient estimates for
variables measured in widely differing units (dollars, euros, or counts) we computed the
elasticity of Tobin’s q with respect to each of the main regressors and displayed it in the tables
below the coefficients.
         ∂ log Qit                               γ j X itj
                    =                                                                             (5)
         ∂ log X itj 1 + γ 1 ( RDit / Ait ) + γ 2 ( Pit / RDit ) + γ 3 (CITit / Pit )
where Xjit is the regressor of interest - R&D stock/physical assets, patent stock/R&D stock (total
or software patents) and citation stock/patent stock. We computed these elasticities and their
standard errors using the “delta” method for each observation in the dataset and then averaged
them. The tables show the average elasticity and its average standard error.
        Note that in general, shadow prices are equilibrium prices resulting from the interaction
between the firm’s demand and the market supply of capital for a specific asset at a given point
in time. This implies that no structural interpretation should be attached to estimates of the
market value equation. However, the values obtained by estimation of the market value equation
are still informative, in the sense that they do measure the average marginal shadow values of an
additional euro spent in R&D or an additional patent filed at a particular point in time.8



        7
            We have also used OLS for comparison but the results are not reported here due to lack of space.
        8
          For a more detailed discussion of various problems concerning the estimation and interpretation of the
market value equation, see Hall (2000, 2006).

                                                                    8
        The market value approach rests on the restrictive hypothesis of capital market efficiency
and therefore it can be used only for firms quoted in well-functioning and thickly traded stock
markets. In fact, financial markets are not always perfect and there are persistent institutional
differences across countries which may result in different evaluations of intangible assets.9 To
have an idea of the differences in the level of development of the stock market across countries,
we looked at a somewhat imperfect measure, the ratio of stock market capitalization (aggregate
market value of equity) to GDP (IMF 2006) in the right hand column of Table 2.
        This ratio ranges from about 1.37 in the UK (very close to 1.36 of the US) through 0.73
of France, 0.43 in Germany, 0.45 in Italy to 0.11 in emerging Eastern European countries like
Poland, Hungary and Ukraine.10 The differences in financial development across European
countries persist over time despite the rapid overall growth of the European financial markets
during the 1980s and the 1990s (Rajan and Zingales, 2003) and tthese differences in financial
market development could have a confounding effect on our estimates of the market value of
intangible assets. For example, Hall and Oriani (2006) found that financial markets in France and
Italy placed little value on the R&D performed in firms where the largest shareholder owned
more than 30 per cent of the firm. However, over time the globalization of financial institutions
(e.g., IMF, 2007) probably reduces the differences in asset valuation across countries with
different financial development. In the regressions that follow, we control for country-specific
differences in valuation (which are significant), but it would be desirable to probe this question
more deeply in future work.
        Not surprisingly, most empirical studies that follow the market value approach rely on
data from the US and the UK, where the stock markets are larger and more thickly traded than in
other countries. For related reasons, studies based on data from these countries also benefit from
the availability of large sets of firm-level panel data. These studies find that R&D stocks are
significantly valued by financial markets in addition to physical assets. The empirical evidence
for the US also shows that patent counts have an additional, albeit weaker, impact on market



        9
           We should note that other indicators of patent value have their own drawbacks. For example, survey data
obtained by interviewing inventors may suffer from retrospective response bias. Data on patent renewal as an
indicator of patent value do not provide information on the upper tail of the value distribution, where the most
valuable patents are located.
        10
           The large numbers for Switzerland and Spain presumably reflect the global nature of the financial sector
in those countries, relative to the size of these country’s economies.

                                                             9
value after controlling for R&D. Finally, Hall et al. 2005 find that citation-weighted patents are
more informative than mere patent counts about the market value of innovation.
       A series of studies based on European datasets have used the varying indicators of
innovation (R&D, patents and patent citations) to confirm that, by and large, innovative assets
impact significantly upon the firm market value (see Table 1 for a list of these studies).
                                                  [Table 1 about here]

3.     Data

3.1.   Sample
       To construct our sample we started with 10,218 publicly-traded firms headquartered in 33
European countries over the period 1980-2005. Our sample includes a large variety of countries
with different levels of financial development and accounting regulations, ranging from the UK,
a common-law country with an active equity market, to emerging Eastern European countries
with a very small market capitalisation-to-GDP ratio. Only 2,197 firms reported data on R&D
expenditures for one or more of the sample years. For these firms we collected data on patents
and found that 575 were granted at least one patent and 165 at least one software patent by the
EPO during the period 1985-2005.
       Data on corporate structure (date of incorporation, ownership structure, ultimate parent
company, subsidiaries) and balance sheet were obtained from the Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus
database. Changes in corporate structure were checked for the years 1998 to 2006 by drawing on
different issues of Amadeus. 11 Data on market capitalization at the end of each year were
obtained from Thomson Financial’s Datastream. R&D data were obtained from Amadeus,
Thomson Financials’ Global Vantage and the UK Department of Industry’s R&D Scoreboard.
More precisely, we extracted from Amadeus all quoted companies reporting positive R&D
expenditures for at least one year between 1980 and 2005 and filled in any missing R&D
numbers for these firms using data from the other sources.
       Firms’ patent counts in all technological classes were obtained by matching the name of
the assignee from the PATSTAT patent database with the company name in Amadeus. Patent
citations and the number of IPC classes were also extracted from the PATSTAT database,
available under license from the EPO-OECD Taskforce on Patent Statistics (PATSTAT 2006).

       11
            Information on corporate structure for previous years has been retrieved manually from other sources,
such as Who Owns Whom, Hoovers, etc..

                                                              10
For companies with subsidiaries, the patents of the ultimate parent company have been
consolidated on the basis of the 1998-2006 ownership structure reported in Amadeus. Further
information on corporate structure was collected from Hoovers, Who Owns Whom, and
company websites for the period before 1998. Holding companies have been reclassified
manually according to the main line of business or their most important subsidiaries using
additional information from Amadeus, Hoovers, and company websites.
       After dropping a few observations with extreme outliers in the patent data, very small
firms and those with unconsolidated data, our final sample consisted of 1,060 firms for the
period 1991 through 2002. The choice of time period was dictated by the fact that the patent
quality measures are based on forward citations, and we required at least three years in which to
observe them following the patent application (that is, 2003-2005). We consolidated some of the
countries with small numbers of firms into larger groupings in order to reduce the number of
dummies needed (e.g., all Eastern European countries form one group, and Spain and Greece
another).
       As Table 2 shows, over 90 per cent of the sample of firms for which both R&D and
market capitalization are available generally consists of medium to large firms (over 5 million
sales and 100 employees according to the Eurostat definition). About two-thirds of the sample is
composed of firms with over 100 million sales (the Eurostat definition of a large firm is one with
more than 20 million sales).
                                            [Table 2 about here]
       Tables A.1 and A.2 in Appendix A report the distribution of the firms in the sample by
market capitalization and the main stock markets involved. About half the firms in this sample
have a market capitalization less than 100 million euros and only about 10 per cent of firms have
a capitalization above 5 billion euros, with over half of these very large firms having been
established before 1970. On the other end of the distribution, about one third of firms with a
capitalization less than 1 billion euros were incorporated since 1990; 20 per cent of those with
capitalization between 1 and 5 billion euros are also new firms. This latter fact is in part the
result of restructuring, liberalization and privatization of formerly state-owned corporations in
many European continental countries during the 1990s. Another reason is the entry of software
and “internet economy” companies such SAP, Business Objects, Infineon Technologies and O2.
       The R&D-reporting firms in our sample are in a large number of sectors (see Table A.3
in the Appendix) and about half of these firms hold EPO or US patents. However, although about

                                                     11
20 per cent have US software patents, only 30 firms have EPO patents that we identify as “pure”
software, reflecting the fact that such patents are not usually granted at the EPO.12 Of these 30
firms, two-thirds are in computing hardware and software, telecommunications, electronics, and
electrical machinery.
        The distribution of patents and R&D expenditures across industries is reported in Table
A.4. The most important sectors in terms of R&D expenditures are pharmaceuticals and
chemical products, motor vehicles, electronic instruments & communications equipment, and
electrical machinery. These are also the most important sectors in terms of total US and EP
patents. As expected software patents are more concentrated in few industries, with electrical
machinery alone accounting for half of EP software patents and 32 per cent of US software
patents. Electrical machinery, electronics and communication equipment, and
telecommunications services together account for over 85 per cent of EP software patents and 65
per cent of US software patents.
        We should note that the high concentration of software patents in few sectors is due in
part to the exclusion of non-European firms from the sample. For example, IBM accounts for
about 10 per cent of total EPO software patents granted to business enterprises, followed by
Siemens and Canon (about 4 per cent each). Other large electronics firms are also relatively large
software owners – e.g., Philips (3.4 per cent) and Sony (2.5 per cent). The largest software firm
among the top owners of EPO software patents is Microsoft with a one per cent share.

3.2.    Variables
        Our dependent variable is Tobin’s q for the firm, that is, the ratio of the firm’s market
value to tangible assets. Firm’s market value is defined as the sum of market capitalization (price
multiplied by the number of outstanding shares at the end of the year) and non current liabilities
less a correction for net current liabilities plus inventories.13 Tangible assets are the net costs of
tangible fixed property and inventories used in the production of revenue, and are obtained as the
sum of gross fixed assets plus inventory stocks less depreciation, depletion, and amortization
(accumulated), investment grants and other deductions.14

        12
             The exact definition of a software patent used here is given in section 3.5 of the paper.
        13
             Outstanding shares include both common shares and preferred shares.
        14
          All values expressed in domestic currencies have been converted into euros by using annual average
exchange rates reported by EUROSTAT.

                                                                 12
       Corporate finance scholars have developed alternative, more complex estimations of the
Tobin’s q which rely on estimated market value of the firm compared with that used in this paper
(e.g., Perfect and Wiles, 1994). These alternative approaches to Tobin’s q measurement produce
more precise estimations but are computationally costly. Moreover, their greater precision is
traded off by a larger selection bias. DaDalt et al. (2003) have used the Compustat dataset and
found that using the Perfect and Wiles’ approach produces a 20 per cent loss in sample size. It is
important to note that DaDalt et al (2003) have estimated that simple methods, like that used
here, and complex ones, like that of Perfect and Wiles, agree in approximately 90% of cases for
values of q below 0.8 and above 1.2. As Table 3 clearly shows, for most firms in our sample the
Tobin’s q value is above 1.2.
       The R&D expenditure history of each firm was used to compute R&D stock. R&D
spending includes amortization of software costs, company-sponsored research and
development, and software expenses. As mentioned earlier, European firms are not required or
recommended to disclose information on their R&D expenditures, implying that the availability
of data on R&D expenditures is potential source of sample selection bias. Reporting R&D is then
an endogenous variable since the decision whether or not to disclose this information rests upon
the discretion of the firm. Hall and Oriani (2006) found that selection was not a factor for most
of the countries they considered. We treat this issue in Section 4 of the paper.
       Since the stock of our key regressors cannot be measured directly from the firm books we
rely on proxies obtained from current and past flows of R&D and patent-related variables. R&D
stocks (KRD) were obtained using a declining balance formula and the past history of R&D
spending:
       KRDt = R&Dt + (1-δ)KRDt-1
where δ is the depreciation rate. We chose the usual 15 per cent depreciation rate for easy
comparison to earlier work. Our starting R&D stock was calculated for each firm at the first
available R&D observation year as KRDo = RDo/(δ+g). This assumes that real R&D has been
growing at a constant annual growth prior to the sample; we used a growth rate g of 8 per cent.
Patent stocks were obtained using the same methods, except that the initial available patent
counts were not discounted to obtain an initial capital stock because we have a longer pre-sample




                                                     13
history of patenting (back to 1978) than for R&D, so the impact of the initial stock is
minimal.15,16
         Our controls include firms’ annual sales, which account for scale effects in the market
value equation, industry dummies, country dummies and year dummies.17 Firms’ R&D and sales
have been depreciated by the annual GDP deflator extracted from the AMECO-EUROSTAT
web directory. In future work, we will control for differences in ownership structure (see also
Hall and Oriani, 2006).

3.3.     Patent variables
         For each of our firms, we have data on their EPO patents (and European national patents)
as well as data on their USPTO patents. We have also constructed the ‘family’ of each patent as
described in the next section.18 We then identified the categories of patents shown in the table
following:
          (i) EP             All EPO patents (labelled European in the tables)
          (ii) EP only       EPO patents only (i.e., EPO patents without US equivalents,
                             although they may have equivalents elsewhere in the world or in
                             the European national offices)
          (iii) EPUS         EPO patents with at least one US equivalent (i.e., patents whose
                             family includes at least one US patent)
          (iv) US            All USPTO patents (labelled US in the tables)
          (v) US only        USPTO patents only (i.e., USPTO patents with no EPO or
                             European national office equivalents, although they may have
                             equivalents elsewhere in the world)
          (vi) USEP          US patents with at least one EPO or European national office
                             equivalent




         15
            Because our patent data begin in 1978 and the first year we use in the regressions is 1991, the effects of
omitted initial conditions will be small (0.8514 = 0.10).
         16
            Our approach to the construction of patent stocks follows the methodology in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg
(2005), in order to facilitate comparison with that paper’s results.
         17
           We use sales rather than assets to reduce measurement error bias arising from the fact that assets also
appear on the left hand side of the equation.
         18
        We used the PATSTAT database to find priority links between patent documents in different the EPO
and USPTO.

                                                               14
        Note that (i) is the disjoint sum of (ii) and (iii) and (iv) is the disjoint sum of (v) and (vi),
but that (i) and (iv) may contain many of the same inventions. Note also that in principle
(ii)+(v)+(iii) should be approximately equal to (ii)+(v)+(vi) and that either should cover all
inventions that are patented in the US and/or the EPO.19 In the regressions presented in section 4
we have explored the significance of these different measures by including (i) and (iv) separately
and then breaking these into their constituents.

3.4.    Patent quality measures
        Research on the economic importance of individual patented inventions have
demonstrated that the distribution of patent value is very skewed (e.g., Harhoff et al. 1999). The
large majority of patents have an extremely limited commercial value and only few represent an
important source of revenues to the assignee. It is therefore desirable to make use of patent stock
measures that are adjusted for the quality of the patents they contain. We make use of two such
quality weights, both of which have been used in prior empirical investigations: forward citations
(as in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005) and an index derived from a factor model based on three
indicators, as suggested by Lanjouw and Schankerman 2004. The indicators we use are forward
citations, number of IPC classes, and family size). We describe each of these two quality
measures in more detail below.
        Forward citations received by a patent indicate that the information in an invention has
served as a basis for a future invention. Citations, i.e., citations of ‘prior art’ that is relevant to a
patent, serve an important legal function, since they delimit the scope of the property rights
awarded to the patent. Thus, if patent B cites patent A, it implies that patent A represents a piece
of previously existing knowledge upon which patent B builds, and over which B cannot have a
claim. Citations to other patents then can be considered as evidence of spillovers or knowledge
flows between patented inventions.
        However, the usefulness of citations as a proxy for knowledge spillovers is limited by the
fact that citations are not always added by the inventor (Jaffe et al. 2000). In the US, the
applicant is required to disclose her knowledge of the prior art, although in fact, references to
prior art are often found by the inventor’s patent attorneys, rather than the inventor, and the

        19
            The counts are not identical between whether one starts with EP or US patents, for two reasons: 1) the
equivalence correspondence may be one-to-many in either direction; and 2) our name-matching of patents to firms
may not have picked up all the US subsidiaries of the European firms. However, the two stocks are correlated 0.96
so that the error from (2) is fairly small,.

                                                             15
decisions regarding which patents to cite ultimately rests with the patent examiner, who is
supposed to be an expert in the area and hence to be able to find prior art that the applicant
misses or conceals.
        In the case of EPO patents, inventors are not required to cite prior art and therefore
references to earlier patents are usually added by patent examiners. This suggests that patent
citations to EPO patents may be even less useful as a measure of spillovers. However, compared
to the USPTO, citations contained in EPO patents tend to be more consistent and objective
because they are assigned by a single team of patent examiners. Unlike that at the USPTO, EPO
citation practice also tends to minimize the number of citations per patent. For more information
on the meaning of European patent citations, see Harhoff, Hoisl, and Webb (2006).
        In order to make citations to EPO and USPTO patents as comparable as possible given
these differences, we have to take into account another important difference between the two
patent systems. Unlike US patents, a large share of EPO patents are cited indirectly through their
non-EPO equivalents, i.e., different ‘incarnations’ of the same inventions in other patent systems
such as the European national patent offices and the USPTO. For this reason Harhoff et al.
(2006) suggest that citation links to EPO patents should include also citations received by their
equivalents. To account for this difference in citation patterns we counted direct and indirect
citations to both EPO and USPTO patents.
        We used PATSTAT (release of September 2006) to retrieve data on citations counts,
which reports around 63 million citing correspondences up to December 2005. US patents
received directly about 42.6 million or 68 per cent of all world citations contained in the
PATSTAT dataset (for comparison, US patent applications were about one quarter of worldwide
applications during the 2001-2004 period, according to the WIPO statistical database). 5.5
million US patents have received at least one cite.
        After excluding patent applications that were not yet granted, we retrieved information on
the publication dates of the citing patents. When the publication date of the citing patent was
missing or it was antecedent to the date of the cited patent (approximately 2.7 million citations,
about 7 per cent of the total number), the citation was not included in the analysis. Our final
sample consisted of approximately 4.7 million U.S. patents having at least one citation prior to
December 2005, 3.1 million patents having at least one citation within 5 years from the
publication date, and 2.45 million having at least one citation within 3 years from the publication
date.

                                                      16
        EPO patents, which are about 8 per cent of worldwide applications during the same
period, receive far fewer citations directly. EPO patents and their non-EPO equivalents overall
receive about 1.8 million citations (2.8 per cent of the total) and 529,161 EPO granted patents
have at least one cite. Restricting the citation lag to three years gives 460,142 citation links, of
which about half are accounted for by citations to non-EPO equivalents of EPO patents.
        For comparability we used the same search strategy for both EPO and USPTO patents,
including citations to their equivalents. In particular, for EPO patents we considered as a citation
link to an EPO patent the direct citation to a direct equivalent of that EPO patent. For example if
the EPO patent X had two direct equivalents Y and Z respectively in two other patent offices, the
citation count of X included not only the direct cites to X but also the direct cites to Y and Z
(with duplicate cites removed). The same search strategy was followed for USPTO patents. For
more details on this methodology see Harhoff et al. (2006).
        Previous studies have also used backward citations as a measure of the quality of the
citing patent. Some scholars have suggested that large numbers of citations to others reveal that a
particular invention is likely to be more derivative in nature and, therefore, of limited importance
(Lanjouw and Schankerman 2004). However, a large number of backward citations may also
indicate a novel combination of existing ideas. This is probably the reason why Harhoff et al.
(1999) have found that backward citations are positively correlated with patent value. Because of
this ambiguity we do not use this variable in our analysis.20
        Our second measure of patent quality was based on three indicators of patent value rather
than one; in addition to forward citations, we used family size (the number of jurisdictions or
countries the patent has been applied for) and the number of different technological classes
assigned by patent examiners to a given patent.21
        Our measure of family size was obtained as follows. We identified all priorities for the
EPO patents in our sample firms (recall that there is a many-to-many correspondence between
patents and priorities). Using this information, we found the non-EPO patents that reported the
same priority. This first step gives a lower bound on the family size. The second step was to find
all applications (EPO and non-EPO) that report an EPO application from one of our firms as a

        20
           Our results do not change substantially when backward citations are used along with other indicators of
patent quality.
        21
           Other studies have also used the number of claims which delimit the scope of the invention as a measure
of patent quality; this variable was not available to us in PATSTAT.

                                                             17
priority.22 After removing any double counting, the number of patent applications thus identified
plus those from the first step constitute the size of the patent family. The same procedure was
followed to obtain the family size of US patents. Note that our definition is the same as the
middle of the three definitions (equivalent, family, and extended family) suggested by Harhoff et
al. (2006).
         The number of technological classes have been shown to be an indicator of technological
“quality” similar to the number of citations by Lerner (1994). To guarantee a reasonable level of
precision, we use the number of eight-digit IPC classification codes reported in the patent
document. The number of IPC classes can be viewed as a measure of technological scope or
generality of the patent even though, as noted by Guellec and Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2000),
it may be also a measure of ambiguity reflecting the difficulty of the examiner in locating the
invention in the technological space.
         These three indicators were combined into a composite index of patent ‘quality’ derived
from a common factor model in an approach developed by Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004).
The common factor explains as much as possible the total variance of each indicator while
minimizing its idiosyncratic component. The methodology is briefly described in Appendix B.
The three component indicators are all strongly correlated with each other at the 1% level of
significance.

3.5.     Correcting for citation truncation
         Patent citations suffer from several potential sources of biases, the most obvious of which
is truncation. The number of citations to any patent is truncated in time because only citations
received until the end of the dataset are observed. The observed number of citations to any given
patent may also be affected by differences across patent cohorts, technological fields and patent
offices. The observed citations then have to be adjusted or normalized for this multiplicity of
effects. For this purpose we have adopted the approach developed by Caballero and Jaffe (1993)
and Hall et al. (2005) – hereafter referred to as the HJT method- which is based on the estimation
of a semi-structural model where the citation frequency is explained by cited patent-year effects,
citing patent-year effects, technological field effects and citation lag effects. The estimated
parameters of this model can be used to correct observed citation rates. Appendix B reports a

         22
         EPO patents which refer to earlier EPO patents as their priority are classified as divisional patents by the
EPO and correspond to continuations in the USPTO system.

                                                              18
brief description of the HJT method and the distribution of the weights used by technology field.
The inverse of the numbers in Tables B.1 and B.2 gives the proportion of the lifetime citations
that are predicted to occur in the time window observed. Actual citations are multiplied by the
numbers given to correct for truncation.

3.6.   Software patents
       One of the goals of the research reported here was to get a picture of the use and
valuation of software patents in European firms. More precisely, comparing the existence of and
valuation of software patents in the US and the EP patent systems may shed light on some
differences between these two patent systems. Software represents an interesting technology for
our purposes because of the growing attention to software patents amongst business
practitioners, scholars and policy-makers. Critics claim that software patents have an average
poor quality and are applied for mainly for ‘strategic’ reasons rather than for protecting real
inventions, whereas advocates maintain that software inventions are technological inventions
like any other and should be entitled to patentability. Scholars looking at software-related patents
have found evidence consistent with the hypothesis that strategic patent portfolio building in the
ICT sector lies behind the increase in software patents. Studies using different definitions of
software patents all find that the number of USPTO software patents is large and growing and
that the holders of these patents are large hardware rather than software firms (Bessen and Hunt
2004; Graham and Mowery 2003; Hall and MacGarvie 2006). Bessen and Hunt (2004) have
pointed out that IBM alone accounts for over 20% of software patents held by US firms. Hall and
MacGarvie (2006) find that the widespread introduction of software patenting in the U.S. via
court decisions was initially negative for software firms, but that these patents have become
more privately valuable than other patents in the recent past. At the same time, their “quality” as
measured by citations does not matter for hardware firm value, which suggests that adding an
additional patent to the portfolio is more important than the patent per se.
       Even in the U.S., it is difficult to find a simple definition of a software-related patent that
can be used for statistical purposes, that is, does not require the reading of individual patents. In
Europe it is even more difficult, because the international patent classification system does not
actually recognize their existence. We therefore chose to rely on the methods used in the earlier
studies on USPTO data, which are based on keyword searching as well as identifying
class/subclass combinations in which pure software firms patent. The three main alternatives are


                                                      19
those used by Graham and Mowery (2003), Bessen and Hunt (2004), and Hall and MacGarvie
(2006).
          Graham and Mowery identify as software patents those that fall in particular International
Patent Classification (IPC) class/subclass/groups. Broadly defined, the classes are “Electric
Digital Data Processing” (G06F), “Recognition of Data; Presentation of Data; Record Carriers;
Handling Record Carriers” (G06K), and “Electric Communication Technique” (H04L).23
Graham and Mowery selected the subclasses from these classes in which six large U.S. software
producers patented between 1984 and 1995. They found that patents in these classes account for
57% of the patents assigned to the hundred largest firms in the software industry.24
          An alternative definition is that adopted by Bessen and Hunt who define software patents
as those that include the words “software” or “computer” & “program” in the patent document
description. Patents that meet these criteria and also contain the words “semiconductor”, “chip”,
“circuit”, “circuitry” or “bus” in the title are excluded under the assumption that they refer to the
device used to execute the computer program rather than the program itself.
          Hall and MacGarvie (2004) suggest a third algorithm to define software patents that
identifies all the U.S. patent class-subclass combinations in which fifteen “pure” software firms
patent, yielding 2,886 unique class-subclass combinations. Patents falling in the classes and
subclasses combinations obtained from this search method are defined as software patents. The
definition preferred by Hall and MacGarvie combines this definition with that of Graham and
Mowery and then takes the intersection of the result with the Bessen-Hunt sample. Hall and
MacGarvie report that their results for the market value of software patents are not significantly
affected by the choice of definition.
          We followed a combination of the search methods above to identify software patents at
the EPO. First, we searched the title, abstract, claims and description of patents in the EPO
dataset by relying on the same keywords used by Bessen and Hunt in their 2002 study of US
software patents: ((software) OR (computer AND program)) AND NOT (chip OR
semiconductor OR bus OR circuit OR circuitry <in> TI) AND NOT (antigen OR antigenic OR
chromatography). To obtain keywords and classification for the patents we relied on the


          23
               The detailed class/subclass groups included are G06F: 3,5,7,9,11,12,13,15; G06K: 9,15; H04L: 9.
          24
               Graham and Mowery (2003), p. 232. The firms are Microsoft, Adobe, Novell, Autodesk, Intuit, and
Symantec.

                                                                20
Delphion dataset (www.delphion.com), which gives access to the full-text of the patent
document, including the application date, the technological classes and the address of the
assignee. This procedure yielded 11,969 patents (in 7,117 different IPC classes-subclasses) (the
keyword method hereafter).
         Second, we analyzed the IPC (International Patent Classification) classes of the patent
portfolios of the world’s 15 largest specialized software firms (the IPC method hereafter). We
expanded the set of firms used in earlier studies to obtain a representative sample of specialized
software firms including European companies.25 The firms we used account for over 30% of the
world software market ($227 billion according to European Information Technology
Observatory estimates). They have been granted 373 patents in 3,518 different technological
classes-subclasses (117 if one considers only the main IPC codes in each patent).
         As in Hall-MacGarvie (2006), we defined a software patent as one that fell in the
intersection of the two sets of patents defined by the keyword and IPC methods.26 As one might
expect, this method yielded very different results for patents issued by the two patent systems: in
the US, 6.7 per cent of the granted patents applied for during the 1991-2002 period by firms in
our sample are software patents by this definition, whereas at the EPO, only 0.4 per cent of
issued patents are software patents, a total of 286 patents. Of these, one third of the sample
software patents are held by Siemens, and 75 per cent by the top five firms (Siemens, BT,
Philips, Oce, and Alcatel). The largest software firm, SAP, holds 5. Two conclusions can be
drawn from these facts: first, the EPO has been mostly successful at holding the line against
“pure” software patents; and second, to the extent they exist, they are mostly held by hardware
rather than software firms, as in the case of USPTO software patents.


         25
            The top European software patenters over 1978-2004 are Microsoft, Oracle, Peoplesoft, Veritas,
Symantec, Adobe Systems, Novell, Autodesk, Intuit, Siebel Systems, Computare, BMC Software, Computer
Associates, Electronic arts (Japan), and SAP (Germany), whereas the top U.S. software patenters during the 1980-
2000 period are Microsoft, Oracle, Peoplesoft, Veritas, Symantec, Adobe Systems, Novell, Autodesk, Macromedia,
Borland, Wall Data, Phoenix, Informix, Starfish, and RSA Security. Only half the firms are common between the
two lists, and only two firms are not U.S.-based.
         26
             By relying on the intersection between the two methods we reduce the Type I-error (excluding a patent
that we should have included among software patents) and high Type-II error (classify as software patent a patent
that is not related to software). Preliminary work by Bergstra and Klint (2007) suggests that there is fair amount of
Type-II error in EPO software patents when the union of the keyword and the IPC method is adopted. Using the
intersection of the two methods we find few EPO patents that qualify as pure software, which suggests that the EPO
is successful in restricting patenting in this area (many pure software patents do not qualify for patentable subject
matter because, according to the EPC, they do not produce any technical effect or are not capable of industrial
application).

                                                              21
3.7.     Descriptive statistics
         Tables 3a and 3b show some descriptive statistics for the final sample of 1061 firms, an
unbalanced panel with 5,312 observations (from 1 to 12 years per firm). Table 3a gives statistics
for the continuous variables and Table 3b for the various patent measures. The firms in the
sample are large, with median sales of 306 million euros and median employment of 1423. They
are fairly R&D intensive, with a median R&D to tangible asset ratio of 0.25, and this is reflected
in their median Tobin’s q of 1.7, which is well above unity.
         Table 3b reports descriptive statistics for granted patents (by their priority date), the stock
of granted patents, the ratio of patent stocks to R&D stocks, and the ratio of citation stocks to
patent stocks, for all patents and for software patents separately. In this table the statistics for all
of the variables are based on the entire sample, but the number of non-zero observations is
reported for each variable. For the patent flows, we report statistics on the six types of patents
described in the previous section: all EPO patents, all US patents, EPO only, US only, EPO with
US equivalents, and US with EPO or European national office equivalents. For the sake of
brevity, only the statistics for patent grants include those for EPO only and US only patents, as
these can generally be derived for the difference between the total and the equivalents (see the
discussion in section 3).
                                                     [Table 3 about here]
         This table reveals that the firms in our sample take out twice as many USPTO as EPO
patents (13 per firm year versus 26 per firm per year) and that this is reflected in a much larger
share of inventions for which protection is sought only in the US and not in Europe (about 50 per
cent) as compared to the reverse situation (about 25 per cent). The average firm that spends one
million euros on R&D obtains 0.3 EPO patents and 0.44 USPTO patents, but of course the
distributions are very skew, with medians of 0.08 and 0.15 respectively. USPTO patents receive
far more citations (corrected for truncation) than EPO patents (12 versus 3), probably reflecting
differences in the two patent systems.27




         27
            In principle, the differences in citation behavior should affect the citing, not the cited patent, but to the
extent that search is local to a patent office, and also to particular technologies, these differences will also affect the
patents being cited.

                                                                 22
4.      Results
        Tables 4 through 7 contain the results of our estimations. The equation estimated is based
on equation (4) and is estimated by nonlinear least squares: 28
                                                                                      
                          log Qit = qt + λk + δ j + β s log Sit + log 1 + ∑ γ l X itl                     (1)
                                                                          l           
where i, t, k, j, and l index firms, years, countries, industries, and variables respectively. S is a
control for size (the current sales or turnover of the firm); the size coefficient was invariably
small and positive, and had little impact on the rest of the equation. The Xitj are the various
measures of R&D, patent, and citations stock ratios.
        Table 4 contains our basic results using the R&D-assets ratio and various patent stock-
R&D stock ratios. Table 5 adds information on software patents, and Table 6 includes
information on the two patent value indicators. Table 7 reports results with the value indicators
for software patents also included separately. Each table displays coefficient estimates and their
robust standard errors in the top panel, and the average elasticities implied by the coefficients in
the bottom panel. Below we discuss each of the tables in turn.

4.1.    Estimation of the basic model without citations
        The results for the basic model that includes R&D stocks, total patent stocks, and
software patent stocks are shown in Table 4. For this model only, we also show the coefficients
on dummies for zero patent stocks; these were included in all the models to control for possible
differences in non-patenting firms or errors in matching, but they are not readily interpretable.
        The first and by far the most significant and robust result in all the tables is that the ratio
between R&D stock and physical assets is positively and significantly related to Tobin’s q across
different specifications of the market value equation. The magnitude of the coefficient (slightly
less than unity) is consistent with most of those reported in earlier works on single or multiple
countries (e.g., Hall 2000; Blundell et al. 2002; Toivanen et al. 2002; Hall and Oriani 2005;
Greenhalgh and Rogers 2006). The estimated elasticity is even more robust across all the
specifications in Tables 4 and 5, taking values within a small interval around 0.20 in almost all


        28
           OLS estimates of the log approximation to equation (4) produced similar results and are therefore not
shown. We should also note that approximating the log (1+x) with x reduces substantially the accuracy of estimates.
For instance, approximating the log (1+R&D/assests) with R&D/assets=0.2 yields a 10 per cent measurement error
(log(1+0.2)=0.18). With a R&D/asset ratio equal to 0.55 the error amounts to about 25 per cent.

                                                              23
cases. The average R&D-assets ratio is 0.51 with a standard deviation of 0.74, so that these
estimates imply that firm which is one standard deviation above the mean has a market value that
is 30 per cent higher than the average firm.
         Second, in all specifications a firm’s patent stocks are significantly related to value,
above and beyond the R&D stock that generated them, but with some interesting detail,
depending on the jurisdictions in which the patent was taken out. As discussed earlier, we have
six possible (overlapping) patent measures: (i) EPO, (ii) EPO only, (iii) EPO with US
equivalents, (iv) US, (v) US only, and (vi) US with European equivalents. In columns (2) and
(3), we compare the use of all EPO and all US patents in the equation and find that both are
significantly related to market value, with US patents having a slightly higher coefficient and
elasticity (0.05 versus 0.03).
         In models (4) and (5) we break up these two measures into patents with equivalents in the
other jurisdiction and without. In models (6) and (7) we include the three indicators that should
exhaust the information available, first using EP patents with US equivalents and then using US
patents with EP equivalents.29 The message is fairly clear and persists throughout these tables
with only a few exceptions: Patents taken out at the EPO only are not valued by the financial
markets once we control for equivalent patents taken out in the US. In addition, patents taken out
in both jurisdictions are clearly more valuable than those taken out only in the U.S. An additional
US patent with European equivalent per million euros of R&D leads to a 20 per cent increase in
market value, whereas an additional EPO patent with a US equivalent leads to a 30 per cent
increase in market value. An additional US patent without an equivalent per million euros of
R&D leads only to a 12 per cent increase in market value, but an additional patent taken out only
in Europe adds an insignificant amount to value. Clearly, there is a substantial premium to
geographical scope for EPO patents, even when controlling only for patenting in the US and not
for the rest of the world. Financial markets place a positive value on EPO patented inventions
owned by European firms only when patent protection is also acquired in the United States.


         29
            It is worth noting that about two-thirds of our firms regularly patent in the USPTO and about one third
never patents there. The number of EP patents is smaller than US patents for various reasons. First, the EP system is
younger than its US counterpart. Second, the examination-granting lag is larger in the EP. Finally, many firms in our
sample carry out R&D activities in the US and therefore they may file their first patent application to the USPTO to
establish the priority of an invention and then use the PCT system to obtain protection in the European national
countries. Finally, German firms (and UK as well) tend to apply more to their national patent system and the
USPTO than the EPO. We took account of this fact when defining equivalents to US patents, but data constraints
prevent us from including these patents themselves.

                                                             24
         The average elasticities reported in the bottom panel of Table 4 show that EPO and US
patents have a similar impact with an elasticity of 4 and 3 per cent respectively, but with some of
the US impact coming from patents taken out only in the US. A one standard deviation increase
in the stock of EPO patents with US equivalents relative to R&D is associated with about an 11
per cent increase of market value, and similarly a one standard deviation increase in the stock of
US patents with EPO equivalents (relative to R&D stock) yields a 10 per cent increase in market
value.
                                            [Table 4 about here]
         The coefficients for EPO and US patents in Table 4 are substantially higher than the
coefficient obtained by Hall et al. 2005 using the same methodology for U.S. firms and U.S.
patent data during the 1980s: between 0.16 and 0.18 as compared with 0.03 for the earlier period
and data. However, they are closer to the estimate obtained by Hall and MacGarvie 2006 for a
sample of US information and communication technology (ICT) firms during the late 1990s,
which was 0.15. Note that the estimates here are probably the first set of estimates using patents
for firms from continental European countries and they seem to suggest that the incremental
value of EPO patents above and beyond the R&D that generated them is roughly the same as that
of US patents, but only if these patents have equivalents in the US system.
         Given the results in Table 4, which shows that patents taken out in only one jurisdiction
have little if any association with firm market value, in Table 5, which looks at software patents,
we focus on the specifications that break patents up into those that have equivalents in the other
jurisdiction and those that do not. This table repeats the regressions of Table 4, adding separate
patent stock-R&D stock ratios for software patents. The coefficients of the software patents
stock-R&D ratios are to be interpreted as premia or discounts for patents that fall into the
software class. However, the elasticities shown are the total elasticities for software patents
rather than premia, for ease in interpretation. Because the very small number of EPO only
software patents (fewer than 10 per year) and because EPO only patents are generally not value-
relevant, we have omitted this variable from the regression in Table 5.
                                            [Table 5 about here]
         The results in Table 5 for patents in general are similar to those in Table 4, with the only
patents that are informative for market value are those taken out in both jurisdictions and to a
lesser extent, those taken out in the US only. US software patents with EP equivalents and EP
software patents with US equivalents are both valued at a considerable premium over other

                                                      25
patents. Although the coefficients appear very large, it has to be remembered that the variables
themselves (software patent-total R&D ratios) are very small so that the elasticities are small.
The US software patent-R&D ratio has an elasticity of around one per cent, implying that a
doubling of software patent yield per R&D would increase market value by one per cent.
Although the coefficient on US software patents is smaller than that on EPO patents the average
elasticity of EPO software patents is very close to zero. This is because the higher coefficient for
EPO patents is inversely correlated with their smaller numbers. Thus, although each EPO
software patent is more valuable than a USPTO patent, the same per cent increase in either stock
produces a much smaller impact on market value in the case of EPO patents.
          Note also that software patents taken out only in the U.S., which are actually more
numerous than those with equivalents in Europe, are no more valuable than other US only
patents. These are presumably patents on inventions that are not eligible for patenting at the
EPO, and it is interesting that they are not as valuable to European firms as software patents that
can be taken out in both jurisdictions.

4.2.      Sample selection bias
          As mentioned earlier in the paper, the disclosure of R&D expenditures is an endogenous
variable and this gives rise to potential sample selection bias. To see whether sample selection
biases our results, we first calculated the share of total R&D in the population of manufacturing
and utility firms accounted for by our sample. Country-level R&D expenditures were taken from
the OECD STAN dataset. As Table A.5 shows, the ratio of total R&D in our sample to the
country-level industrial R&D varies across countries. For example, the ratio was 99.5 per cent in
France, 98 per cent in Germany and over 100 per cent in the UK and Switzerland.30 Apparently,
the problem of sample selection is potentially relevant for firms from Spain and Italy while it is
less important for other firms in our sample. Overall, the high coverage of national R&D
expenditures demonstrates that in Europe, as in the US, most of the business R&D activity is
conducted by large, publicly traded firms. Moreover, our sample accounts for around 15.9% of
overall patenting activity and 6.7% of software patenting activity at the EPO. These shares are
quite large given that our sample does not include firms from the United States and Japan.



          30
               The fact that the share is above unity is explained by the R&D activity of their foreign subsidiaries
abroad.

                                                                  26
         To check for sample selection bias we estimated a sample selection model using the
Heckman two step method. For this purpose we collected accounting data for 3,773 publicly-
listed firms that report data on R&D and for a matching sample of 3,194 publicly-listed firms
from the same countries but which had reported no R&D data over the period 1991-2002.31 The
non-R&D doing firms are smaller, less labour-intensive, have higher leverage, and lower Tobin’s
q.
         Our selection equation includes leverage (the ratio of current + non-current debt to
tangible fixed assets), capital intensity (the ratio of tangible fixed assets to sales), and labor
intensity (the ratio of labor cost to sales), as well as the share of the firm held by the main
shareholder to account for observable firm characteristics that can affect its decision whether or
not to reveal R&D expenditures. To account for ‘environmental’ factors we also included
industry and year dummies in the equation. The inverse Mills’ ratio obtained from the first stage
estimation obtained by a probit model was then entered in the market value equation (see
Maddala, 1983 and Hall, 1987). Our results show that there is little evidence of sample
selection.32 This result is consistent with that of Hall and Oriani (2006) for firms in France,
Germany, and Italy.

4.3.     Accounting for patent quality
         Tables 6 and 7 report estimations that include our patent value indicators (forward
citations and the composite ‘quality’ index) for total patents and software patents. In these tables
we restrict the specifications to two: one that includes EPO only patents, US only patents, and
EPO patents with US equivalents, and one that includes EPO only patents, US only patents, and
US patents with European equivalents. The first two columns of Table 6 report the results of
specification including the average forward citation/patent stock ratios, and the second two
columns report those including the average factor index/patent stock ratios. Table 7 reports the
same thing including software patents, but only for the second specification (US patents with
EPO equivalents) because of the paucity of EPO software patents.



         31
         The sample includes all publicly listed firms in the sample countries whose accounting data are available
in Amadeus company directory.
         32
           The estimated coefficient on the inverse Mills’ ratio does not enter significantly in the market value
equation at the 10 per cent level . Firms from Austria and Ireland were dropped because of the small number of
observations. The results of these estimations are available upon request.

                                                              27
       The results in these tables for R&D and patents are similar to those in the previous tables.
Citations yield an additional albeit small premium to either the EPO or the US patent counts. It is
worth to note that the ‘quality’ of EPO only and US only patents, whether measured by citations
or the factor index, does not yield any significant impact on the market value of the firm. Recall
that both EPO and US citations include all citations to their equivalents. Probably because EPO
citations are more parsimonious in general, the EPO citation-patent stock ratio has a mean and
standard deviation of 2.9 and 3.3, much smaller than the US citation-patent stock ratio, with 12.6
and 15.3 respectively. The elasticity of market value with respect to the EPO (with US
equivalents) cite per patent ratio is 7.0 per cent, as compared to 2.8 per cent for the US with
European equivalents, which suggests that these cites are even more informative about value
than would be suggested by the 4 to 1 ratio in which they are received.
                                           [Table 6 about here]
       The second pair of columns in Table 6 report similar results using the patent quality
index based on 3-year forward citations, family size, and number of IPC classes instead of
forward citations alone. The other coefficients in the regression are little affected by the change
in quality indicator. However, the elasticity of market value with respect to the index is greater
than that with respect to forward citations, suggesting that it is a somewhat better proxy for the
average quality of a firm’s patented inventions. For EPO patents with US equivalents a one
standard deviation increase in average patent quality is associated with an increase in the market
value of the firm equal to 5.0 per cent. The same calculations for US patents yields a 7.4 per cent
increase. The corresponding numbers for the forward citation measure are 11.1 per cent for
average cites to EPO patents with US equivalents and 6.2 per cent for average cites to US patents
with EPO equivalents. Thus it appears that citations to EPO patents and their equivalents are a
somewhat stronger value indicator than the constructed index, while for US patents both are
about the same.
       Table 7 reports the results of similar estimations that include software patents. The only
significant result for software patents is the positive premium for patents with equivalents, as
before. There is no premium for higher “quality” software patents, at least not using our
measures of quality; in fact the elasticity of market value with respect to the quality indicators for
software patents is almost exactly the same as that for ordinary patents. This result indicates that
the financial market does not recognize any additional premium from the “intrinsic” value of
software-related inventions.

                                                     28
                                            [Table 7 about here]
       Various robustness checks of the above results have been done using regressions that
excluded extreme values of R&D stocks, patent stocks, the composite ‘quality’ index and
software citation stocks. The qualitative results are very similar. However, these estimations do
not account for bias due to unobserved firm-specific heterogeneity. We defer this to future
research using panel data estimation.

5.     Discussion and conclusions
       This paper reports some new estimates of the economic value of patents in a sample of
European firms. The main novelty of the paper consists in the use of both EPO and USPTO
patents and quality-adjusted patents in the market value equation. In addition, we explored the
question of whether software-related patents in Europe are valued differently from other patents.
This exercise was motivated by the growing number of software patents in the EPO, the debate
over the patentability of Computer Implemented Inventions and the supposedly poor quality of
‘software-related’ patents due to their strategic nature.
       As far as total patents are concerned, our results demonstrate clearly that the financial
markets primarily value those patented inventions for which patents are obtained in both
European and US jurisdictions. Although EPO patents held by European firms are valued
somewhat more highly than USPTO patents held by the same firms, this result is entirely
accounted for by the fact that USPTO patents are slightly more numerous, so that the elasticity of
market value with respect to patenting of either type is the same. Compared to USPTO patents
held by US firms, patents of either type held by European firms have a slightly greater impact on
value than those held by U.S. ICT firms during a similar time period (an elasticity of 0.035
versus about 0.016 reported by Hall and MacGarvie 2006) or those held by all US firms during
the 1980s (0.02 reported by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005).
       Although quality adjusting these patents is significant, using either forward citations or
an index based on forward citations, family size, and number of IPC classes, it adds only about
0.1 per cent to the explanatory power of the regression. It is also noteworthy that forward
citations do almost as well as the 3-component factor index for EPO patents. One reason for this
may be that by including patents with equivalents separately in the regression we have already
captured much of the information associated with family size. That is, the taking out of a patent
at both the EPO and the USPTO is a good enough indicator that it is more valuable than other


                                                      29
patents. However, for US patents, the factor index provides more information than citation
weights alone.
       The insignificant share of software firms in software patenting suggests that most
software firms in Europe are not using patents to protect their inventions. It is also true that the
very small number of EPO patents we obtain when using a definition designed to capture “pure”
software patents suggests that the EPO has been successful in excluding such patenting.
Nevertheless, patents identified as software-related in general are more valuable that other
patents, whether taken out at the EPO or at the USPTO. More interestingly, the quality-weighted
software patents are no more valuable than other patents, suggesting that the value of these
patents derives from their numbers rather than the quality of the inventions that they cover.
       The present paper is a first investigation of the EPO patent dataset based only on
European firms from a large set of countries. In future research we will try to correct for some
limitations of the dataset. First, we want to extend the analysis to firms of non-European
countries such as the United States. Second, we will control for differences between citations to
patents held by other firms and self-citations. Although we have included self-citations, we do
not expect significant changes in our results from this exploration. Previous work on US data by
Hall et al. (2005) and Hall and MacGarvie (2006) have found that removing self-citations yields
real but limited changes in the impact of citation-adjusted patents on the firm’s market value.
       Finally, we will control for changes in corporate structure. The results presented in this
paper rely on the pooled ownership links of the firms mainly in the period from 1998 to 2005,
which was used to match the name of patent assignees in the EPO database with that of
companies in Amadeus. Therefore in earlier years our patent variables may include more or
fewer patents than are actually owned by the firm, which introduces an unknown source of bias.
Moreover, we do not take into account the date of a merger, acquisition or the entry of a
subsidiary firm. We recognize that this is a potential source of bias because expectations about
future firms’ performance (our dependent variable) may be correlated with future acquisitions of
patents, implying that the patent variable proxies for growth expectations in some cases.




                                                      30
Bibliography

Arundel, A. (2001), “The Relative Effectiveness of Patents and Secrecy for Appropriation.”
      Research Policy 30: 611-624.
Arundel, A. (2003), Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy, Report of the KNOW Survey,
      MERIT, University of Maastricht.
Bacchiocchi, E. and F. Montobbio (2004), “EPO vs. USPTO Citations Lags.” in CESPRI
      Working Papers.
Bergstra, J. A., and P. Klint (2007), “How to find a software patent?” Informatics Institute,
       University of Amsterdam: manuscript.
Bessen, J and Hunt, R. M. (2004), “An Empirical Look at Software Patents,” Boston University,
       Working Paper: http://www.researchoninnovation.org/swpat.pdf
Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen (2002), “Patents, real options and firm performance.” Economic
      Journal 112: C97-C116.
Blundell, R., R. Griffith, and J. Van Reenen (1999), “Market share, market value and innovation
      in a panel of British manufacturing firms.” Review Of Economic Studies 66: 529-554.
Blundell, R., R. Griffith, and J. Van Reenen (1995), “Market Share, Market Value, and
      Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms.” University College London
      Discussion Paper 95/19, London, October.
Bureau van Dijk (2005) Amadeus – Company Directory Database, available also at
      www.amadeus.bvdep.com
DaDalt, P.J., Donaldson, J.R. and Garner J.L. (2003) “Will Any q Do?”, Journal of Financial
      Research, 4: 535-551.
Datastream (2006) Thomson Financial, www.datastream.com.
Gambardella, A., D. Harhoff, and B. Verspagen (2005), “The Value of Patents.” Universita
     Bocconi, Ludwig-Maximiliens Universitaet, and Eindhoven University, Working Paper:
     http://www.creiweb.org/activities/sc_conferences/23/papers/gambardella.pdf
Gold, B. (1977), Research, Technological Change and Economic Analysis, Lexington Books,
       Lexington, Mass.
Graham, S. J. H. and D. C. Mowery (2003), “Intellectual Property Protection in the U. S.
      Software Industry,” in W. M. Cohen and S. A. Merrill (eds.), Patents in the Knowledge-
      Based Economy, Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Greenhalgh, C., and M. Rogers (2006), “The value of innovation: The interaction of competition,
      R&D and IP.” Research Policy 35: 562-580.
Griliches, Z. (1979), “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
       Productivity Growth.” Bell Journal of Economics 10(1): 92-116.
Griliches, Z. (1980), “Returns to Research and Development Expenditures in the Private Sector.”
       In Kendrick, J. W., and B. N. Vaccara (eds.), New Developments in Productivity
       Measurement and Analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 419-454.

                                                  31
Griliches, Z. (1981), “Market Value, R&D and Patents.” Economic Letters 7: 183-87.
Griliches, Z. (1990), Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey, Journal of Economic
       Literature, XXVIII (Dec.): 1661-1707.
Griliches, Z., Hall, H. B. and Pakes, A. (1991), “R&D, Patents. And Market Value Revisited: Is
       There a Second (Technological Opportunity) Factor?.” Economics of Innovation and New
       Technology 1: 183-202.
Guellec, D. and B. Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2000), “Applications, Grants, and the Value
       of Patent,” Economic Letters 69 (1): 109-114.
Hall, B. H. (1993), The Stock Market Valuation of R&D Investment during the 1980s.”
       American Economic Review 83: 259-64.
Hall, B. H. (2000), “Innovation and Market Value.” In R. Barrell, G. Mason, and M. O’Mahoney
       (eds.), Productivity, Innovation and Economic Performance, Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Hall, B. H. (2006), “R&D, Productivity, and Market Value,” revised version of paper presented
       at the International Conference in memory of Zvi Griliches, Paris, August 2003. UC
       Berkeley and NBER.
Hall, B. H., and M. MacGarvie (2006), “The Private Value of Software Patents,” Cambridge,
       Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12195 (April).
Hall, B. H., and Mairesse, J. (1995), “Exploring the Relationship between R&D and Productivity
       in French Manufacturing Firms,” Journal of Econometrics 65: 263-94.
Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, M. (1998), “The Economic Significance of Patent
       Citations.” UC Berkeley, Nuffield College, Brandeis University, University of Tel Aviv,
       mimeo.
Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001), “The NBER Patent Citations Data File:
       Lessons, Insights, and Methodological Tools.” In A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg (eds.),
       Patents, Citations and Innovations, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Also Cambridge,
       Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8498 (October).
Hall B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005), “Market Value and Patent Citations,” Rand
       Journal of Economics 36: 16-38.
Hall, B. H., and R. Oriani (2006), “Does the market value R&D investment by European firms?
       Evidence from a panel of manufacturing firms in France, Germany.” International
       Journal of Industrial Organization 24: 971-993.
Hansen, L. P. (1982), “Large Sample Properties of Generalised Methods of Moments
      Estimators.” Econometrica 50: 1029-1054.
Harhoff, D., K. Hoisl, and C. Webb (2006), “European patent citations – How to count and how
       to interpret them?” University of Munich and CEPR (London), University of Munich,
       and OECD.
Harhoff, D., F. Narin, and K. Vopel (1999), “Citation Frequency and the Value of Patented
       Inventions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 81(3): 511-15.
Hoover’s (2005), Hoover’s Company Directory, www.hoovers.com.


                                                  32
IMF (2006), Global Financial Stability Report. Market Development and Issues, International
      Monetary Fund, Washington DC, September www.imf.org / External /
      Pubs/FT/GFSR/2006/02/index.htm.
IMF (2007), Global Financial Stability Report. Market Development and Issues, International
      Monetary Fund, Washington DC, September www.imf.org / External /
      Pubs/FT/GFSR/2007/01/index.htm.
Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and Fogarty, M. (2000), “The Meaning of Patent Citations: Report of
        the NBER/Case Western Reserve Survey of Patentees.” Working Paper No. 7631,
        NBER. Reprinted as Chapter 12 in Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002), Patents, Citations and
        Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge: MIT Press,.
Jolliffe, I T. (2002), Principal Component Analysis, Second Edition. New York: Springer-
         Verlag.
Lanjouw, J. O., and M. Schankerman (2004), “Patent Quality and Research Productivity:
      Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators.” Economic Journal 114: 441-465.
Lanjouw, J. O., A. Pakes, and J. Putnam (1998), “How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual
      Property: The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data,” Journal of Industrial
      Economics 46 (4): 405-432.
Layne-Farrar, A. (2005). “Defining Software Patents: A Research Field Guide,” LECG, Chicago:
      manuscript.
Lerner, J. (1994), “The Importance of Patent Scope: An Empirical Analysis,” Rand Journal of
       Economics 25 (2): 319-33.
Levine, R. and Zervos, S. (1998), “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth.” American
       Economic Review 88(3): 537-58.
Lindenberg, E.B. and S. A. Ross (1981), “Tobin's q Ratio and Industrial Organization.” Journal
      of Business 54: 1-32.
Mairesse, J. and M. Sassenou (1991), “R&D and productivity: a survey of econometric studies at
       the firm level.” STI Review (OECD) 8: 9-46.
Mansfield, E. (1968), Industrial Research and Technological Innovation. An Econometric
      Analysis. Norton, New York.
Montgomery, C.A. and B. Wernerfelt (1988), “Diversification, Ricardian Rents, and Tobin's q.”
      Rand Journal of Economics 19(4): 623-32.
Nelson, R.R. (1959), “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research.” Journal of Political
       Economy 67(June): 297-306.
Norsworthy, J. R. and S. L. Jang (1992), Empirical Measurement and Analysis of Productivity
      and Technological Change. Applications in High-Technology and Services Industries,
      North Holland, Amsterdam.
PATSTAT (2006), EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database – Available under license from
     OECD-EPO Task Force on Patent Statistics.
Perfect, S. and Wiles, K. (1994), “Alternative construction of Tobin’s q: an empirical
        comparison,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1: 313-341.


                                                 33
Quillen, C. D., O. H. Webster, and R. Eichmann (2002), “Continuing Patent Applications and
       Performance of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office – Extended,” The Federal Circuit
       Bar Journal 12(1): 35-55
Rajan, R. G. and Zingales, L. (2003) “Banks and Markets: The Changing Character of European
       Finance”, CEPR discussion paper series financial economics,3865, May,
       www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP3865.asp and http://ssrn.com/abstract=419440.
Schumpeter, J. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University Press,
     Cambridge, Mass.
Teece, D.J. (1986), “Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration,
       Collaboration, Licensing and Public Policy.” Research Policy 15: 285–305.
Thoma G. and Torrisi S. (2005), “Evolution of Software Industry in Europe,” Study of the effects
      of allowing patents claims for computer-implemented inventions, Brussels: EU DG
      Commission Research Report.
Toivanen, O., P. Stoneman, and D. Bosworth (2002), “Innovation and the market value of UK
      firms, 1989-1995.” Oxford Bulletin Of Economics And Statistics 64: 39-___.
Wildasin, D. E. (1984), “The q Theory of Investment with Many Capital Goods.” American
       Economic Review 74(1): 203-10.
WIPO (2007), Patent statistics database, available at
      http://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/statistics/patents/




                                                   34
                                     Appendix A – Sample description

                                              [Table A.1 about here]

                                              [Table A.2 about here]

                                              [Table A.3 about here]

                                              [Table A.4 about here]

                                              [Table A.5 about here]



                           Appendix B – Correcting for citation truncation

        The HJT method to identify the random process generating citations is based on the
estimation of a semi-structural model which is made of two equations. With the first equation the
citation frequency is modelled as a multiplicative function of cited-year effects (s), citing-year (t)
effects, technology field (k) effects and citation lag effects (Hall et al., 2001). The equation can
be written as follows:
        Ckst / Pks = α 0α sα tα k exp[ f k ( L)]
where Ckst is the total number of citations received by patents with application date s and in
technology k from patents with application date t. Pks is the number of patents in technology k,
year s. Ckst / Pks is then the average number of citations received by patents k-s by all patents in
year t. The parameters αs, αt, αk measure the effect of, respectively, cited-year, citing-year and
technology on the probability of citations. The function fk(L) describes the shape of the citation-
lag (L=t-s) distribution, which is allowed to vary across fields. The multiplicative form of the
citation frequency relies on the assumption of proportionality, i.e., the shape of the lag
distribution is assumed to be independent of the number of citations received.
        The α parameters are normalized so that each parameter measures the proportional
difference in the citation propensity with respect to the base category. For instance, an estimated
coefficient αk= (k=chemicals field) = 2 implies that the expected citation rate of patents in the
chemical field is twice the citation rate of patents in the base field.
        The second equation in the model is the following:
        f k ( L) = exp(− β1k L)(1 − exp(− β 2 k L)




                                                           35
where the parameters β1k and β 2 k measure the depreciation or obsolescence of the knowledge
protected by patents in field k and the diffusion effect, respectively.
       Following Hall et al (2001), we estimated this model by non linear least squares.
Estimated α parameters can be used to remove cited-patent, citing-patent and technology field
effects. Since we are primarily interested in truncation, we used the estimates of β parameters to
calculate the expected distribution lags. Table B.1 reports the cumulative citation lag
distributions in the seven technological groups defined by Fraunhofer-ISI and the Observatoire
des Sciences et des Techniques over the cited period 1978-2004.33 We used these proportions to
correct the observed citation counts. Consider, for example, a chemical patent in year 2002
which has received 5 citations until 2005. Table B.1 shows that the typical chemical patent in
year 2002 receives about 48.2% of citations after three years from its application. To correct for
truncation we have to ‘deflate’ the observed citations by 0.48183 obtaining 10.38 citations.
       The weights reported in Table B.1 and Table B.2. are obtained by using all citations
respectively to EPO and USPTO by year of cited patents, year of citing patents, citation lag and
technological field of the cited patent. The source of data is PATSTAT (2006), which reports
citations received by EPO and the USPTO patents from the main world patent offices, including
the USPTO, the JPTO and the WIPO. The weights reported above have been estimated
separately for EP and US patents without conditioning on the patent office from which they
originate from, and we have used the same weights to correct all citations received by the patents
in our sample, assuming that the shape of the simulated cumulative lag distributions does not
vary with the citing patent’s office.
       Unfortunately, the EPO system does not require examiners to indicate the ‘main’
technological field. The PATSTAT Data Catalogue_3_22 states that ‘…For other authorities,
like the EPO, there is in general no meaning in the position – classes may be quoted in
alphabetical order for instance …” p. 50). The problem is serious since many patents are
classified in two or more 2-digit IPC fields. In this case, we used the arithmetic mean of the
citation lag distribution weighted by the patent’s own IPC distribution (e.g., if it has 3 chemical
classes and one drug, we used 3/4 the chemical cite lag and 1/4 the drug cite lag; given the




       33
            http://www.obs-ost.fr


                                                      36
similarity of the lag distributions, this procedure is not likely to introduce much error into the
measure.
                                           [Table.B.1 about here]
                                           [Table.B.2 about here]

                     Appendix C – A Composite Patent Quality Indicator

       The construction of the multidimensional measure of patent quality relies on factor
analysis. In factor models each series of data (quality indicator in our case) is decomposed into a
common component and an idiosyncratic component. The common component is only driven by
a few common shocks, denoted by V< N, where N is the number of indicators. In a static factor
model, the common shocks affect the indicators only contemporaneously. The basic model is
given by X = UB + E = K+ E, where X is the (T × N) matrix of observations on N series
(indicators) of length T. The series are normalized to have mean 0 and variance 1. U is the (T ×
V) matrix of V common shocks and B is the (V × N) matrix of factor loadings, which determines
the impact of common shock v on series n. The common shocks and the factor loadings together
make up the common component K. After the influence of common shocks has been removed,
only the idiosyncratic component (E) remains. To estimate the common component we have to
find a linear combination of the indicators in X that explains as much as possible the total
variance of each indicator, minimizing the idiosyncratic component (for a technical discussion of
factor models see Jolliffe (2002).
       The parallel with least squares estimation is clear from this formulation, but the fact that
the common shocks are unobserved complicates the problem. The standard way to extract the
common component in the static case is to use principal component analysis. In principal
component analysis the first V eigenvalues and eigenvectors are calculated from the variance-
covariance matrix of the dataset X. The common component is then defined as K= XVV’, with V
= [p1,…,pV] and where pi is the eigenvector corresponding to the ith largest (i = 1 . . .Q)
eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of X. This method does not guarantee a unique solution. A
further problem is that ex ante it is not known how many common shocks V affect the series in X.
Following the approach suggested by Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004), we use a multiple-
indicator model with an unobserved common factor:
       yk i= λk vi + β’X + eki



                                                      37
where yki indicates the value of the kth patent indicator for the ith patent; v is the common factor
with factor loadings λk and normally distributed, while X is a set of controls. The main
underlining assumption is that the variability of each patent indicator in the sample may be
generated by the variability of a common factor across all the indicators and an idiosyncratic
component ek∼ N(0,σ2k) which is not related to other ‘quality’ indicators.
       In our setting, the common factor is the unobserved characteristic of a patent that
influences positively three ‘quality’ indicators: family size, forward citations, and the number of
8-digit IPC technology fields. The analysis is based on the total number of EPO patents granted
between 1978 and 2002 (around 785,740 observations) and of US patents granted between 1978
and 2002 (around 2,756,353 observations).
       More precisely, to estimate v we followed a two step estimation procedure. In the first
step we regressed the three patent ‘quality’ indicators against two observable patent
characteristics, the year of application and the main technology class of the patent (out of 30
macro-technological classes) using three stage least squares. Estimation of the common quality
index v is then based on information extrapolated from the covariance matrix of three observable
indicators conditional on year and technology class. In the second step we used maximum
likelihood to estimate a factor model using the residuals from the first step under the assumption
that v ∼N(0, σ2). We found evidence of the existence of a single common factor which we used as
our multidimensional measure of patent ‘quality’ in the market value estimations. Factor analysis
in the second step yields the following factor loadings:
                Variable                       EPO patents        USPTO patents
                Forward citations                  0.289                0.173
                Family size                        0.301                0.106
                Number of IPC classes              0.170                0.334




                                                     38
                                  Table 1
  Empirical studies of the market value of innovation using European data
                          Innovation      Patent Sample Geographical    Time
Paper             R&D       output       citations  size  coverage     period
                        USPTO patents,
Blundell et al.         SPRU innovation
(1999)            NO        counts          NO      340     UK       1972-1982
Bloom and Van                           5-year cite
Reenen (2002)     NO     USPTO patents     stock    404     UK       1968-1996
Toivanen et al.
(2002)            YES        NO             NO    1519       UK      1988-1995
Greenhalgh and           UK and EPO
Rogers (2006)     YES      patents          NO    3227        UK     1989-2002
Hall and Oriani                                          US, UK, FR,
(2006)            YES       NO              NO    2156      IT, DE   1989-1998
                        USPT and EPO                     21 European
Our study         YES      patents          Yes   7168    countries  1991-2002




                                       39
                                        Table 2
           Country-size distribution of R&D-reporting firms in our sample
Average sales                                10M-         100M-                                        Market
(euros in 2000)                  < 10M       100M           1B      1B-10B       > 10B       Total   cap/GDP*
Austria                             1           4            6          3           0          14       0.41
Belgium & Luxembourg                0          9             9          5           1          24       0.77
Switzerland                         1          11           39         18           3          72       NA
Germany                             8          73           67         35          11         194       0.43
Denmark                             2           9            9          4           0          24       0.62
Eastern Europe                      0           2            7          1           0          10       0.11
Spain & Greece                      0           8           21          3           0          32       0.82
Finland                             1          26           21         13           2          63       0.94
France                              9          43           44         23          13         132       0.73
UK                                 51         123          100         55          14         343       1.73
Ireland                             2           2            6          2           0          12       0.45
Italy                               0           0            1          1           1           3       0.45
Netherlands                         2          10           10          9           4          35       0.81
Norway                              2           8            8          3           2          23       NA
Sweden                             13          28           21         15           3          80       0.97
Totals                             92         356          369        190          54        1061
This variable is the total stock market capitalization for the country over GDP (source: IMF 2006)




                                                     40
                                                   Table 3a
                                             Descriptive Statistics
                            5312 observations, 1061 firms, 15 country/regions, 1991-2002
                              Number** Mean          S.D.     Median      1Q       3Q      Min      Max
Sales*                          5312     3749.8    11996.8    306.3     66.9    1950.6      0.0    194,724
Tobin's q                       5312      2.99       3.54      1.71     1.14      3.18      0.10    24.85
Employment                      4729     16864      47119     1423      298      9600         1    477,100
R&D expenditures*               5312     129.32    485.91      8.11     1.87     36.62     0.000    6,787
R&D stock*                      5312     637.45    2396.47    35.16     8.44    183.46     0.01    33,127
R&D stock/assets                5312      0.51       0.74      0.25     0.09      0.59     0.000     4.99
*In millions of current euros
**The number of good observations.




                                                     41
                                                 Table 3b
                                Descriptive statistics for patent variables
                  5312 observations, 1061 firms, 15 country/regions, 1991-2002
                                      N nonzero Mean              S.D. Median      1Q      3Q
                              Granted patents by application date
EPO                                         3980     13.22       64.04       0      0       4
EPO with US equivalents                     3758       9.94      48.40       0      0       3
EPO only                                    3309       3.28      18.46       0      0       1
USPTO                                       4253     25.80     134.46        1      0       7
USPTO with European equivalents             4020     12.96       70.41       0      0       3
USPTO only                                  3383     12.85       81.91       0      0       3
                         Granted software patents by application date
EPO                                          277       0.05       0.58       0      0       0
EPO with US equivalents                      205       0.04       0.46       0      0       0
EPO only                                     150       0.01       0.21       0      0       0
USPTO                                       2393       1.73      13.35       0      0       0
USPTO with European equivalents             1925       0.68       5.90       0      0       0
USPTO only                                  1732       1.05       9.30       0      0       0
                                    Stock of granted patents
EPO                                         3980     81.67     365.23     3.53    0.00   26.02
EPO with US equivalents                     3758     61.75     267.71     2.44    0.00   17.29
USPTO                                       4253 132.40        607.71     5.89    0.38   39.30
USPTO with European equivalents             4020     74.54     361.60     3.10    0.07   21.21
                               Stock of granted software patents
EPO                                          277       0.25       2.38    0.00    0.00    0.00
EPO with US equivalents                      205       0.19       1.72    0.00    0.00    0.00
USPTO                                       2393       9.56      57.84    0.00    0.00    1.73
USPTO with European equivalents             1925       4.28      30.19    0.00    0.00    0.72
                                    Patent-R&D stock ratios
EPO                                         3980       0.30       0.87    0.08    0.00    0.28
EPO with US equivalents                     3758       0.21       0.65    0.05    0.00    0.20
USPTO                                       4253       0.44       1.36    0.15    0.02    0.46
USPTO with European equivalents             4020       0.26       0.75    0.07    0.00    0.25
                          Patent-R&D stock ratios - software patents
EPO                                          277     0.001       0.016   0.000   0.000   0.000
EPO with US equivalents                      205     0.000       0.015   0.000   0.000   0.000
USPTO                                       2393     0.023       0.084   0.000   0.000   0.012
USPTO with European equivalents             1925     0.010       0.047   0.000   0.000   0.003
                                  Citation-patent stock ratios
EPO                                         3809       2.92       3.33    2.47    0.00    4.06
EPO with US equivalents                     3599       3.10       3.48    2.64    0.00    4.49
USPTO                                       4141     12.57       15.25   10.00    2.91   16.17
USPTO with European equivalents             3909     14.59       23.94    9.50    0.00   16.69
                         Citation-patent stock ratios - software patents
EPO                                          234       0.21       1.31    0.00    0.00    0.00
EPO with US equivalents                      194       0.19       1.30    0.00    0.00    0.00
USPTO                                       2298     12.80       31.91    0.00    0.00   16.92
USPTO with European equivalents             1861     13.94       49.98    0.00    0.00   12.84
*In millions of current euros



                                                 42
                                                                          Table 4
                                                         Market value regressions with patent stocks
                                       5312 observations for the 1991-2002 period. Dependent variable = log Tobin's Q
                                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)      (6)                                           (7)
R&D stock-assets ratio                   0.675 (0.061) 0.728 (0.067) 0.782 (0.071) 0.763 (0.072) 0.753 (0.070) 0.748 (0.071)                                   0.788 (0.074)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 European                                                    0.157 (0.034)
 European only                                                                                       0.014 (0.030)                            0.026 (0.032)    0.007 (0.034)
 US                                                                              0.177 (0.031)

 US only                                                                                                                 0.121 (0.045)        0.100 (0.047)    0.124 (0.046)
 European with US equivalents                                                                        0.330 (0.066)                            0.274 (0.065)
 US with European equivalents                                                                                            0.191 (0.042)                         0.211 (0.049)
                                                                     Dummies for zero patent stocks
European                                                     -0.016 (0.037)
European only                                                                                 0.188 (0.044)                                   0.202 (0.043)    0.145 (0.043)
US                                                                          0.062 (0.041)
US only                                                                                                                  -0.132 (0.034)       -0.114 (0.037)   -0.161 (0.035)
European with US equivalents                                                                         -0.101 (0.043)                           -0.047 (0.047)
US with European equivalents                                                                                             0.160 (0.042)                         0.112 (0.048)
Log sales (millions of euros)             0.016 (0.005)       0.020 (0.006)      0.024 (0.006)       0.028 (0.006)       0.019 (0.006)        0.022 (0.007)    0.024 (0.007)
R-squared (s.e.)                          0.255 (0.729)       0.263 (0.725)      0.266 (0.723)       0.269 (0.722)       0.269 (0.722)        0.271 (0.721)    0.271 (0.721)
                                                                  Average elasticity (standard deviation)
R&D stock-assets ratio                    0.194 (0.011)       0.201 (0.012) 0.205 (0.012) 0.199 (0.012)                  0.203 (0.012)        0.198 (0.012)    0.205 (0.012)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 European                                                     0.032 (0.006)
 European only                                                                                       0.001 (0.002)                            0.002 (0.002)    0.001 (0.002)
 US                                                                              0.049 (0.007)
 US only                                                                                                                 0.014 (0.005)        0.011 (0.005)    0.013 (0.005)
 European with US equivalents                                                                        0.041 (0.007)                            0.035 (0.007)
 US with European equivalents                                                                                            0.033 (0.006)                         0.035 (0.007)
These regressions include 15 country dummies, 24 industry dummies, and 12 year dummies, as well as dummies for obs with zero patent stocks.
Nonlinear least squares with robust standard errors.


                                                                                       43
                                              Table 5
                        Market value regressions with software patent stocks
           5312 observations for the 1991-2002 period. Dependent variable = log Tobin's Q
Variable                                  (8)             (9)            (10)             (11)
R&D stock-assets ratio               0.722 (0.068)   0.790 (0.072)  0.710 (0.068)    0.746 (0.070)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 US only                                                            0.100 (0.052)    0.125 (0.052)
 European with US equivalents        0.293 (0.059)                  0.243 (0.057)
 US with European equivalents                        0.206 (0.047)                   0.158 (0.041)
 US only software                                                                    -0.003 (0.313)   -0.101 (0.298)
 EP software with US equivalents              2.59 (1.34)                              2.54 (1.18)
 US software with European equiv.                                 1.57 (0.61)                          1.50 (0.57)
Log sales (millions of euros)               0.020 (0.006)        0.028 (0.006)       0.015 (0.006)    0.018 (0.006)
R-squared (s.e.)                            0.266 (0.723)        0.265 (0.724)       0.268 (0.722)    0.270 (0.722)
                                       Average elasticity (standard deviation)
K/A                                        0.198 (0.012)      0.205 (0.012)    0.198 (0.012)          0.201 (0.012)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 US only                                                                             0.011 (0.006)    0.014 (0.005)
 European with US equivalents               0.038 (0.006)                            0.032 (0.006)
 US with European equivalents                                    0.034 (.007)                         0.027 (0.006)

 US only software                                                0.0009 (0.0025) 0.0002 (0.0023)
 EP software with US equivalents 0.0004 (0.0001)                 0.0004 (0.0001)
 US software with European equiv.                0.0096 (0.0029)                 0.0092 (0.0028)
These regressions include 15 country dummies, 24 industry dummies, and 12 year dummies, as well as
dummies for obs with zero patent stocks.
Nonlinear least squares with robust standard errors.




                                                        44
                                           Table 6
            Market value regressions with patent stocks and patent value indicators
              5312 observations for the 1991-2002 period. Dependent variable = log Tobin's Q

Variable                                           (12)                 (13)                 (14)            (15)

R&D stock-assets ratio                        0.806 (0.083)        0.807 (0.078)        0.854 (0.116)   0.852 (0.099)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 European only                                0.029 (0.037)       -0.002 (0.033)        0.034 (0.037)   0.000 (0.036)
 US only                                      0.109 (0.053)        0.105 (0.047)        0.113 (0.056)   0.081 (0.046)
 European with US equiv.                      0.300 (0.073)                             0.308 (0.081)
 US with European equiv.                                           0.237 (0.053)                        0.258 (0.060)
Value indicator stock-patent ratios:                Forward citations                               Index
 European only                               -0.002 (0.007)   0.001 (0.007)            -0.088 (0.060)   -0.062 (0.056)
 US only                                      0.000 (0.001)   0.000 (0.001)            -0.005 (0.050)
 European with US equiv.                    0.0320 (0.0080)                             0.200 (0.084)
 US with European equiv.                                         0.0026 (0.0008)                        0.155 (0.040)
Log sales (millions of euros)                 0.019 (0.007)        0.022 (0.007)        0.022 (0.007)   0.023 (0.007)
R-squared (s.e.)                              0.274 (0.719)        0.272 (0.721)        0.272 (0.721)   0.273 (0.720)
                                        Average elasticity (standard deviation)
R&D stock-assets ratio                      0.191 (0.012)       0.202 (0.012)   0.197 (0.012)           0.203 (0.012)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 European only                                0.002 (0.002)        0.000 (0.002)        0.002 (0.002)   0.000 (0.002)
 US only                                      0.011 (0.005         0.011 (0.005)        0.011 (0.005)   0.008 (0.004)
 European with US equiv.                      0.034 (0.007)                             0.034 (0.007)
 US with European equiv.                                           0.038 (0.007)                        0.039 (0.007)
Value indicator stock-patent ratios:                Forward citations                               Index
 European only                               -0.002 (0.009)   0.002 (0.009)            -0.047 (0.034)   -0.035 (0.033)
 US only                                     0.003 (0.005)    -0.004 (0.005)           -0.003 (0.030)   -0.007 (0.031)
 European with US equiv.                      0.070 (0.015)                             0.140 (0.048)
 US with European equiv.                                           0.028 (0.008)                        0.102 (0.023)
These regressions include 15 country dummies, 24 industry dummies, and 12 year dummies, as well as
dummies for obs with zero patent stocks.
Nonlinear least squares with robust standard errors.




                                                          45
                                  Table 7
                          Market value regressions
   with patent stocks, software patent stocks, and patent value indicators
    5312 observations for the 1991-2002 period. Dependent variable = log Tobin's Q
Variable                                                       (17)                       (19)

R&D stock-assets ratio                                   0.774 (0.074)               0.799 (0.093)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 US only                                                 0.113 (0.053)               0.094 (0.052)
 US with European equiv.                                 0.185 (0.045)               0.196 (0.049)

 SW: US only                                             -0.149 (0.309)              -0.177 (0.309)
 SW: US with European equiv.                               1.47 (0.59)                 1.55 (0.64)
Value indicator-patent ratios:                        Forward citations                   Index
 US with European equiv.                               0.0026 (0.0008)                0.157 (0.038)
 SW: US with European equiv.                           0.0000 (0.0002)               -0.040 (0.028)
Log sales (millions of euros)                            0.017 (0.006)               0.017 (0.007)
R-squared (s.e.)                                         0.272 (0.721)               0.272 (0.720)
                              Average elasticity (standard deviation)

R&D stock-assets ratio                                   0.199 (0.012)               0.199 (0.013)
Patent stock-R&D ratios:
 US only                                                 0.012 (0.005)               0.010 (0.005)
 US with European equiv.                                 0.030 (0.006)               0.031 (0.006)
 SW: US only                                           -0.0003 (0.0027)            -0.0007 (0.0023)
 SW: US with European equiv.                            0.0087 (0.0028)             0.0090 (0.0029)
Value indicator-patent ratios:                        Forward citations                  Index
 US with European equiv.                                0.029 (0.009)                0.108 (0.023)
 SW: US with European equiv.                            0.030 (0.008)                0.091 (0.031)
These regressions include 15 country dummies, 24 industry dummies, and 12 year dummies, as well as
dummies for obs with zero patent stocks.
Nonlinear least squares with robust standard errors.




                                               46
Table A.1. Distribution by year of incorporation and market capitalisation

   Year of                 Market Capitalisation (million mil EUR - latest year available)
incorporation         <100         100-1000        1000-5000          > 5000               All
 before 1970    142      27.3%    135     42.2%     71    54.6%     49     53.8%     397         37.4%
 1971-1980       41       7.9%    27       8.4%     10     7.7%      5     5.5%       83          7.8%
 1981-1990      140      26.9%    63      19.7%     25    19.2%      9     9.9%      237         22.3%
 1991-2000      183      35.2%    89      27.8%     20    15.4%     25     27.5%     317         29.9%
 After 2000      11       2.1%     5       1.6%      1     0.8%      2     2.2%       19          1.8%
    N.A.          3       0.6%     1       0.3%      3     2.3%      1      1.1%       8          0.8%

     All        520     49.0%     320     30.2%    130    12.3%     91     8.6%      1061    100.0%




                                             47
Table A.2. Distribution by stock market listing
Main exchange                              Companies   Share (%)
Athens Stock Exchange                          31        2.9%
Australian Stock Exchange                       1        0.1%
Budapest Stock Exchange                         5        0.5%
Dusseldorf Stock Exchange                       1        0.1%
Euronext Amsterdam                             24        2.3%
Euronext Brussels                              22        2.1%
Euronext Paris                                136       12.8%
Frankfurt Stock Exchange                       93        8.8%
Hamburg Stock Exchange                          1        0.1%
Helsinki Stock Exchange                         1        0.1%
Irish Stock Exchange                           10        0.9%
Italian Continuous Market                       3        0.3%
London Stock Exchange (SEAQ)                  154       14.5%
London Stock Exchange (SETS)                  182       17.2%
Madrid Stock Exchange                           1        0.1%
NASDAQ National Market                          3        0.3%
NASDAQ OTC Bulletin Board                       1        0.1%
New York Stock Exchange                         3        0.3%
Not available                                   2        0.2%
OFEX                                            1        0.1%
OMX - Copenhagen Stock Exchange                23        2.2%
OMX - Helsinki Stock Exchange                  62        5.8%
OMX - Stockholm Stock Exchange                 80        7.5%
OMX - Tallinn Stock Exchange                    1        0.1%
Oslo Stock Exchange                            24        2.3%
Stuttgart Stock Exchange                       3         0.3%
Swiss Electronic Stock Exchange                13        1.2%
Swiss Exchange                                 57        5.4%
Vienna Stock Exchange                          13        1.2%
Warsaw Stock Exchange                           2        0.2%
XETRA                                         106       10.0%
Zagreb Stock Exchange                           2        0.2%

Total                                         1061      100.0%




                             48
Table A.3. Distribution of companies by industry – 2.5 digit industry class
                                                               with EP                    with US
                                   with R&D    with EP pats software pats with US pats software pats
2.5 digit industry class           firms   %   firms    %    firms     %   firms   %    firms    %
01 Food & tobacco                    39    3.7   31     4.5     0      0.0   28    3.8    18     4.6
02 Textiles, apparel & footwear      20    1.9   12     1.7     1     2.3    11    1.5     4     1.0
03 Lumber & wood products             7    0.7    3     0.4     0      0.0    4    0.5     2     0.5
04 Furniture                         10    0.9    8     1.2     1     2.3     8    1.1     4     1.0
05 Paper & paper products            17    1.6   13     1.9     0      0.0   15    2.0     6     1.5
06 Printing & publishing             14    1.3    6     0.9     1      2.3    7    0.9     3     0.8
07 Chemical products                 46    4.3   40     5.8     1      2.3   41    5.5    21     5.4
08 Petroleum refining & prods        20    1.9   16     2.3     0     0.0    17    2.3    12     3.1
09 Plastics & rubber prods           17    1.6   12     1.7     1      2.3   13    1.8     7     1.8
10 Stone, clay & glass               22    2.1   18     2.6     0      0.0   16    2.2     8     2.1
11 Primary metal products            24    2.3   15     2.2     0      0.0   15    2.0     5     1.3
12 Fabricated metal products         28    2.6   21     3.0     1      2.3   22    3.0    10     2.6
13 Machinery & engines               89    8.4   76    10.9     0      0.0   75   10.1    44    11.3
14 Computers & comp, equip,          29    2.7   20     2.9     3      6.8   22    3.0    16     4.1
15 Electrical machinery              39    3.7   30     4.3     3      6.8   32    4.3    17     4.4
16 Electronic inst, & comm, eq,     127   12.0   82    11.8     7    15.9    90   12.1    50    12.8
17 Transportation equipment          10    0.9    9     1.3     1      2.3    9    1.2     8     2.1
18 Motor vehicles                    25    2.4   22     3.2     3      6.8   22    3.0    12     3.1
19 Optical & medical instruments     41   3.9    32     4.6     2     4.5    34    4.6    17    4.4
20 Pharmaceuticals                   61    5.8   47     6.8     2      4.5   49    6.6    26     6.7
21 Misc, manufacturing               23    2.2   15     2.2     0      0.0   17    2.3     8     2.1
22 Soap & toiletries                 11    1.0   10     1.4     0      0.0   11    1.5     6     1.5
24 Computing software               159   15.0   42     6.0     8    18.2    65    8.8    30     7.7
25 Telecommunications                21    2.0    9     1.3     5     11.4    9    1.2     7     1.8
26 Wholesale trade                   26    2.5   14     2.0     0      0.0   16    2.2     5     1.3
27 Business services                 16    1.5    9     1.3     1      2.3   10    1.3     6     1.5
29 Mining                            13    1.2   11     1.6     0      0.0   11    1.5     6     1.5
30 Construction                      19    1.8   12     1.7     0      0.0   11    1.5     4     1.0
31 Transportation services            6    0.6    4     0.6     1      2.3    4    0.5     3     0.8
32 Utilities                         21    2.0   20     2.9     1      2.3   18    2.4    11     2.8
33 Trade                              7    0.7    2     0.3     0      0.0    2    0.3     0     0.0
34 Fire, Insurance, Real Estate       2    0.2    0     0.0     0      0.0    0    0.0     0     0.0
35 Health services                    4    0.4    2     0.3     0      0.0    2    0.3     2     0.5
36 Engineering services              38    3.6   26     3.7     1      2.3   28    3.8     9     2.3
37 Other services                    10    0.9    6     0.9     0      0.0    7    0.9     3     0.8
Total                              1061 100.0 695 100.0        44    100.0 741 100.0 390 100.0




                                             49
Table A.4. Distribution of R&D, patents and software patents by industry
2.5 digit industry classes (1060 firms)
                                                                          EP software                   US software
                                          R&D        EP patents              patents       US patents       patents
2.5 digit industry class             Mil EUR %        n     %               n      %         n    %        n      %
01 Food & tobacco                     24875    3.5 1752     2.5             0      0.0    3534    2.6    103      1.1
02 Textiles, apparel & footwear        658    0.1   103     0.1            0      0.0     175     0.1     4      0.0
03 Lumber & wood products               52     0.0    1     0.0             0      0.0      3     0.0      0      0.0
04 Furniture                           2402    0.3   162    0.2             1      0.4     264    0.2      2      0.0
05 Paper & paper products              2170    0.3  444     0.6             0      0.0     477    0.3    12       0.1
06 Printing & publishing               1243    0.2     4    0.0             0      0.0      18    0.0      9      0.1
07 Chemical products                  73977   10.5 10964 15.6               0      0.0   15701 11.5      262      2.8
08 Petroleum refining & prods         25109    3.6 1822     2.6             0      0.0    3610    2.6    165      1.8
09 Plastics & rubber prods             5515    0.8 1291     1.8             1      0.4    1115    0.8     54      0.6
10 Stone, clay & glass                 5215    0.7  1627    2.3             0      0.0    2137    1.6     79      0.9
11 Primary metal products              2594    0.4  349     0.5             0      0.0     765    0.6     13      0.1
12 Fabricated metal products          2134     0.3  790     1.1             0      0.0    1824    1.3    44      0.5
13 Machinery & engines                16343    2.3 2984     4.2             0      0.0    4707    3.4    137      1.5
14 Computers & comp, equip,            3185    0.5  171     0.2             1      0.4     700    0.5    181      2.0
15 Electrical machinery               93255   13.2 19372 27.6             139     51.3   35529 25.9     2930 31.8
16 Electronic inst, & comm, eq,       93435   13.3 6605     9.4            33     12.2   26183 19.1     2657 28.8
17 Transportation equipment           22424    3.2  409     0.6             1      0.4     579    0.4    33       0.4
18 Motor vehicles                    145932 20.7 8922 12.7                  3      1.1   17272 12.6     1130 12.3
19 Optical & medical instruments      5580    0.8   670     1.0            17     6.3     1316    1.0   185      2.0
20 Pharmaceuticals                   116961 16.6 4852       6.9             2      0.7   11501 8.4       404      4.4
21 Misc, manufacturing                 1503    0.2   108    0.2             0      0.0     275    0.2      4      0.0
22 Soap & toiletries                   8972    1.3  2532    3.6             0      0.0    2722    2.0     42      0.5
24 Computing software                  9645    1.4   205    0.3             7      2.6     474    0.3    183      2.0
25 Telecommunications                 16885    2.4 1089     1.6            65     24.0    1524    1.1    337      3.7
26 Wholesale trade                      493    0.1    16    0.0             0      0.0      21    0.0      3      0.0
27 Business services                   3701    0.5    28    0.0             1      0.4      94    0.1     18      0.2
29 Mining                              1894    0.3   375    0.5             0      0.0    1012    0.7     14      0.2
30 Construction                        2645    0.4   116    0.2             0      0.0     140    0.1     10      0.1
31 Transportation services             3697    0.5 1473     2.1             0      0.0    1690    1.2     46      0.5
32 Utilities                           8445    1.2  719     1.0             0      0.0    1273    0.9    125      1.4
33 Trade                                178    0.0     0    0.0             0      0.0       0    0.0      0      0.0
34 Fire, Insurance, Real Estate         10     0.0    0     0.0             0      0.0      0     0.0     0       0.0
35 Health services                      217    0.0    54    0.1             0      0.0      60    0.0      2      0.0
36 Engineering services                2192    0.3   181    0.3             0      0.0     289    0.2     12      0.1
37 Other services                       287    0.0    27    0.0             0      0.0      88    0.1     13      0.1
Overall                              703823 100.0 70217 100.0             271 100.0      1E+05 100.0    9213 100.0

*This is the total over all years of the sample, in constant year 2000 euros.




                                                       50
Table A.5. Distribution of R&D expenditures by country and sector
                                                                                                                      HTT sample
                             R&D expenditure in millions of euros                As a share of total expenditure       relative to
                     Business   Govt     HEI                 Total     HTT     Business    Govt     HEI             Business    Total
Country       Year    Sector   Sector   Sector     Other     R&D      sample    Sector    Sector   Sector   Other    sector     R&D
Austria       2002       3131      266     1266        21      4684       65.1 66.8%       5.7%    27.0%    0.4%      2.1%      1.4%
Belgium       2000       3589      312     1005        58      4964      907.7 72.3%       6.3%    20.2%    1.2%     25.3%     18.3%
Bulgaria      2000         15       49         7         0       71        0.0 21.4%      68.6%     9.8%    0.2%      0.0%      0.0%
Switzerland   2000       5065       90     1566       132      6852     8794.5 73.9%       1.3%    22.9%    1.9%    173.7%     128.3%
Cyprus        2000           5      11         6         2       25        0.0 21.3%      46.6%    24.8%    7.3%      0.0%      0.0%
Czech Rep.    2000        446      188      106          4      744        0.0 60.0%      25.3%    14.2%    0.5%      0.0%      0.0%
Germany       2000      35600     6873     8146          0    50619   28094.8 70.3%       13.6%    16.1%    0.0%     78.9%     55.5%
Denmark       2000       2596      492      770        34      3892      979.8 66.7%      12.6%    19.8%    0.9%     37.7%     25.2%
Estonia       2000           8        9      19          1       37        1.0 22.5%      23.1%    52.4%    1.9%     11.4%      2.6%
Spain         2000       3069      905     1694        51      5719        0.0 53.7%      15.8%    29.6%    0.9%      0.0%      0.0%
Finland       2000       3136      468      789        30      4423      731.3 70.9%      10.6%    17.8%    0.7%     23.3%     16.5%
France        2000      19348     5361     5804       439     30954   14557.8 62.5%       17.3%    18.8%    1.4%     75.2%     47.0%
Greece        2001        278      188      383          3      852       55.1 32.7%      22.1%    44.9%    0.4%     19.8%      6.5%
Croatia       2002        115       60       95          0      271       50.5 42.7%      22.2%    35.1%    0.0%     43.8%     18.7%
Hungary       2000        180      106       97        23       405       35.4 44.3%      26.1%    24.0%    5.6%     19.7%      8.7%
Ireland       2000        842       96      238          0     1176      403.8 71.6%       8.1%    20.2%    0.0%     47.9%     34.3%
Iceland       2000        142       64       41          5      251        0.0 56.4%      25.5%    16.2%    1.9%      0.0%      0.0%
Italy         2000       6239     2356     3865          0    12460       37.0 50.1%      18.9%    31.0%    0.0%      0.6%      0.3%
Lithuania     2000         16       31       27          0       73        0.0 21.5%      41.9%    36.5%    0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
Luxembourg    2000        337       26         1         0      364        1.7 92.6%       7.1%     0.2%    0.0%      0.5%      0.5%
Latvia        2000         15         8      14          0       38        0.0 40.3%      22.1%    37.6%    0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
Malta         2002           3        2        7         0       12        0.0 24.7%      16.4%    58.8%    0.1%      0.0%      0.0%
Netherlands   2000       4458      974     2120        75      7626     8370.4 58.5%      12.8%    27.8%    1.0%    187.8%     109.8%
Norway        2001       1814      444      780          0     3037      321.3 59.7%      14.6%    25.7%    0.0%     17.7%     10.6%
Poland        2000        432      386      377          2     1197       10.1 36.1%      32.2%    31.5%    0.1%      2.3%      0.8%
Portugal      2000        258      222      348       100       927        0.0 27.8%      23.9%    37.5%    10.8%     0.0%      0.0%
Romania       2000        103       28       18          0      149        0.0 69.4%      18.8%    11.8%    0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
Russia        2000       2087      721      134          7     2948        0.0 70.8%      24.4%     4.5%    0.2%      0.0%      0.0%
Sweden        2001       8118      297     2085        10     10511     7119.9 77.2%       2.8%    19.8%    0.1%     87.7%     67.7%
Slovenia      2000        167       77       49          3      297        0.0 56.3%      25.9%    16.6%    1.2%      0.0%      0.0%
Slovakia      2000         94       35       14          0      143        0.0 65.8%      24.7%     9.5%    0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
Turkey        2000        464       86      839          0     1389        0.0 33.4%       6.2%    60.4%    0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
UK            2000      18884     3672     5985       529     29070   17214.8 65.0%       12.6%    20.6%    1.8%     91.2%     59.2%
Europe        2000     121054    24902    38694      1528    186177   87752.0 65.0%       13.4%    20.8%    0.8%     72.5%     47.1%
EU15          2000     109883    22508    34499      1351    168239   78539.2 65.3%       13.4%    20.5%    0.8%     71.5%     46.7%
EU25          2000     111365    23436    35233      1385    171417   78585.7 65.0%       13.7%    20.6%    0.8%     70.6%     45.8%
US            2000     216552    29926    33221     10218    289917        0.0 74.7%      10.3%    11.5%    3.5%      0.0%      0.0%
Japan         2000     109181    15217    22354      7108    153860        0.0 71.0%       9.9%    14.5%    4.6%      0.0%      0.0%

(Source: Eurostat and Stan, OECD, 2007)




                                                                      51
Table B.1. Weights implied by estimated cumulative lag distributions for EPO patents
cited year   lag   CHEM     DRUG     ELEC           IND     MECH     OTHR     INST
   2004       1    25.743   25.656   26.754        27.755   27.581   26.453   27.786
   2003       2    12.613   12.574   12.629        12.828   12.723   12.374   12.970
   2002       3     8.367    8.343   8.255         8.300    8.226    8.058    8.429
   2001       4     6.272    6.255   6.146         6.148    6.092    5.992    6.255
   2000       5     5.023    5.010   4.906         4.894    4.849    4.783    4.983
   1999       6     4.194    4.184   4.090         4.073    4.037    3.989    4.148
   1998       7     3.604    3.596   3.513         3.495    3.465    3.428    3.558
   1997       8     3.162    3.155   3.082         3.065    3.039    3.011    3.118
   1996       9     2.819    2.814   2.749         2.733    2.711    2.688    2.779
   1995       10    2.545    2.540    2.484         2.469    2.450    2.431    2.509
   1994       11    2.322    2.317    2.268         2.254    2.238    2.222    2.288
   1993       12    2.135    2.131    2.088         2.075    2.061    2.048    2.105
   1992       13    1.977    1.974    1.936         1.925    1.913    1.902    1.951
   1991       14    1.842    1.840    1.806         1.796    1.786    1.776    1.819
   1990       15    1.726    1.723    1.694         1.685    1.676    1.668    1.705
   1989       16    1.623    1.621    1.596         1.588    1.580    1.573    1.605
   1988       17    1.533    1.531    1.509         1.502    1.496    1.490    1.517
   1987       18    1.453    1.452    1.433         1.427    1.421    1.416    1.439
   1986       19    1.381    1.380    1.364         1.359    1.354    1.350    1.370
   1985       20    1.317    1.316    1.302         1.298    1.294    1.291    1.307
   1984       21    1.259    1.258    1.247         1.243    1.240    1.237    1.250
   1983       22    1.206    1.205    1.196         1.193    1.191    1.188    1.199
   1982       23    1.157    1.157    1.150         1.148    1.146    1.144    1.152
   1981       24    1.113    1.113    1.108         1.106    1.105    1.103    1.109
   1980       25    1.072    1.072    1.069         1.068    1.067    1.066    1.070
   1979       26    1.035    1.035    1.033         1.033    1.032    1.032    1.034
   1978       27    1.000    1.000    1.000         1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000




                                              52
Table B.2. Weights implied by estimated cumulative lag distribution for US patents
cited year   lag   CHEM     DRUG     ELEC      IND     MECH     OTHR     INST
   2004        1   31.692   36.501   28.857   33.062   27.891   33.167   33.167
   2003        2   13.617   15.548   13.224   13.977   12.151   14.284   14.284
   2002        3    8.454    9.580    8.516    8.584    7.623    8.874    8.874
   2001        4    6.114    6.882    6.288    6.165    5.558    6.415    6.415
   2000        5    4.799    5.368    4.995    4.816    4.392    5.030    5.030
   1999        6    3.961    4.404    4.150    3.963    3.647    4.145    4.145
   1998        7    3.381    3.739    3.555    3.376    3.130    3.533    3.533
   1997        8    2.957    3.252    3.114    2.949    2.751    3.084    3.084
   1996        9    2.634    2.880    2.774    2.624    2.461    2.741    2.741
   1995       10    2.379    2.587    2.503    2.368    2.233    2.470    2.470
   1994       11    2.172    2.350    2.283    2.162    2.048    2.251    2.251
   1993       12    2.002    2.155    2.100    1.993    1.896    2.070    2.070
   1992       13    1.860    1.991    1.946    1.851    1.768    1.918    1.918
   1991       14    1.738    1.852    1.814    1.730    1.659    1.789    1.789
   1990       15    1.634    1.732    1.701    1.626    1.565    1.678    1.678
   1989       16    1.543    1.627    1.601    1.536    1.484    1.581    1.581
   1988       17    1.463    1.535    1.514    1.457    1.413    1.496    1.496
   1987       18    1.393    1.454    1.436    1.387    1.349    1.420    1.420
   1986       19    1.330    1.382    1.367    1.325    1.293    1.353    1.353
   1985       20    1.273    1.317    1.305    1.270    1.243    1.293    1.293
   1984       21    1.223    1.258    1.249    1.219    1.198    1.239    1.239
   1983       22    1.177    1.205    1.198    1.174    1.157    1.190    1.190
   1982       23    1.135    1.157    1.151    1.133    1.120    1.145    1.145
   1981       24    1.097    1.112    1.109    1.095    1.086    1.104    1.104
   1980       25    1.062    1.072    1.069    1.061    1.055    1.066    1.066
   1979       26    1.030    1.035    1.033    1.029    1.026    1.032    1.032
   1978       27    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000




                                        53
