                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




POLICY VS. CONSUMER PRESSURE: INNOVATION AND DIFFUSION OF ALTERNATIVE
             BLEACHING TECHNOLOGIES IN THE PULP INDUSTRY

                                               David Popp
                                              Tamara Hafner
                                              Nick Johnstone

                                          Working Paper 13439
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13439


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2007




We thank Ivan Hascic for helpful comments and assistance in locating data for the project, and Dave
Halliburton, Mimi Nameki, and Grethe Torrissen for their willingness to clarify regulations in their
countries. The data upon which this report is based was collected as part of the OECD project on "Environmental
Policy and Technological Innovation" (www.oecd.org/env/cpe/firms/innovation) and is the exclusive
property of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. The views contained in
this article are those of the authors and may not reflect those of the OECD, its member countries, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David Popp, Tamara Hafner, and Nick Johnstone. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Policy vs. Consumer Pressure: Innovation and Diffusion of Alternative Bleaching Technologies
in the Pulp Industry
David Popp, Tamara Hafner, and Nick Johnstone
NBER Working Paper No. 13439
September 2007
JEL No. O31,O33,Q53,Q55

                                              ABSTRACT

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, concern over dioxin in both paper products and wastewater led to
the development of techniques that reduced the use of chlorine in the pulp industry. Both regulatory
and consumer pressure motivated this change. We use patent data to examine the evolution of two
completing bleaching technologies in five major paper-producing countries, both of which reduce
the use of chlorine in the pulping process. By the end of the 1990s, nearly all pulp production in these
countries used one of these technologies. Unlike other papers using patents to study environmentally-friendly
innovation, we focus on a process innovation, rather than on end-of-the-pipe solutions to pollution.
Moreover, while previous studies emphasize the importance of regulation for inducing innovation,
here we find substantial innovation occurring before regulations were in place. Instead, pressure from
consumers to reduce the chlorine content of paper drives the first round of innovation. However, while
some companies choose to adopt these technologies in response to consumer pressure, not all firms
will differentiate their product in this way. Thus, governments need to regulate if their goal is broad
diffusion of the environmental technology.

David Popp                                            Nick Johnstone
Associate Professor of Public Administration          OECD Environment Directorate
Syracuse University                                   Empirical Policy Analysis Unit
The Maxwell School                                    2 rue Andre Pascal
426 Eggers                                            75775 Paris Cedex 16
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020                               France
and NBER                                              nick.johnstone@oecd.org
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

Tamara Hafner
Department of Public Administration
Center for Policy Research
The Maxwell School
Syracuse University
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
tafranci@maxwell.syr.edu
         This paper uses patent data to examine the evolution of elemental chlorine free (ECF) and

totally chlorine free (TCF) technologies used by the pulp and paper industry. In both cases, the

technologies reduce (or eliminate) the use of chlorine in the bleaching stage of pulp production.

Use of these technologies grew rapidly during the 1990s, beginning in the Nordic countries

(Finland, Norway, and Sweden) and then spreading to the United States and Canada. One

advantage of studying innovation on these technologies is that they are process technologies.

Most previous studies of environmental innovation using patents examine end-of-pipe pollution

control technologies, as it is easier to identify patents for specific end-of-pipe technologies than

for modifications to the production process.1 However, for ECF and TCF technologies, there are

well-defined patent classes related to these processes. Thus, this study is among the first to study

the evolution of a process environmental technology using patent data.

         Another advantage of studying ECF and TCF technologies is that it offers a window into

the effects of different policy regimes on innovation. While there is a large theoretical literature

on the different effects of various policy instruments on innovation, few empirical studies

compare innovation under different types of policy incentives.2 Here, at least three types of

policies are relevant. First, in each country, command and control regulation limits the amount

of chlorine releases from the pulp bleaching process. In the U.S. and Canada, national (or

provincial, in the case of Canada) standards set the basic limits on chlorine usage. There is some

variation across plants, as each plant operates under an environmental permit. In the Nordic

countries, decisions on allowable emissions are made on a plant-by-plant basis as part of a plant

permitting system.


1
  Examples include Popp (2003, 2006), Taylor et al. (2003), and Lanjouw and Mody (1996).
2
  The theoretical literature includes Magat (1978), Milliman and Prince (1989), and Fisher et al. (2003). These
papers predict that market-based environmental policies, such as a tax or permit trading, will induce more
innovation than a comparable command and control policy.
                                                                                                2

       In addition to these two regulatory systems, some European mills also chose to adopt

TCF production because of consumer preferences in the European market (Reinstaller 2005).

Much of the early demand for reductions in chlorine came from consumers, rather than from

regulators. Chlorine used in bleaching not only affects wastewater released from mills, but also

persists in the final paper product (Galloway, Helminen, and Carter, 1989). Concerns over

chlorine in paper products led to increased demand for chlorine-free paper in the late 1980s and

early 1990s. A growing literature in environmental policy looks at the possibility of voluntary

provision of environmental quality by firms (see, for example, Lyon and Maxwell, 2002). One

reason often proposed for such behavior is that firms are responding to consumer demand. This

study considers the potential effects of such demand-side influences on environmentally-friendly

innovation. In addition, we ask whether product labeling requirements allowing consumers to

identify paper made without chlorine magnify demand-side influences by making information

about paper quality more readily available to consumers.

       Finally, this paper also offers a look at the links between environmental regulation and

innovation across countries. In previous work, Popp (2006) finds that innovations for sulfur

dioxide and nitrogen oxide control at coal-fired power plants responds primarily to domestic

regulation. Looking at patents in these fields, that paper finds increases in patents assigned to

own-country inventors when a country passes or strengthens environmental regulations for

power plants, but little increase in innovations from other countries. An important question is

whether this finding is robust to other technologies, or is unique to the electric power industry.

One important difference between the electric power industry and pulp and paper is that there is

little trade in electric power.    Moreover, regulations affecting air pollution from power

production focus on the location of production.       In contrast, while regulations addressing
                                                                                                          3

chlorine in pulp and paper production do focus on the location of production, the final paper

product is a traded commodity. As such, consumer preferences for chlorine-free paper in trading

partner countries may influence innovation in producer countries.



I. The Pulp & Paper Industry

       The pulp and paper industry consists of two main types of firms. Pulp and paper mills

process raw wood fiber or recycled fibers to make pulp and paper. Converting facilities use

these primary materials to manufacture specialized products such as paperboard products,

writing paper, and sanitary paper (EPA 2002). The focus of this study is on pulp mills. Pulp

mills are typically located near where trees are harvested. 65% of the world pulp market is

supplied by the NORSCAN countries (the U.S., Canada, Sweden, Finland, and Norway)

(Reinstaller 2005).

       Table 1 summarizes the top pulp producing nations in 2000, sorted by chemical pulp

production and percentage of value added from the pulp and paper industries.3 The first panel

shows the top pulp producers using chemical pulp methods. This panel includes countries from

around the world. The second panel shows the top countries based on value added in the pulp,

paper, paper products, and printing & publishing industry. Value added data are from the OECD

STAN database, and have two weaknesses.                 First, the data only include OECD countries.

Second, the value added data are for the entire paper industry, not just pulp production. Note, for

example, that some of the top 10 in value added have no chemical pulp production. Nonetheless,

note that four countries (U.S., Canada, Finland and Sweden) appear in both panels. In addition,

Japan comes close to being on both lists, as it ranks 12th among OECD nations in percentage of


3
 Pulp can be produced using chemical or mechanical methods, as described in the following section. Most
production, particularly in developed countries, uses chemical methods.
                                                                                                              4

value added from the pulp and paper industry. As it is also an important source of patents for

ECF and TCF technologies, we include Japan in our study as well.4

       Because consumer pressure played an important role in the reduction of chlorine

bleaching, it is also important to consider where paper produced in these countries is sold. Table

2 shows the percentage of exports going to each of the countries in the study, along with

Germany, other EU countries, and the rest of the world.                Germany is included separately

because, as shown in the next section, consumer pressure in Germany played an important role in

the diffusion of chlorine-free paper. These data show that much trade in paper products is

regional. Most exports from Sweden and Finland go to other European countries. Most exports

from Canada and the US flow between the two countries. Japan paper exports go primarily to

other countries. Given that consumer pressure varied across the world, its effects are likely to

vary by region.



A. Pulp & Paper Manufacturing

        Manufacturing paper products includes two main steps. First, the pulping process

dissolves wood chips into lignin and fibers that will be used for paper production. Depending on

the desired quality of the final paper product, this can be a chemical or mechanical process. The

most common process in the countries in this study is the kraft process, which is a chemical

pulping process.5 In the kraft process, wood chips are boiled with an alkaline liquor (white

liquor) to dissolve the lignin bonds holding cellulose fibers together. The process results in

wood fibers (pulp) and a liquid containing the dissolved lignin solids (black liquor) (EPA 2002).



4
  Despite being a NORSCAN country, Norway appears on neither list, and has few ECF or TCF patents. Thus, we
do not include Norway in the analysis.
5
  83% of all US pulp tonnage in the year 2000 was produced using kraft pulping (EPA 2002).
                                                                                                                     5

         After these fibers are produced, they must be processed before they are used to produce

paper. If the pulp will be used to produce high quality paper products (instead of, for example,

boxes or paper bags), the fibers must be bleached. Also, for professional quality paper, the fibers

of the pulp must be strong enough to produce paper that will hold up to the demands of printing

presses. For this, a delignification treatment that does not damage the fibers is needed. Oxygen

delignification was introduced in the 1970s to meet these requirements (Reinstaller 2005). In

addition, extended delignification can have environmental benefits, as it reduces the amount of

bleaching chemicals needed (EPA 2002).

         The bleaching process is a major source of water pollution from the pulp and paper

industry. This bleaching occurs in stages, generally alternating between acid and alkaline stages.

The acid stages increase the whiteness of the pulp, while the alkaline stages remove any residual

lignin and alkali from the pulping stage. Until the development of ECF and TCF technologies,

most pulp mills used elemental chlorine (Cl2) for the first bleaching stage. In the second stage,

remaining alkali from cooking the pulp are eliminated using caustic soda. In the third stage,

chlorine dioxide (ClO2) is used to further bleach the pulp. In the fourth and fifth stages, the

alkali removal using caustic soda and the ClO2 bleaching are repeated (Norberg-Bohm 1998,

Reinstaller 2005, EPA, 2002).

         During the 1970s and 1980s, evidence that chlorine bleaching produces dioxins, which

are highly toxic, led to stricter regulation and the development of alternative bleaching

technologies.6 Mills switched to chlorine dioxide (ClO2) in the first bleaching stage or to

processes that eliminated chlorine entirely. These are the basis for the elemental chlorine free


6
  Acceptable levels of dioxin in wastewater are lower than what can be detected. Thus, regulations often focus on
the level of absorbable organic halogens (AOX). AOX is a measure of the total halogens (chlorine, bromide, and
iodine) in the water. Reductions in these halogens correlate with reductions in the level of dioxins in wastewater
(Norberg-Bohm and Rossi, 1998).
                                                                                                                   6

(ECF) and total chlorine free (TCF) technologies commonly used today.                             Bleaching with

elemental chlorine has been reduced dramatically since 1990, with only 10 percent of chemical

pulp production still using such technologies.                  Elemental chlorine has been completely

eliminated in the Nordic countries. Most of this capacity has been replaced with ECF bleaching,

although over 20 percent of plants in the Nordic countries use TCF (Alliance for Environmental

Technology, 2006).



B. Elemental Chlorine Free Bleaching

         Elemental chlorine free bleaching replaces the elemental chlorine used in the first stage

bleaching with chlorine dioxide. This was aided by improvements in oxygen delignification in

the pre-bleaching stage, allowing ClO2 to achieve results similar to what had been achieved by

using elemental chlorine. ECF technologies achieve almost complete delignification, which is

important for high quality paper products. Because ClO2 is used, chlorine substances are still

synthesized. However, the different molecular structure of ClO2 greatly reduces levels of AOX.



C. Total Chlorine Free bleaching

         In contrast, total chlorine free bleaching completely eliminates the use of both elemental

chlorine and chlorine dioxide. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and ozone (O3) are used as substitute

bleaching agents.       Denoting peroxide as P, ozone as Z, oxygen delignification as O, and

chelation as Q,7 a typical TCF bleaching sequence is OQPZP. TCF bleaching provides a much

better environmental performance than ECF. However, this better environmental performance

comes at a cost of lower paper quality. In particular, achieving high brightness using TCF results


7
 Chelation is the addition of compounds to control the formation of free radicals to retard decomposition of the
hydrogen peroxide (Reinstaller 2005).
                                                                                               7

in lower fiber strength. In addition, early yields from TCF were lower, necessitating more timber

use. Bleaching costs can be 40-50% higher than for ECF (Lockie 1998). Nonetheless, despite

these disadvantages, TCF technologies were adopted, particularly in the Nordic paper producing

countries (Reinstaller 2005).



II. Pollution and the Pulp and Paper Industry

       As noted earlier, increased awareness of the links between chlorine and dioxin led to

dramatic reductions in chlorine use by the pulp and paper industry. One notable feature of this

reduction is that consumer demand played a critical role in both the innovation and adoption of

chlorine-free technologies. A series of environmental scares led to increased environmental

awareness among consumers. Increasing consumer awareness spurred governments into action,

creating regulatory pressure on the industry to rectify environmental problems. At the same

time, competition among major industry players to satisfy consumer demand for chlorine-free

paper played a vital role. Companies took advantage of the demand for environmentally friendly

products through the use of environmental labeling to highlight reduced chlorine content and

maintain their share of the global market.

       Concerns over the release of halogenated organic compounds in pulp and paper mill

effluents grew during the 1980s. Chlorinated organic compounds such as dioxins and furans,

which are recalcitrant and bioaccumulative, are by-products of the bleaching process when

chlorine gas is used as the bleaching agent. In 1980, the US EPA discovered furans and dioxins

in paper mill waste. In 1983 dioxin was found in fish living downstream from pulp and paper

mills. These studies were first leaked to the public by Greenpeace in August 1987 (Gray,

Lowther, & Todd, 1987). In addition, Greenpeace publicized studies finding trace amounts of
                                                                                                8

dioxin in consumer products such as diapers, milk cartons and coffee filters (Collins, 1992),

creating consumer awareness of the environmental impacts caused by the pulp and paper

industry.

       Some of the most publicized research on the accumulation and adverse effects of

chlorinated organic compounds in the environment emerged from Sweden in the mid 1980s

(Galloway, Helminen, & Carter, 1989). In 1983, a Swedish report suggested that chlorinated

organic compounds in the effluents of pulp and paper mills were to be blamed for the declining

health of coastal waters. Government-sponsored scientists did a more comprehensive assessment

at the Norrsundet kraft mill at the Gulf of Bothnia in 1984, finding altered fish populations with

acute skeletal deformities and other adverse effects in waters receiving mill discharges (Larsson,

Andersson, Förlin, & Härdig, 1988; Thulin, Höglund, & Lindesjöö, 1988). Finally, in 1987 the

discovery of dioxin in diapers prompted a call for the ban of chlorine in the bleaching of pulp to

be used in the manufacture of disposable diapers (Anonymous, 1987). These findings led

regulators to reassess discharge limits within the context of possible toxicological and

bioaccumulative effects and pressure pulp and paper mills to address the problems associated

with chlorine bleaching (Smith & Rajotte, 2001).

       Two other key events occurred in the German market, which was a major market for

paper producers from Sweden and Finland.           In 1989, Tengelmann, a leading toilet tissue

manufacturer, announced plans to abandon chlorine and ECF pulp altogether. All its competitors

in Germany, Austria and Switzerland took similar steps within 3 months, switching to TCF or

deinked secondary fibers.     Arguably the most influential action occurred in 1991 when

Greenpeace published a spoof of Der Spiegel, Germany’s most influential weekly.               The

publication, titled Das Palgiat, was published on TCF paper. It provided information on TCF
                                                                                                 9

technology and its benefits, including reply cards to the publishers of Der Spiegel requesting that

future issues be printed on TCF paper. This led to many publishers requesting TCF paper from

their suppliers (Smith & Rajotte, 2001).

       Finally, in 1992, the Swedish firm Sodrä started its “Z pulp” campaign. This campaign

publicized the company’s discussions with Greenpeace and embraced the goal of zero discharge.

Most influentially, it adopted the political debate rhetoric that brilliant white paper might be

poisoning its users. Sodrä is considered to have started the TCF ball rolling (Smith & Rajotte,

2001). The importance of firms exploiting a perceived market niche aided in the diffusion of

new bleaching technologies throughout the global industry.



A. Environmental Labeling

       Linking chlorine to contamination in everyday consumer products helped drive consumer

demand for paper products produced using chlorine-free technologies.          However, for such

demand to have an impact on production processes, it is important that consumers be informed as

to the production processes used. For this, environmental labeling (ecolabeling) emerged as an

early policy. Environmental labeling promotes more environmentally friendly consumption for

the consumer and acts as an economic instrument for the industry, which can tap into a perceived

market niche for green products (Salzman, 1991). Regarding pulp and paper products, most

labeling schemes initially emphasized recycled fiber content, rather than chlorine content (Webb,

1994). Table 3 summarizes the major labeling schemes, along with noting the limits on chlorine

content for paper products for each ecolabel.

       Most labeling schemes began in the late 1980s. One prominent exception is Blue Angel,

which was launched in Germany in 1978 with 200 labels across 33 product categories
                                                                                                        10

(Sammarco, 1997). The Blue Angel scheme did not cover chlorine usage in paper until February

1992, when a new category for newsprint was introduced. Among other things, this category, a

response to the spoof publication of Der Spiegel by Greenpeace, prohibited the use of

halogenated bleaches (Webb, 1993).

        Many countries adopted similar schemes in the late 1980s, although requirements on

chlorine content for paper typically came later.                 The Canadian government introduced

Environmental Choice in 1988. Criterion for paper products were first proposed in 1991,

stipulating limits for total absorbable organohalides (AOX), biological oxygen demand (BOD),

and total suspended solids (TSS) in wastewater discharge, and requiring that bleached paper

products do not produce measurable concentrations of chlorinated dioxins in the wastewater and

have no effect on rainbow trout (Webb 1993). However, these proposed limits were postponed

(Webb 1994), and it was not until the second iteration of Environmental Choice in 1998 that

dioxins were addressed.8

        The Nordic council launched the Nordic White Swan in 1989, with the first paper

standards beginning in November 1991. Among the criteria, halogenated and aromatic

hydrocarbon cleaning solvents and fluorescent brightening agents were prohibited in fine papers

and overall AOX releases were limited to 0.5 kg/ton. A 1994 revision removed a ban of chlorine

bleaching of recycled fibers, replacing it with a general ban on the use of chemicals containing

more than 1% of any substance that has been classified as harmful to the environment by the EU

(Webb, 1994). This new limit allows the use of ECF, rather than TCF bleaching.

        In the United Kingdom, paper merchants Brands Paper introduced Ecocheck in 1991,

which included limits for chemical oxygen demand (COD), AOX, BOD, and TSS in wastewater


8
 We thank Dave Halliburton, Chief of the Forest Products Section of the Natural Resources Division of
Environment Canada for this information.
                                                                                                               11

discharge (Webb 1993, 1996). The United States launched Green Seal in 1989. Administered

by a private US environmental labeling agency, its first paper standards covered bathroom and

facial tissues, and were introduced in 1992. Chlorine bleaching was allowed until 1996, if the

wastewater AOX was below 1kg/ton pulp, but banned thereafter (Webb, 1994). Standards for

printing and writing paper, issued in 1993, included a complete ban on chlorine-containing

bleaches. Japan introduced the EcoMark label in 1989. However, limitations on the use of

chlorine were not part of the criteria until 2004, when the use of chlorine bleaching was not

allowed for products receiving this label.9 Finally, the EU launched its Eco-label program in

mid-1993 (Sammarco, 1997). Criteria for toilet tissues and kitchen towels were finalized in

1994. By mid 1996 agreement was reached on the criteria for copy papers based on a pass/fail

system in four areas: COD and AOX content in wastewater discharge, sulfur-compounds air

emissions, energy consumption (Webb, 1996).



III. Regulatory Responses

        Increased awareness of the links between chlorine and dioxin also spurred governments

into action, creating regulatory pressure on the industry to reduce the use of chlorine in pulp

production. In the Nordic countries, regulation is done on a plant-by-plant basis.10 In Sweden,

these permits, which are reviewed every ten years, are issued by the National Licensing Board

for Environmental Protection. Regulatory authority regarding pulp mill effluents comes from the

Environmental Protection Act of 1969, which emphasized prevention instead of control of
9
   Documentation on the EcoMark label notes that chlorine content were not considered because dioxin pollution had
already taken care by all the relevant emitters. We thank Mimi Nameki, First Secretary, Permanent Delegation of
Japan to the OECD for Environment & Sustainable Development for this insight.
10
   In addition, European Union integrated pollution and prevention control (IPPC) regulations covers European pulp
mills. The European Union reached agreement on IPCC in 1996, and is based on similar legislation passed earlier in
the United Kingdom (Webb 1999). Directives for pulp and paper production took effect in 2001. For bleached kraft
pulp, the new AOX standard is <0.25 kg/adt. Existing standards in both Finland and Sweden already satisfy this
requirement.
                                                                                            12

pollution. For pulp and paper, this was done through in-process changes such as adopting the

oxygen delignification process to recycle the waste stream. Such changes gave the industry

experience with mill retrofitting and sourcing the best available technology and made chlorine-

free technologies available when consumer demand for chlorine-free pulp reached its peak in the

early 1990s (Smith & Rajotte, 2001).

       The final requirements of each permit are developed after negotiation with each plant.

The focus is on application of the best available technology (BAT), which the Swedish

Environmental Protection Agency (NV) defines as the “best technology used on a commercial

scale at a similar plant anywhere in the world” (OECD, 1999b, p. 176). By 1990, ECF was

considered BAT. The Licensing Board also considers technical, environmental, and economic

factors. Typically, economic considerations focus on effects on the industry as a whole, rather

than a specific plant. Under special circumstances, a plant may be given more time to implement

needed upgrades (OECD 1999b).

       Because of the use of plant-by-plant licensing, Sweden has not imposed national

discharge standards.    However, legislative action sets national goals for environmental

performance.   In 1987, the NV established goals for organochlorine substances.       In 1992,

Parliament established more stringent national goals, stating that the pulp and paper industry

should work to attain no noticeable effect of effluents by the end of the century (OECD 1999a).

Recommended limits for AOX releases from kraft pulp mills were just 0.1-0.2 kg/t. (OECD

1999a).

       In contrast to Sweden, Finland moved more slowly towards chlorine reduction. Like

Sweden, Finland has no regulation specifically limiting AOX emissions, as it issues permits to

plants on a case-by-case basis. In 1988, Sweden proposed new discharge limits for chlorinated
                                                                                               13

organics for Nordic states at a meeting of Nordic Ministries. Finland viewed this as an attempt

by Sweden to raise its market share, as Swedish mills had already adopted the required

technology (Smith & Rajotte, 2001). Instead, Finland set less stringent targets for the kraft pulp

industry in 1989, limiting AOX releases to 1.4 kg/ADt by 1994.11 Finland finally accepted more

stringent performance targets developed by a Nordic Working Group in 1993. These targets

limited AOX releases to 0.2-0.4 kg/t for bleached kraft mills, with the more stringent guidelines

applying to new mills (OECD, 1999b). Finland’s willingness to accept these limits came in part

because independent research had demonstrated that the limits could be met using their existing

waste treatment technology. More importantly, because of increased demand for chlorine-free

paper in Europe, Finland had also become anxious about economic risks, as much of Finland’s

pulp was exported (Auer, 1996; Smith & Rajotte, 2001). At the time, the pulp and paper

industry was Finland’s most important next exporter earner.

           Unlike the Nordic countries, both the United States and Canada have binding national

regulations limiting AOX emissions. Individual permits are still needed for each plant, but the

national performance standards must be met or exceeded.          In the United States, the EPA

established an ambient water quality standard for dioxin of 0.013 ppq in 1984. However, pulp

mills were not covered as they were not a known source of dioxin at that time. A follow-up study

completed in 1989 confirmed that pulp mills were an important source of dioxin. The EPA

responded by initially requiring pulp mills to meet the 0.013 ppq ambient standard in their

wastewater, although this requirement was later eased to 1.2 ppq (Norberg-Bohm and Rossi

1998).

           The EPA first proposed regulations for AOX releases in October 1993. These standards

could not have been met using existing ECF technology, suggesting that TCF would be
11
     ADt represents an air dry ton of pulp product.
                                                                                                                   14

considered the BAT in the US. Pressure from industry led to the EPA weakening the standard in

their final rule, which was issued as part of the Cluster Rules of 1997 (Reinstaller 2005).12 The

final rules established ECF as the BAT, with less stringent AOX limits than the Nordic countries,

as shown in Table 4 (Webb, 1998). Mills had until 2001 to comply. To encourage TCF usage,

mills that voluntarily chose to install TCF technology are given an additional three years to

comply (OECD 1999b). However, as will be evident in the data presented in section V, few

plants have chosen this option.

         In Canada, federal and provincial governments share responsibility for water pollution

control. The federal role in water pollution control is outlined in the Fisheries Act of 1970. Pulp

and Paper Effluent Regulations were first introduced in 1971. In May 1992, the federal

government introduced new regulations for the pulp and paper industry, which included new

standards for dioxins, but did not include specific limits for AOX (OECD 1999b). However,

several provinces have established limits for AOX emissions.                       First to do so was British

Columbia, which in 1990 set a limit of 1.5 AOX kg/ADt, to be met by 1995. The 1990

legislation called for eliminating AOX emissions by 2002 (OECD 1999b), but this was later

repealed after review by a panel of scientific experts. New standards now limit the monthly

average AOX releases to 0.6 kg/ADt.13 Quebec established AOX limits in 1992, as did Ontario

in 1993. In both cases, the standards were phased in gradually, with monthly AOX averages

needing to fall to 0.8 kg/ADt by 2000. In addition, new mills in Quebec face a more stringent

standard of 0.25 kg/ADt (OECD 1999b). Finally, Alberta’s initial response to dioxin was to

consider limits as part of individual plant permits, as in Sweden (Galloway, Helminen and


12
   They are called the Cluster Rules because the standards address multiple pollutants, including both air and water,
simultaneously.
13
   We thank Dave Halliburton, Chief of the Forest Products Section of the Natural Resources Division of
Environment Canada for this information.
                                                                                                          15

Carter, 1989). AOX standards have since been implemented at levels comparable to the other

provinces.14

        Finally, in Japan, regulation took a back seat to voluntary compliance measures by

Japanese pulp mills. In 1991, the Japanese pulp and paper industry proposed that AOX levels be

limited to 1.5 kg/metric ton by the end of 1993, and recommended the use of oxygen

delignification equipment and chlorine dioxide substitution to meet this goal (Management

Institute for Environment and Business, 1994). The first law pertaining to dioxin took effect in

2000, limiting dioxins in wastewater to 1 pg/l.15 This is a general regulation applying to all

industries. No specific limits apply to the pulp and paper industry.16

        Table 4 summarizes the key regulations in each country. Note that the Nordic countries

both moved faster and introduced permitting guidelines that were more stringent than regulations

elsewhere. Finland first regulated in 1988, and Sweden in 1991. While Canadian provinces also

passed regulations in the early 1990s, these did not take effect immediately. Moreover, their

standards (0.6-0.8 kg/ADt) are less stringent than those of Sweden and Finland (0.1-0.4 kg/t).

While the United States attempted to establish TCF as best available technology in 1993,

industry opposition led the EPA to weaken its proposed limits when the final Cluster Rule was

published in 1997. The monthly average AOX releases from existing sources must be below

0.62 kg/t for existing sources – a standard comparable to British Columbia. Japan’s regulations

are weakest, relying on voluntary compliance until 2000.




14
   We thank Dave Halliburton, Chief of the Forest Products Section of the Natural Resources Division of
Environment Canada for this information.
15
   There is no specific standard for AOX in Japan.
16
   We thank Mimi Nameki, First Secretary, Permanent Delegation of Japan to the OECD for Environment &
Sustainable Development for this information.
                                                                                                                     16


IV. Data

         We use patent data to study innovations of ECF and TCF technology. For our purposes,

patents have several advantages as a measure of innovation. Most importantly, patent data are

available in highly disaggregated forms. Using patent classes, we are able to identify patents

specifically pertaining to ECF and TCF technology. Moreover, we can use data on the inventor

to identify the source of each patent. Patents are granted by national patent offices in individual

countries. Patent protection is only valid in the country that grants the patent. An inventor must

file for protection in each nation in which protection is desired. Thus, the choice of an inventor

to file a patent in multiple countries suggests that the inventor views these countries as potential

markets for the innovation.

         Economists have found patents, sorted by their application date, provide a good indicator

of R&D activity (see, e.g., Griliches 1990). Nonetheless, when working with patent data, it is

important to be aware of its limitations. The existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of

using patent data is quite large.17 One potential concern is that, although the decision to file a

patent obviously follows from the decision to perform R&D, not all successful research results

are patented. In return for receiving the monopoly rights inferred by a patent, the inventor is

required to publicly disclose the invention.              Rather than make this disclosure, inventors may

prefer to keep an invention secret. Surveys of inventors indicate that the rate at which new

innovations are patented vary across industry (Levin et al. 1987). Fortunately, when studying

the development of a single technology, this is less of a concern than when using patent data to

measure innovation trends across several dissimilar industries.18 Finally, it is also important to


17
  Griliches (1990) provides a useful survey.
18
  An additional concern that remains is that the propensity to patent may vary over time. For example, the number
of patents filed in recent years in the United States has risen dramatically. Some observers argue that at least part of
this increase can be attributed to recent court decisions that have increased the value of patent protection. However,
                                                                                                                       17

note that, because of the random nature of the innovative process, the quality of individual

patents varies widely. Some inventions are extremely valuable, whereas others are of almost no

commercial value. The aggregate counts provided in this paper include all such inventions.

         We collected data on patents granted in each of our five countries using the Delphion

patent database. One advantage of looking at ECF and TCF technologies is that there are

specific patent classes pertaining to these technologies. These are listed in Appendix A. Within

these classes, the first, D21C 9/14, pertains to ECF production, as it covers the use of chlorine

dioxide. Note that chlorine dioxide was used in the later stages of bleaching even before the

switch to ECF technologies, so that there will be patents in this class before regulations were in

place. However, we would expect an increase in innovation here once the shift from elemental

chlorine to ECF begins. The second class, D21C 9/147, includes bleaching processes using

oxygen. These can be either ECF or TCF. The last two classes, D21C 9/153 and D21C 9/16

cover bleaching using ozone or per compounds (e.g. hydrogen peroxide). While these also can

be used in both ECF and TCF bleaching, they are particularly important for TCF, as these

chemicals substitute for chlorine dioxide in the TCF process.

         Within each country, we generate patent counts by the home country of the inventor.19 In

our analysis, we focus primarily on patents by domestic inventors, as this shows how inventors

are reacting to incentives in that country. Patents are sorted by the priority year. This is the year

in which the initial application pertaining to this patent was filed. If a patent is granted,

protection begins from the priority date. Inventors who desire patent protection in other nations

must file applications in those nations, either directly or by using a Patent Cooperation Treaty

(PCT) that designates the countries in which protection is desired, within one year of the priority

this does not appear to be a problem for these data. As shown in the following section, patent counts for these
technologies in the US have been declining since the early 1990s, even as overall patenting activity has increased.
19
   In the case of multiple inventors from different countries, we use the home country of the inventor listed first.
                                                                                                                 18

date. If the inventor does file abroad within one year, the inventor will have priority over any

patent applications received in those countries since the priority date that describe similar

inventions. Thus, the priority year is typically the year in which an application was filed in the

inventor’s home country. As noted earlier, this corresponds to when the inventive activity took

place, as patent applications are usually filed early in the inventive process. Finally, we also

make use of data on patent families – that is, the set of patent applications in multiple countries

pertaining to the same invention (and thus sharing the same priority date).20



V. Analysis

A. Patent Trends

        We begin by looking at domestic patent applications in each country. This allows us to

compare incentives for invention in each of the countries in our study. Figure 1 shows patents

granted in each country to domestic inventors, sorted by the first priority year. What is most

notable from this figure is that perceived public pressure, in response to initial reports of dioxin

in waterways, appears to drive innovation on ECF & TCF technologies. With the exception of

Canada, every country experiences an increase in ECF & TCF patents that begins after release of

the Greenpeace report in 1987. While there was some regulation at this time, recall that initial

regulations were not strict – Sweden, the first country to pass stringent AOX guidelines, did so in

1992. While the US did announce plans for strict regulations that would declare TCF to be best


20
   In the case of Sweden and Finland, inventors might also choose to file patents through the European Patent Office
(EPO), rather than through the national patent offices. EPO patent applicants may designate as many of the 18 EPO
member-states for protection as desired. The application is examined by the EPO. If granted, the patent is
transferred to the individual national patent offices designated for protection. Because EPO applications are more
expensive, European inventors typically first file a patent application in their home country, and then apply to the
EPO if they desire protection in multiple European countries. Thus, most Swedish and Finn inventors will first file
an application in their home country. However, inventors from other European countries are likely to use an EPO
patent if they desire protection in Sweden and Finland. Thus, we also include in our data European Patents that
designate Sweden and/or Finland for protection
                                                                                                                   19

available technology in 1993, the lack of innovative response from US inventors after this

announcement suggests that this initial proposal was not perceived as credible.21

         The findings that patenting increases before regulations were put in place, rather than in

response to regulation, and that these increases occur even in countries that did not pass early

regulation, suggests that increased public scrutiny played an important role in influencing this

first wave of innovation.22 The American Paper Institute noted as early as November 1988 that

several mills where dioxin was detected downstream had begun process modifications, even

though no regulations were in place at the time (Chemical Week, 1988). Similarly, the discharge

limits adopted by the Nordic states ironically became redundant because green market demand

had surpassed those limits for more stringent measures (Smith & Rajotte, 2001, p. 146).

         In addition, industry experts expressed concern over future regulation in response to

increased scrutiny. An April 1988 article in Chemical Week cites a prediction from I. Bruce

Sanborn, associate director of research and development, process development and control of

Consolidated Paper, that the bleaching process would soon be regulated, and that this would have

a “heavy impact on purchasing over the next 5-10 years” (Agoos and Portnoy, 1988, p. 45).

Another unnamed paper producer noted at the time that “there is likely to be a substantial change

in the way pulp is bleached” (Agoos and Portnoy, 1988, p. 45).

         A second implication of these data is that stringent regulation will spur additional

innovation. Here, it is worth comparing innovation in the Nordic countries to innovation in the


21
   In contrast, in the late 1980s, patenting activity for sulfur dioxide control technologies increased in response to
early attempts at modifying the U.S. Clean Air Act, suggesting that innovators expected that these attempts would
eventually lead to regulatory changes (Taylor et al., 2003).
22
   At the same time, the implementation of the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) in the United States in 1990 led firms
to reduce releases of chemicals such as chlorine. However, the finding that innovation is global, rather than just in
the US, suggests that the importance of consumer pressure was greater than the pressure from TRI. Of particular
importance, TRI data only reports releases from the production process. It says nothing about the levels of chlorine
that remain in paper. However, consumer pressure, particularly in Europe, focused on the chlorine content of paper,
rather than chlorine releases.
                                                                                                                 20

US and Canada. Recall that while Sweden uses plant by plant licensing, its strong definition for

best available technology led to ECF being considered BAT as early as 1990. In addition,

Sweden also issued guidelines for AOX releases in 1992 that were not only more stringent than

any issued at the time, but remain the most stringent guidelines for AOX among the countries in

this study.23 Similarly, in 1993 Finland agreed to the stringent AOX limits recommended by the

Nordic Working Group. In both cases, these regulations can be seen as technology forcing, and

innovation responds in kind. Both Swedish and Finnish ECF & TCF patents peak within two

years of passing these stringent limits.

        By comparison, US and Canadian regulations were less stringent than the Nordic

guidelines, and typically made use of existing technologies. As such, we see little evidence of

innovation in response to these regulations. Canadian patents experience no notable increases.

US patenting activity increases dramatically in response to the initial news about dioxin, but not

in response to new regulations. Neither the proposed (and ultimately defeated) standards of 1993

nor the final Cluster Rule of l998 led to additional patenting in the US.

        We can see further evidence of the importance of both stringent and flexible regulation

by looking at the types of innovation taking place. Table 5 provides counts of patents using

chlorine dioxide (ClO2) and chlorine substitutes for selected years. Note that patents using ClO2

could only be used for ECF processes, whereas those using chlorine substitutes could be used in

either ECF or TCF processes. Thus, while we cannot definitely state when research has shifted

to TCF processes, we can identify cases where ECF is the main research goal. These counts



23
  One interesting possibility is that case-by-case permitting may hasten the development of new technologies. Ulf
Bjällås of Sweden’s National Licensing Board for Environmental Protection notes that Sweden’s approach to
permitting encourages innovation by allowing individual plants to propose different solutions to pollution problems.
Moreover, the National Licensing Board can postpone decisions in order to investigate new technologies (Bjällås
1999). While we do not have sufficient patent data do not allow us to test whether innovation in Sweden included a
greater variety of options for these technologies, this is a question worth further study.
                                                                                                                21

suggest that regulatory stringency, or lack thereof, did shape the nature of innovation. During the

first wave of patenting in the late 80s and early 90s, most US patents focused on chlorine

substitutes. Sweden had fewer patents at this time, and many used chlorine dioxide. However,

after Sweden establishes strict AOX standards in 1992, nearly all Swedish patents use chlorine

substitutes. This is also true after Finland adopts stringent standards in 1993. In contrast, not

only does US patenting activity fall after the revised Cluster Rule in 1997, but the nature of

innovation shifts. Once the revised Cluster Rule establishes ECF as acceptable, most US patents

make use of chlorine dioxide, as there is little regulatory incentive for plants to consider

alternatives such as TCF bleaching.

        Examination of patent family data provides further evidence of the leading innovative

role of Sweden and Finland. Patent protection is only valid in the issuing country. To receive

protection in multiple countries, an applicant must obtain a patent in each country for which

protection is desired. Additional fees apply for each application. However, inventors are given a

one-year window after their first filing to decide to patent elsewhere. Because of these features

of patent law, only the most valuable inventions are filed in several countries. Moreover, filing a

patent application in a given country is a signal that the inventor expects the invention to be

profitable in that country. Because of this, researchers such as Lanjouw and Schankerman

(2004) have used data on patent families as proxies for the quality of individual patents.

        Figure 2 shows the average family size of domestic patents in each country by year. Note

that Sweden, Finland, and the US consistently produce the largest family sizes, whereas most of

Japanese patents are filed only in Japan.24 Moreover, family sizes are largest after the initial

outcry over dioxin in the late 1980s. This provides further evidence of global concern, rather


24
  Japan’s small family size is explained by Japan being a technology-follower in this field. Most pulping equipment
used in Japan comes from foreign sources (Management Institute for Environment and Business, 1994).
                                                                                                                    22

than domestic regulation, driving innovation. Also notable is that the family size of Swedish and

Finnish patents remains high throughout the 1990s. In contrast, the average family size of US

patents falls dramatically after 1996. A likely explanation for this is the technology following

nature of US regulations.            Because the Nordic regulations were more stringent than the

regulations passed in the US, larger inventive steps would be needed to comply with Nordic

regulations. US regulations, in contrast, could be met with existing technology. As such, not

only did the level of innovation fall once it was clear that TCF technology would not be required

in the US, but also the quality of innovation. Since the mid-90s, most major patents for ECF &

TCF technologies come from the Nordic countries.

         To better illustrate the flows of knowledge across countries, Figure 3 shows both

domestic and foreign patents in Finland, Sweden, and the United States. One thing of note here

is that both domestic and foreign regulations appear to influence innovation. For example,

patents from US inventors peak in 1990 in the US. However, they peak in 1992 in Sweden and

1993 in Finland – after passage of tighter regulations in those countries. Similarly, we observe

an increase in Swedish patents, both in Sweden and the US, after the 1997 Cluster Rule in the

US.25 This contrasts with the results of Popp (2006), which finds that domestic regulations are

the primary driver of innovation for air pollution control devices for coal-fired power plants.

One difference here is that the pulp and paper industry is a global market, whereas most

suppliers of pollution abatement equipment in Popp (2006) were domestic companies.




25
  Since the peaks are different for each destination country, at least some of the variation comes from inventors
choosing to file more of their patent applications in other countries. However, our data doesn’t allow us to say to
what extent inventors are responding to regulation in other countries by increasing innovative activity (e.g. creating
more inventions) or simply by choosing to file more of their patent applications in other countries.
                                                                                                                  23


B. Adoption of ECF & TCF Technologies

         Figure 1 suggests that innovation on ECF and TCF technologies came early, in some

cases preceding regulations.          However, looking at innovation does not present a complete

picture, as it does not consider whether newly developed technologies are put to use. Figures 4

and 5 show the percentage of pulp production using ECF technology and ECF or TCF

technology respectively.26 It is here where the influence of regulation becomes clearer. By

1994, all pulp production in the Nordic countries uses either ECF or TCF technology. In

contrast, North American usage grows more slowly. It is not until the Cluster Rule deadline of

2001 that nearly 100% adoption is achieved. One important difference in North America is that

public pressure for chlorine-free paper did not persist as it did in Europe. Moreover, the US

industry serves a primarily domestic market, exporting just 10 percent of its paper products

(Norberg-Bohm and Rossi, 1998). While public pressure was sufficient to jumpstart innovation

on ECF and TCF technologies, as well as to encourage some reductions of chlorine use, the

adoption data make clear that complete diffusion will not occur unless binding regulations are

put in place.



C. Policy vs. Public Pressure

         The combination of early innovation and delayed adoption in North America provides

some interesting lessons for the induced innovation literature. First, the early influence of public

pressure, particularly after Greenpeace leaked EPA reports on dioxin, is striking. Typically,


26
  The chart combines Canada and the US as part of North America, as separate data are available for these countries
only through 2001. Using separate data reveals similar trends. Canada has slightly higher adoption rates than the
US, due to earlier regulation at the provincial level. The only deviation between the two countries is that increased
North American diffusion in 2001 is entirely due to the US, which saw usage of ECF technology increase from 76%
to 96% as the deadline for compliance with the Cluster Rule regulations passed (Alliance for Environmental
Technology, 2002). Note that less than one percent of plants in the US and Canada use TCF, since it is possible to
comply with regulation using ECF technology.
                                                                                                24

induced innovation studies focus on the effect of regulation on innovation. Here, innovation

comes first.   Regulation followed, encouraged both by public pressure for action and the

availability of alternative technologies for pulp production. The role of leading countries is also

important. Sweden and Finland moved quickly to reduce chlorine usage. As discussed earlier,

these decisions were made partly because the technologies that had been developed in response

to news on dioxin were deemed acceptable to regulators. However, the patent data suggest that

additional research was needed to perfect these technologies, as both Sweden and Finland

experience an increase in ECF & TCF patenting after announcing stringent national guidelines in

the early 1990s. In contrast, the US and Canada delayed regulation, and appear to develop these

regulations based on the availability of existing technologies. Early attempts to establish TCF as

the best available technology in the US failed. When the US finally adopts the Cluster Rule in

1998, ECF had been clearly established as a viable technology. As such, while the rule served to

increase adoption of ECF technology, no further innovation was needed.

       Note that this result differs from Popp (2006), which finds that even late adopters of coal-

fired power plant regulations needed to innovate to adapt technologies to local conditions. One

difference here is that domestic innovation did occur in the US prior to the Cluster Rule, whereas

in the case of power plants, little domestic innovation occurred before regulations were enacted.

In the case of power plants, even if there had been public pressure to reduce emissions,

consumers’ only option before regulation would be to reduce electricity usage. Alternative,

clean suppliers of electricity were not available, as regulations for nitrogen dioxide and sulfur

dioxide took effect before the movement towards deregulated electricity markets in the late

1990s. In contrast, some pulp manufacturers did face incentives to reduce chlorine usage before
                                                                                                                25

regulations were in place, as it enabled these manufacturers to differentiate their product and

target environmentally-conscious consumers.

        Finally, we turn to labeling. The importance of early publicity suggests a possible role

for labeling to encourage both innovation and diffusion of ECF & TCF technologies. However,

the first labeling requirement restricting chlorine was the Nordic Swan in 1991. Most schemes

did not address chlorine usage until later in the 1990s. While they may have played a role in the

diffusion of ECF and TCF technology, labeling schemes appear to incorporate existing

technologies in their criteria, rather than serve as technology-forcing standards.27 Given that

these labels are voluntary measures, this is not surprising, as labeling programs do not offer

consumer choices unless some products qualify for the label.



VI. Conclusions

        This paper uses patent data to study the development of ECF and TCF bleaching

technologies in the pulp and paper industry across five OECD countries. While most studies

using patent data focus on end-of-the-pipe solutions to environmental problems, this study offers

a first look at patenting for a process technology.                 As in other studies of environmental

innovation, regulation plays a role in both the development and diffusion of these technologies.

However, it is not the only driver of innovation, and perhaps not even the most important.




27
   Even the influence of labeling schemes to encourage adoption is hard to discern from the data. Clearly, adoption
of ECF and TCF technology increases in Scandinavia in the early 1990s, but this is not solely due to labeling, as
regulations in Sweden and Finland were also tightened at this time. However, the Nordic Swan standards are more
stringent than the AOX requirements in these countries, and may help reduce emissions beyond what is required
(personal communication, Grethe Torrissen, Advisor, Sustainable Production and Consumption/IPP, the Norwegian
Ministry of the Environment). In contrast, the US Green Seal label allowed chlorine, as long as releases were below
1 kg/ton, until 1996. This may be one explanation for adoption of ECF technology prior to the Cluster Rule.
However, although Green Seal banned chlorine bleaching after 1996, there was no shift to TCF technology in the
US, with less than 1 percent of production using this technology (Alliance for Environmental Technology, 2002).
                                                                                                26

       One striking result from the patent data is the role of public pressure. While ECF and

TCF technologies are process technologies, they do affect the quality of the final product. In the

late 1980s, studies linking chlorine bleaching technologies to dioxin led to pressure from

environmentalists for reduced chlorine bleaching in paper production.          Detection of trace

amounts of dioxin in products such as diapers and coffee filters led to increased awareness of the

issue, particularly in Europe. In response, the development of alternative bleaching technologies

increased rapidly in each of the countries in this study. Moreover, this increase occurred before

new environmental regulations could be put in place limiting chlorine use, suggesting that public

pressure, rather than regulation, was the primary driver of this first wave of innovation. Finally,

although product labeling is important for consumers to indentify chlorine-free products, the

formalized labeling schemes developed in the 1990s emphasized available technologies, rather

than spurring additional innovation. Because the success of such voluntary programs depends on

firms’ willingness to participate, these programs do not appear well-suited for spurring additional

innovation.

       Despite the importance of consumer pressure, public policy does play an important role.

In response to increased awareness of the problems of chlorine bleaching, both Sweden and

Finland enacted strict regulations in the early 1990s. In both countries, these regulations were

followed by both increased innovation and increased adoption of ECF and TCF technologies.

Moreover, these tighter regulations shaped the nature of innovation, as firms focused on

technologies relevant for TCF production. In contrast, the U.S., Canada, and Japan all enacted

weaker regulations that could be satisfied using ECF technology. Moreover, in the U.S. and

Japan, these regulations did not come until later in the decade. As such, patenting in the U.S. did

not remain at high levels (although it did in Japan, presumably in response to foreign
                                                                                                27

regulations). Moreover, the majority of U.S. patents at the end of the decade focused on ECF,

rather than TCF, technology.

       Public policy also plays a role in diffusion. While the patent data show the U.S. was an

early innovator of ECF and TCF technologies, adoption of these technologies was slower in the

U.S. than in Sweden or Finland. While some U.S. plants adopted ECF technology in response to

consumer pressure, it was not until regulations requiring its use took effect in 2001 that near

universal adoption of ECF or TCF technologies occurred. In contrast, Sweden and Finland

achieved 100 percent diffusion of ECF and TCF technologies by 1994, due to earlier regulation

requiring these technologies.

       Finally, it is worth noting that while this paper illustrates the effect of different policy

regimes on innovation, it says nothing about efficiency. TCF technology was more costly and

produced lower quality paper than ECF. While the more stringent regulations in Sweden and

Finland did hasten the development and diffusion of TCF technology, it is beyond the scope of

this paper to assess whether the additional benefits from completely removing chlorine from the

bleaching process, compared to the partial reduction achieved by ECF, are worth the additional

costs of developing and using TCF technology.
                                                                                             28


References

Agnoos, Alice and Kristine Portnoy (1988), “Chemicals alter their roles in papermaking,”
      Chemical Week, p. 45.
Alliance for Environmental Technology (2002), Trends in World Bleached Chemical Pulp
       Production: 1990-2001.
Alliance for Environmental Technology (2006), Trends in World Bleached Chemical Pulp
       Production: 1990-2005.
Anonymous (1987), “Dioxins in diapers stir Sweden,” Chemical week, December 23, 1987, p.
     28.
Auer, M. R. (1996), “Negotiating toxic risks; a case from the Nordic countries,” Environmental
      Politics, 5(4), 687-699.
Bjällås, Ulf (1999), “The Swedish Integrated Permitting System,” Environmental Requirements
        for Industrial Permitting, Vol. 2, Organisation of Economic Co-Operation and
        Development, Paris.
Chemical Week (1988), “Paper Industry Fights Dioxin,” p. 84.
Collins, L. (1992), “Environment versus industry: a case study of how the pulp and paper
       industry is responding to changing attitudes to the environment,” Business Strategy and
       the Environment, 1(4), 29-36.
EPA Office of Compliance (2002), Profile of The Pulp And Paper Industry, 2nd Edition,
     Washington, DC.
FAOSTAT data (2006), http://www.fao.org/faostat. Accessed May 2, 2006.
Fisher, C., Parry, I.W.H., and Pizer, W.A. (2003), “Instrument choice for environmental
       protection when environmental protection is endogenous,” Journal of Environmental
       Economics and Management, 45, 523-45.
Galloway, L. R., Helminen, P. I., & Carter, D. N. (1989), “Industry's effluent problems spawn
      new engineering technology, design,” Pulp & Paper, 63(9), 91-97.
Gray, M., Lowther, W., & Todd, D. (1987), “Alarm over paper goods,” Maclean's, October 26,
      1987, p. 57.
Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent Statistics As Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
       Economic Literature, 28(4), 1661-707.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
      Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-71.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman (2004), “Patent quality and research productivity:
      Measuring innovation with multiple indicators,” Economic Journal, 114(495), 441-465.
Larsson, A., Andersson, T., Förlin, L., & Härdig, J. (1988), “Physiological disturbances in fish
       exposed to bleached kraft mill effluents,” Water Science and Technology, 20(2), 67-76.
                                                                                            29

Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter (1987),
       “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 783-820.
Lockie, Mark (1998), “Pulp producers hunt for lower cost bleaching,” PPI, 40(10), 44-45.
Lyon, Thomas P. and John W. Maxwell (2002), “Voluntary Approaches to Environmental
      Regulation: A Survey,” in Maurizio Franzini and Antonio Nicita (eds.), Economic
      Institutions and Environmental Policy: Post Present and Future, Aldershot, Hampshire,
      UK: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
Magat, W.A. (1978), “Pollution control and technological advance: a dynamic model of the
      firm,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 5, 1-25.
Management Institute for Environment and Business (1994), “Competitive Implications of
      Environmental Regulation: A Study of Six Industries,”U.S. EPA., Washington, DC.
      Available online at http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eerm.nsf/vwSER/C6E46F0830E7B87
      78525644D0053BE5A?OpenDocument.
Milliman, S.R. and Prince, R. (1989), “Firm incentives to promote technological change in
       pollution control,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 17, 247-165.
Norberg-Bohm, Vicki and Mark Rossi (1998), “The Power of Incrementalism: Environmental
      Regulation and Technological Change in Pulp and Paper Bleaching in the US,”
      Technology Analysis and Strategic Management, 10(2), 225-245.
OECD (2005), “Environmental Exposure Assessment: Final Draft for Emission Scenario
    Document on Kraft Pulp Mills,” ENV/JM/EEA(2005)4.
OECD (1999a), “Environmental Requirements for Industrial Permitting: Case Study on the Pulp
     and Paper Sector, Part One,” ENV/EPOC/PPC(99)8/FINAL/PART1.
OECD (1999b), “Environmental Requirements for Industrial Permitting: Case Study on the Pulp
     and Paper Sector, Part Two,” ENV/EPOC/PPC(99)8/FINAL/PART2.
Popp, David (2006), “International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Control
      Technologies: The Effects of NOX and SO2 Regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany,”
      Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 51(1), January 2006, 46-71.
Popp, David (2003), “Pollution control innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990,” Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management, 22, 641-660.
Reinstaller, Andreas (2005), “Policy entrepreneurship in the co-evolution of institutions,
       preferences, and technology. Comparing the diffusion of totally chlorine free pulp
       bleaching technologies in the US and Sweden,” Research Policy, 34, 1366-1384.
Salzman, J. (1991), Environmental labelling in OECD countries, Paris, France: OECD.
Sammarco, L. (1997), “Eco-labelling paper and board products; the story so far and what the
     future holds,” Paper & Packaging Analyst, 29, 37-51.
Smith, A., & Rajotte, A. (2001) “When markets meet sociopolitics: the introduction of chlorine-
       free bleaching in the Swedish pulp and paper industry,”.in R. Coombs, K. Green, A.
       Richards & V. Walsh (Eds.), Technology and the market. Demand, users and innovation.
       Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
                                                                                           30

Taylor, M.R., E.S. Rubin, D.H. Hounshell (2003), “Effect of government actions on
       technological innovation for SO2 Control,” Environmental Science & Technology, 37,
       4527-4534.
Thulin, J., Höglund, J., & Lindesjöö, E. (1988), “Diseases and parasites of fish in a bleached
       kraft mill effluent, Water Science and Technology, 20(2), 179-180.
Webb, Leslie (1999), “IPPC steps up to BAT,” Pulp and Paper International, 41(4), 29-32.
Webb, Leslie (1998), “Wastewater treatment: regulations, bugs and beds,” Pulp and Paper
      International, 40(6), 39-43.
Webb, Leslie (1996), “Making the labels stick on a complex issue,” Pulp & Paper International,
      38(12), 31-34.
Webb, Leslie (1994), “Eco-labels stuck on search for common standards,” Pulp & Paper
      International, 36(11), 39-42.
Webb, Leslie (1993), “How green is your labelling scheme?” Pulp & Paper International, 35(5),
      32-35.
                                                                                         31


                                  Table 1 – Top Pulp Producers
Top countries: pulp production

                                   Chemical pulp production    % Value added from Pulp
                                      (1000 metric tons)              & Paper
United States                              48,198                      2.25%
Canada                                     13,553                      2.99%
Japan                                       9,792                      1.73%
Sweden                                      7,979                      3.52%
Finland                                     7,100                      6.06%
Brazil                                      6,689                       N/A
Russian Federation                          4,195                       N/A
Indonesia                                   3,626                       N/A
Chile                                       2,220                       N/A
France                                      1,817                      1.50%


Top countries: % total value added from pulp, paper, paper products, printing and
publishing

                                   Chemical pulp production
                                      (1000 metric tons)              Percentage
Finland                                     7,100                       6.06%
Ireland                                       0                         3.82%
Sweden                                      7,979                       3.52%
Canada                                     13,553                       2.99%
New Zealand                                  754                        2.43%
United Kingdom                                0                         2.35%
United States                              48,198                       2.25%
Austria                                     1,190                       2.02%
Netherlands                                   0                         2.01%
Portugal                                    1,774                       1.84%


Source: Pulp production from FAOSTAT (2006). Value added percentages are authors
       calculations based on data from the OECD STAN database.
                                                                                          32


           Table 2 – Percentage of Exports to Each Country: Paper and Paperboard


                                                    Exports to:
Exporter     Year   Canada   Finland   Japan   Sweden    USA      Germany   Other EU   Other
Canada       1988             0.0%      2.0%    0.0%    82.3%       1.2%      4.7%     9.8%
Finland      1988    0.9%               2.9%    2.9%     6.3%      12.4%     50.1%     24.5%
Japan        1988   1.5%      0.8%              1.1%    18.2%       4.5%      8.6%     65.3%
Sweden       1988   0.3%      1.7%     0.8%              4.6%      17.1%     58.7%     16.9%
USA          1988   19.3%     0.1%     12.4%    0.4%                2.8%     12.3%     52.9%
Canada       1993             0.0%     2.7%     0.0%    81.9%       0.8%      5.3%     9.3%
Finland      1993    0.5%              2.2%     2.6%     7.7%      14.5%     51.9%     20.6%
Japan        1993    0.7%     0.1%              0.2%    14.8%       1.7%      5.6%     76.8%
Sweden       1993    0.1%     2.2%     0.4%              2.0%      19.3%     57.6%     18.4%
USA          1993   27.5%     0.0%     9.2%     0.3%                2.4%      9.6%     51.0%
Canada       1998             0.0%     1.6%     0.0%    87.1%       0.5%      3.1%     7.6%
Finland      1998    0.8%              1.7%     3.0%     7.3%      16.1%     49.1%     21.9%
Japan        1998    0.8%     0.1%              0.1%    21.4%       1.7%      5.9%     70.0%
Sweden       1998    0.1%     2.5%     0.3%              2.0%      19.5%     60.3%     15.3%
USA          1998   30.5%     0.1%     6.5%     0.1%                2.1%     10.5%     50.2%



Source: Authors calculations using data from Comtrade (http://comtrade.un.org). Includes
       exports in SITC2 categories 641 (Paper and paperboard) and 642 (paper and paperboard,
       precut and articles of paper or paperboard).
                                                                                             33


                         Table 3 – Summary of Ecolabel Programs


Blue Angel (Germany), begins 1978
   • 1992: new category for newsprint: no halogenated bleaches

Environmental Choice (Canada), begins 1988
   • 1991: limits for AOX proposed, but eventually postponed
   • 1998: AOX limits added

Nordic White Swan, begins 1989
   • 1991: Chlorine bleaching prohibited
   • 1994: Revised to allow ECF

Ecocheck (UK), begins 1991
   • 1991: Included limits for COD, AOX, BOD and TSS in wastewater

Green Seal (US), begins 1989
   • 1992: Bathroom and facial tissue standards limit AOX to 1kg/ton pulp
   • 1993: Standards for printing and writing paper prohibit chlorine bleaching
   • 1996: Chlorine bleaching prohibited for bathroom and facial tissues

Eco-label (EU), begins 1993
   • 1996: Criteria for copy papers includes pass/fail system in four areas, including AOX

Ecomark (Japan), begins 1989
   • 2004: Chlorine gas not to be used in bleaching process
                                                                                          34


                          Table 4 – Summary of Key Regulations


Sweden
1991: Environmental legislation establishes strict guidelines for AOX (0.1-0.2 kg/t).
      Enforcement is through plant-by-plant permitting.

Finland
1987: Issues first guidelines for AOX (1.4 kg/ADT), to be met by 2004. Enforcement is
      through plant-by-plant permitting.
1993: Accepts Nordic Working Group performance standards for AOX (0.2 – 0.4 kg/t).
      Enforcement is through plant-by-plant permitting.

Canada
1990: British Columbia sets AOX limits of 1.5 kg/ADt, to be met by 1995. Since lowered to
      0.6 kg/ADt.
1992: Quebec passes AOX limits that are phased in gradually. AOX limit of 0.8 kg/ADt by
      2000. New mills limited to 0.25 kg/ADt.
1993: Ontario passes AOX limits that are phased in gradually. AOX limit of 0.8 kg/ADt by
      2000.

United States
1993: Proposed Cluster Rule suggests TCF as best available technology. Never took effect.
1997: Revised Cluster Rule limits monthly average AOX releases to 0.62 kg/t pulp for existing
      sources, and 0.27 kg/t pulp for new sources. Daily discharges cannot exceed 0.95 kg/ton
      pulp and 0.48 kg/ton pulp, respectively. Mills have until 2001 to comply.

Japan
1991: Pulp and paper industry proposes voluntary AOX limit of 1.5 kg/metric ton by end of
      1993.
2000: First law limiting dioxins in wastewater (1 pg/l). No specific limit for AOX or for the
      pulp and paper industry.
                                                                                                                                 35


Table 5 – Number of Domestic Chlorine and Non-Chlorine Patents, Selected Years

                                                                     Priority Year
                       1975     1980     1985      1988     1989     1990       1991    1992      1993     1998     2000      2002
Canada    ClO2            2        0        1         0        0         1          0      1         0        1        0         1
          Other           1        0        2         1        2         2          2      5         2        3        2         2
Finland   ClO2            0        0        0         1        2         2          0      0         0        1        3         0
          Other           0        0        2         0        2         1          3      1         7        3        0         1
Japan     ClO2            3        1        0         4        1         6          2      1         4        3        5        10
          Other           2        7        0         8       15         7         14     22        25       11       14        21
Sweden    ClO2            1        2        0         1        3         6          0      0         1        0        2         2
          Other           2        4        1         4        1         2          5     11        22        5        4         0
US        ClO2            1        1        1         1        7         2          2      5         0        5        2         0
          Other           3        0        3         4       11        15         27     13        21        0        2         0

The table shows the number of domestic patent applications for selected years for technologies using chlorine dioxide (ClO2) and
using substitutes for chlorine (other). ClO2 patents correspond to IPC class D21C 9/14, and other corresponds to the other three IPC
classes. Note that ClO2 patents could only be used in ECF processes, whereas the other patents could be used in both ECF and TCF
processes.
                                                                                                                            36


                             Figure 1 – Domestic ECF & TCF Patents by Country


                                                                                                          New JP dioxin limits
           35
                                                     SE tightens guidelines        US Cluster Rule

           30
                          Greenpeace report                                            FI tightents
                                                                                       standards
           25


           20
  number




           15


           10


            5


            0
            1975   1977    1979   1981   1983      1985   1987   1989    1991   1993     1995     1997   1999    2001   2003
                                                             priority year

                            SE                US             Finland            Canada                   Japan




The figure shows patent applications of domestic inventors for each country in our sample. In all
cases except the US, both successful and unsuccessful applications are included. Only patents
subsequently granted are included in US applications.
                                                                                                         37


                                Figure 2 – Average Patent Family Size by Country and Year

                        16


                        14


                        12
  average family size




                        10


                         8


                         6


                         4


                         2


                         0
                         1985   1987        1989   1991   1993       1995     1997   1999      2001   2003
                                                           priority year

                                       Sweden      US      Finland          Canada     Japan




The figure shows the average patent family size of patent applications of domestic inventors for
each country in our sample. In all cases except the US, both successful and unsuccessful
applications are included. Only patents subsequently granted are included in US applications.
                                                                                                                                                 38


                                      Figure 3 – ECF & TCF Patent Trends, Selected Countries
A. Finland

                             16
                                                                       FI tightens standards

                             14


                             12
       patent applications




                             10


                              8


                              6


                              4


                              2


                              0
                              1975   1977   1979   1981    1983    1985      1987    1989      1991   1993   1995   1997    1999   2001   2003
                                                                                     year

                                                      FI          SE         US        OTHER EUROPEAN               OTHER


B. Sweden

                             25
                                                                                                                SE tightens guidelines




                             20
       patent applications




                             15




                             10




                              5




                              0
                              1975   1977   1979   1981    1983    1985      1987    1989      1991   1993   1995   1997    1999   2001   2003
                                                                                     year

                                                           SE           US          OTHER EUROPEAN             OTHER
                                                                                                                                            39


C. United States

                             35
                                                                           Failed Cluster Rule
                                              Greenpeace report                                                  Revised Cluster Rule

                             30



                             25
       patent applications




                             20



                             15



                             10



                              5



                              0
                              1975   1977   1979   1981   1983    1985   1987   1989   1991      1993   1995   1997    1999   2001   2003
                                                                                year

                                                     US          SE      CA        OTHER EUROPEAN              OTHER




The figures show all ECF & TCF patents in Finland, Sweden, and the United States, grouped by
inventor country.
                                                                                                                                          40


                                           Figure 4 – Diffusion of ECF Bleaching Technologies

                         100%

                         90%


                         80%
  % of Pulp Production




                         70%


                         60%

                         50%


                         40%

                         30%

                         20%


                         10%

                          0%
                            1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995     1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005
                                                                                  Year

                                            World              Nordic                    North America            ROW


The figure shows the percentage of chemical pulp production using ECF technology in the
Nordic countries, North America, and the rest of the world (ROW). Note that diffusion of ECF
has been rapid in the Nordic countries due to both strong consumer demand and early regulation.
In contrast, diffusion in North America has been more gradual until 2001, the deadline for
compliance with the US Cluster Rules.
Source: Authors calculation using data from Alliance for Environmental Technology (2006)
                                                                                                                                         41


                                     Figure 5 – Diffusion of ECF & TCF Bleaching Technologies

                         100%


                         90%


                         80%
  % of Pulp Production




                         70%


                         60%


                         50%


                         40%


                         30%


                         20%


                         10%


                          0%
                            1990   1991   1992    1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005
                                                                                 Year

                                          World                 Nordic                      North America                ROW


The figure shows the percentage of chemical pulp production using either ECF or TCF
technology in the Nordic countries, North America, and the rest of the world (ROW). Note that
the use of elemental chlorine has been completely eliminated in the Nordic countries, and nearly
eliminated in North America since the US Cluster Rules took effect.
Source: Authors calculation using data from Alliance for Environmental Technology (2006)
                                                                                           42


          Appendix A: Relevant Patent Classes for Pulp Bleaching Technologies


D21C 9/14:    Paper/Paper-Making; Production of Cellulose/Production of Cellulose by
              Removing Non-cellulose Substances from Cellulose-containing Materials;
              Regeneration of Pulping Liquors; Apparatus Therefor/After-treatment of cellulose
              pulp, e.g. of wood pulp, or cotton liners/Bleaching/with halogens or halogen-
              containing compounds/with ClO2 or chlorites
D21C 9/147: Paper/Paper-Making; Production of Cellulose/Production of Cellulose by
            Removing Non-cellulose Substances from Cellulose-containing Materials;
            Regeneration of Pulping Liquors; Apparatus Therefor/After-treatment of cellulose
            pulp, e.g. of wood pulp, or cotton liners/Bleaching/with oxygen or its allotropic
            modifications (9/16 takes precedence)
D21C 9/153: Paper/Paper-Making; Production of Cellulose/Production of Cellulose by
            Removing Non-cellulose Substances from Cellulose-containing Materials;
            Regeneration of Pulping Liquors; Apparatus Therefor/After-treatment of cellulose
            pulp, e.g. of wood pulp, or cotton liners/Bleaching/with oxygen or its allotropic
            modifications (9/16 takes precedence)/with ozone
D21C 9/16:    Paper/Paper-Making; Production of Cellulose/Production of Cellulose by
              Removing Non-cellulose Substances from Cellulose-containing Materials;
              Regeneration of Pulping Liquors; Apparatus Therefor/After-treatment of cellulose
              pulp, e.g. of wood pulp, or cotton liners/Bleaching/with per compounds
