                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SOCIOECONOMIC DISADVANTAGE AND EARLY CHILDBEARING

                                         Melissa S. Kearney
                                          Phillip B. Levine

                                        Working Paper 13436
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13436


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




This paper was prepared for the conference meeting "An Economics Perspective on the Problems of
Disadvantaged Youth." The authors thank conference participants for very helpful comments and Dubravka
Colic and Rebecca Vichniac for very helpful research assistance. This research was funded by the
Annie E. Casey Foundation. We thank them for their support and acknowledge that the findings and
conclusions presented in this report are those of the authors alone, and do not necessarily reflect the
opinions of the Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Early Childbearing
Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 13436
September 2007
JEL No. I3,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the empirical relationship between socioeconomic disadvantage and rates of early childbearing.
First, we use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to confirm a strong correlation
at the individual level - women who grow up "disadvantaged" are much more likely to give birth as
teens. Then we aggregate Vital Statistics microdata from 1968 through 2003 to conduct a cohort-based
analysis of the relationship between rates of socioeconomic disadvantage of a birth cohort and the
cohort's subsequent early childbearing experiences. Our cohort level analysis implies an even tighter
intergenerational correlation between rates of background disadvantage and early childbearing. But,
when our analysis econometrically controls for fixed state and year of birth effects in the model to
account for cultural and other differences across cohorts, the relationship between rates of disadvantage
and early childbearing is found to be quite modest. For example, the elasticity of early childbearing
rates by age 18 with respect to the probability of being born to a mother under age 18 is only 0.05.
This suggests that broader, societal forces are far more important in determining rates of early childbearing
than rates of socioeconomic disadvantage per se.

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

       Each year, roughly five percent of teenagers give birth in the United States, a level that is

considerably higher than that in any other developed country (United Nations, 2006). As we

show subsequently, in the United States between 7 and 10 percent of women will give birth

before the age of 18 and roughly 20 percent will give birth before the age of 20.

       Concern is often expressed regarding the potential harm that teen childbearing imposes

on the mother, the child, and potentially to society more broadly. The National Campaign to

Prevent Teen Pregnancy (2007) has summarized many of the statistics that are often used to

support arguments about the potential pitfalls associated with teen childbearing. They highlight

the fact that women who give birth as teens tend to subsequently have lower educational

attainment and higher rates of welfare receipt. Their children are more likely to be born with low

birth weight and have weaker performance in school. Although it is difficult to determine the

extent to which the teen birth is the causal reason for these poor outcomes, these relationships are

both sufficiently strong and alarming that they receive a great deal of attention.

       If early childbearing is associated with poor outcomes for both mothers and their

children, then why do women give birth at such an early age? Public discussions directed at

answering this question have focused on a number of potential explanations: the incentives of

the welfare system, poor labor market outcomes for teens, lack of access to affordable

contraception, poor parental and peer influences, and socioeconomic disadvantage, among

others. In this paper we focus on the last potential contributor.

       Socioeconomic disadvantage can lead to early childbearing through a number of different

mechanisms. The poor may lack the resources available to know about the different opportunities

available to them or to take advantage of those opportunities. This could hinder their ability to

                                                 1
make optimal choices regarding contraceptive use, educational attainment, labor market training,

and the like. Alternatively, those at the bottom of the economic ladder may have given up hope

of improving their economic conditions or those of their offspring. Schools and/or labor market

conditions in their communities may be so weak that staying in school and avoiding early

motherhood might not be seen as offering any material benefit. In addition, some evidence

suggests that those who grow up in disadvantaged situations have a stronger "taste" for children.

Edin and Kafalas (2006) argue that "the daily stresses of an impoverished adolescence…breed a

deep sense of need for something positive to 'look to'" (page 205).

         Our goal in this paper is to examine the empirical relationship between socioeconomic

disadvantage and rates of early childbearing. We begin by exploring past research in different

disciplines that posit factors that may lead to early childbearing, focusing on the role that

socioeconomic disadvantage may play. We then extend our literature review to discuss related

empirical research that may inform our discussion. We continue our analysis by offering our

own empirical exercises.           First, we use micro-level data from the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID) to provide a descriptive analysis of the relationship between socioeconomic

disadvantage and early childbearing. Second, we aggregate Vital Statistics microdata from 1968

through 2003 to conduct a cohort-based analysis of the relationship between rates of

socioeconomic disadvantage of a birth cohort and the cohort’s subsequent early childbearing

experiences. 1 We proxy for disadvantage at birth with four alternate factors, all based on the




1
  To be clear, we do not investigate what it is about socioeconomic disadvantage that leads young women to have
children before the age of 18 or 20. Our empirical approach does not allow us to separately identify which aspects of
socioeconomic disadvantage – such as poor schools, peer influences, living arrangements, or lack of optimism about
future labor market opportunities – are driving this relationship. Yet, as we clarify in our literature review, the state
of knowledge regarding the broader relationship is sufficiently limited that we can make a substantial contribution
focusing on that alone.


                                                           2
mother’s characteristics: having been born to a mother with a low level of education, to an

unmarried mother, or to a teen or minor mother.

       Our cohort-based analysis allows us to answer the following hypothetical question: if we

reduce the rate of socioeconomic disadvantage among a birth cohort of women, then what impact

does that have on their subsequent rate of early childbearing? Asked differently, to what extent is

early childbearing driven by socioeconomic disadvantage and its associated environmental

factors? We know from previous studies that women who grow up “disadvantaged” are much

more likely to give birth as teens. Our PSID analysis confirms this strong correlation at the

individual level. Our cohort level analysis implies an even tighter intergenerational correlation

between rates of background disadvantage and early childbearing. But, when our analysis

econometrically controls for fixed state and year of birth effects in the model to account for

cultural and other differences across cohorts, the relationship between rates of disadvantage and

early childbearing is found to be quite modest. For example, the elasticity of early childbearing

rates by age 18 with respect to the probability of being born to a mother under age 18 is only

0.05. This suggests that broader, societal forces are far more important in determining rates of

early childbearing than rates of socioeconomic disadvantage per se.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents some theoretical

considerations that are designed to help think about what we might expect regarding the

relationship between socioeconomic disadvantage and early childbearing. Section III describes

the results of past research that may help guide our thinking. In Section IV, we present our

analysis of PSID data, providing a descriptive analysis of this relationship. Section V reports the

details of our cohort-based analysis using aggregated Vital Statistics natality data. We conclude

in Section VI.



                                                  3
II. THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS

        Non-economists typically attribute early childbearing to be the result of myriad

influences that affect a youth’s development and fall outside the control of a rational decision-

making process (e.g., Brooks-Gunn and Furstenberg, 1989; Hardy and Zabin, 1991; Brooks-

Gunn and Paikoff, 1997). Brooks-Gunn and Furstenberg (1989) consider five perspectives on

adolescent sexual behavior: (1) biological perspectives; (2) parental influences; (3) peer

influences; (4) academic perspectives; and (5) social cognitive perspectives. In stark contrast to

the economic model of rational decision-making, the authors note that “most teens do not

consciously plan to become sexually active, and they often do not foresee their first sexual

experience. As such, it frequently is not experienced as a decision but rather as something that

‘happened’,” citing Chilman (1983) on this last point.

        A focus on biological perspectives emphasizes the role of hormonal factors in driving the

onset of sexual activity. 2 In their consideration of parental influences the authors highlight

research suggesting that teens who have good communication with their parents, teens who have

feelings of “connectedness and supportiveness” with their parents, and teens with relatively more

parental supervision tend to have later onset of intercourse. In discussing peer influences, the

authors cite work suggesting that perceptions about what is normative in one’s peer group are

more strongly associated with sexual behavior than the actual behavior of one’s peers. But the

authors suggest that the presumed effects of parental and peer influences on teenage sexual



2
  The authors are quick to note that social and contextual effects will interact with the onset of hormonal changes:
“So while very early sexual initiations may be in part hormonally mediated, by the time that behavior is normative,
social factors may account for sexual initiation (p 251).” They cite research indicating that initiation of sexual
behavior is highly associated with what is perceived as normative in one’s peer group. They further purport that
racial differences in the initiation of intercourse prior to puberty speak to the importance of social and contextual
factors on sexual behavior.

                                                         4
behavior are stronger than the available research evidence indicates. A focus on academic

perspectives emphasizes the observation that teenagers with lower academic success or

aspirations are more likely to have sex as teenagers. And finally, their consideration of social

cognitive abilities raises questions about the ability to “integrate domain-specific knowledge into

a coherent system”, i.e. into an understanding of “where babies come from.” Other social

cognitive processes that the authors point to as relevant and in need of greater research

understanding include self-definitions, self-efficacy, and social comparisons, i.e. how a teenage

girl determines what it means to be a mature woman.

       A more recent article by Brooks-Gunn and Paikoff (1997) moves even further from the

traditional economic approach to the issue by suggesting that the study of adolescent sexuality

must consider not only behaviors, but also feelings. They write that though insightful, the

framework that they and others have used to consider adolescent sexual behavior, namely in the

contexts of family, peer, neighborhood, biological, and cognitive characteristics, has been

limiting. They propose four key topics that need to be explored in order to understand adolescent

sexuality: (1) sexual well-being and developmental transitions; (2) the gendered nature of

sexuality; (3) decision making and sexuality, and (4) the meaning of sexuality to youth.

       Economists generally do not attempt to model parental behavior or the effect of feelings

directly. But that does not mean that we ignore that these factors are potentially very important,

perhaps crucial, to determining whether a young woman will engage in sexual activity and give

birth as a teenager. Indeed, it is the correlation of these “other” factors with observable

characteristics such as childhood poverty and growing up in a single-mother household that leads

us to worry that the empirical associations between such background characteristics and early

childbearing cannot be interpreted as causal. For example, if single mothers tend to be the type of



                                                5
women who would be less likely to supervise or communicate with their adolescent daughters

regardless of marital status, than it is the not the fact of being born to a single mother per se that

leads daughters from single-parent homes to have relatively higher rates of early childbearing.

       Work in other social sciences on this topic has tended to group the theoretical linkages

between background characteristics and teen nonmarital childbearing into four categories, as

helpfully summarized by An, Haveman, and Wolfe (1993): (1) the lifestyle characteristics of the

parents; (2) information and network effects; (3) stressful childhood events; and (4) a utility

maximization perspective. The first perspective emphasizes the intergenerational transmission of

a culture of “welfare dependence.” The idea is that a girl growing up in a mother-only family

where welfare receipt is the norm will develop preferences and behaviors that lead her to repeat

such a lifestyle for herself. The second perspective holds that girls who grow up in poverty or

without connections to the labor market will be more likely to engage in early childbearing than

girls who grow up with economic resources and connections to a world that engenders career or

educational ambitions. The third perspective is borne from research in sociology suggesting that

stressful and unsettling events during childhood or early youth, such as changes in family

structure, may lead to feelings of insecurity in young women. These types of feelings might lead

a young girl to desire a baby or family of her own and therefore give birth as a teenager.

       The fourth perspective, emphasizing a rational choice framework, tends to be the

approach taken by economists who have written in this area (see e.g., Leibowitz, et al., 1986;

Duncan and Hoffman, 1990; Lundberg and Plotnick, 1995). This literature builds on the seminal

work of Becker (1960) and Butz and Ward (1980) by modeling fertility as a decision-making

process determined by economic factors. While Becker (1960) and Butz and Ward (1980) focus

on the fertility of married women, their insight can easily be applied to the decision facing



                                                  6
unmarried teenage women. Duncan and Hoffman (1990) is an early example of a study modeling

the choice to have a nonmarital birth as a rational comparison of the income outcomes associated

with the choice, modeled by these authors as welfare benefits versus expected income returns

from career and a higher probability of marriage.

        Recent work by behavioral economists offers some important modifications that may

help synthesize a rational choice model with the perspectives of other social scientists. Work in

this field argues that the rational-choice model is inaccurate in some systematic and important

ways. A key insight for the issue of early childbearing is that when modeling decisions to

undertake actions that involve immediate gratification and future costs - such as sex or smoking -

otherwise rational individuals might exhibit “present-biased preferences” (e.g. O’Donahue and

Rabin, 1999; Laibson, 1994). Such preferences are characterized by “excessive myopia,”

whereby individuals put additional weight on the present period relative to all future periods.

When we talk about the actions of teens, such a model implies that teens might engage in too

much risky behavior (say, unprotected sex) because they attach too little weight to their well-

being as adults. In other words, they overly discount long-term consequences relative to short-

term gratification. Economists tend to be uncomfortable normatively declaring that people’s

behaviors are not in their best interest; but if individuals make decisions based on present-biased

preferences, that is tantamount to them making decisions about present actions that they will

regret later in life. Such preferences might also be considered a reflection of self-control

problems. If an otherwise rational decision-maker who is considering the costs and benefits of

early childbearing has such present-biased preferences, or has self-control problems, then she

might make decisions that lead to early childbearing, even if it is not in her long-term best

interest.



                                                7
       O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001) review insights and issues raised by behavioral

economists and psychologists that are relevant to modeling risky behavior by adolescents,

including behaviors leading to unprotected sex and potentially early childbearing. Their reading

of the behavioral/psychological evidence is that adolescents are similar to adults in terms of their

ability to carry out the decision-making process but, importantly, that youths are less able to

recognize the consequences associated with given actions. If minors are not fully capable of

predicting the consequences of early childbearing – either for themselves or their children – they

might initiate childbearing earlier than would be optimal from their own fully-informed

perspective.



III. RELEVANT EMPIRICAL LITERATURES

       Our analysis of the impact of socioeconomic disadvantage on early childbearing is related

to several empirical literatures. Some are directly on point while others address different, albeit

related, questions and can help inform our discussion and analysis. This section describes each

of these related areas and what we can learn from them regarding the relationship between

socioeconomic disadvantage and early childbearing.

A. The Costs of Teenage Childbearing

       There is a fairly large literature in economics examining the consequences of giving birth

at an early age. This literature has separately focused on the costs to the teen mother herself in

the form of inferior subsequent outcomes (e.g. lower completed schooling and earned income)

and the costs to her offspring (e.g. lower cognitive ability, higher rates of child poverty, and,

potentially, early childbearing).    Recent analyses have focused on methods designed to

separately identify the role that early childbearing plays in altering these outcomes, abstracting



                                                 8
from all of the other differences that exist between women who give birth at an early age and

those who delay childbearing. Analysts have used approaches including examining differences

in later-life outcomes between siblings who did and did not have a teen birth (Geronimus and

Korenman, 1992 and Geronimus, et al., 1994); between teens who gave birth to those who were

pregnant but miscarried (Hotz, McElroy, and Sanders, 2005); and between teens who gave birth

to twins to those who gave birth to singletons (Grogger and Bronars, 1993). The motivation for

these approaches is to find a relevant comparison group for teenage mothers whose average

outcomes might reasonably be considered a proxy for what the average teen mother would have

experienced had she not given birth before the age of 18 or 20. These studies generally find that

the inferior outcomes observed for women who give birth as teens are largely due to underlying

unobserved heterogeneity, as opposed to the teen birth itself. 3

        It is important to recognize that these studies are in some sense examining the reverse

causal relationship from the one we address in this paper. The studies described above are

designed to identify the impact of early childbearing on subsequent rates of disadvantage. Our

analysis attempts to identify the link between early childhood disadvantage and the propensity to

give birth at an early age. In fact, the studies described above deliberately hold constant

measures of childhood disadvantage in order to isolate the impact of teen childbearing from any

confounding influence of disadvantage. This is precisely not what we try to do with our

empirical analysis described below.




3
  Ribar (1994) and Klepinger, Lundberg, and Plotnick (1999) use the age at menarche as an instrument for teen
pregnancy, based on the observation that an earlier age at menarche leads to more years at risk of becoming
pregnant. Ribar (1994) finds that this approach eliminates any negative effect of teen births on high school
completion; Klepinger et al. (1999) find a negative casual effect.

                                                     9
B. The Determinants of Teenage Childbearing

        Two distinct literatures in economics focus directly on the determinants of teen

childbearing. One focuses on the impact of policies and social conditions in a woman’s state of

residence and the other examines the impact of personal characteristics. The policy-related

literature is methodologically stronger, applying quasi-experimental methods designed to

identify causal estimates of a policy’s impact on teen childbearing. Moffitt (1992, 1998, and

2003) reviews the extensive literature on the effects of welfare policy on the incidence of female-

headed households. 4         Economists have also explored the role that abortion policy, and

particularly parental involvement laws and Medicaid funding restrictions, play in teen fertility

behavior (e.g., Levine, et al., 1996; and Levine, 2003). Kearney and Levine (2007) examine the

cost of contraception, finding that publicly-funded family planning can significantly reduce teen

birth rates. The role of labor market conditions also has been examined (e.g.. Dehejia and

Lleras-Muney, 2004; Levine, 2001). Despite the methodological advantages of this work, the

focus on specific policies and their impact on early childbearing is different than our goal of

examining the role of socioeconomic disadvantage. But, these literatures do help guide our

choice of other factors that are important to control for in our model.

        The literature that is perhaps most closely aligned with our goals examines the impact of

personal background characteristics on early childbearing outcomes. Haveman and Wolfe (1995)

review a large number of studies in this area, highlighting the key contributions in this area of

Duncan and Hoffman (1990), An, et al. (1993), and Lundberg and Plotnick (1995). An important

contribution since this review is Duncan et al. (1998). These studies examine the relationship

between factors related to economic disadvantage (including family income, parental education,


4
 Female-headed households are not necessarily headed by women who initiated childbearing as a teen, but there is a
strong correlation between the two.

                                                       10
family structure) and the likelihood of giving birth at a young age and/or outside a marital union.

Given that there are almost surely unobserved factors correlated with both an individual’s

observed characteristics and her propensity for a teen or nonmarital birth, these individual-level

studies are limited in their ability to identify a causal link between disadvantage per se and early

childbearing. 5 Two recent studies exploit arguably exogenous variation in female educational

attainment in order to identify the causal link between education and teen childbearing (Black,

Devereux, and Salvanes 2004; and McCrary and Royer 2006). 6 These studies are somewhat

further removed from the focus of our analysis, as they concentrate on a woman’s own level of

education. We are interested in the environment into which a young girl is born and are therefore

interested in relating her mother’s level of education to her own likelihood of giving birth as a

teen.

C. The Intergenerational Transmission of Income

        As we describe below, our empirical analysis relates early childbearing as the outcome of

interest to childhood disadvantage, which we define as being born to a mother with certain

characteristics. When we use being born to a young mother as our measure of disadvantage and

examine its links to early childbearing, we are conducting an exercise very similar in spirit to

that considered in the literatures on intergenerational transmission of personal characteristics like

income, education, and health. (For a review of these literatures, see Solon, 1999). These

literatures examine the extent to which a parent’s characteristic is transmitted to his or her child.

The earlier economics literature on this question almost always focused on the intergenerational

transmission of income from fathers to sons. In a regression framework where son's income is

5
  The methodological considerations of these studies tend to focus more on issues such as correlated errors in joint
decision processes that include teen childbearing and welfare receipt than on finding exogenous variation in
measures of economic disadvantage.
6
  Black, et al. (2004) uses variation in compulsory schooling laws and McCrary and Royer (2006) uses age-at-
school-entry policies to identify exogenous differences in the amount of education received by women.

                                                        11
the dependent variable, the coefficient on father’s income represents the intergenerational

correlation. The methodological issue frequently grappled with in this literature is how to

appropriately measure income (say, by using multiple years of earnings) in order to reduce

attenuation bias due to measurement error.7 More recent studies of intergenerational income

correlation have considered the relationship between father's or family income and daughter's

earnings or family income. These studies have addressed conceptual issues such as assortative

mating (Chadwick and Solon, 2002) and the transmission of gender preferences for work

(Altonji and Dunn, 2000).

        More recent work in this area has focused on trying to identify the mechanisms for

intergenerational correlations, asking whether the intergenerational correlation in income is

attributable to an intergenerational correlation in health or education, for instance (e.g. Currie

and Moretti, 2007; and Black, et al., 2005). If one views part of our analysis as the

intergenerational correlation in early childbearing, then this may be thought of as one of the

mechanisms generating an intergenerational correlation in income. 8



IV. EVIDENCE FROM THE PANEL STUDY OF INCOME DYNAMICS (PSID)

        We begin our exploration of the empirical linkages between socioeconomic disadvantage

and early childbearing with an examination of data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

(PSID). The PSID is a longitudinal survey of a representative sample of U.S. individuals and

their households. It was conducted annually from 1968 to 1997 and biannually since then. We

study the cohort of women age 20 to 35 in the 2003 survey and observe particular circumstances


7
  In our work on early childbearing, measurement issues are less of a concern, particularly in our analysis of Vital
Statistics data.
8
  This would depend upon the extent to which early childbearing is causally related to low income. As we described
earlier, this proposition is not perfectly clear on the basis of past research.

                                                        12
of their births using information contained in the 1968 through 1983 survey files. We focus on

five measures of disadvantage at birth: being born to a mother of age less than 20 or less than 18,

being born to a single mother, being born to a mother who has not completed high school, and

being born into a family whose income is at or below the federal USDA poverty threshold. We

also consider two measures of socioeconomic disadvantage during adolescence: not living with

married parents (or step-parents) at age 15 and living in poverty at age 15. 9

        Our PSID sample consists of 1,797 women age 20 to 35 observed in the 2003 survey and

back to the year of their birth. Table 1 reports rates of disadvantage and rates of teen childbearing

by disadvantage factor. Among our sample of women, 24 percent gave birth before age 20. 10 The

rates of teen childbearing are dramatically higher for women who were born with each of our

four measures of disadvantage. Forty-six percent of women born to teen mothers give birth as

teenagers themselves; 43 percent of women born to an unmarried mother; 44 person of women

born to a mother with less than a high school degree (including teenagers); and 49 percent of

women born into poverty. Similar increases in the likelihood of giving birth by age 18 are also

observed for women from disadvantaged backgrounds.

        One interesting finding in Table 1 is that the heightened propensity to give birth as a teen

relative to the full sample is about the same for any of the disadvantage factors considered. In

particular, being born to a teen mother, an unmarried mother, or a less-educated mother has

about the same impact on rates of early childbearing as does being born to a poor mother, which

9
  In our exploration of linkages between background factors and early childbearing in the PSID, we do attempt to be
as exhaustive in our set of variables considered as the PSID analyses of either An, et al. (1993) or Duncan et al.
(1998), which look at much larger sets of demographic characteristics for earlier cohorts of young women. We
merely look to the PSID for descriptive purposes. In attempt to uncover causal relationships, we rely primarily on a
cohort-based analysis of vital statistics natality data.
10
  One potentially confusing finding in these data is that 24 percent of women gave birth to children before age 20,
but only 14 percent of them were born to mothers under 20 years old. The reason for the discrepancy is that not all
of the women in our PSID sample are first-born children. So, the number of women born to teen mothers understates
the number of women in that older cohort who actually had a first birth during their teen years.

                                                        13
is perhaps the measure that is most closely associated with the notion of childhood disadvantage.

This is important to keep in mind when we move to our cohort-based analysis, where poverty

status at birth is something that we are unable to measure.

       We also use these data to estimate raw intergenerational correlations in teen childbearing

in a manner consistent with past research on intergenerational correlations in economic

outcomes. In particular, we run simple regressions of own teen childbearing behavior on an

indicator variable for whether each woman was born to a teen mother. We conduct an analogous

exercise for births before age 18. The results of this exercise are reported in the top panel of

Table 2. They indicate that women who were born to teen mothers are 25 percentage points

more likely to go on to give birth as teens themselves; given that the mean rate of teen

childbearing is 24 percent, this is roughly a doubling of the odds. The results for births by age

18 are not statistically significant, likely due to the very small number of children born to

mothers under age 18 in the sample.

       The remainder of Table 2 reports the results of multivariate regression specifications

where the dependent variable is defined as giving birth before the age of 20 and giving birth

before the age of 18 and combinations of measures of disadvantage are included as explanatory

variables.   The results from these models can be interpreted as descriptive only, but they

establish a form of “horse race” between disadvantage factors that provide at least one gauge of

their relative importance. The six measures of socioeconomic disadvantage examined include

the following: born to a teen mother, born to an unmarried mother, born to a mother with less

than a high school degree, born into poverty, not living with married parents at age 15, and living

in poverty at age 15. The coefficient estimates from these specifications imply statistically

significant and substantial increases in rates of early childbearing among young women



                                                14
associated with most of these measures of disadvantage, even after controlling for the other

correlated measures of disadvantage.



V. ANALYSIS OF VITAL STATISTICS BIRTH DATA

A. Data Description

         We now turn to an exploration of data from the Vital Statistics Natality Detail Files

between 1968 and 2003. These data represent individual records on births that took place in the

United States. 11 We use data from 1968 to 1986 to identify the number of women born in each

state and year along with the proportion of those births that can be classified as “disadvantaged.”

The alternative measures of disadvantage for those women born in these years include having a

mother who is a high school dropout, unmarried, or under age 18 or under age 20 at the time of

giving birth. 12 These data provide us with rates of “disadvantage” for the women born in these

birth cohorts and also provide us with a denominator for a measure of the rate of early

childbearing that these women subsequently experience.

         To get the numerator for this early childbearing statistic, we use data from the 1980

through 2003 Vital Statistics file to tally births born to women less than age 18 or age 20. 13

These data allow us to assign every birth that takes place in the United States to the mothers’




11
   These data are first available starting in 1968 and 2003 is the last year currently available. From 1985 onward,
these data represent a complete count of births. Prior to 1972, births were sampled at a 50 percent rate nationwide.
In the intervening period, some states sampled at a 50 percent rate and others included all births. In our analysis, we
applied appropriate weights to provide estimates of all births.
12
   We also experimented with a measure of the poverty rate, but decided not to include it in our analysis because of
data limitations. Poverty rates by state and year are not available for the birth cohorts in our sample. Instead, we
tried using county level data from the 1970 Census, attaching to each birth cohort the poverty rate that existed in the
relevant county of birth. As the geographic composition of births changed over time within a state, this measure
would provide some within state variation in poverty. Unfortunately, we found that this variation was insufficient to
provide robust parameter estimates.
13
   When we consider births before age 20, we can only use birth cohorts through 1984.

                                                         15
state and year of birth. 14 From these data, we tally all first births that occur to women less than

age 18 or 20 from that state/year of birth cohort. Dividing this count by the size of that cohort

provides a measure of the rate of early childbearing.

           Consider, for instance, the 1970 birth cohort from New York. We use the 1970 Vital

Statistics natality file to tally the total number of females born in that state and year, which

becomes the denominator for our early childbearing statistic. That data file also allows us to

identify the number born to teen/minor mothers, to unmarried mothers and to mothers with less

than a high school degree. We use this information to construct the rates of “disadvantage” in

this cohort. To calculate the numerator for our early childbearing statistic, we sum the number of

first births in 1983 to 13 year old mothers born in New York, the number of first births in 1984

to 14 year old mothers born in New York, and so on through the 1989 file, when the 1970 birth

cohort would have been age 19. That sum represents the number of girls born in New York in

1970 who gave birth by age 20.

           The ability to link births to mothers’ birth cohorts is crucial for our purposes. In effect,

we are linking three generations: we look at birth records in a given year and identify the age –

and birth cohort – of the mother. We then look to the birth records for that cohort of teenage

mothers and identify the characteristics of their mothers. The completeness of Vital Statistics

birth records substantially reduces measurement error in our estimated rates of early

childbearing. Nevertheless, the data are not perfect. First, our identification of a teen mother's

birth cohort relies on the reporting of a mother's age on the birth record; the natality data does

not report the exact year in which the mother was born. We simply subtract the mother's age




14
     For a very small number of births, this information is missing. These births are not included in the analysis.

                                                            16
from the year she gave birth to determine her birth year, so there may be a misclassification by

up to one year in the mother’s birth cohort associated with an early birth. 15

        Another important limitation of these data is that information on mother’s education and

marital status is not complete in the years in which we are measuring the size of birth cohorts and

recording their rates of disadvantage. First, data on maternal education is not available at all for

the 1968 birth cohort and they exist for only a subset of states for the years between 1969 and

1979. To balance the panel when we use this variable, we include in our analysis just the 36

states for which these data are available in all years. Similarly, direct information on marital

status of the mother is only available in all years for 37 states; we focus our attention on just

those states in analyses regarding marital status. 16

B. Descriptive Analysis

        Figures 1 through 4 provide a description of these data, separately considering the

conditions at birth for these cohorts of women along with their subsequent rates of early

childbearing. Figure 1 displays trends in the percentage of each birth cohort that exhibit each

form of disadvantage. The first conclusion that one can draw from this figure is that there are

very distinct trends over time that differ across measures of disadvantage. The percentage of

birth cohorts that are born to less-educated mothers (defined as not having completed high

school) has fallen rather consistently from slightly more than 31.7 percent among the 1969 birth

cohort to 20 percent for the 1986 birth cohort. The fraction of a birth cohort born to a mother less

than age 20 has likewise fallen from a high of 19.7 percent among the 1973 birth cohort to 12.5



15
   Another minor limitation of these data is that births to women who were born in the United States but gave birth
in another country would not be captured in these data. It is our impression that this is a very infrequent event and
we ignore it here.
16
   The set of states with missing information on maternal education is the following: AL, AR, CA, CT, DE, DC, FL,
GA, ID, MD, NM, OR, PA, TX, and WA. The set of states with inadequate data on marital status is: CA, CT, GA,
ID, MD, MA, MT, NM, NY, OH, VT, MI, NV, and TX

                                                        17
percent among the 1986 birth cohort. On the other hand, the fraction of each birth cohort born to

an unmarried mother has risen continuously over this period (and beyond). In the youngest birth

cohort we study, nearly one in four women (23.1 percent) were born to unmarried mothers,

compared to roughly one in ten among the oldest birth cohort. These secular changes over time,

driven by other social forces (cohort fixed effects), are the type of variation in the data that needs

to be held constant in an analysis trying to identify the causal impacts of disadvantage.

       Similar variation exists in these measures of disadvantage across states at a point in time.

Figure 2 displays one representative measure, the percentage of a birth cohort born to teen

mothers, across states. Among the 1969 birth cohort, over 20 percent were born to teen mothers

in Mississippi and Alabama, but less than half that percentage in Massachusetts and Minnesota.

Clearly, at least a portion of this gap may be attributable to different social customs that exist

across these states. This is apparent in the fact that most states that have rates of births to teen

mothers in 1969 also have relatively high rates in 1983. Again, these longstanding differences in

state attitudes towards fertility (state fixed effects) need to be held constant if we are going to

attempt to identify the causal impact of disadvantage.

       It is interesting to note in Figure 2 that the change between 1969 and 1983 within states

in the percentage of a birth cohort born to teen mothers varies considerably across states. This

rate fell in every state over the 14 year period, but it fell by more in some states than others. For

instance, Rhode Island and New Mexico experienced a trivial drop, but the percentage of a birth

cohort born to teen mothers fell by roughly one-third in Washington and Kansas. Although it is

not clear that the variation in changes in measures of birth cohort disadvantage – such as being

born to a teen mother – over time between states is purely exogenous to preferences/tastes for

early childbearing (as we will discuss later), focusing on these within-state, across-birth-cohort



                                                 18
changes as our identifying source of variation removes the confounding influences of secular

changes that occurred over time nationally and longstanding cross-sectional variation across

states.

          Figures 3 and 4 provide analogous information about the patterns in early childbearing

for women in these birth cohorts. Figure 3 displays the aggregate trend over time. 17 It shows

that the percentage of women giving birth either before age 18 or before age 20 rose somewhat

among women born for the early 1970s birth cohorts, but then fell subsequently. This pattern

roughly corresponds to the aggregate trends in annual teen childbearing rates, which spiked in

the late 1980s and early 1990s. Figure 4 displays cross-sectional variation in the percentage of

women giving birth by age 20 (similar patterns exist for births by age 18). Again, there is

substantial cross-sectional variation in early childbearing rates. Among women in the 1969 birth

cohort, about 30 percent in Mississippi and the District of Columbia gave birth by age 20. The

comparable figure for women born in Massachusetts and Connecticut is closer to 10 percent. For

women born in most states, the rate of early childbearing fell somewhat between the 1969 and

1983 birth cohorts. Importantly, there is considerable variation across states in the extent of the

reduction in rates of early childbearing between 1969 and 1983.

C. Econometric Specification

          Our empirical approach relates the variation in state-year birth cohort teen childbearing

rates to the variation in state-year birth cohort rates of disadvantage. The thought experiment that

corresponds to this econometric exercise is the following: if we could reduce the amount of

socioeconomic disadvantage among a birth cohort of women, what impact would that have on

their rates of early childbearing down the road? If that impact were large, we would infer that


17
  No data is available for births by age 19 beyond the 1984 birth cohort because 2003 is the most current Vital
Statistics data available.

                                                      19
early childbearing is in large part a consequence of being born into socioeconomic disadvantage,

as so measured. If that impact were small in magnitude, however, we would conclude that teen

childbearing is driven only in small measure by childhood disadvantage.

       In our more formal econometric discussion, we develop our thinking regarding the

models that we estimate and report, highlighting their strengths and limitations as well as

appropriate interpretations. Let us begin by considering the following cross-sectional, individual-

level model. The outcome variable is a binary indicator for early childbearing (EC). It is modeled

as a function of some measure of economic disadvantage in the individual’s past (D) and other

personal characteristics (X1) for individual i.

                                    ECi = β 0 + β 1 Di + Γ1 X1i + vi                             (1)

This equation is a simplification of the approaches reviewed in Haveman and Wolfe (1995),

emphasizing the cross-sectional nature of the variation in the data available. The estimate of

coefficient β1 is interpretable as the relationship between the disadvantage measure and early

childbearing, conditional on the control variables included in the X-vectors.

       The main limitation of equation (1) is that there are likely to be factors that are related to

both the measure of disadvantage and the early childbearing outcome that are not controlled for

and may even be very difficult or impossible for the researcher to observe. As such, they lead to

omitted variable bias that precludes assigning a causal interpretation to β1. Suppose, for instance,

that a woman’s own values lead her to have a child early and to instill those values in her

daughters, leading them to have children early as well. If those values are related to lower

socioeconomic outcomes, then we may erroneously attribute the relationship in early

childbearing across generations to economic disadvantage.




                                                  20
        We can move closer to identifying a causal relationship between D and EC by controlling

for state and cohort fixed effects in the model. For instance, early childbearing outcomes for

women who reached age 20 in 1996 are likely to be different than their counterparts who reached

age 20 in 1986, due to differences in the cultural climates in the years in which they were

developing values and making relevant choices. Likewise, there are cultural differences across

communities that exert influence on individual decisions and behaviors. We thus augment the

model as follows:

                        EC ics = β 0 + β 1 Dics + Γ1 X1ics + γ c + γ s + η ics               (2)

In this specification, each individual i is identified by her “community” (state in this example,

denoted by s) and period (or cohort - denoted by c). This approach eliminates two possible forms

of unobservable heterogeneity. To the extent that rates of disadvantage vary by cohort and by

state, and to the extent that time and place matter to early childbearing decisions, the inclusion of

these controls in the model will alleviate some of the omitted variable bias.

        We can go one step further in removing individual-level heterogeneity by estimating this

model at the aggregate level. This has the effect of averaging out differences across individuals

within cohorts/states. There is sure to be a great deal of variation in individual values that may be

related to disadvantage and early childbearing decisions and this variation is greatly reduced

when aggregated. So, instead of estimating equation (2) with individual-level data, we estimate

this relationship at the level of a state/year birth cohort:

                              EC cs = β 0 + β 1 Dcs + Γ1 X1 cs + γ c + γ s + η cs                  (3)

This differs from equation (2) in the subscripts, indicating the aggregated nature of the data

within cohorts. Each variable is now the average over individuals within the state/birth cohort

cell.


                                                      21
        We control for a set of X variables that varies at the level of state/year birth cohort. At

the cohort level, rates of childbearing will vary with the average demographic composition of a

cohort. We explicitly control for marital status, age, racial/ethnic composition, and level of

educational attainment among women 15-44 in the state/year cohort. Any remaining

demographic differences are captured with cohort fixed effects, to the extent that those

differences are geographically uniform at a point in time. The vector of control variables in

equation (3) also includes a set of variables that are designed to measure environmental

conditions around the time that early childbearing decisions are being made. The specific

variables we include are the unemployment rate, to capture economic conditions, and an

extensive set of policy variables, including abortion restrictions, welfare benefit levels and

reform indicators, and SCHIP implementation. 18 Further details regarding the specific variables

used and their sources are available in Kearney and Levine (2007). We simplify the

measurement of these variables by including their values at the time each birth cohort was age 17

or age 19 in specifications in which our measure of early childbearing is births by age 18 and

births by age 20, respectively.

        How should we interpret the results of estimating equation (3)? As stated above, the

thought experiment captured by this cohort specification is the following: if we were to “shock”

the amount of socioeconomic disadvantage (D) of a birth cohort of women, what impact would

that have on cohort rates of early childbearing (EC)? Two points of comparison and contrast with

equation (2) are important. First, equation (2) relates a particular background characteristic, say

being born in poverty, and early childbearing outcomes. As discussed above, the existence of


18
   Specifically, these variables include indicators for TANF implementation, the presence of a welfare family cap,
maximum AFDC/TANF benefits for a family of three, SCHIP implementation, Medicaid coverage of abortion,
abortion parental notification requirements, and abortion delay rules. We also control for cohort size, although the
results are virtually unchanged when cohort size is excluded from the model.

                                                        22
omitted variable bias in such equations almost surely make a causal interpretation inappropriate.

We have not completely surmounted this issue of omitted variable bias with our cohort

specification. There might be remaining unobserved differences across state/year birth cohorts

that correlate with both our measures of disadvantage and early childbearing outcomes. For

example, it is possible that values change within states across birth cohorts in a way that is

correlated with both economic disadvantage and early childbearing. As we note below, a

comparison of results from the estimation of various specifications of equation (3) suggest that

these possibilities are probably not that important. 19

         The second important issue relevant to the interpretation of the coefficient, β1, is that

when estimating this equation at the cohort level, β1 incorporates spillover or peer effects. When

we “shock” the amount of disadvantage in a state/year birth cohort, that might have a general

effect on sexual behavior and fertility outcomes even for those women whose own background

characteristic is not changed. Consider the possibility that the tastes and values of girls born to

married women are to some extent influenced by the proportion of girls in their cohort born to

unmarried mothers. We remain agnostic as to how such spillover or peer effects operate in this

context.

         In general, we cannot fully characterize the complexities of the mechanism by which

socioeconomic disadvantage may affect early childbearing. When we define D in equation (3) as,

say, the proportion of a state/year birth cohort born to a teen mother, we are estimating the

19
   One methodological approach that would, in principle, be useful to eliminate this remaining source of
unobservable heterogeneity is instrumental variables. To implement this approach, one would need instruments that
are correlated with our measures of disadvantage without being correlated with the residual in early childbearing.
The difficulty in identifying such an instrument is that any variable that shifts the characteristics of a birth cohort,
like the fraction born to teen mothers, is likely to alter other characteristics of that cohort, like its values/tastes. For
instance, we experimented with using variation in abortion legalization across states and over time in the early
1970s, like Ananat, et al. (2006). The problem with this is that if abortion legalization changed the selection process
determining who is born (like the percentage to teen mothers), it is likely also to affect attributes of that birth cohort
other than their socioeconomic disadvantage (like their tastes/values). Without any other obvious suitable
instruments, we have chosen not to pursue this estimation strategy.

                                                            23
relationship between the prevalence of this factor and cohort rates of early childbearing. This

does not identify the isolated impact of teen childbearing itself; when we “shock” teen

childbearing, we necessarily shock all associated factors that are not directly controlled for in the

model, such as the values of the women, their parenting styles, their career aspirations, their

relationship formations, etc. So, we do not purport to get inside the black box of what it is about

a particular characteristic that leads to changes in teen childbearing propensities; we claim only

to empirically estimate the broader relationship.

D. Results

       The results of our analysis using Vital Statistics data are reported in Tables 3 and 4. The

left panel of these tables uses data from the 1968 through 1986 birth cohorts and considers a

dependent variable measuring their rate of early childbearing, defined as giving birth before age

18. The mean value of this early childbearing rate across states and birth cohorts is 8.4 percent.

The right panel uses data from the 1968 through 1984 birth cohorts and is comparable, but

defines early childbearing to be that occurring before age 20; the mean of this rate is 20.1

percent.

       The first row of Table 3 presents sample means for each measure of disadvantage at birth

for the relevant subset of birth cohorts. These data indicate that about 26 percent of the women

in these birth cohorts were born to mothers who had not yet completed high school, about 16

percent to mothers who were not yet married, over 16 percent to mothers who were teens, and

over six percent to mothers who were minors.

       The first panel of regression results in Table 3 reflects estimates from simple regressions

where the dependent variable is the relevant rate of early childbearing for the birth cohort and the

sole independent variable is the rate of economic disadvantage at birth among that state/year



                                                 24
female birth cohort. These results show a very strong intergenerational linkage between

disadvantage at birth and subsequent rates of early childbearing. These figures indicate that a

birth cohort with an additional one percentage point higher rate of children in it born to minors is

associated with about a one percentage point higher rate of childbearing as minors themselves.

A similar result is obtained for births by age 20 as a function of the proportion of the cohort born

to teen mothers.

        This estimated relationship of a nearly one-to-one correspondence in rates of teen

childbearing across generations stands in contrast to the estimated relationship at the individual

level in the PSID. Recall that in that analysis we found that having been born to a teen mother

increases one’s likelihood of having a teen birth by 25 percentage points. This comparison

suggests that early childbearing is much more tightly linked across generations in the aggregate.

We interpret these findings as suggesting that the culture or environment that supports teen

childbearing is more deterministic of early childbearing outcomes than the specific influence of

the individual’s mother and her childbearing experiences. 20 This is an example of what we

referred to earlier as spillover or peer effects that may lead to differences in results based on

aggregate data as opposed to microdata.

        The remainder of Table 3 provides additional evidence that cultural factors play a very

important role in explaining early childbearing. In the second panel of the table, we report OLS

estimates in models that are augmented by state and birth cohort fixed effects, but with no other


20
   One reason that we would expect the intergenerational correlation in early childbearing to be smaller in microdata
is that outcomes are determined by probabilities even if behavior is changed with certainty. As an extreme example
to clarify the point, suppose that all children born to young mothers are willing to engage in unprotected sexual
intercourse at a young age themselves. Yet, because of the uncertainties associated with finding a partner, having
sex, getting pregnant, and carrying the pregnancy to term, one would not expect all of these women to have children
at an early age themselves. One could imagine a larger impact in aggregate data if communities in which more
women became mothers at an early age change the social norms of behavior for all teens. In that case, the
hypothesized changes in behavior among more young women could lead to larger changes in outcomes even after
factoring in all the relevant probabilities.

                                                        25
covariates. In these models, the estimated coefficient on the relevant measure of disadvantage is

greatly attenuated compared to the results from the simple regression models. Although

considerably smaller in magnitude, many of the estimates still are statistically significant, at least

at the 10 percent level.

       The coefficient on the proportion of a state/year birth cohort born to a minor in a model

where the dependent variable is defined as giving birth before age 18 falls from 1.097 (standard

error of 0.059) to 0.250 (standard error of 0.114). This estimate implies that a cohort with a one

percentage point higher rate of being born to a minor (a 16 percent increase from a 6.1 percent

base) will, net of state and birth year fixed effects, have a roughly 0.25 percentage point higher

rate of childbearing as minors themselves. With a mean rate of childbearing as minors of 8.4

percent, this is a very small impact for a sizeable intervention.

       Similarly, the estimated coefficient on the proportion of a state/year birth cohort born to

mothers without a high school degree (base rate of 25.7 percent) in the model focusing on births

by age 18 falls from 0.261 (standard error of 0.021) to 0.106 (standard error of 0.022). This

means that if the rate of less educated mothers fell from 25.7 percent to, say, 20.7 percent, then

the rate of early childbearing by age 18 would fall by about half a percentage point. Again,

given that the mean rate of childbearing before age 18 is 8.4 percent, this is not a very large

impact for a substantial reduction in the rate of socioeconomic disadvantage.

       Table 4 replicates the analysis in Table 3, reporting models of the form described by

equation (3), but in log-log form so that the coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. Once

we include fixed effects, we see that a 10 percent decrease in the proportion born to a mom with

less education than a high school degree is associated with a 2.5 percent reduction in the rate of

childbearing by age 18. The analogous decrease in the proportion born to a teen mom is also



                                                 26
associated with a decrease of approximately 2 percent. These are the two largest elasticities that

we observe and they are not that large. Other elasticities are considerably smaller. For instance,

a 10 percent reduction in the proportion of a cohort born to minors only reduces the rate of

childbearing by age 18 in that cohort by about 0.5 percent.

       It is interesting to note that once the model controls for state and birth year fixed effects,

there no longer appears to be a statistically significant relationship between the percentage of a

birth cohort born to unmarried mothers and childbearing by age 18 (it still has a statistically

significant impact on childbearing by age 20 in levels, but not in logs). Nevertheless, this may

indicate that mother’s marital status may not be as good an indicator of socioeconomic

disadvantage as mother’s age or educational attainment. One might even expect that it would

become an even poorer measure of disadvantage at birth as we go forward since the last birth

cohort we are analyzing here is from 1986. As nonmarital childbearing continues its steady

growth, it is reasonable to assert that it has become less selective on economic disadvantage.

       The remaining panel of Tables 3 and 4 includes a large array of variables controlling for

differences in population characteristics (age/race/educational attainment/marital status) in each

state/year at the time each birth cohort reached age 17 or 19 as well as differences in relevant

policies (abortion, welfare, Medicaid) in place and labor market conditions at those times. As we

discussed earlier, including birth cohort and state fixed effects helps control for important

elements of heterogeneity that may introduce bias, but they do not solve the problem. In

particular, omitted variables that reflect differences across cohorts in different locations may still

result in bias. Although we recognize the possibility of unobservable factors that have this

feature, we incorporate these additional variables here as an attempt to reduce the problem.




                                                 27
       The results reported in the bottom panel of the tables are very similar to those reported in

the middle panel, from models that include no additional covariates besides the state and birth

year fixed effects. Among the additional variables included, the unemployment rate at about the

time that early childbearing would take place is estimated to be positively related to early

childbearing. Similarly, when the population of women 15-44 in a state/year is comprised of

more high school dropouts, the rate of early childbearing at that time in that location tends to be

higher. Other than that, all other factors tend to be statistically insignificant. The fact that

adding these observable factors that vary by birth cohort/state had so little impact on the

disadvantage coefficient estimates may provide a glimmer of hope that much of the unobservable

heterogeneity has been eliminated. Of course, it would be imprudent to rely on this proposition

too heavily.



VI. CONCLUSIONS

       This paper has addressed the relationship between socioeconomic disadvantage and early

childbearing. After presenting a review of relevant theoretical and empirical literatures from

economics as well as other disciplines, we provided a descriptive analysis from the PSID of the

relationship between socioeconomic disadvantage and early childbearing at the individual level.

Confirming what many previous studies have shown, we find that growing up disadvantaged is

associated with substantially higher rates of teen childbearing.

       The main empirical contribution of this paper is a cohort-based analysis of the

relationship between rates of socioeconomic disadvantage among women at birth and their

subsequent rates of early childbearing. This analysis is conducted at the level of a state and year

female birth cohort. We initially use these cohort-based data to estimate an intergenerational



                                                28
correlation in early childbearing, relating the percentage of a birth cohort that gives birth at a

young age to the percentage of the cohort born to young mothers. Unlike the intergenerational

transmission of early childbearing propensities between mothers and daughters, the

intergenerational cohort-level correlation includes the impact of peer and spillover effects

generated by a shared culture or environment. The results of our analyses suggest that the

correlation of early childbearing across generations is much stronger in the aggregate than at the

individual level.     This suggests that community characteristics and the culture of teen

childbearing may be more important than whether or not one’s own mother gave birth at an early

age.

       We obtain similar results when we take advantage of the panel nature of the cohort-based

data and estimate the relationship between early childbearing and measures of disadvantage at

birth. With these data, we can econometrically capture cultural/environmental differences that

are longstanding in nature across states as well as geographically uniform changes that take place

over time. When these elements are accounted for with state and year fixed effects, the estimated

relationship between disadvantage at birth and subsequent early childbearing is greatly

attenuated. This suggests that the observed relationship is almost entirely driven by broader

changes in social conditions. For each of our four measures of socioeconomic disadvantage, our

estimates imply that a 10 percent reduction in the proportion of a cohort with that particular

proxy characteristic would lead to a decline of less than about 2.5 percent in the proportion who

give birth by age 18 or age 20. Our results lead us to conclude that the impact of a fairly large

shock to socioeconomic disadvantage would have only a modest impact on rates of early

childbearing. Other broader societal forces seem to play a larger role in determining early

childbearing rates.



                                               29
                                        References

Altonji, Joseph G. and Thomas A. Dunn. 2000. "An Intergenerational Model of Wages, Hours,
and Earnings," Journal of Human Resources. 35(2): 221-258.

Angrist, Joshua D. and William N. Evans. 1999. "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences
of the 1970 State Abortion Reforms." Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 18. Solomon
Polachek, ed, Greenwich: JAI Press, 1999.

Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans, Jonathan Gruber, and Phillip B. Levine. 2004. AAbortion
Legalization and Lifecycle Fertility.@ National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
10705.

An, Chong-Bum, Robert Haveman, and Barbara Wolfe. 1993. “Teen Out-of-Wedlock Births and
Welfare Receipt: The Role of Childhood Events and Economic Circumstances,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 75 (2) (May): 195-208.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereaux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2004. “Fast Times at Ridgement
High? The Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on Teenage Births.” NBER working paper
10911. November.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. “Why the Apple Doesn’t Fall
Far: Understanding the Intergenerational Transmission of Education.” American Economic
Review. 95(1): pp. 437-449.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Frank F. Furstenberg, Jr. “Adolescent Sexual Behavior.” American
Psychologist. Vol. 44, No. 2 (February 1989). pp. 249-257.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Roberta Paikoff. “Sexuality and Developmental Transitions During
Adolescence,” pp. 190-245 in John Schulenberg, Jennifer L. Maggs, and Klaus Hurrelmann
(eds.), Health Risks and Developmental Transitions during Adolescence. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press. 1997.

Chadwick, Laura and Gary Solon. 2002. "Intergenerational Income Mobility among
Daughters," American Economic Review. 92(1): 335-344.

Chilman, C.S. (1983). Adolescent sexuality in a changing American society: Social and
psychological perspectives for the human services professions (2nd ed.) New York: Wiley.

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. 2007. “Biology as Destiny? Short- and Long-Run
Determinants of Intergenerational Transmission of Birth Weight.” Journal of Labor Economics,
25 (2): pp. 231–264.

Dehejia, Rajeev, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2004. “Booms, Busts and Babies’ Health.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 3 (August). pp. 1091-1130.



                                            30
Duncan, Greg and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, eds. 1997. Consequences of Growing Up Poor. NY:
Russell Sage.

Duncan, Greg and Saul Hoffman. “Welfare Benefits, Economic Opportunities, and Out-of-
Wedlock Births among Black Teenage Girls.” Demography 27 (November 1990): 519-36.

Duncan, Greg, W. Jean Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith R. Smith. 1998. “How Much
Does Childhood Poverty Affect the Life Chances of Children?” American Sociological Review
63(3), (June): 406-423.

Edin, Kathryn and Maria Kefalas. (2005), Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women Put
Motherhood before Marriage. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Geronimus, Arline T. and Sanders Korenman. 1992. "The Socioeconomic Consequences of
Teen Childbearing Reconsidered." Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 107, No. 4
(November). pp. 1187-1214.

Geronimus Arline T., Sanders Korenman, Marianne M. Hillemeier. 1994. Does Young
Maternal Age Affect Child Development? Evidence from Cousin Comparisons in the United
States. Population and Development Review. Vol. 20, No. 3 (September). pp. 585-609.

Grogger, J. and S. Bronars. 1993. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen Childbearing:
Findings from a Natural Experiment.” Family Planning Perspectives 25 (July-August): 156-161.

Hardy, Janet B. and Laurie Schwab Zabin. Adolescent Pregnancy in an Urban Environment.
Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press. 1991.

Haveman and Wolfe (1995), Journal of Economic Literature 33: 1829-78.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders. 1996. "The Impacts of
Teenage Childbearing on the Mothers and the Consequences of Those Impacts for Government."
pp. 55-94 in Rebecca A. Maynard (ed.), Kids Having Kids: Economic Costs and Social
Consequences of Teen Pregnancy. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.

----------. 2005. “Teenage Childbearing and Its Life Cycle Consequences: Exploiting a Natural
Experiment,” Journal of Human Resources 40 (3): 683-715.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2003. “Teen Births Keep American Crime High,” NBER Working Paper 9632.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2007. “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and
Sexual Behavior.” Unpublished manuscript.

Kirby, Douglas. 1997. No Easy Answers: New Research Findings on Programs to Reduce Teen
Pregnancy. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.




                                             31
Klepinger, D., Shelly Lundberg, and R. Plotnick, (1999). “Teen Childbearing and Human
Capital: Does Timing Matter?” mimeo, University of Washington, October.

Leibowitz, A, Marvin Eisen, and Winston K. Chow. 1986. “An Economic Model of Teenage
Pregnancy Decisionmaking.” Demography. Vol. 23, No. 1 (February). pp. 67-78.

Levine, D.I. and Painter, G. (2003). “The Schooling Costs of Teenage Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing: Analysis with a Within-School Propensity-Score-Matching Estimator” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 884-899.

Levine, Phillip B. 2003. “Parental Involvement Laws and Fertility Behavior.” Journal of
Health Economics. Vol. 22, No. 5 (September). pp. 861-878.

Levine, Phillip B, Amy Trainor, and David J. Zimmerman. 1996. "The Effect of State Medicaid
Funding Restrictions on Pregnancy, Abortion, and Births," Journal of Health Economics, Vol.
15, No. 5 (October). pp. 555-578.

Levine, Phillip B. 2001. AThe Sexual Activity and Birth Control Use of American Teenagers,@ in
Jonathan Gruber (ed.), An Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior among Youths. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert D. Plotnick. 1995. “Adolescent Premarital Childbearing: Do
Economic Incentives Matter?” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol. 13, No. 2 (April). pp. 177-
200.

Mayer, Susan E. What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 1997.

McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2006. “The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth” NBER Working
Paper 12329. (June).

Moffitt, Robert A. 2003. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.” In Robert
A. Moffitt (ed.), Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

--------. 1998. “The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility,” Welfare, the Family, and
Reproductive Behavior: Research Perspectives. Robert A. Moffitt, editor. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.

--------. 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review,” Journal of Ecomomic
Literature, 30(1) (March): 1-61.

National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy. 2007. Why it Matters. Accessed March 19,
2007 at http://www.teenpregnancy.org/wim/default.asp.



                                             32
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing it Now or Later.” American Economic
Review. Vol. 89, No. 1 (March). pp. 103-124.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 2001. “Risky Behavior among Youths: Some Issues from
Behavioral Economics,” 2001. In ed. Jonathan Gruber, Risky Behavior Among Youths. National
Bureau of Eocnomic Research Conference Report. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press.

Solon, Gary. 1999. "Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market," in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Turley, Ruth N. López. 2003. “Are Children of Young Mothers Disadvantaged because of the
Mother’s Age or Family Background?” Child Development. Vol. 74, No. 2 (March). pp. 465-
474.

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2006. Demographic Yearbook.
New York: United Nations.




                                             33
                                             Figure 1: Trends in Conditions at Birth
          35




          30




          25




          20
Percent




          15




          10




           5




           0
               1968   1969   1970   1971   1972   1973   1974   1975   1976   1977   1978   1979   1980   1981    1982   1983   1984   1985   1986
                                                                         Birth Cohort
                                    Low-Education Mother         Born to Unmarried Mother          Born to Teen      Born to Minor
                          Percent




             0
                 5
                     10
                            15
                                    20
                                         25
                                              30


       DC
       MS
       AL
        SC
       AR
       TN
       GA
       NC
       KY
       OK
        FL
       LA
       NV
       WV
       TX
       WY
       DE
        IN
       VA
       MO
       MD
       ME
       KS
       NM




1969
       AZ

        MI
       OR




1983
       CO
       CA
                                                                     Born to Teen Mothers




        IL
       OH
       WA
       VT
       MT
        ID
       AK
       SD
       NE
       PA
       NH
        IA
        HI
                                               Figure 2: Cross-Sectional Variation in Percentage of Birth Cohorts




       NY
        NJ
       WI
       UT
       MN
       ND
       CT
        RI
                                      Figure 3: Trends in Rates of Early Childbearing
          25




          20




          15
Percent




          10




           5




           0
               1968   1969   1970   1971   1972   1973   1974   1975   1976   1977   1978    1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986
                                                                         Birth Cohort

                                                                Birth by Age 18         Birth by Age 20
               Figure 4: Cross-Sectional Variation in Percentage of Birth Cohorts
                                    Giving Birth by Age 20
          35



          30



          25



          20
Percent




          15



          10



           5



           0
               TX
               GA
               MS




               KS




               WI

                RI
                MI




                HI


               NE


               VT




               CT
               AL
               AZ




                FL




               UT

                IL

               DE



               MT

               ME
               NM




                NJ
               OR
               DC
               AR




                SC




               NC




                IA
               TN




               NH


               NY


               ND
               MN
               MA
               LA




               KY
               OK

               WV

               MO
                IN
               NV
               OH
               WY
               CO
               AK
               CA
                ID




               VA
               MD

               WA


               SD
               PA
                                               1969   1983
             Table 1: Rates of Early Childbearing by Disadvantage Factor

                                               % with       % Gave Birth    % Gave Birth
                                            Disadvantage    before Age 20   before Age 18
All                                              ---             0.24            0.12

 Born to mother less than age 20                 0.14           0.46             0.26
 (n=1,797)
 Born to mother less than age 18                 0.04           0.43             0.24
 (n=1,797)
 Born to unmarried mother                        0.28           0.45             0.23
 (n=1,743)
 Born to mother with less than HS degree         0.28           0.44             0.26
 (n=1,266)
 Born into Poverty                               0.13           0.49             0.26
 (n=1,611)
 Not living with married parents at age 15       0.45           0.39             0.21
 (n=1,412)
 Living in poverty at age 15                     0.04           0.53             0.38
 (n=1,553)
Notes: The sample is comprised of women age 20-35 in the 2003 PSID. Estimates are similar
when we use a uniform sample size across measures.
        Table 2: Relationship between Early Childbearing and Measures of Disadvantage
                                         Dep. Var:                       Dep. Var:
                                  Gave Birth by Age 20             Gave Birth by Age 18
                                     (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)
Born to Mom < 20 (col. 1&2)         0.250          ---             0.043            ---
or 18 (col. 3&4)                   (0.041)                        (0.061)

Born to Mom < 20 (col. 1&2)         0.014        -0.001             -0.108          -0.122
or 18 (col. 3&4)                   (0.045)       (0.049)            (0.061)         (0.067)

Born to Single Mom                  0.186         0.092              0.112           0.059
                                   (0.031)       (0.037)            (0.024)         (0.029)

Born to Mom < HS grad               0.198         0.191              0.146           0.135
                                   (0.030)       (0.033)            (0.023)         (0.025)

Born into Poverty                   0.075         0.112              0.049           0.075
                                   (0.041)       (0.028)            (0.032)         (0.035)

Age 15- Not living w/                 -           0.112                -             0.053
married parents                                  (0.028)                            (0.022)

Age 15 - Living in poverty            -           0.093                -             0.121
                                                 (0.068)                            (0.054)

constant                            0.138         0.112             0.056            0.046
                                   (0.014)       (0.017)           (0.011)          (0.014)

 sample size                        1,213         1,022              1,213           1,022
            2
 Adjusted R                         0.116         0.117             0.0823           0.083
Notes: Estimates are the results from linear probability models that include no other covariates
besides those listed.
              Table 3: Estimates of the Impact of Alternative Measures of Economic Disadvantage on Early Childbearing

                    Dep. Var: Proportion of Cohort Giving Birth by Age 18               Dep. Var: Proportion of Cohort Giving Birth by Age 20
                                       (mean = 0.084)                                                      (mean = 0.201)
Measure of        Mother with     Unmarried                                           Mother with     Unmarried
Disadvantage:    Low Education     Mother       Born to Teen Born to Minor           Low Education      Mother       Born to Teen Born to Minor
Proportion w/
disadvantage         0.257           0.162           0.163          0.061                 0.264           0.154           0.167       0.063

                                                               No Other Covariates
coeff./s.e.          0.261           0.184           0.550         1.097                  0.478            0.327           1.062      2.037
                    (0.021)         (0.040)         (0.033)       (0.059)                (0.035)          (0.078)         (0.061)    (0.124)

R-squared            0.635           0.168           0.746          0.776                 0.588           0.153           0.792       0.783


                                                        State and Birth Cohort Fixed Effects
coeff./s.e.          0.106           0.060           0.122           0.250                0.095            0.137           0.172      0.292
                    (0.022)         (0.053)         (0.063)         (0.114)              (0.038)          (0.071)         (0.088)    (0.164)

R-squared            0.982           0.968           0.974          0.974                 0.988           0.984           0.985       0.985


                        State and Birth Cohort Fixed Effects along with Additional Policy and Demographic Control Variables
coeff./s.e.          0.137            0.057           0.129           0.272                 0.161          0.155           0.187      0.342
                    (0.022)          (0.040)         (0.056)        (0.095)                (0.036)        (0.065)         (0.074)    (0.128)

R-squared            0.983           0.974           0.98            0.98                 0.989           0.985           0.985       0.986

Num obs.              612             666             918            918                  576              629             867        867
Note: Additional policy and demographic control variables include the unemployment rate, indicator variables for the
implementation of a welfare waiver (pre-TANF) or TANF, and the implementation of a welfare family cap, log maximum
welfare benefits for a family of three, an indicator for SCHIP implementation, abortion policy indicators including the presence of
a Medicaid funding restriction, parental notification law and mandatory delay law, and aggregate demographic chacteristics of
women of childbearing age, including the percent married, percent white, percent Hispanic, and the percent who are high school
drop outs, high school graduated, and have attended some college. All these variables are measured in the year the cohort turned
age 18 (left panel) or 20 (right panel).
        Table 4: Elasticity Estimates of the Impact of Alternative Measures of Economic Disadvantage on Early Childbearing

                 Dep. Var: Log Proportion of Cohort Giving Birth by Age 18            Dep. Var: Log Proportion of Cohort Giving Birth by Age 20

Measure of       Mother with      Unmarried                                           Mother with      Unmarried
Disadvantage:   Low Education      Mother       Born to Teen   Born to Minor         Low Education      Mother        Born to Teen   Born to Minor

                                                               No Other Covariates
coeff./s.e.         0.852           0.256           1.115          0.861                 0.623            0.227           0.915          0.669
                   (0.055)         (0.076)         (0.059)        (0.041)               (0.050)          (0.063)         (0.052)        (0.040)

R-squared           0.646           0.095           0.78           0.799                 0.557           0.127           0.803          0.792


                                                       State and Birth Cohort Fixed Effects
coeff./s.e.         0.252           0.103           0.101           0.049                0.196            0.000           0.124          0.054
                   (0.120)         (0.067)         (0.100)         (0.082)              (0.075)          (0.041)         (0.055)        (0.042)

R-squared           0.983           0.981           0.979          0.979                 0.988           0.985           0.985          0.985


                       State and Birth Cohort Fixed Effects along with Additional Policy and Demographic Control Variables
coeff./s.e.         0.282            0.052           0.129           0.054                 0.229          0.002           0.140          0.065
                   (0.088)          (0.055)         (0.092)        (0.063)                (0.056)        (0.036)         (0.046)        (0.029)

R-squared           0.987           0.985           0.984          0.984                 0.99            0.987           0.987          0.987

Num obs.             612             666             918            918                  576              629             867            867
Note: All measures of disadvantage are included in the right hand side as the log of the proportion in the cohort with each
disadvantage. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Additional policy and demographic control variables include the
unemployment rate, indicator variables for the implementation of a welfare waiver (pre-TANF) or TANF, and the implementation
of a welfare family cap, log maximum welfare benefits for a family of three, an indicator for SCHIP implementation, abortion
policy indicators including the presence of a Medicaid funding restriction, parental notification law and mandatory delay law, and
aggregate demographic chacteristics of women of childbearing age, including the percent married, percent white, percent
Hispanic, and the percent who are high school drop outs, high school graduated, and have attended some college. All these
variables are measured in the year the cohort turned age 18 (left panel) or 20 (right panel). Standard errors are clustered at the
state level. Regressions are weighted by cohort size.
