                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SKILL BIASED FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT:
     EDUCATION, WAGES AND OCCUPATIONS IN THE U.S. FINANCIAL SECTOR

                                          Thomas Philippon
                                            Ariell Reshef

                                        Working Paper 13437
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13437


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




We have benefited from discussions with Donghoon Lee, Holger Mueller, Tony Saunders, Bill Silber
and Jeff Wurgler. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Thomas Philippon and Ariell Reshef. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Skill Biased Financial Development: Education, Wages and Occupations in the U.S. Financial
Sector
Thomas Philippon and Ariell Reshef
NBER Working Paper No. 13437
September 2007
JEL No. G2,J21,J24,J3

                                             ABSTRACT

Over the past 60 years, the U.S. financial sector has grown from 2.3% to 7.7% of GDP. While the
growth in the share of value added has been fairly linear, it hides a dramatic change in the composition
of skills and occupations. In the early 1980s, the financial sector started paying higher wages and hiring
more skilled individuals than the rest of economy. These trends reflect a shift away from low-skill
jobs and towards market-oriented activities within the sector. Our evidence suggests that technological
and financial innovations both played a role in this transformation. We also document an increase
in relative wages, controlling for education, which partly reflects an increase in unemployment risk:
Finance jobs used to be safer than other jobs in the private sector, but this is not longer the case.

Thomas Philippon
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

Ariell Reshef
New York University
Department of Economics
19 W. 4th Street, 6FL
New York, NY 10012
ar825@nyu.edu
   The financial sector in the U.S. has grown steadily over the post-war period. In 1950, it
accounted for 2.3% of U.S. GDP, and 2.8% of aggregate employee compensation. In 2005,
both shares were 7.7%. These steady increases, however, hide a deep structural break, that
occurred in the early 1980s. Until then, and for more than three decades, the financial
sector had grown by hiring more employees. From the early 1980s onward, the value added
per employee increased much faster in the financial sector than in the rest of the economy,
while the number of employees remained flat or even declined.
   Understanding the growth of the financial sector, and the changing composition of its
labor force, can shed light on several important economic issues. The first is the allocation
of talent in the economy. It is well understood that entrepreneurial talent is a key input
into the process leading to economic growth. Baumol (1990) argues that the allocation of
talent across occupations is more readily influenced by institutions and economic incentives
than the overall supply of talent. Economic growth requires the allocation of talent to
socially productive activities. Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991) make a similar point,
and also discuss the role of increasing returns to ability in determining the careers of talented
individuals.
   Both Baumol (1990) and Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991) argue that the flow of
talented individuals into law and financial services might not be entirely desirable, because
social returns might be higher in other occupations, even though private returns are not.
Yet, there is little systematic evidence on changes in the flows of talent over time. Even if
the potential for the diversion of talent exists, it does not matter if the diversion does not
actually take place, or only on a small scale. Our paper sheds light on this issue.
   Our work also contributes to the understanding of the much debated issue of skill biased
technological change and income inequality. Katz and Murphy (1992) study the secular
growth in the demand for more-educated workers from 1963 to 1987, while Autor, Katz, and
Krueger (1998), Acemoglu (1998) and Card and Lemieux (2001), among others, discuss the
role of technological improvements biased in favor of skilled workers. The finance industry
has benefited greatly from innovation in computers and information technologies. We should
therefore expect to see large changes in the relative productivities of its employees.
   While computers are general purpose technologies, there have been a number of financial
innovations since the 1960s. Silber (1983) reviews new financial products and practices be-


                                               2
tween 1970 and 1982. Miller (1986), reflecting upon the financial innovations that occurred
from the mid 1960s to the mid 1980s, argues that the development of financial futures was
the most significant one. Tufano (2004) argues that the more recent decades have witnessed
equally important innovations. These innovations and the development of new markets
probably changed the demand for skills in the financial sector. Moreover, they probably
increased the span over which individuals can apply their skills, making the financial sec-
tor more attractive to highly talented individuals, as emphasized by Murphy, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1991).
   Finally, we contribute to the large literature on economic growth and structural change,
with the well-known contributions of Stigler (1956), Kuznets (1957) and Baumol (1967).
The rise in the finance industry is in some ways similar to the rise in other skill-intensive
services, studied recently by Buera and Kaboski (2006), but the financial sector plays a
particular role and needs to be analyzed separately. In a complete market, Arrow-Debreu
economy, there would be no financial sector. The complete market is the benchmark for
most economic applications. Studying the use of human capital in the financial sector might
inform us about the most important departures from the complete market model.
   In this paper, we provide evidence on the transformation of the financial industry by
looking at the occupations, education and wages of its workforce. Was there a general
increase in the average education of the workforce entering the industry? Did some low skill
occupations disappear? Which occupations expanded? To answer these and other questions,
we turn to the Current Population Survey. Although this survey has been extensively used
to study the U.S. labor market at large, to the best of our best knowledge it has not been
utilized to study the financial sector in particular.
   Our analysis uses a long time series and a representative sample of U.S. population.
This sample, however, is not appropriate for the study of very high incomes, which is the
focus of recent work by Kaplan and Rauh (2007).
   We find that until the late 1970s, workers in the financial sector were only slightly more
educated and received slightly higher wages than in the rest of the economy. Since the early
1980s, however, the financial sector has been hiring more and more skilled individuals, at
a higher rate than the rest of the private sector. The increase in the skill intensity of the
finance labor force reflects both a composition shift away from the Banking industry and


                                               3
towards investment banks, mutual, pension and private equity funds, which are relatively
more skill intensive, and an increase in skill intensity within some industries. Along with
the rise in skills, we document an increase in the wages paid to workers in the financial
sector, which is partly due to a relative increase in unemployment risk. Finally, we analyze
the changes in the set of tasks performed by workers in the financial sector.
        Section 1 describes the growth of the financial sector, as well as three industries within
the industry. Section 2 considers the role of education in explaining the rise of wages paid
to employees in the financial sector. Section 3 studies the evolution of residual wages,
controlling for education, and the role of unemployment risk. Section 4 concludes. A
detailed description of the data can be found in the appendix.


1        The growth of the financial sector

In this section, we present broad trends for the U.S. financial sector over the post-war
period. We consider first the industry as a whole, using data from the Annual Industry
Accounts of the United States, and then three industries within the industry, using the
March supplement of the Current Population Survey. The data are described in details in
the appendix.

1.1        Trends for the sector

We start from the Annual Industry Accounts of the United States, published by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis. We consider three measures of the size of an industry: value added,
compensation of employees, and employment. Value added is the contribution of the indus-
try’s labor and capital to the overall gross domestic product (GDP) of the country. We also
compute the compensation share. Compensation includes wage and salary accruals, as well
as supplements to wages and salaries. The compensation share and the value added share
of an industry can diﬀer if the share of labor in the value added of the industry is not equal
to the labor share in the rest of the economy. For employment, we use the series Full-Time
and Part-Time Employees (FTPT) because it is consistently defined over the whole post-
war period. This measure simply counts the number of employees in the industry without
adjusting for the number of hours worked.1
    1
        The full-time equivalent series (FTE) is available only from 1998 onward.


                                                        4
    Figure 1 shows that, in terms of valued added and compensation of employees, the
share of the financial sector has grown fairly linearly over the post-war period. However,
the pattern for the employment share is markedly diﬀerent. The employment share of the
financial sector grows just like the value-added share until the early 1980s, but it then
flattens out and even declines somewhat after 1987.
    The growth of the financial sector can therefore be decomposed into two distinct periods:

    • From 1947 to 1977, the share of value added of the financial sector increased from
        2.32% to 4.55%, an increase of 2.23 percentage points over 30 years. The share in the
        compensation of employees increases from 2.72% to 4.36%. During this period, the
        financial sector grows mostly by hiring more employees. The share of employment
        increases from 2.39% to 3.86%, and the compensation per employee grows like in the
        rest of the economy.

    • From the 1980s onward, the financial sector grows by increasing the value added and
        compensation of its employees faster than in the rest of the economy. The employment
        share remains roughly constant, increasing to a maximum of 4.64% in 1987, and then
        falls to 4.32% in the early 2000s. The value added share increases from 4.55% in 1977
        to 7.69% in 2005, an increase of 3.14 percentage points over 28 years, faster than in
        the previous period.

1.2     Trends for industries

We now turn to the March supplement of the Current Population Survey. The Current
Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of over 50,000 households conducted by the
Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In this section, and in the rest of
the paper, we focus on the private sector: we exclude all government employees, as well as
employees of the United States Postal Services. There are two reasons for doing so. The
first is to check that the trends identified earlier also hold for the share of finance within
the private sector. The second, more important reason is that the private sector is a better
control group than the whole economy, in particular when we think about unemployment
risk.
    In the previous section, we treated financial sector as one large homogenous sector. One


                                               5
might wonder, however, whether the trends that we have described are the same in all
industries. We define three industries within the financial sector: “Banking and Saving”,
“Insurance” and “Other Finance Industries”. Banks, thrift and saving institutions are in-
cluded in “Banking and Saving”. Securities, commodities, funds, trusts, and other financial
establishments, as well as investment banks are all included in “Other Finance Industries”.
The top panel of Table 1 explains the classification, and Table 2 contains the number of
observations and the shares of employment of each industry on a full-time equivalent basis,
computed with the Census weighting scheme to obtain a sample representative of the U.S.
economy. Note that these are shares in the private sector, and therefore they add up to
more than the share presented in Figure 1. The trends, however, are consistent with those
from the Industry Accounts. In the CPS, the employment share of finance increases until
the early 1980s and remains constant afterwards. The wage-bill share increases linearly
throughout the 1970-2005 period, just like the value added share described above.
   The left panel of Figure 2 shows the size of each industry in terms of hours worked.
The share of the Insurance sector is remarkably stable, at 2% of total hours worked. The
share of Banking increases from 2% in 1970 to 3% in 1988, and then decreases to 2.75%
in 2006. By contrast, the share of Other Finance Industries was constant until 1980 at
around 0.3% before increasing to 0.9% in 2006. The right panel of Figure 2 shows the size
of each industry in terms of its wage bill. Interestingly, the wage-bill share of Other Finance
Industries increased by more than twice as much as its share of hours worked. There are
smaller diﬀerences between the (increase in) wage-bill and (flat) hour share in the other two
industries. The financial sector accounted for 4.875% of private labor income in 1967 and
8.127% in 2005, an increase of 3.252 percentage points. Other Finance Industries increased
by 1.68 percentage points, from 0.62% to 2.3%, so it accounts for slightly more than half of
the overall increase of the industry.

Result 1
Over the post war period, the financial sector grew first by hiring more employees, and later
by increasing the value added of its employees. Wages in finance increased much faster than
in the rest of the economy from the late 1970s onward. The composition of the sector has
shifted away from Banking and towards Other Finance Industries.


                                              6
        An increase in the relative wage can reflect various economic forces. In the short run,
because of search costs and industry specific human capital, the supply of labor is not
perfectly elastic across industries. Thus, an increase in demand or in productivity can lead
to an increase in relative wages, holding constant the composition of the labor force. In
the long run, however, the relative labor supplies adjust and diﬀerences in wages reflect
diﬀerences in human capital and in the disutility from work in diﬀerent occupations. Our
next step is therefore to investigate the education of employees in the finance industry.


2        Education of the workforce

In this section, we investigate whether the evidence in Figures 1 and 2 reflect a shift in the
composition of the labor force of the financial sector around 1980. Our CPS data cover
the period 1967-2005. Over this period, the average education of the U.S. workforce has
increased substantially. We investigate whether the improvement in education has been
relatively faster or slower in the financial sector.

2.1        Wages and education

Given that value added per employee started to increase relatively faster in the financial
sector after 1980, it is natural to study the skill composition of the labor force. To do so, we
break down hours worked between employees with less than a college degree and employees
with at least a college degree. Let hi,s,t be hours worked by employee i in sector s at time t,
and let ei,t be a dummy variable for having at least a college degree. We define the college
graduate share of hours worked in sector s at time t as:
                                        P
                                           hi,s,t ω i,t ei,t
                                         i
                                 xs,t = P                    ,                               (1)
                                             hi,s,t ω i,t
                                                     i
where ωist is the CPS sampling weight for that observation. The relative education of the
workforce of the financial sector is defined as the college graduate hour-share in Finance
and Insurance (s ≡ fin) minus the college graduate hour-share in the rest of the private
sector (s ≡ rop): xf in,t − xrop,t . We also construct the average hourly wage in each sector
ws,t , and we define the relative wage as the percentage diﬀerence in average hourly wages:
(wf in,t − wrop,t ) /wrop,t .2 Figure 3 shows the evolution of the relative wage and the relative
    2
        Average wages are weighted averages, using CPS weights.


                                                         7
education over time. The two series display some striking similarities. Both are flat until
1980 and rise linearly afterwards, which suggests that part of the observed increase in
relative wages comes from a relative increase in the skill composition of the labor force.
Until 1980, wages are 12.5% higher and the hour-share of college graduates is 2.5 percentage
points higher in finance than in the rest of the private sector. By 2005, wages are more
than 40% higher and the hour-share of college graduates is 17.5 percentage points higher.

Result 2
The education of employees in the financial sector increased faster than in the rest of the
economy after 1980.

         Does education account for the entire increase in relative wages? If wages are equalized
across sectors for a given level of education, the percentage diﬀerence in average hourly
wages should be equal to π t (xf in,t − xrop,t ) / (1 + π t xrop,t ), where π t is the college premium
at time t, defined as the percentage diﬀerence in the hourly wages of workers with and
without a college degree. The hour-share of college graduates increased from 13% to 30%
in the private sector between 1967 and 2005, and from 18% to 47.5% in the financial sector.
The college premium — the percent diﬀerence between the wages of college graduate and
those without a college degree — is around 55% in the 1970s and reaches 94% by the end of
our sample.3
         Given the college premium and the diﬀerences in the hour shares of college graduates,
we would have expected finance wages to be 2.6% higher than in the rest of the economy
in 1970, while in fact they were 12.5% higher. By 2005, we would have predicted a 12.83%
diﬀerence in wages, compared to the observed 40%. The discrepancy comes from the fact
that employees of the financial sector earn more than employees in other sectors with similar
levels of education, and that the gap has increased over time. We address this issue in section
3.

2.2        Skill intensity

We use a simple model of the demand for skill to organize our discussion of skill intensities.
Suppose that there are two skill levels, h and l, and that the production function of sector
     3
    The increase in the college premium is well known in the literature. See Katz and Murphy (1992) for
instance.


                                                  8
s is:
                                 ³                                     ´
                                                         1/σ 1−1/σ
                           ys = f μ1/σ
                                   s   h1−1/σ
                                              + (1 − μs )   l      ; Xs ,                                (2)

where Xs is a vector of industry characteristics, and h and l are hours worked by high
education and low education workers, respectively. This production function has a constant
elasticity of substitution between high and low skill labor, σ. Many models of macroeco-
nomic growth use production functions with constant values for σ. Let wh and wl be the
hourly wages for high and low education workers. Cost minimization of the wage bill for
any level of output in (2) implies that the relative demand for high skill labor must satisfy:4
                                                         µ        ¶−σ
                                        hs     μs            wh
                                           =                            .                                (3)
                                        ls   1 − μs          wl

In the benchmark case, where σ and wl /wh are the same across sectors, the relative skill
intensity hs /ls depends only on the relative parameters μs across diﬀerent industries.5 In
particular, using (3) to compare finance versus the rest of the economy leads to:

                                    hf in /lf in     μf in 1 − μrop
                                                 =                  .                                    (4)
                                    hrop /lrop     1 − μf in μrop

       Figure 4 focuses on employees with a least a college degree. The left panel shows the
share of hours worked by employees with at least a college degree in each industry, computed
according to equation (1). For the total private sector, it increased from 13.2% in 1968 to
30.6% in 2006, with a sample average of 23%. This share, however, varies a lot across sectors.
The sample average is 53.8% for Other Finance Industries, 32% in Insurance companies,
and 26.3% in Banking. The trend increase in Insurance is the same as in the rest of the
private sector, but the trends are steeper in Banking and Other Finance Industries. The
share of college graduates in Banking was roughly the same as in the rest of the private
sector in the early 1970s (even slightly lower), but 10 percentage points higher in 2005.
       The right panel of Figure 4 shows the evolution of the left-hand side of equation (4)
over time, using hours worked by college graduates as a measure of h. The series are
normalized to have a mean of one over the first five years, 1967 to 1971. Interestingly, the
   4
      These relationships do not require perfect competition in the market for goods and services, since they
follow from cost minimization, and not from profit maximization. They do require that firms take wages as
given, however.
    5
      Although wages grow faster in the financial sector, the relative wage of college graduates was not
markedly diﬀerent from the rest of the private sector. See Figure 9.



                                                     9
relative skill intensity of Insurance has remained roughly constant throughout the sample
period, consistent with the benchmark model and balanced growth. On the other hand, the
relative skill intensity in Banking and in Other Finance Industries has increased sharply.
The Banking sector was slightly less skill intensive than the rest of the economy in the early
1970s, but it became significantly more skill intensive over the 1980s. The Other Finance
Industries sector was already skill intensive and has become more so over time.

Result 3
The relative skill intensity of the Insurance industry has remained approximately constant.
In contrast, Banking and Other Finance Industries have become more skill-biased than the
rest of the economy after 1980.

   So far, we have documented an increase in the skill intensity of the financial sector
relative to the rest of the economy, and a change in the allocation of the workforce within
the financial sector away from Banking and towards Other Finance Industries. These trends
presumably reflect changes in the set of tasks performed by workers in the financial sector,
a topic that we now discuss.

2.3   Occupations

Our classification of occupations attempts to group employees according to the tasks they
perform, irrespective of the industry in which they work. For instance, we classify all em-
ployees trading securities as traders, no matter whether they work in Banking, Insurance
or Other Finance Industries. We do the same for managers and for administrative work-
ers. Unfortunately, it is hard to find consistent definitions of occupations over time. The
appendix explains in details what we did, the constraints we faced and the reasons for our
choices. At the end of the day, we use six occupations, presented in the bottom panel of
Table 1. Table 3 contains the number of observations for each occupation and each year,
and the shares of each occupation in the total employment of the Finance and Insurance
sector.
   Figure 5 shows the evolution of the employment shares of four occupations: The two
largest on the left panel, and the two fastest growing on the right panel. The fraction of
clerks and workers employed in administrative tasks has declined dramatically over time.

                                             10
This is true in all industries, and it is particularly important in Banking. The decrease in
the share of clerks explains much of the evolution of average wages in Banking after 1980.
“Securities and Financial Asset Sales” and “Computer and Mathematics” are the fastest
growing occupations.6 It is clear that the financial sector has become more trading-intensive
and more computer-intensive over time.

Result 4
Much of the skill bias in Banking reflects the decline of bank tellers and other administrative
occupations. The fastest growing occupations in finance are related to the trading of financial
assets, and the use of computers and mathematics.


2.4      Technological or financial innovations?

Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2002) sort jobs and tasks along two dimensions: manual or
cognitive, routine or non-routine. Computers can perform routine tasks and are therefore
substitutes for labor employed in routine jobs. Computers are complements to non-routine
tasks, especially cognitive ones, and they are neither complements nor substitutes to manual
non-routine tasks. As a result, employees in abstract or analytical tasks become more
productive, the demand for routine jobs decreases, while manual jobs are less aﬀected.
       The evolutions of the tasks performed by the financial sector provide support for the
idea that advances in information technology, and in particular the decrease in the price of
computing power, have considerably decreased the demand for routine jobs and increased
the productivity of non-routine abstract jobs.
       The relative stability of Insurance, however, suggests that financial innovations might
also have played a role. Insurance was already a skill intensive industry in 1980, yet its
evolution does not suggest a strong skill bias afterwards. Moreover, one might think that
improvements in computers by themselves aﬀected the insurance sector as much as the other
financial sectors.
       It seems likely that financial innovations also played an important role. Indeed, among
the 38 new financial products and practices introduced between 1970 and 1982 listed in
   6
    One should keep in mind that, as shown in Table 2, there are few observations in these occupations at
the beginning of the sample, which explains the initial volatility of the series.



                                                   11
Silber (1983), only 2 or 3 are related to Insurance. These innovations had a larger impact
on Other Finance Industries than on the Insurance industry. Many of these innovations are
market-oriented, which explains the nature of the fastest growing occupations in Figure 5.
This is also consistent with the argument in Miller (1986) on the importance of financial
futures markets.


3     Wage premia in the financial sector

To what extent can education account for the change in relative wages that we have doc-
umented? In this section, we document that even controlling for education, finance wages
have increased faster than in the rest of the economy, and then we show that this might
partly reflect an increase in unemployment risk. To make the discussion more concrete, we
start by considering the striking example of engineers.

3.1   Financiers and engineers

In this section, we focus on a particular comparison, that between engineers and financiers
with similar levels of education. Figure 6 shows the evolution of the average annual wages
of employees in the Finance and Insurance sector with a college degree or more, and of
engineers employed in the private sector (but not in Finance and Insurance). The wages
are in constant 2000 prices. The left panel uses individuals with exactly a college degree,
and the right panel uses employees with a post-graduate degree. In both cases, the relative
wage of finance employees was constant until the 1980s, and then started to increase faster
than the wage of engineers with the same level of education. The picture is particularly
striking for post-graduates, a category that includes MBAs and PhD graduates.
    Moreover, the CPS underestimates the income of individuals who earn very high salaries,
due to top-coding of income. Therefore, the wages that we report may not be accurate for
certain occupations, Securities and Financial Asset Sales in particular. In our sample, the
percent of top-coded observations in the private sector is around 1%, but it is around 2%
in Banking, 2.5% in Insurance and up to 13% in Other Finance Industries. We have tried
to correct the induced biases, as explained in the appendix, but it is not possible to remove
them entirely. See Kaplan and Rauh (2007) for a detailed analysis of the highest incomes
inside and outside finance.

                                             12
3.2      Wage regressions

We have seen that the wages of employees in the financial sector have increased relative
to the rest of the private sector. This increase has been accompanied by an increase in
the share of college graduates working in the financial sector. The first question we seek
to answer is whether the change in the composition of the labor force, in particular its
education, can account for all of the observed increase in wages.
      To answer this first question, we run a series of cross-sectional regressions on sub-
samples of five years.7 Pooling the data ensures that we have enough observations in each
cell. We restrict our attention to full time employees of the private sector, i.e., employees
who work at least 40 weeks a year, and at least 35 hours a week.8 For each subsample
τ ∈ {[1967, 1970] , ... [2001, 2005]}, we run the following regression:

                        log (wit ) = αt,τ + β τ · Xi,t + γ τ · edui,t + φτ 1φit + uit ,               (5)

where t ∈ τ . In equation (5), wit are the annual wage earnings of individual i in year
t, Xit are individual characteristics of individual i at time t (race, sex, marital status,
urban residence, potential experience and its square), and eduit is a vector of dummies for
education groups: 12 years of education, 13 to 15 years, 16 to 17 years, and 18 years or
more. The variable 1φit is a dummy, equal to one if individual i works in the financial sector
in year t. Within each period we also control for year eﬀects αt,τ . We allow the vector of
coeﬃcients γ τ to vary over periods in order to capture changes in the returns to education
common to all sectors in the economy. The coeﬃcient φτ measures the extent to which
every finance employee receives a higher wage, controlling for all other things. It captures
compensating wage diﬀerentials or unobserved heterogeneity.
      Table 4 displays the results of the regressions (5). The most striking feature of the data
is the increase in the returns to education, especially for high education. Mincer (1997),
Lemieux (2006) and Deschênes (2006) show that log wages have become an increasingly
convex function of the years of education since the 1970s, and Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2006) argue that the U.S. labor market has become more polarized since 1980. Indeed, one
can see in Table 3 that the gap between high-school graduates and college-educated workers
  7
      The first regression uses the first four years of data, from 1967 to 1970.
  8
      Our sample excludes individuals that earned less than 80% of the federal minimum hourly wage.


                                                      13
has increased dramatically, while the gap between high-school graduates and dropouts has
increased only moderately. Controlling for education is important if one wants to understand
the evolution of the wages of workers in the financial sector.
   Figure 7 plots the evolution of φτ from two specifications of equation (5), one where we
exclude education (not reported here) and one where we include education, which corre-
sponds to the first row of Table 4. The drop from one line to the other shows that education
accounts for six to eight percentage points of the diﬀerence in log wages. However, even
controlling for education, we find that individuals working in the Finance and Insurance
sector earn more than individuals working in the Rest of the Private Sector. The ‘finance
premium’ was small, around 3.4% until the mid-seventies. It started to grow in the late
1970s, to reach 20% in the early 2000s. To better understand the ‘finance premium’, we
decompose it into three premia, one for each of our industries. Figure 8 shows that the wage
diﬀerentials have increased in all three industries. In Banking, there is no wage diﬀerential
in the early 1980s. The wage diﬀerential is much larger in Other Finance Industries, which
is the more skill intensive sector. Moreover, in this industry it increases the most, by more
than 20 percentage points. However, since we control for observed skill, this is indeed a
premium for working in the sector.
   Our previous specification implicitly assumed that wage diﬀerentials were the same for
all education groups. We now relax this assumption and run the following regression:
                                                           ³                  ´
            log (wit ) = αt,τ + β τ · Xi,t + γ τ · edui,t + φτ + γ φτ · edui,t 1φit + uit .

The vector of coeﬃcients γ φτ measures the additional return to education in the financial
sector. Table 5 displays the results of the regressions and Figure 9 plots the evolution of the
wage earnings of college and high school graduates inside and outside finance. Within each
education group, the wage diﬀerential is small in the 1970s and starts to increase in the early
1980s. The wage regressions therefore confirm that a specific transformation took place in
the financial sector in the late 1970s and early 1980s — one that aﬀected all education groups
and all industries within finance. In addition, the results show that the college premium
— the relative wage of college graduates to high school graduates — is roughly the same in
finance as in the rest of the private sector.

Result 5

                                                14
Controlling for the observed characteristics of employees, the relative wage in finance started
to increase in the late 1970s. A similar pattern emerges within each industry and within
each education group.

3.3      Wage diﬀerentials and unemployment risk

That two individual with the same education and observable characteristics earn such diﬀer-
ent income can be explained in one of three ways: compensating diﬀerentials, employment
and wage risk, and unobserved heterogeneity. According to the first candidate explanation,
finance jobs are relatively less attractive than non-finance jobs, and, in equilibrium, this
is reflected in the relative wages. Compensating diﬀerentials are certainly important, and
they can account for a fraction of the average diﬀerences that we observe. However, they
do not strike us as a plausible explanation for the increase in the relative wages paid in the
financial sector, because it is hardly sensible to argue that finance jobs are less interesting
today than they were 30 years ago, especially relative to the rest of the private sector.
      Another, and in our view more plausible, explanation for the trends in relative compen-
sation, is a relative increase in labor income risk in the financial sector. If finance workers
are more likely to loose their jobs, or if their wages are more volatile, they would have to
be compensated for this extra risk. To test this explanation, we fit two regressions. Let λit
be a dummy for being employed at time t. First, we run a logit regression on the likelihood
of becoming unemployed:
                                                     ³                           ´
                         Pr (λit+1 = 0 | λit = 1) = f 1φit ; wit ; edui,t ; Xi,t            (6)

where f is the logistic function.
      The estimation of equation (6) requires a longitudinal dimension. Therefore we use the
Matched CPS, which allows us to potentially observe each individual in the CPS twice,
in two consecutive years. See the appendix for a complete description of the methodology
involved in matching observations on individuals from consecutive surveys.
      We use a broad definition for unemployment. It includes not only the individuals who
are not employed and are looking for a job for the entire year, but also those that worked
part-year and were actively looking for a new job in some of the weeks not worked.9 Thus,
  9
      See appendix for a more detailed definition.


                                                     15
to be in the sample at time t, an individual must be in the labor force, and employed in
the private sector. At time t + 1, the individual must be in the labor force (in the private
or public sectors), either employed or not. On average, over the whole sample, 6.91% of
individuals experience a transition from employment to unemployment. Individuals in the
financial sector are less likely to loose their jobs: only 4.39% make the transition. The
relative stability of finance jobs has decreased over time, however, as one can see in Table 6,
which reports our estimates for equation (6). As expected, full time, married, experienced
workers, and workers with a higher level of education, are less likely to become unemployed.
   Figure 10 shows the evolution of unemployment risk in the financial sector relative to
the private sector. The probability of becoming unemployed is evaluated for the average
worker, i.e., it is evaluated at the means of all other variables. From the late 1970s to the
early 1990s, the stability of jobs in the financial sector has converged to the average for the
rest of the private sector. This convergence started in the early 1980s, which coincides with
the timing of the increase in relative wages in finance, as shown in Figure 2.
   When we estimate equation (6) with separate dummies for the three industries, we find
clear trends in Banking and Insurance. In Other Finance Industries we do not observe
enough transitions to draw reliable conclusions. We have also estimated an equation with
wage risk, measured either by the volatility of the log wage, or by the probability of a drop
of more than 10%, on the left hand side. We did not find any evidence that wage risk is
higher in the financial sector, or that the relative risk has changed over time.
   An important concern with our controls for education is that it might not capture
important heterogeneity among individuals with the same number of years of schooling.
A better way to capture this heterogeneity is to control for the current wage, rather than
education. To do so, we construct three wage groups with cutoﬀs at the 34th and 67th
percentiles of the overall wage distribution in a given year. Note that the cutoﬀs correspond
to the distribution of wages in the entire private sector, not the financial sector, because the
correct experiment is to compare individuals with the same wages inside and outside the
financial sector. Table 7 reports the results of the regression. Figure 11 shows the evolution
of the relative unemployment risk of jobs in the financial sector, broken down into these
three wage groups. Once again, we observe a clear upward trend in all groups.



                                              16
Result 6
Unemployment risk was lower in the financial sector than in the rest of the private sector
until 1980. It increased in relative terms over the 1980s and early 1990s.

A simple calibration
Based on the evidence presented so far, we can propose a first interpretation of the data.
Regarding the level of compensation, a constant compensating diﬀerential appears to be
required, since even in the more recent years, the unemployment risk in the finance industry
is not higher than in the rest of the economy. It has merely converged to the same level.
The increase in the relative unemployment risk in the financial sector can however account
for some of the increase in relative wages. Ruhm (1991) finds that layoﬀs lead to temporary
unemployment and long lasting decreases in earnings: “Displaced workers were out of work
eight weeks more than their observably similar counterparts in the year of the separation,
four additional weeks in period t+1, and two extra weeks at t+2. By year t+3 they were
jobless only 1.5 weeks more than the peer group, and the t+4 increase was just six days.”
By contrast, “almost none of the t+1 wage reduction dissipated with time. The earnings
gap remained at 13.8 percent and 13.7 percent, respectively, in years t +3 and t +4.”
   A complete study of the eﬀects of unemployment risk on the level of compensation that is
needed to keep workers indiﬀerent between diﬀerent jobs is clearly beyond the scope of this
paper. Nonetheless, we think it is useful to provide some simple benchmark calculations.
We do so in the simplest framework possible and we assume that labor income is the only
source of risk and that the utility function has constant relative risk aversion. We set the
personal discount rate and the market rate both equal to 3% per year. We assume that
workers live and work for 40 years, and that the labor income process, yt , is given by
                        ½                                 ¾
                           1.02 yt with probability 1 − p
                 yt+1 =                                     , and y1 given.
                             0.86 yt with probability p
The increase of 2% captures the normal increase in real labor income. The drop by 14%
captures the income loss from displacement documented by Ruhm (1991). This process
implies that shocks are permanent, which makes the eﬀect of unemployment risk more
important, so we are likely to obtain an upper bound for the impact on the relative wages.
   We perform the following experiment. First, we set p = 4.41% and y1 = 1, we solve
and simulate the model with a coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion equals to 2. We then

                                             17
increase the unemployment risk to p = 6.91%. This increase of 2.5 points corresponds to
the increase in relative unemployment risk that we have documented earlier. In order to
keep workers indiﬀerent, the new starting wage should be y1 = 1.084, an increase of 8.4%.
If we lower the calibrated risk aversion to 1, the required increase in wages is 7.8%. If we
increase risk aversion to 3, the required increase in wages is 9%. Recall that the premium
paid to finance employees has increased by 16.6 points, from 3.4% to 20%. Thus, it appears
that the increase in unemployment risk could account for half of the increase in relative
wages.


4    Conclusion

Until the late 1970s, workers in the financial sector were only slightly more educated and
received slightly higher wages than in the rest of the economy. Since the early 1980s,
however, the financial sector has been hiring more and more skilled individuals. There has
been a composition shift away from Banking and towards relatively more skill intensive
industries. In addition, there has been an increase in skill intensity within Banking and
within Other Finance Industries.
    Our results suggests two sources of skill bias: computers and market-related financial
innovations. First, there is clear evidence that jobs involving routine tasks have tended
to disappear, probably because of improvement in computers and information technologies.
This is especially true in Banking, where the trend may have been reinforced by deregulation
and consolidation. The relative stability of Insurance, however, as well as the fact that the
fastest growing tasks involve the trading of financial assets suggests that innovations in
financial markets also played an important role.
    Controlling for education and observable characteristics, we find that employees of the
financial sector earned 3 to 4% more than employees in the rest of the private sector during
the 1970s. At that time, however, they also enjoyed substantially lower unemployment
risk. After 1980, the unemployment risk in the financial sector started to catch up with
unemployment risk in the rest of the private sector. Over the same period, the finance
wage premium (controlling for education and observable characteristics) increased to 20%.
A simple calibration suggests that the increase in relative unemployment risk could account



                                             18
for one half of the increase in the finance wage premium. The remaining half probably
reflects unobserved heterogeneity in the labor force.
    Overall, the share of talented individuals hired by the financial sector has increased
very significantly over the past three decades. This finding raises several questions for
future research. First, does the increase in skilled labor in the financial sector lead to
more innovations in this sector? Second, how do financial innovations aﬀect the rest of
the economy? Finally, what are the welfare consequences of the shift in the allocation of
talent?10
   10
      Philippon (2007) discusses the optimal allocation of talent in a model with credit constraints and indus-
trial innovations, but no financial innovations.




                                                      19
Appendix
A       Description of the data
A.1      Annual industrial accounts
We obtain data on employment and value added at the industry level from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (BEA). Value added, the contribution of each industry’s labor and
capital to the overall gross domestic product (GDP), is equal to an industry’s gross output
(Sales or receipts and other operating income, commodity taxes, and inventory change)
minus its intermediate inputs (consumption of goods and services purchased from other
industries or imported). Current-dollar value added by industry is calculated as the sum
of disbursements to its labor and capital which are derived from the components of gross
domestic income.
     Employment could be defined in a number of ways: all employees, full-time equivalent,
or total hours worked. There is, however a compatibility issue around 1997, when the BEA
changed its industry classification from SIC to NAICS. As a result, only the series for the
number of ‘full time and part time employees’ (FTPT) is available consistently, and this is
the one that we use. The 1948-97 full-time and part-time employees was released in Octo-
ber 2006, by the Industry Economic Accounts, Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), U.S.
Department of Commerce. Because this series is based on the current NAICS classification,
it is possible to link the 1948-1997 and 1998-2005 samples.

A.2      The Current Population Survey
Our data on individuals comes from the March supplement of the Current Population Sur-
vey (Annual Social and Economic Study) from survey years 1968-2006, which pertain to
1967-2005 actual years. A CPS year refers to data of the preceding year, i.e. March CPS
2006 documents annual data from calendar year 2005. We therefore adopt the following
taxonomy: We call “year” the actual year that the survey pertains to, while a CPS year is
denoted as “survey year”. The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of
about 50,000 households conducted by the Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.11 Currently, there are more than 65,000 participating households. The sample is
selected to represent the civilian non-institutional U.S. population. The CPS includes data
on employment, unemployment, earnings, hours of work, and other demographic character-
istics including age, sex, race, marital status, and educational attainment. Also available
are data on occupation, industry, and class of worker. We choose to use only one particular
month survey, the March supplement, for two reasons. First, this supplement contains more
demographic details, in particular on work experience and income sources and amounts.
Since 1976, the survey has also been supplemented with a sample of Hispanic households
(about 2,500 interviewed). Second, it has been extensively used in the empirical labor and
macro-labor literature, which lends to the comparability of our results. Let us now define
the groups that we use in our empirical analysis. We restrict attention to individuals who
are in the labor force, of at least 15 years of age.
    Industry Classification
We define three industries within the private sector: “Banking and Saving”, “Other Finance
Industries”, and “Insurance”. To define the private sector, we exclude all government
employees, as well as employees of the United States Postal Services. Banks, thrift and
saving institutions are included in “Banking and Saving”. Securities, commodities, funds,
 11
      We obtained the data from Unicon Research, http://www.unicon.com/


                                                 20
trusts, and other financial investments as well as investment banks are all included in “Other
Finance Industries”. Table 2 shows the number of observations of employees surveyed from
the three financial industries and from the rest of the private sector from 1968 to 2006.
Table 2 also shows the shares of employment, computed with the Census weighting scheme
to obtain a sample representative of the U.S. economy. These sectors are consistently
identified, without any "jumps" or "drops" in their shares of total employment, despite
changes in industrial classifications in the CPS in our sample, which occur following each
decennial census. The major industrial re-classifications occurred in survey year 1983, from
the Census 1970 system to the 1980 system; and in survey year 2003, from the Census 1990
system to the 2000 system. Of these two re-classifications, the latter was more substantial
overall, yet it does not aﬀect our sectors. The Census Bureau provides industrial crosswalks
for the 1970-1980 systems and for the 1990-2000 systems, from which one can gauge how
some industries are split or merged into others (Census Bureau (1989), Census Bureau
(2003)). These crosswalks are basically a transition matrix for all industries from one
classification to the other. A close examination of these transition "probabilities" lead us
to conclude that our industries are consistently defined throughout our sample. In the
transition from the 1970 system to the 1980 system 99.9% remain inside each industry; and
for the transition from the 1990 system to the 2000 system over 95% of workers remain
inside each industry. This is due to the fact that the functions of our three industries are
narrowly and well defined, and due to the fact that they are not too large.
    Occupations
Examining the distribution of occupations within our three industries lead us to choose
six occupation groups (henceforth, "occupations"), which describe the major occupational
groups in our sample. These are: “Managers and Professionals”, “Computer and Mathe-
matics”, “Insurance Specialists”, “Securities and Financial Asset Sales”, “Administration,
Including Clerks”, and “All the Rest” (janitors, security and miscellaneous). As with indus-
try classifications, major occupational re-classifications occurred in survey year 1983, from
the Census 1970 system to the 1980 system, and in survey year 2003, from the Census 1990
system to the 2000 system. Of these two re-classifications, the latter was more substantial.
We examined the occupational crosswalks, which are provided by the Census Bureau to
make sure that our occupational groups are consistently defined over time (Census Bureau
(1989), Census Bureau (2003)). We could not consistently separate "managers" from "pro-
fessionals" due to re-classifications in survey years 1983 and 2003; some occupations that
were defined as "professional" were split and re-classified as "managerial" and vice versa.
However, these two groups together are consistently identified, without any "jumps" or
"drops" in their employment shares over time. Much eﬀort was devoted to making sure
that the other occupation groups are also consistently defined throughout our sample. See
the appropriate appendix for a detailed description of occupation groups and how they
are constructed. Note that some of these occupations potentially mean diﬀerent things in
diﬀerent industries. For instance, in Banking the “Managers and Professionals” include
“bank oﬃcers”, but these oﬃcers do not exist in the two other industries. Another example
from Banking is that bank tellers are a significant part of the “Administration, Including
Clerks”, but, once again, they do not exist in other industries. However, our more narrowly
defined occupations, “Computer and Mathematics”, “Insurance Specialists” and “Securities
and Financial Asset Sales” are the same in all industries. Table 3 contains the number of
observations for each occupation and each year, and the shares of each occupation in the
total employment of the finance and Insurance sector, using the Census weights to obtain
a representative sample.
    Education and experience
Until survey year 1991 years of education are reported in annual steps, starting with 0
years till 18 years (which also absorbs instances of more than 18 years). Also until survey


                                             21
year 1991 we correct years of schooling for individuals who did not complete the last year
in school by subtracting one year. This correction is not needed after survey year 1992.
From survey year 1992 and on early school attainment is lumped into groups: 0 years, 1-4
years, 5-6 year and 7-8 years. Also starting in survey year 1992 school attainment starting
with high school is marked by degrees, not years, therefore it is not possible to distinguish
between, e.g., 13, 14 and 15 years of school. To make our education variable consistent
throughout our sample, we adopt the coding that starts in survey year 1992, i.e., we group
early school attainment into brackets for all the sample and assign maximal values to each
bracket. Also, we group 13, 14 and 15 years of school together and assign 14 years for all
individuals within that bracket in all years. In addition, we lump 17 years of schooling
together with 16 years, for similar reasons. This makes the education variable categories
smooth throughout the sample, and in particular around the 1991-1992 surveys. In our
analysis we consider mainly two education categories: less than 4-year college graduates
(up to 15 years of school, including 2-year college graduates), and college graduates (16
years of school, including 4-year college graduates, and post-graduates). These groups are
suﬃcient to characterize diﬀerences in skill. In some cases where it is not, we separate
tertiary education into only college and post-graduate degrees. Experience is potential
labor market experience. It is measured as min(age-edu-6;age-18), where ‘edu’ is years of
schooling. The CPS does not contain data on job spells.
     Annual hours worked
In order to compute annual hours worked we multiply the number of weeks worked by
average hours worked in a week. Weeks worked are grouped into 7 brackets before survey
year 1976. Therefore we impute the average number of weeks worked before survey year
1976 by calculating the average weeks worked within those brackets in later years, by sex
(male\female). By this we get a better estimate of typical number of weeks worked for each
sex in earlier years. Average hours worked per week are reported from survey year 1976 and
on, but not beforehand. Until survey year 1975 only hours last week are reported, so we use
those when available. For individuals who worked during the survey but where hours last
week are not reported we impute average hours worked by calculating the average hours
worked per week in later years by sex and full-time\part-time status (full-time means at
least 35 hours a week).
     Wages and top-coding
We deflate all wages reported in the CPS using the deflator for personal consumption
expenditures from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The reference year is 2000. Hourly
wages are calculated by dividing annual wage income by number of hours worked. The CPS
underestimates the income of individuals who earn very high salaries, due to top-coding of
income. Therefore, the wages that we report may not be accurate for certain occupations,
Securities and Financial Asset Sales in particular. In our sample, the percent of top-coded
observations in the private sector increases from 0.06% in 1967 to 1.1% in 1980, after which
it fluctuates in the range 0.38%-1.6%, due to secular adjustments of the top-coding income
limit. However, in the financial sector there are many more incidents of top-coding: in
Banking, there are on average twice as many top-coded observations, in Insurance there are
on average 2.4 as many top-coded observations, whereas in Other Finance Industries there
are on average 13 times as many top-coded observations. This leads to an under-estimation
of relative wages in the financial sector. In an attempt to compensate for this, we multiply
top-coded incomes in all survey years until 1995 by a factor of 1.75–which is higher than
the traditional factor of 1.4-1.5. From survey years 1996 and on, top-coded incomes are
average amounts of actual earnings for 12 socioeconomic cells; therefore we do not adjust
them.




                                             22
B     Construction of occupation cells
In order to create meaningful, but not-too-small occupation cells, we first tabulated all oc-
cupations in each of the three industries, “Banking and Saving”, “Other Finance Industries”
and “Insurance” separately over time. Merging the industrial classifications for these three
industries over time was relatively straightforward, since changes in industrial classifications
over the years did not result in any significant re-allocation of workers in these sectors. See
description in the text above. The 2-digit occupation classifications did not contain enough
information on some occupations of interest, so the tabulation was done at the 3-digit level
(the most detailed available). Consistent classifications are available within the following
survey year intervals: 1968-71, 1972-82, 1983-2002, 2003-06. For 1968-71, the census 1960
classification was used, for 1972-82 the Census 1970 classification, for 1983-2002 the Census
1980 and 1990 classifications, and for 2003-06 the Census 2000 classification. Census 1980
and 1990 classifications are virtually identical, but there are significant re-allocations of
occupations between the 1970 and 1980 systems, and between the 1990 and 2000 systems.
Since the classifications change from time to time, much eﬀort went into identifying the
relevant classifications across years. This was done by comparing high-frequency occupa-
tions from the tabulation with their headings from the CPS documentation. Then, using
the apparent occupation groups, time series of occupational shares within each industry
were graphed in order to make sure that the groups are consistent across time. Major re-
classifications occurred in survey year 1983 and in survey year 2003; in these cases we checked
the occupational crosswalks from the Census Bureau to make sure that our occupational
groups are consistently identified (Census Bureau (1989), Census Bureau (2003)). Finally,
we defined six occupation groups (henceforth, "occupations"), which concisely describe the
major occupational groups in our sample in a parsimonious way. These are: “Managers
and Professionals”, “Computer and Mathematics”, “Insurance Specialists”, “Securities and
Financial Asset Sales”, “Administration, Including Clerks”, and “All the Rest” (janitors,
security and miscellaneous). Some additional adjustments were done by comparing average
wages and education levels within 3-digit occupation cells to average wages in our occupa-
tional groups. This helped us understand better the nature of some occupational headings
and to hint towards where they belong within our occupational groups. In particular, this
led us to allocate "supervisor-of..." occupations in survey years 1983-2002 into "Managers
and Professionals", since their wages were similar to that group and an order of magnitude
higher than closely-labeled occupations. But we did not allocate "first-line supervisors" in
CPS 2003-06 into that group, as their wages did not conform to the previous rule.
    Managers and Professionals
Managers are quite heterogeneous. They include chief oﬃcers, but also middle manage-
ment, operation managers, financial managers, human resources managers, etc.’. We found
a large range of variation within this group in terms of education. Management-related
occupations are part of the managerial occupation classifications in survey years 1983-2002,
but are mostly allocated to other occupations in the Census 2000 system and 1970 system.
Therefore we allocated managers with professionals in all years. A close examination of
the titles and wages of these occupations justifies this allocation. Professionals are also
quite heterogeneous in terms of occupation titles, but less so in terms of education lev-
els. The most prevalent occupations in this cell are economists, accountants, analysts and
lawyers. Before survey year 1983 bank oﬃcers (presumably, branch managers) are allocated
to the one classification that is relevant for management in this industry: “Bank oﬃcers
and financial managers”. But from 1983 bank managers are allocated to “professional”
classifications. This is evident from the heading of the managerial category that is relevant
for Banking from 1983 and from a sharp drop in the share of managers from 1981 to 1982
(data years), which is commensurate with an increase in the share of professionals. Bank


                                              23
oﬃcers cannot be separately identified before 1983–so we aggregated “managers” and “pro-
fessionals” together as one unit throughout the sample in order to keep a consistent group.
When keeping these two groups separate, the real wages of each group separately seem to
be consistent over time and do not exhibit any jumps due to the change in classification
systems aforementioned. In particular, wages of “professionals” do not jump upward after
1983, when bank oﬃcers are allocated to that group. Managers’ wages are somewhat higher
throughout, and start increasing more after 1985. But the wages of Managers and Profes-
sionals in Banking commove quite closely; this might reflect the relatively tight hierarchical
organizational structure in Banking.
    Computer and Mathematics
This cell is quite homogeneous throughout. Much eﬀort was put into making it consistent
through time. Despite significant variance in distribution across education categories, indi-
viduals in this cell earn relatively similar wages. This indicates that tasks\productivity in
this group do not vary much across education categories. The cell includes computer sci-
entists and systems analysts, computer programmers, software engineers, database admin-
istrators, network and computer systems administrators, etc.’. In addition, it also includes
mathematicians. The cell does not include actuaries and statisticians for the simple reason
that these two occupations appear almost only in Insurance and, therefore, are allocated to
the “professionals” cell.
    Insurance Specialists
This cell includes only Insurance agents, adjusters, examiners, investigators and underwrit-
ers. Almost all observations in this cell come from the Insurance industry, but there is a
significant number of observations in Banking and Saving. “Insurance adjusters, examiners,
and investigators” were split from 2003 CPS into two categories (“Claims adjusters, apprais-
ers, examiners, and investigators” and “Insurance claims and policy processing clerks”). We
re-allocated them together to get a consistent group.
    Securities and Financial Asset Sales
This cell includes stock, bond, commodity and other asset traders, and personal financial
advisors. Almost all observations in this cell come from the Other Finance Industries in-
dustry, but there is a significant–and growing– number of observations in the other two
industries. Before survey year 1971 (i.e., 1968-70) many individuals that would fit in “Secu-
rities and Financial Asset Sales” were actually allocated to broad managerial classifications
and cannot be separated.
    Administration, Including Clerks
This cell is probably the most diverse in terms of education levels and wages. It contains
a large range of diﬀerent occupations that operate in oﬃces, like tellers, clerks, secretaries,
oﬃce assistants–but does not include managers thereof. In the Banking industry this cell
includes a large number of bank tellers. In all industries the cell includes a large number of
secretaries.


C     Construction of Matched CPS
We thank Donghoon Lee for providing us with his methodology. The "Matched CPS" takes
advantage of the fact that households in the CPS are sampled for more than a year, in the
following pattern. Each household that enters the survey at any given month is sampled for
four months, leaves for eight months, and then returns for four more months, after which it
exits. Therefore, theoretically, every household that is surveyed in March of any given year
must have been surveyed in the previous March, or will be surveyed in the next. Of course,
in practice not all individuals get surveyed twice due to survey attrition, non-compliance,
etc.’.


                                              24
    Unfortunately, the CPS does not hold a definitive person ID, by which one could easily
match two observations on the same individual from two consecutive surveys. The following
methodology is used to match observations on the same individual from two consecutive
surveys. We match individual observations from two consecutive surveys by household ID,
their "line" within the household (which is an intra-household identifier), state of residence,
race, sex and year of birth. These are supplemented with a few more identifiers generated
by the CPS (segment number, serial number and a random cluster code). We make sure
that there are only two observations within each cell defined by these identifiers and drop
all other cells.
    Some survey years cannot be matched. Survey year 1968 cannot be matched backwards,
because our sample starts with that survey year. Likewise, survey year 2006 cannot be
matched backwards, because our sample end with that survey year. Other survey years
that cannot be matched for technical reasons are 1971, 1972, 1976, 1985, 1995 and 2001.
Approximately 63% of all observations are actually matched from within survey years that
can be matched.
    Definition of unemployment
Here we give the exact definition of our unemployment indicator. A person would get a
positive indication of unemployment if:

  1. did not work last year and reported: could not find work, looking for work or on layoﬀ.
  2. in survey years 1968-1993 major activity in the week before the survey was looking
     for work.
  3. in survey years 1968-1993 did not work last week due to being laid-oﬀ.
  4. in survey years 1994-2006 reported being on layoﬀ or looking for work.
  5. in survey years 1968-1988 reported reason for working part year was looking for work
     or being unemployed.
  6. reported positive number of weeks looking for work last year.
  7. reported positive number of weeks being unemployed last year.

   Since the sample for our transition regressions includes only people that were not unem-
ployed in the first year they were surveyed, this eventually reduces our sample. Table A
contains the number of observations in the transition regressions for every year that could
be matched.




                                              25
References
Acemoglu, D. (1998): “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Tech-
 nical Change and Wage Inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1055—
 1089.
Autor, D., L. Katz, and A. Krueger (1998): “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
 Changed the Labor Market?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1169—1214.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): “The Polarization of the U.S.
 Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 96(2), 189—194.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2002): “Upstairs, Downstairs: Computers
 and Skills on Two Floors of a Large Bank,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55,
 432—447.
Baumol, W. J. (1967): “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of the
 Urban Crisis,” American Economic Review, 57, 415—426.
Baumol, W. J. (1990): “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 98, 893—921.
Buera, F. J., and J. P. Kaboski (2006): “The Rise of the Service Economy,” Working
 Paper, Northwestern University.
Card, D., and T. Lemieux (2001): “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to
 College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 116(2), 705—746.
Census Bureau (1989): “The Relationship Between The 1970 and 1980 Industry and
 Occupation Classification Systems,” Discussion Paper Technical Paper 59.
        (2003): “The Relationship Between the 1990 Census and Census 2000 Industry
  and Occupation Classification Systems,” Discussion Paper Technical Paper 65.
Deschênes, O. (2006): “Unobserved Ability, Comparative Advantage and the Rising Re-
 turn to Education in the United States 1979-2002,” Working Paper, University of Cali-
 fornia, Santa Barbara.
Kaplan, S. N., and J. Rauh (2007): “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes
 to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?,” NBER Working Paper 13270.
Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
 and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35—78.
Kuznets, S. (1957): “Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations: Industrial
 Distribution of National Product and Labor Force,” Economic Development and Cultural
 Change, 5, 1—111.
Lemieux, T. (2006): “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Eﬀects, Noisy
  Data, or Rising Demand for Skill?,” American Economic Review, 96(3), 461—498.
Miller, M. H. (1986): “Financial Innovation: The Last Twenty Years and the Next,”
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 21(4), 459—471.


                                          26
Mincer, J. (1997): “Changes in Wage Inequality, 1970-1990,” in Research in Labor Eco-
 nomics, ed. by S. W. Polachek, pp. 1—18, London. JAI Press.
Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1991): “The Allocation of Talent:
 Implications for Growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 503—530.
Philippon, T. (2007): “Financiers versus Engineers: Should the Financial Sector Be Taxed
  or Subsidized?,” Working Paper, NYU.
Ruhm, C. J. (1991): “Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?,” The
 American Economic Review, 81(1), 319—324.
Silber, W. L. (1983): “The Process of Financial Innovation,” The American Economic
  Review, 73(2), 89—95.
Stigler, G. J. (1956): “Trends in Employment in the Service Industries,” General Series.
  NBER.
Tufano, P. (2004): “Financial Innovation,” in The Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
 ed. by M. H. George Constantinides, and R. Stulz. North Holland.




                                          27
                      Appendix Table A: Matched CPS Sample
      Year         Matched observations             Year         Matched observations
     1967                   14,318                 1986                  17,441
     1968                   13,683                 1987                  16,568
     1969                   15,004                 1988                  17,555
     1970                      .                   1989                  19,146
     1971                      .                   1990                  18,393
     1972                   9,299                  1991                  17,634
     1973                   13,882                 1992                  13,497
     1974                   8,857                  1993                  12,704
     1975                      .                   1994                      .
     1976                   15,761                 1995                  17,461
     1977                   15,984                 1996                  17,794
     1978                   16,516                 1997                  17,639
     1979                   20,268                 1998                  17,979
     1980                   18,014                 1999                  18,406
     1981                   17,519                 2000                      .
     1982                   16,525                 2001                  25,253
     1983                   16,256                 2002                  25,390
     1984                      .                   2003                  22,162
     1985                   16,899                 2004                  23,498
                                                  TOTAL                  547,305

Notes: This sample takes into account the number of successful matches in the
CPS and the following restrictions. Individuals in the first matched year must be in
the labor force, employed in the private sector; in the second matched year
individuals just need to be in the labor force (not retired, in school full time, etc').
                         Table 1: Classification of Tasks and Industries


                                        Industries in Financial Sector


Banking                                    Banks, thrifts and saving institutions


Insurance                                  Insurance companies


                                           Investment banks, mutual and pension funds, private equity
Rest of Finance
                                           funds, brokers and dealers




                                       Occupations in Financial Sector


                                           Bank officers, financial managers, economists, financial
Managers and professionals
                                           analysts, etc.

                                           Computer scientists and engineers, systems analysts,
Computer and matchematics
                                           programmers, database administrators and mathematicians


Insurance specialists                      Insurance sales agents, actuaries and statisticians


                                           Securities, commodities, and financial services sales agents,
Securities and financial asset sales
                                           and personal financial advisors


Administration                             Clerical jobs and bank tellers


Other                                      Janitors, private security and miscelanous
                                 Table 2: Number of Observations and Employment Shares, by Industry

                Non Financial
                                               Banking                     Other Finance Industries                     Insurance
                Private Sector
Year                 Obs.              Obs.           Empl. Share           Obs.           Empl. Share           Obs.          Empl. Share
1967                56002              1046              0.0181             149              0.0026              1008               0.0173
1968                57229              1039              0.0176             197              0.0033              1001               0.0168
1969                55806              1118              0.0193             227              0.0040              1030               0.0179
1970                56644              1098              0.0188             196              0.0033              1140               0.0195
1971                54208              1049              0.0186             167              0.0030              1121               0.0198
1972                53218              1112              0.0201             190              0.0034              1048               0.0189
1973                53695              1105              0.0198             183              0.0033              1045               0.0187
1974                52654              1217              0.0220             142              0.0026              1056               0.0191
1975                53979              1154              0.0205             154              0.0028              1009               0.0181
1976                65773              1382              0.0203             179              0.0029              1124               0.0171
1977                64855              1394              0.0211             171              0.0028              1128               0.0178
1978                65574              1514              0.0221             185              0.0030              1216               0.0190
1979                77736              1812              0.0228             207              0.0030              1408               0.0185
1980                77096              1919              0.0249             237              0.0035              1452               0.0195
1981                68789              1749              0.0245             267              0.0041              1294               0.0189
1982                67709              1708              0.0244             276              0.0045              1250               0.0186
1983                67173              1732              0.0250             290              0.0045              1293               0.0196
1984                68834              1840              0.0256             361              0.0055              1253               0.0180
1985                67826              1780              0.0254             318              0.0047              1343               0.0193
1986                67575              1798              0.0254             357              0.0054              1275               0.0183
1987                67589              1955              0.0275             408              0.0057              1400               0.0201
1988                63617              1752              0.0266             350              0.0057              1314               0.0201
1989                69460              1923              0.0260             434              0.0062              1474               0.0205
1990                68970              1842              0.0249             344              0.0049              1491               0.0208
1991                68015              1820              0.0246             331              0.0050              1400               0.0204
1992                67035              1746              0.0247             377              0.0059              1286               0.0187
1993                64307              1714              0.0257             363              0.0059              1313               0.0201
1994                64488              1636              0.0239             444              0.0065              1272               0.0190
1995                57499              1357              0.0223             356              0.0062              1164               0.0200
1996                58939              1431              0.0226             369              0.0064              1099               0.0185
1997                58096              1466              0.0237             391              0.0066              1212               0.0204
1998                58670              1490              0.0238             426              0.0076              1178               0.0197
1999                60287              1523              0.0241             487              0.0083              1096               0.0176
2000                57956              1452              0.0235             468              0.0086              1087               0.0190
2001                95774              2436              0.0234             703              0.0078              1806               0.0184
2002                94455              2532              0.0249             812              0.0079              1803               0.0190
2003                92403              2490              0.0255             700              0.0077              1853               0.0198
2004                90753              2435              0.0254             706              0.0081              1816               0.0196
2005                90427              2396              0.0249             745              0.0087              1659               0.0173

Notes: Obs. is the number of observations in the March CPS of the following year (data for 2005 is collected in the CPS of March 2006).
Employment share is the share in total private sector employment, in terms of full-time equivalents, computed using the CPS weight to obtain a
representative sample.
                                                                     Table 3: Number of Observations and Employment Shares, by Occupation
Occupation       Managers & Professionals          Computer & Mathematics              Insurance Specialists          Securities and Asset Sales         Administration and Clerks                  Others
year               Obs.         Empl. Share          Obs.         Empl. Share          Obs.         Empl. Share          Obs.         Empl. Share          Obs.         Empl. Share          Obs.         Empl. Share
1967                554             0.252              .                .              278             0.127              12             0.006             1272            0.576              87             0.039
1968                534             0.238              .                .              274             0.122               5             0.002             1363            0.609              61             0.028
1969                561             0.232              .                .              230             0.095              15             0.006             1486            0.630              83             0.036
1970                527             0.217             27              0.011            362             0.147              66             0.026             1382            0.571              70             0.027
1971                483             0.206             25              0.011            334             0.141              59             0.025             1361            0.585              75             0.032
1972                513             0.217             18              0.008            335             0.142              65             0.027             1349            0.576              70             0.030
1973                544             0.232             30              0.013            318             0.136              74             0.032             1293            0.556              74             0.032
1974                540             0.224             29              0.012            331             0.138              50             0.020             1390            0.575              75             0.031
1975                539             0.235             29              0.012            288             0.126              48             0.020             1335            0.574              78             0.033
1976                662             0.242             20              0.009            316             0.117              52             0.021             1554            0.577              81             0.034
1977                680             0.253             32              0.012            324             0.119              63             0.026             1526            0.565              68             0.025
1978                722             0.242             35              0.013            316             0.109              64             0.024             1698            0.582              80             0.029
1979                800             0.235             48              0.015            349             0.101              67             0.023             2068            0.597              95             0.028
1980                919             0.248             38              0.012            388             0.106              90             0.028             2066            0.577             107             0.030
1981                794             0.243             54              0.017            346             0.104             123             0.041             1898            0.564              95             0.032
1982                860             0.271             51              0.017            306             0.090             116             0.040             1765            0.541             136             0.041
1983                971             0.297             65              0.021            289             0.086             117             0.034             1747            0.520             126             0.043
1984                976             0.287             60              0.017            273             0.078             161             0.050             1866            0.537             118             0.032
1985                986             0.283             60              0.016            310             0.090             141             0.042             1830            0.535             114             0.033
1986                998             0.296             65              0.020            286             0.080             160             0.048             1814            0.523             107             0.034
1987               1110             0.294             81              0.023            295             0.075             198             0.054             1950            0.519             129             0.035
1988               1126             0.328             76              0.024            281             0.082             167             0.051             1666            0.485             100             0.030
1989               1222             0.320             94              0.026            337             0.092             158             0.042             1897            0.487             123             0.033
1990               1157             0.309             90              0.026            304             0.085             157             0.045             1868            0.510             101             0.026
1991               1130             0.313             71              0.022            291             0.082             155             0.047             1778            0.501             126             0.035
1992               1147             0.339             84              0.026            287             0.087             150             0.049             1645            0.471              96             0.028
1993               1171             0.346             97              0.027            279             0.081             166             0.054             1578            0.460              99             0.032
1994               1170             0.342             107             0.031            261             0.080             192             0.059             1520            0.457             102             0.031
1995                995             0.344             81              0.029            264             0.094             171             0.061             1272            0.437              94             0.034
1996               1034             0.358             87              0.032            240             0.087             188             0.068             1273            0.431              77             0.025
1997               1105             0.363             83              0.027            261             0.083             188             0.064             1339            0.435              93             0.028
1998               1200             0.398             95              0.032            243             0.076             198             0.068             1263            0.398              95             0.028
1999               1166             0.377             103             0.035            218             0.067             229             0.075             1289            0.413             101             0.033
2000               1100             0.368             106             0.040            252             0.087             210             0.076             1237            0.396             102             0.033
2001               1885             0.388             157             0.030            347             0.076             358             0.078             2036            0.396             162             0.032
2002               2162             0.417             227             0.045            341             0.079             400             0.077             1830            0.347             187             0.035
2003               2098             0.410             270             0.055            363             0.072             393             0.084             1790            0.353             129             0.027
2004               2065             0.408             297             0.058            322             0.069             401             0.088             1729            0.350             143             0.027
2005               2081             0.431             247             0.049            282             0.057             394             0.090             1660            0.343             136             0.030
Notes: Obs. is the number of observations in the March CPS of the following year (data for 2005 is collected in the CPS of March 2006). Employment share is the share of employment in Finance and Insurance, in terms of
full-time equivalents, computed using the CPS weight to obtain representative sample.
                                                                          Table 4: Relative Wages in the Financial Sector, Controlling for Education

Sample                             1967-1970                    71-75                     76-80                     81-85                    86-90                     91-95                     96-00                  2001-2005

Finance                              0.03488                   0.0331                   0.04335                    0.0664                   0.12681                   0.14797                   0.17433                  0.19897

                                    [0.00489]                 [0.00468]                 [0.00404]                [0.00406]                 [0.00416]                 [0.00442]                 [0.00472]                 [0.00378]

White                                0.2011                    0.15176                  0.10651                   0.11517                   0.10216                   0.08509                   0.06909                  0.07165

                                    [0.00371]                 [0.00354]                 [0.00295]                [0.00300]                 [0.00304]                 [0.00305]                 [0.00316]                 [0.00232]

Male                                 0.45759                   0.4609                   0.45297                   0.40061                   0.36272                   0.31803                   0.31979                  0.31526

                                    [0.00245]                 [0.00231]                 [0.00191]                [0.00197]                 [0.00203]                 [0.00210]                 [0.00220]                 [0.00180]

Married                              0.08004                   0.08278                  0.07528                   0.06951                    0.0844                   0.09803                   0.10024                  0.11465

                                    [0.00275]                 [0.00257]                 [0.00209]                [0.00214]                 [0.00218]                 [0.00226]                 [0.00236]                 [0.00196]

Urban                                0.02579                   0.01872                  0.01531                   0.01601                   0.02032                   0.01204                   0.00482                  0.00167

                                    [0.00227]                 [0.00225]                 [0.00210]                [0.00222]                 [0.00235]                 [0.00248]                 [0.00256]                 [0.00214]

Potential Experience                 0.02751                   0.03475                  0.03525                   0.03612                   0.03674                   0.03551                   0.03148                  0.03207

                                    [0.00030]                 [0.00029]                 [0.00026]                [0.00029]                 [0.00030]                 [0.00031]                 [0.00032]                 [0.00027]

(Potential Experience)2             -0.00047                   -0.0006                  -0.00058                  -0.00058                  -0.00058                 -0.00054                  -0.00048                  -0.00051

                                    [0.00001]                 [0.00001]                 [0.00001]                [0.00001]                 [0.00001]                 [0.00001]                 [0.00001]                 [0.00001]

Edu = 12 Years                       0.1879                    0.19456                  0.22173                   0.24228                   0.24929                   0.27398                   0.29507                  0.28956

                                    [0.00252]                 [0.00263]                 [0.00248]                [0.00287]                 [0.00318]                 [0.00378]                 [0.00399]                 [0.00343]

13 ≤ Edu ≤ 15 Years                  0.32265                   0.33139                  0.35047                   0.39876                   0.43382                   0.46178                   0.48386                  0.48714

                                    [0.00349]                 [0.00340]                 [0.00297]                [0.00330]                 [0.00355]                 [0.00392]                 [0.00409]                 [0.00348]

16 ≤ Edu ≤ 17 Years                  0.54919                   0.55736                   0.5582                   0.62896                   0.70424                   0.77204                   0.80378                  0.81657

                                    [0.00367]                 [0.00355]                 [0.00313]                [0.00340]                 [0.00366]                 [0.00417]                 [0.00432]                 [0.00364]

Edu ≥ 18 Years                       0.66503                   0.69095                  0.73268                   0.81891                   0.90028                   1.02087                   1.07548                  1.10141

                                    [0.00554]                 [0.00502]                 [0.00414]                [0.00422]                 [0.00442]                 [0.00474]                 [0.00495]                 [0.00408]

Obs                                  130608                    157919                    226316                    227449                   242399                    233500                    223906                    358991
    2
R                                      0.41                      0.41                      0.4                      0.38                      0.36                      0.36                      0.35                     0.35

Notes: Dependent variable is log of annual wage earnings. The sample includes only full-time-full-year workers (at least 40 week per year, at least 35 hours per week on average). Finance is a dummy for the financial sector. Married is a
dummy variable for individuals who are married and not separated. Urban is a dummy variable for individuals who live in an MSA (Census metropolitan statistical area) in a central city (until 2003) or in a principal city (after 2004).
Potential Experience is calculated as min{age-years of school-6 , age-18}. The control group for education consists of individuals with 11 years of schooling or less. Edu = 12 Years is a dummy variable for individuals who have exactly 12
years of education. 13 ≤ Edu ≤ 15 Years is a dummy variable for individuals who have between 13 and 15 years of education, and so on. Each column reports the estimates over a 5-year period (the first column has only 4 years). All
regressions include intra-period year dummies, which are not reported. Standard errors in brackets. Data: March CPS.
                                                                                Table 5: Relative Wages in the Financial Sector, within Education Groups.

Sample                                 1967-1970                     71-75                      76-80                      81-85                      86-90                       91-95                      96-00                   2001-2005

Edu = 12 Years                          0.18853                     0.1955                     0.22368                    0.24424                    0.25149                    0.27573                    0.29691                     0.2906

                                       [0.00256]                   [0.00266]                  [0.00251]                  [0.00290]                  [0.00322]                   [0.00384]                  [0.00405]                  [0.00349]

13 ≤ Edu ≤ 15 Years                     0.32546                    0.33374                     0.35388                    0.40447                    0.43916                    0.46631                    0.48917                     0.49213

                                       [0.00358]                   [0.00348]                  [0.00303]                  [0.00337]                  [0.00361]                   [0.00398]                  [0.00416]                  [0.00355]

Edu ≥ 16 Years                          0.58276                    0.59595                     0.60807                    0.68784                    0.76601                    0.85787                     0.8948                     0.91506

                                       [0.00338]                   [0.00330]                  [0.00292]                  [0.00321]                  [0.00348]                   [0.00399]                  [0.00415]                  [0.00353]

Edu = 12 in Finance                     -0.04836                    -0.0547                    -0.0801                    -0.1155                    -0.12357                   -0.13635                   -0.18547                   -0.16013

                                       [0.01688]                   [0.01985]                  [0.02145]                  [0.02489]                  [0.02927]                   [0.04261]                  [0.04400]                  [0.03634]

Edu 13 to 15 in Finance                 -0.07921                   -0.07406                   -0.09739                   -0.16074                    -0.15938                   -0.16379                    -0.225                    -0.21525

                                       [0.01883]                   [0.02113]                  [0.02222]                  [0.02543]                  [0.02968]                   [0.04262]                  [0.04386]                  [0.03615]

Edu ≥ 16 in Finance                     -0.10067                   -0.07981                    -0.0334                    -0.0934                    -0.09439                   -0.11884                    -0.1677                   -0.15747

                                       [0.01910]                   [0.02103]                  [0.02215]                  [0.02523]                  [0.02943]                   [0.04252]                  [0.04373]                  [0.03600]

Finance                                 0.09271                    0.09114                     0.10731                    0.17751                    0.24032                    0.27375                    0.34998                     0.35888

                                       [0.01546]                   [0.01869]                  [0.02064]                  [0.02411]                  [0.02853]                   [0.04188]                  [0.04307]                  [0.03552]

White                                   0.20103                    0.15202                     0.10718                    0.11644                    0.10307                    0.08652                    0.06985                     0.07189

                                       [0.00371]                   [0.00355]                  [0.00296]                  [0.00302]                  [0.00305]                   [0.00307]                  [0.00319]                  [0.00234]

Male                                    0.45996                    0.46358                     0.45488                    0.40291                    0.36464                    0.31975                    0.32069                     0.31596

                                       [0.00246]                   [0.00232]                  [0.00192]                  [0.00198]                  [0.00204]                   [0.00213]                  [0.00223]                  [0.00183]

Married                                 0.07973                     0.0826                     0.07515                    0.07027                    0.08514                    0.10018                    0.10339                     0.1186

                                       [0.00276]                   [0.00257]                  [0.00210]                  [0.00214]                  [0.00219]                   [0.00228]                  [0.00238]                  [0.00198]

Urban                                   0.02597                    0.01932                     0.0162                     0.01708                    0.02207                    0.01459                    0.00838                     0.0052

                                       [0.00228]                   [0.00225]                  [0.00211]                  [0.00223]                  [0.00236]                   [0.00250]                  [0.00258]                  [0.00216]

Potential Experience                     0.0277                      0.035                     0.03568                    0.03683                    0.03759                     0.0368                    0.03252                     0.03288

                                       [0.00030]                   [0.00029]                  [0.00026]                  [0.00029]                  [0.00030]                   [0.00031]                  [0.00033]                  [0.00027]

(Potential Experience) 2                -0.00048                    -0.0006                   -0.00059                   -0.00059                    -0.00059                   -0.00057                    -0.0005                   -0.00052

                                       [0.00001]                   [0.00001]                  [0.00001]                  [0.00001]                  [0.00001]                   [0.00001]                  [0.00001]                  [0.00001]

Obs                                      130608                     157919                     226316                     227449                     242399                      233500                     223906                     358991
 2
R                                         0.41                        0.4                        0.39                       0.37                       0.35                       0.34                        0.34                       0.34
Notes: Dependent variable is log of annual wage earnings. The sample includes only full-time-full-year workers (at least 40 week per year, at least 35 hours per week on average). Finance is a dummy for the financial sector. Married is a
dummy variable for individuals who are married and not separated. Urban is a dummy variable for individuals who live in an MSA (Census metropolitan statistical area) in a central city (until 2003) or in a principal city (after 2004). Potential
Experience is calculated as min{age-years of school-6 , age-18}. The control group for education consists of individuals with 11 years of schooling or less. Edu = 12 Years is a dummy variable for individuals who have exactly 12 years of
education. 13 ≤ Edu ≤ 15 Years is a dummy variable for individuals who have between 13 and 15 years of education, and so on. “Edu… in Finance” are dummies that take the value one for individuals who have the same educational
attainment as above, but who also work in the Finance and Insurance sector. Each column reports the estimates over a 5-year period (the first column has only 4 years). All regressions include intra-period year dummies, which are not
reported. Standard errors in brackets. Data: March CPS.
                                                                                                     Table 6: Unemployment Risk

Sample                               1967-1970                   71-75                     76-80                     81-85                     86-90                     91-95                     96-00                   2001-2005

Finance                               -0.55163                  -0.48595                  -0.51157                  -0.39715                  -0.22957                  -0.09342                  -0.19605                  -0.13666

                                     [0.12997]                 [0.12223]                 [0.07282]                 [0.07669]                 [0.06556]                 [0.08058]                 [0.08940]                 [0.07263]

Full Time                             -0.6888                   -0.64956                  -0.6678                   -0.6518                   -0.71851                  -0.72143                  -0.73918                  -0.75474

                                     [0.04573]                 [0.04682]                 [0.02845]                 [0.03383]                 [0.03106]                 [0.04054]                 [0.04194]                 [0.03700]

White                                 -0.24414                  -0.26895                  -0.27827                  -0.25777                  -0.24927                  -0.11512                  -0.23705                  -0.22088

                                     [0.06493]                 [0.06572]                 [0.03952]                 [0.04450]                 [0.04011]                 [0.05084]                 [0.05044]                 [0.04001]

Male                                  0.13284                   0.09335                   0.12484                   0.26709                   0.17983                   0.20923                   0.18362                   0.25813

                                     [0.04322]                 [0.04265]                 [0.02592]                 [0.02935]                 [0.02695]                 [0.03431]                 [0.03553]                 [0.02994]

Married                               -0.28398                  -0.15524                  -0.26885                  -0.20554                  -0.22744                  -0.30026                  -0.41706                  -0.41784

                                     [0.04705]                 [0.04754]                 [0.02832]                 [0.03198]                 [0.02939]                 [0.03695]                 [0.03797]                 [0.03198]

Urban                                 0.05337                   0.03043                   0.02159                   0.06543                    0.0692                   0.10191                    0.0425                    0.0438

                                     [0.04457]                 [0.04612]                 [0.03039]                 [0.03445]                 [0.03282]                 [0.04120]                 [0.04222]                 [0.03635]

Potential Experience                  -0.01853                  -0.02353                  -0.02637                  -0.02288                  -0.01941                  -0.0192                   -0.01406                  -0.01132

                                     [0.00157]                 [0.00161]                 [0.00103]                 [0.00118]                 [0.00112]                 [0.00144]                 [0.00147]                 [0.00125]

Edu = 12 Years                        -0.3306                   -0.32743                  -0.28063                  -0.2161                   -0.23232                  -0.21526                  -0.19161                  -0.13053

                                     [0.04565]                 [0.04790]                 [0.03064]                 [0.03648]                 [0.03552]                 [0.05014]                 [0.05219]                 [0.04630]

13 ≤ Edu ≤ 15 Years                   -0.51242                  -0.45212                  -0.48243                  -0.53541                  -0.49445                  -0.44932                  -0.35927                  -0.28709

                                     [0.06535]                 [0.06228]                 [0.03793]                 [0.04415]                 [0.04126]                 [0.05229]                 [0.05351]                 [0.04684]

16 ≤ Edu ≤ 17 Years                   -1.39368                  -1.07073                  -0.93185                  -1.02105                  -0.85484                  -0.8367                   -0.72462                  -0.63434

                                     [0.10816]                 [0.08563]                 [0.04866]                 [0.05451]                 [0.04919]                 [0.06437]                 [0.06470]                 [0.05513]

Edu ≥ 18 Years                        -1.28817                  -1.61834                  -1.56246                  -1.57639                  -1.14617                  -1.12689                  -1.1033                   -0.98919

                                     [0.17475]                 [0.17126]                 [0.09090]                 [0.09203]                 [0.07164]                 [0.08757]                 [0.09209]                 [0.07332]

Obs                                    43005                     32038                     86543                     67199                     89103                     61296                     71818                     96303


Notes: Logit regressions for individuals employed in the private sector at time t. Dependent variable is 1 if individual is unemployed at time t+1 (see appendix for exact definition of unemployed) and zero otherwise. Finance is a dummy
variable for the financial sector. Married is a dummy variable for individuals who are married and not separated. Urban is a dummy variable for individuals who live in an MSA (Census metropolitan statistical area) in a central city (until
2003) or in a principal city (after 2004). Potential Experience is calculated as min{age-years of school-6 , age-18}. The control group for education consists of individuals with 11 years of schooling or less. Edu = 12 Years is a dummy
variable for individuals who have exactly 12 years of education. 13≤ Edu ≤ 15 Years is a dummy variable for individuals who have between 13 and 15 years of education, and so on. Each column reports the estimates over a 5-year perio
(the first column has only 4 years). All regressions include intra-period year dummies, which are not reported. Standard errors in brackets. Data: March CPS.
                                                                                     Table 7: Unemployment Risk, Controlling for Current Wage

Sample                                1967-1970                    71-75                      76-80                     81-85                      86-90                      91-95                     96-00                   2001-2005

Bottom Third in Finance                -0.58205                   -0.60036                   -0.41412                  -0.44401                    -0.2858                   -0.14351                  -0.41276                   -0.22189

                                       [0.18298]                  [0.18757]                 [0.10070]                  [0.11799]                  [0.10623]                 [0.13066]                  [0.16468]                  [0.13544]

Middle Third in Finance                -0.59635                   -0.47248                   -0.56554                  -0.36725                   -0.20259                   -0.17626                   0.03301                   0.00476

                                       [0.22593]                  [0.19836]                 [0.12501]                  [0.12536]                  [0.10422]                 [0.13548]                  [0.13380]                  [0.11694]

Top Third in Finance                   -0.78108                   -0.63339                   -0.95786                  -0.55203                   -0.28899                   0.09347                   -0.26708                   -0.14711

                                       [0.30781]                  [0.26623]                 [0.19315]                  [0.16383]                  [0.13484]                 [0.15288]                  [0.17358]                  [0.12580]

Middle Third                           -0.23101                   -0.27866                   -0.37775                  -0.40952                   -0.32161                   -0.45454                  -0.33456                   -0.36635

                                       [0.05508]                  [0.05584]                 [0.03366]                  [0.03771]                  [0.03423]                 [0.04278]                  [0.04464]                  [0.03748]

Top Third                              -0.74294                   -0.71106                   -0.78857                  -0.75884                   -0.79157                   -0.94773                  -0.74116                   -0.68784

                                       [0.06744]                  [0.06835]                 [0.04078]                  [0.04364]                  [0.04084]                 [0.05206]                  [0.05249]                  [0.04305]

Full Time                              -0.58853                   -0.55453                   -0.52187                   -0.4902                   -0.57371                   -0.52462                  -0.59959                   -0.61395

                                       [0.04989]                  [0.05143]                 [0.03085]                  [0.03617]                  [0.03294]                 [0.04212]                  [0.04350]                  [0.03789]

White                                  -0.24765                    -0.2891                   -0.28991                  -0.25684                   -0.24805                   -0.09657                  -0.22218                   -0.19959

                                       [0.06480]                  [0.06529]                 [0.03939]                  [0.04430]                  [0.04000]                 [0.05083]                  [0.05036]                  [0.03997]

Male                                    0.37533                   0.31184                    0.35865                    0.46078                    0.3633                    0.39333                    0.33302                   0.40178

                                       [0.04565]                  [0.04539]                 [0.02755]                  [0.03083]                  [0.02786]                 [0.03515]                  [0.03622]                  [0.03057]

Married                                -0.24677                   -0.16369                   -0.25301                  -0.20331                   -0.22019                   -0.26551                  -0.40752                   -0.41649

                                       [0.04746]                  [0.04747]                 [0.02840]                  [0.03197]                  [0.02933]                 [0.03707]                  [0.03796]                  [0.03193]

Urban                                   0.04582                   0.00895                    0.01026                    0.04839                    0.0555                    0.08867                    0.02174                   0.02524

                                       [0.04448]                  [0.04592]                 [0.03029]                  [0.03428]                  [0.03271]                 [0.04113]                  [0.04210]                  [0.03627]

Potential Experience                   -0.01259                   -0.01644                   -0.0197                   -0.01569                   -0.01427                   -0.01376                  -0.01079                   -0.00824

                                       [0.00150]                  [0.00153]                 [0.00099]                  [0.00114]                  [0.00109]                 [0.00139]                  [0.00143]                  [0.00122]

Obs                                      43005                     32038                      86543                      67199                     89103                      61296                      71818                     96303


Notes: Logit regressions for individuals employed in the private sector at time t. Dependent variable is 1 if individual is unemployed at time t+1 (see appendix for exact definition of unemployed) and zero otherwise. Three dummies
characterizing the position of the individual in the overall wage distribution (bottom, median and top third) are interacted with a dummy for the financial sector. The control group for education consists of individuals in the bottom third of the
wage distribution and who work outside the financial sector. Married is a dummy variable for individuals who are married and not separated. Urban is a dummy variable for individuals who live in an MSA (Census metropolitan statistical
area) in a central city (until 2003) or in a principal city (after 2004). Potential Experience is calculated as min{age-years of school-6 , age-18}. Each column reports the estimates over a 5-year period (the first column has only 4 years). All
regressions include intra-period year dummies, which are not reported. Standard errors in brackets. Data: March CPS.
                                                   Figure 1: The Growth of the Financial Sector

  0.09



  0.08



  0.07



  0.06



  0.05



  0.04



  0.03



  0.02



  0.01



     0
         1947   1950   1953     1956    1959    1962     1965    1968    1971     1974    1977    1980     1983    1986    1989     1992    1995    1998     2001    2004

                                                            GDP Share        Compensation Share          Employment Share




Notes: Finance includes Insurance but excludes Real Estate. Value added share is the nominal value added of the financial sector divided by the nominal GDP of the U.S.
Employment includes full-time and part-time employees. Data: Annual Industrial Accounts, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
                                                             Figure 2: Evolution of Industries


                        Share of Private Hours Worked                                                        Share of Private Labor Income




                                                                                          .04
      .03




                                                                                          .03
      .02




                                                                                          .02
      .01




                                                                                          .01
      0




                                                                                          0
               1970              1980              1990              2000                           1970              1980              1990              2000

                            Banking                          Other Finance                                      Banking                           Other Finance
                            Insurance                                                                           Insurance



Notes: Share of Private Hours Worked is the number of hours worked in the sector divided by the total number of hours worked in the entire private sector. Share of Private
Labor Income is the sum of annual wages paid to employees of the financial sector divided by the sum of annual wages in the entire private sector. Hours and wages are
weighted using sampling weights. Data: March CPS.
                                               Figure 3: Relative Wages and Education in Financial Sector


                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                   Difference in College Graduate Share
    Percent-Difference in Hourly Wage




                                                                                                                                                                                               .15
                     .3          .4




                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
         .2




                                                                                                                                                                         .05
                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                        1970     1975         1980              1985               1990              1995              2000              2005

                                                     Relative Wage                                         Relative Education


Notes: Relative Wage is the percentage difference in average hourly wages between employees in the financial sector and employees in the rest of the (private) economy.
Relative Education is the share of hours worked in the financial sector accounted for by employees with at least a college degree, minus the corresponding share in the rest of
the private sector. Data: March CPS.
                                             Figure 4: College Graduates and Education Intensity


      .8     Share of Hours Worked by College Graduates                                                  Relative Normalized Education Intensity




                                                                                             1.8
                                                                                             1.6
      .6




                                                                                             1.4
      .4




                                                                                             1.2
      .2




                                                                                             1
                                                                                             .8
      0




                1970              1980               1990              2000                            1970               1980              1990              2000

                             Banking                           Other Finance                                        Banking                           Other Finance
                             Insurance                         Non Fin.                                             Insurance




Notes: Share of Hours Worked by College Graduates is the share of hours worked in the sector accounted for by employees with at least a college degree. Relative
Normalized Education Intensity is the ratio of high skilled hours over low skilled hours in the particular sector, divided by the same ratio in the rest of the private sector. The
measure is normalized so that it has a mean of one over the first five years of the sample. Hours and wages are weighted using sampling weights. Data: March CPS.
                                      Figure 5: Hour-Shares of Occupations in the Financial Sector

      .6




                                                                                          .1
                                                                                          .08
      .5




                                                                                          .06
      .4




                                                                                          .04
      .3




                                                                                          .02
      .2




                                                                                          0


               1970              1980              1990             2000                           1970              1980             1990              2000

                                   Managers & Professionals                                                                 Computers & Math.
                                   Clerks & Administrative                                                                  Securities & Assets



Notes: Hours worked by employees in a given occupation divided by total hours worked in the financial sector. Hours and wages are weighted using sampling weights. Data:
March CPS.
                                           Figure 6: Annual Income of Engineers and Financiers


                                 College Graduates                                                           Post Graduates




                                                                                         120000
      80000




                                                                                         100000
      70000




                                                                                         80000
      60000
      50000




                                                                                         60000
      40000




                                                                                         40000




               1970              1980             1990              2000                          1970     1980       1990      2000

                              Financier                          Engineer                                Financier            Engineer



Notes: All wages are in 2001 U.S. dollars and are weighted using sampling weights. Data: March CPS.
                             Figure 7: Finance Wage Premium, with and without Education Controls

    .3
    .2
    .1
    0




         67-70                 71-75                 76-80                 81-85                86-90                 91-95                 96-00                 01-05

                                           Basic Controls                                         Basic and Education Controls


Notes: Coefficient of Finance dummy and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of log annual wages over individual characteristics. Basic controls include race, sex,
marital status, urban residence, potential experience and its square. Education controls are dummies for education groups: 12 years of education, 13 to 15 years, 16 to 17
years, and 18 years or more. Data: March CPS.
                             Figure 8: Wage Premia in Finance Industries, Controlling for Education

    .5
    .4
    .3
    .2
    .1
    0




         67-70                 71-75                 76-80                81-85                 86-90                 91-95                96-00                 01-05

                                  Banking                                 Insurance                                   Other Finance Industries


Notes: Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for sector dummies in regression of log annual wages over individual characteristics. Controls include race, sex, marital
status, urban residence, potential experience and its square. Education controls are dummies for education groups: 12 years of education, 13 to 15 years, 16 to 17 years, and
18 years or more. Data: March CPS.
                                           Figure 9: Wage Premia in Finance, by Education Groups

     1.2
     1
     .8
     .6
     .4
     .2




           1968                  1973                  1978                   1983                  1988                  1993                   1998                  2003

                                          College Graduate                                               College Graduate in Finance
                                          High School                                                    High School in Finance


Notes: Coefficients of dummies interacted with education, from regressions of annual log wage on individual characteristics, Controls include race, sex, marital status, urban
residence, potential experience and its square. Data: March CPS.
                                      Figure 10: Relative Unemployment Risk in Financial Sector


     0
     -.01
     -.02
     -.03
     -.04




            67-70              71-75                76-80                 81-85                86-90                91-95                 96-00                01-05


Notes: Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of Finance dummy in logit regression of transition from Employment to Unemployment. Controls include current log wage,
race, sex, marital status, urban residence, potential experience and its square. Education controls are dummies for education groups: 12 years of education, 13 to 15 years,
16 to 17 years, and 18 years or more. Data: March CPS.
                  Figure 11: Relative Unemployment Risk in Financial Sector, sorted by Current Wage


    0
    -.02
    -.04




           67-70               71-75                  76-80                 81-85                  86-90                 91-95                  96-00                  01-05

                                  0-34th Centile                                     34-67th Centile                                       67-100th Centile


Notes: Coefficients for position in the wage distribution in logit regression of transition from employment to unemployment. Controls include current log wage, race, sex,
marital status, urban residence, potential experience and its square, as well as the position of the individual in the current income distribution: bottom third, middle third or
top third. Data: March CPS.
