                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TEMPORARY HELP AGENCIES AND THE ADVANCEMENT PROSPECTS OF
                            LOW EARNERS

                                          Fredrik Andersson
                                           Harry J. Holzer
                                              Julia Lane

                                         Working Paper 13434
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13434


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




This paper was prepared for the NBER Labor Market Intermediation Conference, May 17-18, 2007.
We thank David Autor, Yukako Ono and other conference participants for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Fredrik Andersson, Harry J. Holzer, and Julia Lane. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Temporary Help Agencies and the Advancement Prospects of Low Earners
Fredrik Andersson, Harry J. Holzer, and Julia Lane
NBER Working Paper No. 13434
September 2007
JEL No. J31,J6,J62,J68

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper we use a very large matched database on firms and employees to analyze the use of temporary
agencies by low earners, and to estimate the impact of temp employment on subsequent employment
outcomes for these workers. Our results show that, while temp workers have lower earnings than
others while working at these agencies, their subsequent earnings are often higher - but only if they
manage to gain stable work with other employers. Furthermore, the positive effects seem mostly to
occur because those working for temp agencies subsequently gain access to higher-wage firms than
do comparable low earners who do not work for temps. The positive effects we find seem to persist
for up to six years beyond the period during which the temp employment occurred.

Fredrik Andersson                                   Julia Lane
Cornell University                                  University of Chicago - NORC
and U.S. Census Bureau                              Suite 2000
4700 Silver Hill Rd, MS 8400                        55 E Monroe
Washington, DC 20233-8400                           Chicago IL 60603
Fredrik.Andersson@census.gov                        lane-julia@norc.uchicago.edu

Harry J. Holzer
Georgetown University
3520 Prospect Street NW,4th Floor
Washington, DC 20007
hjh4@georgetown.edu
I. Introduction

       Do labor market intermediaries in general, and “temp” agencies in particular, help

unskilled workers with limited work experience transition to more stable and higher wage

jobs? Earlier research on the impact of temporary help agencies for this population was

generally positive. However, recent research by Autor and Houseman (2005, 2007), using

data from a random assignment experiment, has raised questions about the robustness of

the early research, and especially on whether any positive effects of temp agency

employment persist over the longer run. Other researchers have continued to find positive

effects for low earners of temp employment, among other efforts by a range of labor

market “intermediaries” such as unions and various not-for-profit placement agencies.

       In this paper we contribute to the ongoing discussion about temp agencies and

low-wage workers in a number of ways. We do this by using a very large scale matched

database on firms and employees that enables us to establish a broad set of facts about the

workers who use temp agencies, and the firms to which they transition. The dataset has

several key features that we use throughout the study. The first of these is that it is

longitudinal in both firms and workers. A second key feature is that we estimated fixed

personal characteristics that are unobserved in many studies. We also directly estimate

the premium (or discount) that different firms pay observationally equivalent workers.

       Our analysis begins by estimating the impact of temp employment for initially

low earners on their subsequent earnings. We then examine whether workers who work

for temp agencies eventually transition to firms that pay higher wage premia than do

workers who find firms on their own. This is followed by a consideration of the extent to

which these firm characteristics can account for any observed improvements in the




                                              1
earnings of these workers. Finally, we examine the long-term stability of the employment

and earnings outcomes for low-wage workers engaged in temp work, relative to those

who are not.



II. Previous Literature

         The fact that the temporary help industry generates substantial employment for

workers in the low-wage labor market has been well documented (Autor and Houseman

2002). But its impact on the employment outcomes of these workers, however, is not

clear a priori. On the one hand, temp agencies might provide a productive stepping stone

on the path to more stable employment, both by reducing search time and imparting

useful job skills. On the other hand, they might be seen as part of a “secondary” labor

market in which low-wage workers churn from bad job to bad job.

         Why might temp agencies have positive effects? A body of earlier work strongly

suggests that the characteristics of firms and jobs, independently of worker skills, affect

the labor market outcomes of less-skilled workers (Abowd et al., 1999; Holzer et al.,

2004).1 And various groups of less-skilled workers, especially minorities, might have less

access on their own to stable employment and higher-wage jobs. For example, these

workers might lack the informal networks and contacts that are often necessary to gain

such employment (Holzer, 1987; Ioannides and Loury, 2004); or they might lack the

transportation and information needed to overcome “spatial mismatch” between their

residential locations (particularly in inner-city neighborhoods or rural areas) and the more

suburbanized locations of better jobs (Holzer, 1991; Kain, 1992; Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist,

1
  This notion, of course, has been heavily debated for decades in the labor economics literature – especially
in discussions over “dual labor markets” and “efficiency wages.” See Katz (1987) and Rebitzer (1993) for
thoughtful reviews on these issues. For an earlier treatment of this topic see Dunlop (1957).


                                                      2
1998). On the latter issue, Andersson et al. (2005) also show that employers paying

higher wage premia tend to locate further away from the residential areas inhabited for

low-wage workers than do other employers, further suggesting some geographic

mismatch between less-skilled workers and higher-wage job opportunities.

       But do “temp” agencies” help less-skilled workers overcome these geographic

and informational gaps, thus improving their employment opportunities? Does the

general skills training that they often provide these workers (Autor, 2001) perhaps

contribute to their opportunities as well?

       Initial empirical research based on both survey and administrative data provided

some evidence that temp agencies were providing pathways to more stable employment.

Lane et al. (2003) applied matched propensity score techniques to data from the Survey

of Income and Program Participation and concluded that spells in temp agency

employment improved labor market outcomes relative to spells of unemployment.

Heinrich, Mueser and Troske (2005) came to similar conclusions.

       In a more broadranging study using the same dataset used in this paper,

Andersson, Holzer and Lane (2005) found that low earners employed by temporary help

services who subsequently changed firms were more likely to exit their low-earning

status than were low earners not working for temps; while those who stayed with the

temporary help firms had much lower chances of improving their earnings status. This

was true even after controlling for person fixed effects, and a variety of observable

worker characteristics. Furthermore, the research suggested that the positive impacts of

earlier temp employment were largely accounted for by the characteristics of the firms in

which they were subsequently employed This suggested that temp agencies seemed to




                                             3
offer low earners better access to other higher-wage firms, rather than higher-wage

employment while at the agency.

       More recent work continues to show positive effects. For instance, Benner et al.

(2007) examined survey data on employers and workers in Milwaukee and Silicon Valley

who used temp agencies, and a variety of not-for-profit intermediaries, to help fill job

vacancies. Like Andersson et al., they find that workers who used temp agencies to find

employment had higher earnings in subsequent jobs - though this seemed more due to

higher hours worked than higher wages. Some other types of intermediaries – including

community colleges, labor unions, and other not-for-profit agencies - seemed to generate

higher wages as well as hours worked in subsequent jobs. A large number of European

studies have similar positive findings (see Ichino et al., 2006, for a review).

       However, all of these studies relied on econometric techniques to identify the

appropriate comparison groups, and concerns remain about selection on variables

(including time-varying characteristics in studies that control for person fixed effects)

that are unobservable to the econometrician. In the only study to date that has used

random assignment of TANF recipients to temporary help agencies, Autor and Houseman

(2005, 2007) found that temp agencies increased the short-term earnings for workers; but

their longer-term employment was characterized by lower earnings, less frequent

employment and higher welfare recidivism.

       Autor and Houseman also found that other intermediaries, which generated

longer-term job placements for their clients, also generated some positive impacts over

time. But some questions remain about the external validity of their results – especially

since they are based only on TANF recipients, rather than a broader range of low-wage




                                              4
workers; and they use data from the “Work First” agency in only one city (Detroit) to

generate their findings.2



III. Our Data

    A) An Overview of the LEHD Data

         The data used in this study are drawn from the Longitudinal Employer Household

Dynamics (LEHD) program at the U.S. Census Bureau. The core of the dataset is the

universe of state-level quarterly Unemployment Insurance (UI) earnings records from 44

states and the District of Columbia. The UI wage records cover data from the early

1990’s to the third quarter of 2006 and have been merged with a variety of other

household and employer survey data, including the 2000 Decennial Census of

Population, the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the American Community Survey

(ACS). This integration, which takes place under strict confidentiality protection

protocols, is represented in Figure 1.




2
 Autor and Houseman note that their nonexperimental results are very similar to those of other researchers,
perhaps implying that their results are more generalizable than might be expected on the basis of the
particular sample on which they are based.


                                                    5
LEHD Dataset Used:
Longitudinal Employer -Household Dynamics



        Demographic Surveys                         Integration
                                                    Record          Economic
        Household Record                            Person-ID       Censuses and
        Household-ID                                Employer-ID     Surveys
        Data                                        Data            Census Entity-ID
                                                                    Data
        Person Record
                                                     Business Register
        Household-ID
                                                     Employer-ID
        Person-ID                                    Census Entity-ID
        Data
                                                     Data
          The LEHD data have elsewhere been described in great detail (Andersson et al.,

2005, Abowd et al 2004). Briefly, the UI wage records, which consist of quarterly reports

filed by employers every quarter for each individual in covered employment, permit the

construction of a database that provides longitudinal information on workers, firms, and

the match between the two. The coverage is roughly 96% of private non-farm wage and

salary employment; the coverage of agricultural and federal government employment is

less comprehensive. Self-employed individuals and independent contractors are also not

covered. Although the administrative records themselves are subject to some error, staff

at the LEHD program has invested substantial resources in cleaning the records and

making them internally consistent.3

          The Census Bureau information used in this study consists primarily of basic

demographic information: date of birth, place of birth, sex and a crude measure of race

and ethnicity. These are available for almost all workers in the dataset -- the non-match

rate is about 4%. The UI wage records have also been matched with the Current

3
    The approach is described in Abowd and Vilhuber (2003).


                                                    6
Population Survey, but since this is a cross-sectional match we simply use it as a

consistency check in the research.

        There are clearly many advantages associated with this integrated data base -- its

enormous sample size, longitudinal structure, and information on employer-employee

matches. There are also some disadvantages. One is that hours or weeks worked are

typically not reported by employers. Another is that it is impossible to identify whether,

when multiple jobs are held within a quarter, they are held sequentially or at the same

time. We address both of these issues by creating, for each individual in the data, a

measure of that person's annualized earnings at the primary employer in each year that

they appear in the data. That is, for the entire year that an individual appears in a state, we

identify his/her primary employer as the one that pays them the highest earnings in that

year.

        There are two additional conceptual issues to be addressed. Although we typically

refer to the employer as a ``firm,'' the actual reporting unit in the data is an

administrative, rather than an economic entity; in other words, the filing unit reflects an

``Employer Identification Number,'' rather than a specific firm. The distinction is

immaterial for about 70% of workers, who work for a single establishment employer --

but for those who work for a multiple establishment employer, it is really not clear

whether they are working for the ``firm'' or an establishment. The other conceptual issue

involves the measurement of earnings. According to the BLS Handbook of Methods

(1997) UI wage records measure ``gross wages and salaries, bonuses, stock options, tips,

and other gratuities, and the value of meals and lodging, where supplied.'' They do not




                                               7
include employer contributions to OASDI, health insurance, workers compensation,

unemployment insurance, and private pension and welfare funds.

       Given the sensitive nature of the dataset, it is worth discussing the confidentiality

protection in some detail. All data that are brought in to the LEHD system have been

made anonymous, in the sense that standard identifiers and names are stripped off and

replaced by a unique ``Protected Identification Key'' or PIK. Only Census Bureau

employees or individuals who have Special Sworn Status are permitted to work with the

data, and they have not only been subject to an FBI check but also are subject to a

$250,000 fine and/or five years in jail if the identity of an individual or business is

disclosed. All projects have to be reviewed by the Census Bureau and other data

custodians, and any tables or regression results that are released are subject to full

disclosure review.

   Standard measures of human capital include such variables as education and

experience. Other measures, such as ability or family background, have rarely been able

to be captured. Yet work by Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993), for example, demonstrates

that a major contribution to increased earnings inequality in the 1980’s was an increase in

return to “unmeasured” characteristics—for example, interpersonal skills. Work by

Holzer (1996), as well as the sociology literature, also finds that businesses increasingly

value characteristics of the employee that have not traditionally been observable—again,

interpersonal skills are frequently mentioned.




                                              8
    The newly developed longitudinal dataset permits the quantification of the value of

these measures, although not permitting a decomposition of the source.4 This is achieved

by capturing the portable component of individual earnings—that component that

belongs to an individual as she or he moves from job to job in the labor market (and that

is separate from the type of firm for which she or he works). In order to estimate this

effect, the LEHD staff decomposed of the log real annualized full-time, full-year wage

rate (ln w) into person and firm effects.5



                                       ln wit = θ i + xit β +ψ J( i ,t ) + ε it
                                  1) hˆijt = θˆi + xitexp βˆ exp
                                       zˆ j = ψˆ j



The definition of human capital we use here, h, is the part associated with the person

fixed effect—the unobservable individual heterogeneity—and the measurable personal

characteristics (labor force experience, education). We are also interested in capturing

and analyzing the role of the firm effect ψ. The firm effect literally captures the extent to

which the firm the worker is attached to pays above or below average wages (after

controlling for person effects).6



4
  We interpret this person fixed effect as a broad measure of human capital, though the source of the human
capital – whether inter-personal skills, cognitive ability, family background or some combination of these
and other factors – cannot be determined.
5
  This methodology is drawn from Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) and further developed by Abowd
et al. (2003). A key assumption underlying this methodology is that worker mobility is (largely)
exogenous. See Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) for more discussion.
6
  The individual fixed effects in our sample are estimates based on data through the year 1998. In our
empirical work below, we report some earnings equations based on our own sample of data from 1996-98
and also from 1999-2001. Clearly, our empirical work using the latter sample is not subject to any concerns
about the use of fixed effects wage measures that have been estimated over part of the time same period.
Results over the two time periods are generally quite consistent with one another, as we note below.


                                                        9
       The firm fixed effect similarly captures a variety of factors. Most simplistically, it

captures the premium or discount that a given firm pays workers on average, controlling

for their individual characteristics. This premium might be due to a higher level of capital

in the firm, which would clearly increase the productivity of individual workers. Or, it

might be due to unionization -- the transportation equipment industry, for example, has a

relatively high average firm fixed effect. It might also be a compensating differential --

the high average firm fixed effect in the mining industry is presumably in order to

compensate workers for the riskiness and unpleasantness of mine work. Finally, the firm

effect will capture a range of human resource policies chosen by the firm, including the

effects of training and promotion policies as well as compensation.

   B) Sample Used Here and Definitions

       Consistent with our earlier work (Andersson, Holzer and Lane, 2005), we use a

sample of LEHD data for five states in this study: California, Florida, Illinois, Maryland

and North Carolina. These were the first five states for which long panels of micro data

on both firms and workers were available to LEHD researchers. As we note below, we

use data over the period 1993-2001 for workers who were prime-age adults in 1993 and

who had at least minimal labor force attachment and earnings in each year. The result

was a sample that included roughly 18 million workers working in over 1 million firms

per year.

       The demographic characteristics of the workforce in the LEHD data, both overall

and within these five states, are very similar to those of the decennial Census. There are,

however, a few differences. The LEHD data used here have a high proportion of younger

workers overall (about 20%), than do either the five state Census sample or the full




                                             10
Census, which may be due to coverage and reporting differences. The five states which

we are studying have a lower proportion of white workers than does the country at large -

- about 66% here rather than 78% for the nation. The industry distribution is, by and

large, very similar - although the LEHD data show more workers in professional services,

and fewer in educational, health and social services. The earnings in the five states are

typically slightly higher than for the country at large, but the LEHD earnings measures

are, on average, slightly lower -- probably primarily due to the coverage differences that

were mentioned earlier.

       As pointed out in our book, there are a variety of considerations associated with

defining low earners on the basis of administrative data on quarterly and annual earnings

only. It is important to try to separate out individuals who voluntarily work part-time at

high wage from those who work full-time but at low wages, since UI wage records do not

provide information on hours or weeks worked. Similarly, from a policy perspective, it is

useful to separate those with transitory earnings difficulties - such as those returning to

the labor market after a lengthy absence or those who have recently been displaced from

a job — from those with persistent earnings difficulties over some number of years.

Similarly, when studying the impacts of temp agencies, it is also important to measure

impacts over a substantial period of time, so that transitory impacts can be separated from

persistent ones in the labor market.

       The practical way in which we address the first of these challenges is to limit the

sample to one of prime-age workers - i.e., those aged 25 through 54 - at the beginning of

our period of analysis (1993). This at least partially eliminates the largest groups who are

most likely to work part-time — such as students and the elderly (and near-elderly).




                                             11
While some groups of voluntary part-time workers — such as homemakers — will

remain in the sample, the analysis will provide breakouts by gender (and also by

race/ethnicity), thereby separating groups with many voluntary part-time workers (such

as white females) from others where there presumably are fewer.

         The second practical challenge is to identify people who are both attached to the

labor market and persistently low earners. We address the attachment issue by only

including in our sample of low earners those who have worked for at least one quarter in

each year, and earn at least $2000 per year when doing so. These conditions are also

applied for the subsequent six years of the sample, which tends to omit those who left the

population of earners in a state for any number of reasons.7

         We define persistently low earners as those who earn $12,000 per year or less for

each of 3 years during a three-year base period of 1993-95.8 The three-year base period

is long enough that we generally avoid those with strictly transitory problems, and focus

instead on those with persistent low earnings. The implications for our sample sizes, and

the characteristics of our sample (both in terms of employment outcomes, person fixed

effects, and temp agency employment) of these various sample restrictions are considered

in the Appendix. As expected, limiting the sample to persistently low earners in the base

period clearer reduces outcomes and personal skills (while raising the incidence of temp



7
 Since each individual is required to appear in our data in each year of the analysis, we omit those who
move out of state, or who drop out of the labor force for other reasons.
8
  Earnings are measured in 1998 dollars. We have used the CPI-U to deflate earnings over time. Though
this index is known to overstate the rate of inflation over time (e.g., Schultz, 2003), this will have no effect
on comparisons across groups in earnings or earnings growth in comparable time periods. We also have no
data on the pecuniary values of fringe benefits for employees; however, these data are routinely omitted
from calculations of poverty rates and the like. Inclusion of these measures would, if anything, exacerbate
measured inequality across groups (Hamermesh, 1998).



                                                      12
agency employment, as we note below); but further limiting the sample in subsequent

years beyond the base period has little effect on any of these measures.

         In any event, after analyzing temp agency employment during the base period, we

then examine labor market outcomes for low earners, and especially the impact of temp

employment during the base period, in the six years subsequent to the base period. We

also divide the six-year period into two 3-year periods, 1996-98 and 1999-2001. This

enables us to examine the stability of these subsequent labor market outcomes for a

lengthy period of time, and separate out transitory from more persistent impacts.

         The $12,000 cutoff for low earnings may seem somewhat arbitrary, but we have

an extended discussion in our earlier work (Andersson, Holzer and Lane 2005) in which

we discuss the basis for, and implications of, this cutoff.9 The bottom line is that we find

that the $12,000 cutoff generates a sample of workers whose personal and family

characteristics approximate those in which we are most interested.10 However, we also

consider those in an intermediate category of earnings in the base period (whom we call

“occasionally low earners”), who earn less than $12,000 a year for at least one but not all

of the three years in the base period.



IV. Results

    A. Summary Statistics



9
  During this time period, a family relying on the earnings of a single worker earning $12,000 or less would
clearly have income below the poverty line for a family of three, and even below the poverty line for a
family of four if potential eligibility for the Earned Income Tax Credit were taken into account. Varying
this cutoff in our earlier work never affected our qualitative results.
10
   See the Appendix to Chapter 4 of our book, where we consider the educational characteristics and family
incomes of workers from a smaller sample of LEHD workers who are matched to Current Population
Survey (CPS) data, and who are persistently low earners by our definition. The vast majority of these
workers had education levels of high school or less, and had family incomes below twice the poverty line.


                                                    13
         We begin with some data on the use of temp agencies by workers during our

three-year base period (1993-95). In Table 1 we present summary data on the incidence

of temp employment for all workers as well as separately by their earnings status in the

base period - namely, for persistently low earners, occasionally low earners, and non-low

earners.11 We also present these results for individuals who had any employment through

a temp agency over a three-year period, as well as for those who had temporary agencies

as their primary source of employment over that period.

         Our results show that, over a three-year period, roughly 8 percent of the sample’s

entire prime-age workforce has had some employment through a temporary agency –

though only about 1 percent of the workforce had temp agencies as their primary

employer over that period. However, when the sample is limited to include only

persistently low earners, it is clear that temp agencies play a much greater role in securing

employment for these workers than for the workforce overall – with 16 percent of all

such low earners having some temp experience during those three years and about 4

percent having temp work as their primary source of employment. Temp employment for

the “occasionally low earners” is very similar to that of workers whose earnings

“persistently low,” but it is considerably lower for the “non-low earners,” with 4 percent

of this latter group having any temp experience and less than 1 percent working primarily

for temps.

         In Table 2 we consider the personal characteristics of those who work for temp

agencies during our base period. Once again, we consider these characteristics for all

workers and for persistently low earners who have either worked for a temp agency or

11
  “Persistently Low” earners are those who earned less than $12,000 per year (in 1998 dollars) for all three
years between 1993 and 1995; “Occasionally Low” had earnings less than $15,000 for at least some years;
and “Non-Low” earners had earnings above $15,000 for each of the three years.


                                                    14
not; and we separately consider any work through a temp agency v. temp work as a

primary source of employment. For all of these groups, we present data on the gender

(female), age groups (25-34, 35-44, or 45-54), and race of such workers, as well as

whether they are foreign born. We also tabulate the mean person fixed effects of workers

in each category.

       A number of findings appear in Table 2. Among workers of all earnings

categories, those working at temp agencies are generally younger, more likely to be

minority (especially black), and more likely to have below-average personal earnings

characteristics (i.e., fixed effects) than those not working at temp agencies.

       Among those workers with persistently low earnings, those who work at temp

agencies are still more likely to be young or black. But we also find that low earners who

work for temp agencies are also more likely to be male, to be native-born, and to have

above-average personal characteristics than those not working for temps. In other words,

the self-selection mechanisms into temporary employment are somewhat different among

low earners than among others, with somewhat more positive self-selection into temp

agencies occurring among low earners, suggesting that it is important to control for such

forms of selection in regression analysis, if possible.

       Once these workers spend some time working for temp agencies during the three-

year base period, how likely are they to continue with this form of employment in

subsequent years? The answer to this question obviously has important implications for

the issue of the extent to which temp agencies help workers – and especially low earners

– transition to more stable and perhaps higher-wage employment later on.




                                             15
       Table 3 presents data on the extent to which those who worked for temp agencies

during the base period – either with any amount of temp employment or as their primary

form of work – continue to work for temp agencies during the subsequent three years or

six years. These data thus constitute elements of transition matrices for those at temp

agencies during the base period, which shed light on the persistence of such employment

over long periods of time. Once again, the data appear for all workers at temp agencies

and only for those who were persistently low earners during the base period.

       The results of Table 3 show some persistence over time in the attachment of

workers to temp agencies, though large majorities of these workers no longer use temps

by the period 1999-2001. For instance, among all workers who used temp agencies at any

point in the base period, roughly 40 percent still use them at some point over the 1996-98

period, and about a fourth still do so during 1999-2001. Among those for whom temp

agencies constituted the primary employer in the base period, persistence is even greater

– with about 61 and 37 percent respectively having some temp employment in the 1996-

98 and 1999-2001 periods. Also, those who were low earners in the base period and who

used temp employment show modestly higher persistence in temp agency use than do

workers overall, though qualitatively the pattern is quite similar for low earners.

       In any event, the impacts of temp agencies on subsequent advancement for low

earners will likely depend heavily on whether workers who used temps in the base period

continue to do so subsequently, and this factor must be taken into account when we do

our multivariate analysis of earnings gains for temp users over time below.

       Having analyzed the personal characteristics of temp workers and the persistence

of temp employment over time, we now consider a range of employment outcomes




                                             16
among these workers – both during the base period and in the subsequent three- and six-

year periods. For here onward, we focus exclusively on those who were persistently low

earners during the base period – as this is the group for whom temp agency might be

considered a stepping-stone to more stable and successful job opportunities.

        In Table 4 we present a set of employment outcomes for those who used temp

agencies for employment during the base period and those who did not. We present the

outcomes for the base period, and also for the two subsequent 3-year periods. The

outcomes we consider are: a) The number of quarters during which the individual was

employed over the three-year period – a rough measure of overall employment activity;

b) The number of full quarters worked with any employer during that time-period, which

measures employment instability; c) The quarters of job tenure accumulated in their

primary job during this period, or a measure of employment stability; d) Average

quarterly earnings during the three-year period; e) Average quarterly earnings for full

quarters worked with any employer during such a period; and f) Average annual earnings.

Once again, these are presented separately for those with or without any temp

employment in the base period, and for those with or without such employment as their

primary source of work. And, in the two subsequent periods, we present results separately

for the full samples of originally low earners (panels B and D) and for those omitting

temp workers in the current period (panels C and E).

       A number of findings appear in Table 4. During the base period, those low earners

who work at temp agencies work a bit less (in terms of quarters of employment), and are

considerably less likely to work full quarters for their employers or to generate significant

job tenure on these jobs. Their quarterly earnings in this time period are not greatly




                                             17
different from those without such work, though their annual earnings are consistently

lower (especially among those for whom such employment is their primary source of

work over the base period).12

         What happens to these low-earning workers over the subsequent three or six years

in the labor market? Those who worked for temp agencies earlier on (of whom we now

know that only a small fraction still work for temps) still work fewer full quarters for

specific employers and therefore accumulate less tenure on any job. But now their

earnings are higher than those of low earners who did not work for temp agencies

earlier. Specifically, those with any temp agency employment in the base period now

earn 8-9 percent more per quarter than those without such experience, and 9-14 percent

more for full-quarter employment or annual employment. For those whose primary

employment was through temp agencies in the base period, the positive earnings

differentials relative to those without such work are fairly comparable (though just

slightly smaller in most cases).

         Among those who do not work in temp agencies in the subsequent periods, the

earnings of earlier temp workers relative to non-temp workers are even larger.13 And, in

tabulations not included in Table 4, we find these earnings gains among both women and

men who were low earners in the base period, and among those of each racial/ethnic

group - though the gains associated with earlier temp employment are somewhat larger

for women than for men and for minorities than whites.14


12
   Since we are truncating the earnings distribution at a fairly low level when generating this sample, it is
not surprising that earnings differences between those working and not working at temp agencies during
this period are modest.
13
   Panels C and E show earnings that are 12-19 percent higher among those who had earlier worked in temp
agencies during 1996-98 and 9-15 percent higher in 1999-2001.
14
   For instance, full quarterly earnings are 16 percent higher among women and 7 percent higher among
men in 1996-98 among low earners who worked in temp agencies in 1993-95 (when their earnings were


                                                     18
        Do these subsequent earnings advantages persist over time? During the second

subsequent three-year period, those who had worked for temp agencies continue to have

lower numbers of full quarters worked and less tenure accumulated, but they still earn

more than those who did not - with differentials that are just a bit smaller than during the

first subsequent period. Now we find quarterly earnings that are about 5-6 percent higher

among temp workers than among non-temp workers, full quarter earnings that are about

8-10 percent higher, and annual earnings that are 5-6 percent higher. Thus, most of the

earnings advantages associated with earlier temp work seem to persist over time.

        Of course, these summary statistics on earnings do not control for personal

characteristics, and we observed above (in Table 2) that there is positive self-selection

into temporary employment among low earners in the labor market. We consider below

whether or not the subsequently higher earnings among temp workers are still evident

after controlling for observable differences in personal characteristics.

        But, before we move to our regression analysis, we consider some data on the

differences in job characteristics of low earners in the base period who work for temp

agencies and those who do not – with the job characteristics presented for the base period

and also for subsequent periods. In Table 5 we present data on the industries and firm

fixed effects of employers of these different groups of workers. Once again, we present

results for the base period and for the two subsequent periods, and separately for full

samples and for those omitting current temp workers in the latter periods.




only 8 percent and 2 percent higher respectively). Full quarterly earnings are 17 percent higher among
whites, 12 percent higher among blacks and 11 percent among Hispanics in 1996-98 respectively among
those who worked for temp agencies in 1993-95 (when their earnings were only 10 percent, 2 percent and 2
percent higher respectively). The gains associated with earlier temp work are thus higher for women than
for men but higher for minorities than whites among low earners in the base period.


                                                  19
       The results suggest that, during the base period, low earners working for temp

agencies were much less likely to work in agriculture, retail trade, and other services. To

a lesser extent, this remains true in the subsequent periods as well, because of the

persistence of temp agency employment across these periods. But, in subsequent periods,

those who worked for temp agencies in the base period are also now more heavily

concentrated in a variety of higher-wage industries – notably durable manufacturing, but

also to some extent in construction, nondurable manufacturing, transportation/utilities

and wholesale trade. This remains true even in the period 1999-2001, with the data

showing relatively little erosion of this effect between the first and second subsequent

periods. Indeed, by 1996-98, 26% of previously low earners who had any temp work in

the base period had jobs in these higher-wage industries, compared with only 18% of

previously low earners who had no temp work in the base period. By 1999-2001 the

proportions were roughly the same, at 28 percent v. 19 percent; the differences between

those whose primary employment was in a temp agency and those for whom it was not

are similar (though slightly smaller). And these differences are all considerably larger in

the samples that exclude current temp workers than in those that include them.

       Furthermore, in the subsequent periods, those who worked for temp agencies in

the base period now work for employers with higher firm fixed effects than those who did

not work for temp agencies. This was true to a small extent during the base period, but in

subsequent periods, the gaps between the firm fixed effects of low earners do did and did

not work for temp agencies in the base period respectively has grown. This is a critical

finding, and suggests that temp agencies act as labor market intermediaries to link low

earners to better employers than those whom they might be able to find on their own.




                                             20
And, once again, there is only modest evidence of erosion in the magnitude of this effect

between 1996-98 and 1999-2001.

     B. Regression Equations for Earnings in Subsequent Periods

         The extent to which employment in these higher-wage industries and firms might

account for the stronger employment outcomes in subsequent periods for low earners

who initially worked at temp agencies, especially once we control for other personal

characteristics, must now be ascertained.

         In Tables 6 and 7 we present the results of estimated regression equations of the

following form for those who were low earners in the base period:



         2) ln(EARN)ij,t+l = f(TEMPit, TEMPi,t+l, Xi, Xi,t+l, TENij,t+l, TIMEt+l; Xj) + uij,t+l



where EARN represents quarterly earnings, TEMP represents employment at a temp

agency, TEN represents job tenure, TIME represents quarter dummies, X represents a

variety of characteristics; i, j, and t denote the person, firm and time period respectively;

and l takes on the values of 1 or 2, depending on whether the observation is in the first or

second of the three-year periods subsequent to the base period.

         In other words, we have estimated earnings equations across person-quarters,

separately for the period 1996-98 and 1999-2001. We are primarily interested in the

coefficients (and t statistics) on employment at temp agencies during the base period,

which is what we present in those tables. All other variables appear as controls.15



15
  These regressions are based on random 10% samples of the full populations that meet our sampling
criteria; sample sizes are thus about 1/10 of those that appear in the Appendix for the two subsequent
periods.


                                                    21
           In Table 6 we present five specifications of each equation. In the first, we control

for observable fixed characteristics such as race/gender and foreign born status, as well as

age; and time (quarter). In the second we add a control for current employment at a temp

agency. In the third, we replace the fixed personal characteristics noted above with a

person fixed effect. In the fourth we add a control for tenure in the current job. Finally, in

the fifth, we add the firm fixed effect. These different specifications shed light on how

our results might be influenced by the omission or inclusion of all of these variables,

since it seems that temp employment in the base period draws workers with different

personal characteristics than the overall population of low earners, and since temp

employment may or may not causally affect not only subsequent job tenure and firm

characteristics but also subsequent temp employment,.

           Separate equations have been estimated for all earnings and for full quarter

earnings (in the latter case, the sample is restricted only to individual workers’ person-

quarters of full quarter employment with any particular firm). Separate estimates are also

provided for those with any temp employment in the base period v. those whose primary

employment was through the temp agency, and also for 1996-98 v. 1999-2001. Also,

Table 6 presents results for all workers who were persistently low earners in the base

period, while Table 7 presents them only for non-temp workers in the subsequent 3-year

periods.16

           Overall, the estimated effects of temp employment for low earners in the base

period on their subsequent earnings are somewhat varied. The estimates for all earnings

are quite mixed, with primary employment at a temp agency showing more positive



16
     Table 7 thus contains just four specifications, since the second one from Table 6 is omitted.


                                                        22
effects than any temp employment; but the effects of temp employment on full quarter

earnings are uniformly positive.

       Without controlling for current temp employment, effects on all earnings are

negative , though still positive for those with full quarter earnings only. Controlling for

current temp activity makes the results for all earnings considerably less negative, and

even positive for those with primary temp employment in the base period. Controlling for

person fixed effects consistently makes the estimated effects of temp agencies less

positive, by 2-4 log points; this is consistent with the notion of some positive self-

selection into temp employment among low earners. Controlling for tenure has mixed

effects, making the estimates more positive for all earnings (consistent with the shorter

tenure among temp users that we observed in earlier tables) but less positive for those

with full quarter earnings (implying longer tenure among temp users who have full

quarter employment). Also, the estimated effects of current temp agency employment are

large and negative in all equations (not shown in the tables), but controlling for these

makes the effects of previous temp employment more positive as well.

       Controlling for current temp status and also for job tenure, all of the estimated

effects of temp agencies on either earnings measure are positive. Thus, both the estimates

for full quarter earnings and those controlling for tenure show that temp agencies have

positive effects on the earnings of low earners who manage to transition to stable non-

temp employment afterwards. And, while some – though not all – of the positive

estimated effects of temp employment diminish between the first and second 3-year

periods after the base period, at least some positive effects persist over time, suggesting

that the positive effects are not purely short-term.




                                              23
       But all of the positive estimates become much smaller (or even negative) once we

control for firm fixed effects. Indeed, controlling for firm characteristics consistently

reduces the positive impacts of temp agencies by about 7 log points. In other words, most

of the positive effects of temp agencies on subsequent earnings of low earners occur

because they improve the access of these workers to higher-wage employers. This is

consistent with the results reported in Andersson et al. (2005).

       When we consider the effects of earlier temp employment on those not working

as temps in the subsequent periods in Table 7, we generally find much more positive

effects of earlier temp employment than in Table 6. As before, results for those with full-

quarter earnings are positive and quite large – with earlier temp employment raising

subsequent earnings by 20-30 log points in 1996-98 and 16-20 log points in 1999-2001.

For those with any earnings, the effects remain mixed but are clearly positive after

controlling for job tenure. And controlling for firm fixed effects now reduces the

estimated effects of early temp employment by 9-13 log points.

       To see more clearly the apparent positive impact of temp employment on the

quality of firms to which workers get matched subsequently, we present estimates of

early temp employment on the firm fixed effects in 1996-98 and 1999-2001 in Table 8.

As before, estimates appear for full-quarter earnings only and for all earnings, and for any

earlier temp employment as well as primary employment during the base period. Results

from two specifications are presented: the first in which we control for observable

personal characteristics (i.e., race/gender and foreign born status), and the second

controlling for person fixed effects. As in Table 7, those who still work with temp

agencies in the subsequent periods are removed from the sample.




                                             24
          The results show quite substantial positive effects of early temp employment on

the subsequent quality of firms to which low-earning workers are matched. For all

earners, firm fixed effects are 9-14 percentage points higher among those who earlier had

worked for temp agencies; among those with full-quarter earnings, firm fixed effects are

9-18 percentage points higher. Thus, for those making successful transitions to stable

post-temp employment, access to higher-wage firms is improved by having worked for a

time with a temp agency.



V. Conclusion

          Using new longitudinal data from the Census Bureau on the universe of UI-

covered workers and their employers in five states, we have estimated the effects of temp

employment on the earnings of persistently low earners over a subsequent six-year

period.

          Our results show that temp earners clearly have lower earnings than others while

working at these agencies; and even their subsequent earnings are somewhat mixed. But

these earnings are generally higher if they manage to gain stable employment with other

employers. In particular, we find that the effects of temp agency employment in the base

period on subsequent earnings are uniformly positive for those reporting full-quarter

earnings, and for all earnings once we control for job tenure.

          While there is some positive self-selection among low earners into temp

employment, controlling for person fixed effects does not completely eliminate the

positive effects associated with temp employment. Furthermore, the positive effects seem

mostly to occur because those working for temp agencies subsequently work for higher-




                                             25
wage firms than do comparable low earners who do not work for temps. And the positive

effects we estimate seem to persist over time, for as much as six years beyond the base

period during which the temp employment was observed.

        Thus, our results are consistent with the notion that low earners, in addition to

any deficiencies in skills that they bring to the labor market, sometimes have difficulty

“matching” themselves to higher-wage employers in the labor market. This might reflect

employer discrimination, their own limited information and informal contacts in the labor

market, transportation and geographic “mismatch,” or other problems.

       But temp agencies, and perhaps other labor market intermediaries, can help these

workers overcome these problems and gain access to better employers across their

regional labor markets. By providing the initial contact with employers, these

intermediaries can perhaps overcome transportation and informational barriers that limit

initial access (Giloth, 2003); and by providing information about worker quality and

previous performance that might be unobservable to employers on their own, they might

overcome discriminatory behaviors among employers (Holzer et al., 2003). Indeed, the

results suggest that such intermediaries might play a significant role in a strategy of

helping the working poor advance in the labor market by moving them into better jobs

over time, as long as such placements can be combined with appropriate job training and

support services (Holzer, 2004; Holzer and Martinson, 2005).

       Our results are thus consistent with much of the earlier literature on temp agencies

that we reviewed above, though somewhat less consistent with the recent work by Autor

and Houseman in Detroit which suggested that any positive effects are spurious or

transitory. On the other hand, even in their work, contractors who placed TANF




                                             26
recipients into permanent jobs also generated positive impacts on earnings that persisted

over time. In this broader sense, the results of Autor and Houseman are quite consistent

with our results here, suggesting that temps and/or other intermediaries who manage to

achieve more permanent job placements for their workers can have positive impacts.

       Of course, we have not fully eliminated possible self-selection effects regarding

temps, since person fixed effects do not control for any time-varying characteristics of

these individuals. But, combined with the clear evidence that temp agencies result in

subsequent employment at higher-wage firms, our findings at least suggest that the

positive effects of temp agencies or other intermediaries on the job-matching process for

low earners might be real and persistent.




                                            27
                                     References

Abowd, John M., Robert H. Creecy and Francis Kramarz, 2002. “Computing Person and
     Firm Effects Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data,” U.S. Census
     Bureau, LEHD Program Technical Paper TP-2002-06. Available online at
     http://lehd.dsd.census.gov/led/library/techpapers/tp-2002-06.pdf (cited March 4,
     2007).

Abowd, John M., John Haltiwanger and Julia I. Lane, 2004. “Integrated Longitudinal
      Employee-Employer Data for the United States,” American Economic Review
      Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 94, No. 2 : 224-229.

Abowd, John M.; Francis Kramarz and David Margolis. 1999. “High-Wage Workers and
      High-Wage Firms.” Econometrica, Vol. 67, No. 2.

Abowd, John M. and Lars Vilhuber (2005). The Sensitivity of Economic Statistics to
     Coding Errors in Personal Identifiers. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics
     23(2), 133-152.

Andersson, Fredrik, Harry Holzer and Julia Lane, 2005. Moving Up or Moving On:
       Workers, Firms and Advancement in the Low-Wage Labor Market, New York:
       Russell Sage Foundation.

Autor, David. 2001. “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills
       Training?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 4, 1409-48.

Autor, David and Susan Houseman, 2002. “The Role of Temporary E,mployment
       Agencies in Welfare to Work: Part of the Problem or Part of the Solution?”
       Focus, Vol. 22, No. 1, Special Issue, 63-70.

Autor, David and Susan Houseman, 2005. “Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor
       Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from Random
       Assignments.” NBER Working Paper.

Autor, David and Susan Houseman, 2007. “Temporary Agency Employment: A Way Out
       of Poverty?” In R. Blank, S. Danziger and R. Schoeni eds. Working and Poor:
       How Economic and Policy Changes are Affecting Low-Wage Workers. New
       York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Benner, Chris, Laura Leete and Manuel Pastor, 2007. Staircases or Treadmills? Labor
      Market Intermediaries and Economic Opportunity in a Changing Economy. New
      York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Doeringer, Peter and Michael Piore. 1971. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower
      Analysis. Lexington MA: D.C. Heath.




                                          28
Dunlop, John. 1957. The Theory of Wage Determination. London: MacMillan.

Farber, Henry. 1999. “Mobility and Stability: The Dynamics of Job Change in the Labor
        Market.” In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card eds. The Handbook of Labor Economics,
        Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Giloth, Robert, ed. 2003. Workforce Intermediaries for the Twenty-First Century.
        Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1999. “Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 114, No. 4, 1085-1124
.
Heinrich, Carolyn J., Peter R. Mueser, and Kenneth R. Troske. 2005. “Welfare to
       Temporary Work: Implications for Labor Market Outcomes.” Review of
       Economics and Statistics 87(1): 154–173.

Holzer, Harry J. 2004. “Advancement for Low-Wage Workers: A Different Approach.”
       Policy Brief No. 30, Welfare Reform and Beyond, The Brookings Institution.

Holzer, Harry J. 1987. “Informal Job Search and Black Youth Unemployment.”
       American Economic Review. Vol. 77, No. 2, 446-52.

Holzer, Harry J. 1991. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What Does the Evidence
       Show?” Urban Studies. Vol. 28, No. 1, 105-22.

Holzer, Harry J. 1996. What Employers Want: Job Prospects for Less-Educated Workers.
       New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Holzer, Harry J. and Robert J. Lalonde. 1998. “Job Change and Job Stability Among
       Less-Skilled Young Workers.” In D. Card and R. Blank eds. Finding Jobs. New
       York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Holzer, Harry J. and Karin Martinson. 2004. “How Can We Improve the Job Retention
       and Advancement Prospects of Low-Income Parents?” Working Paper, The
       Urban Institute, Washington DC.

Holzer, Harry J.; Steven Raphael and Michael Stoll. 2006 Employers in the Boom: How
       Did the Hiring of Unskilled Workers Change in the 1990s?” Review of Economics
       and Statistics. Vol. 88.

Holzer, Harry J. and Michael Stoll. 2001. Employers and Welfare Recipietns: The Effects
       of Welfare Reform in the Workplace. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of
       California.

Ichino, Andrea, Fabrizio Mealli, and Tommasso Nannicini, 2006. “From Temporary Help




                                          29
Jobs to Permanent Employment: What Can We Learn from Matching Estimators and
        their Sensitivity?” IZA Discussion Paper 2149.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith and David Sjoquist. 1998. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: A
        Review of Recent Studies and their Implications for Welfare Reform.” Housing
        Policy Debate, Fannie Mae, Vol. 9.

Ionnides, Yannis and Linda Datcher Loury. 2004. “Job Information Networks,
       Neighborhood Effects, and Inequality.” Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. 42,
       No. 4, 1056-93.

Juhn, Chinhui; Kevin Murphy and Brook Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in
       the Return to Skilll.” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 101, 410-442.

Kain, John. 1992. The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis Three Decades Later. Housing
       Policy Debate, Fannie Mae, Vol. 3.

Katz, Lawrence. 1986. “Efficiency Wages: A Partial Evaluation.” NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual.

Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers. 1987. “Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure.” In K. Lang and J. Leonard eds. Unemployment and the Structure of
      Labor Markets. New York: Basil Blackwell.

Lane, J. K. Mikelson, P. Sharkey and D. Wissoker, 2003. “Pathways to Work for Low
       Income Workers: The Effect of Work in the Temporary Help Industry” Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management 22(4), 581-598.

Rebitzer, James. 1993. “Radical Political Economy and the Economics of Labor Markets.”
       Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. 31, No. 3, 1394-1471.

Schultz, Charles. 2003. “The Consumer Price Index: Conceptual Issues and Practical
       Suggestions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 17, No. 1, 3-22.




                                          30
                                              Table 1

              Use of Temp Agencies By Workers in the Base Period (1993-95)

 Temp
 Work:         Non-Low          Occasionally Low           Persistently Low          All Workers
  Any            4.0%                 16.0%                     16.3%                    8.0%


 Primary         0.6%                  2.4%                      3.8%                    1.3%


Note: Temp employment is considered “primary” if the agency was the worker’s employer for the
largest number of quarters in the three-year period. “Persistently Low” earners are those who earned
less than $12,000 per year (in 1998 dollars) for all three years between 1993 and 1995; “Occasionally
Low” had earnings less than $15,000 for at least some years; and “Non-Low” earners had earnings
above $15,000 for each of the three years.




                                                   31
                                    Table 2

Personal Characteristics of Workers By Temp Agency Employment in the Base
Period
A. All Workers
Temp Employment                        Any                      Primary
                             Yes              No         Yes               No
Female                      49.4%            46.5%      46.7%             47.7%

Age: 25-34                  50.5%            36.6%      43.6%             37.7%
35-44                       32.6%            36.9%      34.9%             36.6%
45-54                       16.9%            26.4%      21.5%             25.7%

Race: White                 60.8%            74.0%      63.3%             73.1%
Black                       21.5%            11.1%      20.0%             11.8%
Asian                        4.8%             4.3%       4.4%              4.4%
Hispanic                    13.0%            10.6%      12.4%             10.8%

Foreign Born                18.1%            17.6%      18.0%             17.6%
Person Fixed Effect         -0.06             0.08      -0.08              0.07


B. Persistently Low Earners in the Base Period
Temp Employment                      Any                        Primary
                              Yes              No         Yes                   No
Female                        50.9%            65.1%      48.3%              63.4%

Age: 25-34                    54.1%            40.2%      46.7%              42.3%
35-44                         31.1%            35.0%      34.6%              34.4%
45-54                         14.7%            24.8%      18.7%              23.3%

Race: White                   48.8%            59.9%      47.7%              58.5%
Black                         30.1%            13.1%      32.0%              15.3%
Asian                          4.8%             2.9%       2.9%               4.5%
Hispanic                      18.2%            22.2%      17.4%              21.7%

Foreign Born                  20.3%            29.7%      19.7%              28.4%
Person Fixed Effect            -0.41            -0.59      -0.47              -0.56




                                         32
                                   Table 3

  Dynamics of Temp Agency Employment Across 3-Year Time Periods

A. All Workers

Temp Work                     Temp Work in:
In Base Period:               1996-98                      1999-2001
  Any                          40.2%                         26.4%
  Primary                      61.2%                         36.9%


B. Persistently Low Earners

Temp Work                     Temp Work in:
In Base Period:               1996-98                       1999-2001
  Any                           49.2%                          34.4%
  Primary                       63.9%                          41.5%
 Note: Samples consist of all workers (Panel A) and persistently low earners
(Panel B) in the base period who worked for temp agencies, either at any time
  or as their primary employer. The table thus indicates the fractions of these
   workers who still work for temp agencies in 1996-98 and in 1999-2001.




                                           33
                                  Table 4

Employment Outcomes In All Periods of Low Earners During the Base Period: By
            Temp Agency Employment During The Base Period

A. Base Period          Any Temp Employment Primary Temp Employment
                          Yes         No        Yes         No
Quarters Worked          10.09       10.39     9.99        10.34
Full Quarters
Worked                      5           7.85        5.15          7.48
Quarters of Tenure        4.27          5.93        4.31          5.74
Quarterly Earnings       $2,098        $2,021      $1,993        $2,089
Full Quarter
Earnings                 $2,365        $2,217      $2,221        $2,242
Annual Earnings          $6,729        $7,110      $6,544        $7,068

B. 1996-98              Any Temp Employment Primary Temp Employment
                          Yes         No        Yes         No
Quarters Worked          11.05       11.67     11.04       11.07
Full Quarters
Worked                    7.38           9.01       7.27           8.82
Quarters of Tenure        7.12          12.22       6.73          11.66
Quarterly Earnings       $3,275        $2,997      $3,265        $3,030
Full Quarter
Earnings                 $3,513        $3,076      $3,486         $3,129
Annual Earnings         $12,510       $11,048     $12,093        $11,181

C. 1996-98
Excluding Current
Temp Workers            Any Temp Employment Primary Temp Employment
                          Yes          No       Yes          No
Quarters Worked          11.07       11.08     11.07       11.08
Full Quarters             7.52        9.04      7.35        8.87
Worked
Quarters of Tenure        7.09          12.29       5.72          11.78
Quarterly Earnings       $3,356        $2,996      $3,498        $3,033
Full Quarter             $3,609        $3,074      $3,780        $3,130
Earnings
Annual Earnings         $12,476       $11,052     $13,305        $11,196




                                    34
D. 1999-2001               Any Temp Employment Primary Temp Employment
                            Yes          No        Yes         No
Quarters Worked             11.1        11.15     11.07       11.14
Full Quarters
Worked                       7.48             8.57        7.43              8.44
Quarters of Tenure           9.97            15.83        9.56             15.13
Quarterly Earnings          $4,295          $4,038       $4,279           $4,070
Full Quarter
Earnings                     $4,473         $4,082        $4,452          $4,130
Annual Earnings             $16,058        $15,107       $15,945         $15,225

E. 1999-2001
Excluding Current
Temp Workers               Any Temp Employment Primary Temp Employment
                             Yes          No       Yes          No
Quarters Worked             11.14       11.16     11.13       11.16
Full Quarters                7.68        8.63      7.68        8.52
Worked
Quarters of Tenure            10.20          16.03         9.39              15.39
Quarterly Earnings           $4,420         $4,045        $4,553            $4,084
Full Quarter                 $4,601         $4,087        $4,744            $4,141
Earnings
Annual Earnings             $16,590        $15,147       $17,054           $15,298
Note: “Any Temp Employment” and “Primary Temp Employment” refer only to the
base period; thus, outcomes for 1996-98 and 1999-2001 are conditioned on temp
employment during the base period (1993-95). Results for the latter period are also
presented with temp workers in those periods included (panels B and D) or excluced
(panels C and E).




                                         35
                                   Table 5

 Job Characteristics of Low Earners By Temp Agency Employment During the Base
                                      Period

A. Base Period           Any Temp Employment        Primary Temp Employment
Industry:                   Yes         No               Yes          No
 Agriculture               4.4%       13.1%             2.0%        11.9%
 Construction              4.3%        3.4%             3.2%         3.6%
 Durable Mfg.              4.2%        2.4%             2.7%         2.7%
 Non-Durable Mfg.          6.0%        5.7%             5.6%         5.9%
 Trans., Comm. And Ut.     2.3%        2.3%             1.5%         2.3%
 Wholesale Trade          3.2%        3.1%              2.1%         3.2%
 Retail Trade             19.4%       28.8%             9.0%        27.8%
 Fin., Insur. And RE       2.1%        3.0%             1.2%         2.9%
 Services
  Temp Agency             28.8%          0.0%          60.6%           3.0%
  Other                   24.8%         37.0%          14.1%          35.7%
Public Admin               0.6%          1.3%           0.3%           1.2%

Firm Fixed Effect          -0.30         -0.34          -0.35         -0.34

B. 1996-98
Industry:
 Agriculture               3.7%         12.0%          2.1%           10.9%
 Construction              4.7%          3.6%          3.8%            3.8%
 Durable Mfg.              6.2%          2.8%          6.3%            3.2%
 Non-Durable Mfg.          6.1%          5.4%          5.6%            5.5%
 Trans., Comm. And Ut.     3.3%          2.6%           2.7%           2.7%
 Wholesale Trade          3.9%          3.2%           3.4%            3.3%
 Retail Trade             19.0%         25.5%          12.7%          24.8%
 Fin., Insur. And RE       3.2%          3.0%          3.2%            3.1%
 Services
  Temp Agency             21.2%          2.2%          37.2%           4.2%
  Other                   28.0%         38.3%          22.2%          37.1%
Public Admin               0.9%          1.5%           0.8%           1.4%

Firm Fixed Effect          -0.24         -0.3           -0.26         -0.29




                                   36
C. 1996-98 Excluding
Current Temp Workers
Industry:
 Agriculture              3.70%         10.90%    2.20%      10.20%
 Construction             5.40%         3.30%     5.30%       3.50%
 Durable Mfg.            10.00%         3.20%    12.80%       3.90%
 Non-Durable Mfg.         9.90%         6.50%    10.70%       6.80%
 Trans., Comm. And Ut.    4.60%         2.70%     5.00%       2.90%
 Wholesale Trade          5.90%         3.50%     7.50%       3.70%
 Retail Trade            21.20%         25.60%   18.80%      25.20%
 Fin., Insur. And RE      4.20%         3.30%     4.90%       3.30%
 Services                33.50%         39.30%   38.80%      31.00%
Public Admin              1.70%         1.70%     1.90%       1.70%

Firm Fixed Effect          -0.11         -0.26     -0.06       -0.25
D. 1999-2001
Industry:
 Agriculture               3.1%         11.2%      1.6%    10.2%
 Construction              5.5%          4.1%      4.2%    4.3%
 Durable Mfg.              7.1%          3.6%      7.7%    4.1%
 Non-Durable Mfg.          6.6%          5.1%      6.4%    5.4%
 Trans., Comm. And Ut.     4.1%          2.9%      3.8%    3.1%
 Wholesale Trade           4.4%          3.6%      5.1%    3.7%
 Retail Trade             17.9%         24.0%     13.0%    23.3%
 Fin., Insur. And RE       3.2%          3.5%      3.2%    3.5%
 Services
   Temp Agency            16.5%          3.3%     26.1%    4.7%
  Other                   30.2%         37.2%     36.3%    27.6%
Public Admin               1.3%          1.6%      1.5%    1.3%

Firm Fixed Effect        -0.17          -0.25    -0.18     -0.24




                                   37
 E. 1999-2001 Excluding
Current Temp Workers
Industry:
 Agriculture              3.00%         9.70%    2.00%    9.00%
 Construction             5.90%         3.90%    6.00%    4.10%
 Durable Mfg.             10.40%        3.90%    13.30%   4.60%
 Non-Durable Mfg.         9.10%         5.90%    10.00%   6.30%
 Trans., Comm. And Ut.    5.30%         3.10%    5.60%    3.30%
 Wholesale Trade          6.40%         3.80%    7.50%    4.00%
 Retail Trade             18.00%        22.80%   14.80%   21.40%
 Fin., Insur. And RE      4.20%         3.70%    5.30%    3.80%
 Services                 34.70%        41.00%   33.40%   40.40%
Public Admin              2.40%         2.20%    2.50%    2.20%

Firm Fixed Effect          -0.05          -0.2    -0.01    -0.19
Note: See Table 4.




                                   38
                                                   Table 6

Estimated Effects of Temp Agency Employment During Base Period on Earnings in Subsequent
Periods: All Low Earners During the Base Period (T-Statistics)

                                    All Earnings                            Full Quarter Earnings

                                    Temp Employment:
                                    Any   Primary                            Any      Primary
1996-98
Controlling for:

1) Race/Gender,                     -.193      -.168                        .144       .120
   Foreign Born                    (22.18)    (10.13)                      (17.98)    (7.69)

2) Race/Gender,                      -.070      .062                        .181     .192
   Foreign Born,                    (7.74)     (3.64)                      (21.86) (11.69)
   Current Temp

3) Person Fixed                     -.103        .018                        .156      .164
    Effect                         (11.87)      (1.07)                     (20.10)    (10.55)

4) Person Fixed                      .036       .103                        .112      .124
    Effect, Tenure                  (4.17)      (6.35)                     (14.21)    (8.02)

5) Person Fixed                     -.039        .032                       .043      .049
   Effect, Tenure,                  (4.89 )     (2.15)                      (5.98)    (3.50)
   Firm Fixed Effect

1999-2001
Controlling for:

1) Race/Gender,                      -.129      -.136                         .126    .090
   Foreign Born                     (12.66)     (6.95)                       (13.90) (5.12)

2) Race/Gender,                     -.037        .018                        .152      .135
   Foreign Born,                     (3.61)    (10.94)                      (16.56)   (7.55)
   Current Temp

3) Person Fixed                     -.074       -.021                         .131      .118
   Effect                           (7.43)      (1.10)                      (14.92)    (6.84)

4) Person Fixed                      .021       .035                          .098      .083
   Effect, Tenure                   (2.17)      (1.88)                      (11.03)    (4.85)

5) Person Fixed                     -.056       -.033                        .028       .014
   Effect, Tenure,                  (6.17)      (1.91)                      (3.42)     (0.90)
   Firm Fixed Effect

Note: The dependent variable in these regression equations is ln(quarterly earnings). Observations are
person-quarters. The samples are restricted to those with full-quarter employment with any employer for
results listed as “full-quarter.” Each equation also includes controls for age and time dummies. Regressions
are based on a 10% random sample of the relevant population (as described in the Appendix).




                                                    39
                                                 Table 7

Estimated Effects of Temp Agency Employment During Base Period on Earnings in Subsequent
Periods: Low Earners During the Base Period Who Do Not Work for Temp Agencies in Subsequent
Periods (T-Statistics)

                                  All Earnings                          Full Quarter Earnings

                                  Temp Employment:
                                  Any   Primary                         Any        Primary

1996-98
Controlling for:

1) Race/Gender,                  -.075        .025                      .203          .310
    Foreign Born                 (8.10)      (1.26)                    (24.05)      (16.59)

2) Person Fixed                  -.102       -.018                      .180          .278
   Effect                        (11.41)     (0.90)                    (22.69)      (15.71)

3) Person Fixed                    .065      .187                       .132          .212
   Effect, Tenure                 (7.26)     (9.74)                    (16.28)       (1194)

4) Person Fixed                   -.027       .063                      .055         .098
   Effect, Tenure,                (3.24)     (3.55)                     (7.39)       (6.09)
   Firm Fixed Effect

1999-2001
Controlling for:

1) Race/Gender,                   -.004        .081                     .180          .206
    Foreign Born                  (0.34)      (5.69)                    (19.21)      (10.71)

2) Person Fixed                   -.035        .041                      .161         .186
   Effect                         (3.40)      (1.91)                     (18.00)     (10.01)

3) Person Fixed                    .081       .149                       .127         .144
   Effect, Tenure                 (8.00)      (7.14)                     (14.00)      (7.75)

4) Person Fixed                   -.024        .017                      .042         .036
   Effect, Tenure,                (2.57)      (0.89)                      (5.08)      (2.15)
   Firm Fixed Effect

Note: Samples exclude workers who worked for temp agencies during the quarter observed in the periods
1996-98 or 1999-2001. Other conditions from note in Table 6 apply.




                                                  40
                                        Table 8

Estimated Effects of Temp Agency Employment During Base Period on Firm Fixed
Effect in Subsequent Periods: Low Earners During the Base Period Who Do Not
Work for Temp Agencies in Subsequent Periods

                              All Earnings                       Full Quarter Earnings


                              Temp Employment:
                              Any   Primary                       Any       Primary

1996-98
Controlling for:
1) Race/Gender,                .099        .131                   .127         .178
   Foreign Born              (31.15)      (19.00)                (29.31)      (18.63)

2) Person Fixed                .088        .118                   .092        .135
   Effect                    (28.26)      (17.67)                (22.65)     (15.16)

1999-2001
Controlling for:
1) Race/Gender,                 .113      .139                    .133         .163
   Foreign Born               (30.46)     (18.10)                 (28.39)     (16.93)

2) Person Fixed                 .102       .128                   .103         .130
   Effect                     (28.16)     (17.09)                (23.02)      (14.20)


Note: Samples exclude workers who worked for temp agencies during the quarter
observed in the periods 1996-98 or 1999-2001. Other conditions from Note to Table 6
apply, except that the dependent variable is now the firm fixed effect for that quarter.




                                             41
                                          Appendix

Effects of Sample Selection Criteria on Sample Size, Temp Agency Employment,
Earnings and Personal Characteristics


                                    N       Temp       Quarterly          Person Fixed
                                            Employment Earnings           Effect

Sample Including:

1) All workers aged 25-54         17010       8.0%           $9126           0.07
 in 1995 with at least one
 quarter of work and $2000
 earned per year, 1993-95

2) Only persistent low earners,   1384        16.3            2085           -0.56
 1993-95

3) At least one quarter of work     880       14.8            2118           -0.55
  and $2000 earned per year,
  1996-98

4) At least one quarter of work     670          14.1         2129           -0.55
  and $2000 earned per year,
  1999-2001


Note: Sample size (N) is measured as person-quarters during the base period of 1993-95.
Temp Employment reflects the percent of workers with at least one quarter of
employment at a temp agency during the base period. Quarterly Earnings reflects average
quarterly earnings during the base period. Person Fixed Effect is defined as in the text.
The four conditions imposed on the sample are added sequentially.




                                            42
