                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       GUARANTEED TROUBLE:
 THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF THE PENSION BENEFIT GUARANTY CORPORATION

                                         Jeffrey R. Brown

                                       Working Paper 13438
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13438


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2007




The author wishes to thank Brad Belt, Chuck Blahous, Zvi Bodie, Julia Coronado, Doug Elliott, Doug
Holtz-Eakin, Bill Gale, Jim Hines, Olivia Mitchell, George Pennacchi, Andrei Shleifer, Kent Smetters,
Jeremy Stein, Tim Taylor, Mark Warshawsky and David Wilcox for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jeffrey R. Brown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Guaranteed Trouble: The Economic Effects of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
Jeffrey R. Brown
NBER Working Paper No. 13438
September 2007
JEL No. G18,G22,G23,H32

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the economic rationale for, historical experience of, and current pressures facing
the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC). The PBGC is the government entity which partially
insures participants in private-sector defined benefit pension plans against the loss of pension benefits
in the event that the plan sponsor experiences financial distress and has an under-funded pension plan.
The paper discusses three major flaws of the PBGC, namely, that the PBGC has: 1) failed to properly
price insurance and thus encouraged excessive risk-taking by plan sponsors; 2) failed to promote adequate
funding of pension obligations; and 3) failed to promote sufficient information disclosure to market
participants. The paper then discusses potential ways to reform the PBGC so that it operates more
in concert with basic economic principles.

Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820-9080
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu
1. Introduction

       On December 9, 1963, the Studebaker-Packard Corporation announced that it was

closing its manufacturing plant in South Bend, Indiana. At the time of the plant closing, the

pension plan for hourly workers lacked sufficient assets to meet promised pension obligations

(Wooten, 2001). As a result, about two-thirds of the nearly 11,000 retirees and active workers at

the plant lost 85 to 100 percent of their accrued pension benefits (Sutkowski and Rhoads, 2006).

The Studebaker experience was a pivotal political event that eventually led, a decade later, to the

passage of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974. As the name of the

Act makes clear, Congress’ intention was to make defined benefit retirement plans more secure.

Along with creating a complex regulatory framework to be implemented by the Departments of

Treasury and Labor, ERISA also created the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) to

insure participants in defined benefit pension plans, at least partially, against losing their pension

benefits due to a combination of their employer’s financial distress and their employer’s failure

to fully pre-fund the pension promises.

       Thus, when the Bethlehem Steel Corporation declared bankruptcy in October 2001

(Isadore, 2001), the workers and retirees were in quite a different situation than their earlier

counterparts at Studebaker. Bethlehem’s pension plan lacked sufficient assets to meet promised

pension obligations; assets were sufficient to fund only 45 percent of the pension benefits that

Bethlehem’s 95,000 workers and retirees had accrued. However, in 2002 the Pension Benefit

Guaranty Corporation announced that it would cover over 92 percent of the total $7.8 billion

pension liability, roughly double what Bethlehem’s pension assets could have paid for on their




                                                                                                     1
own. The workers and retirees of Bethlehem Steel were exposed to a loss of only 8 percent of the

total liability -- although this still represented an aggregate loss of $600 million.

        The $3.7 billion of liabilities in excess of plan assets that the Pension Benefit Guaranty

Corporation acquired upon the termination of Bethlehem Steel’s pension plan in 2002

represented the largest unfunded liability in the PBGC’s history. Unfortunately, this record did

not hold for long: in 2005, the pension plans of United Airlines were terminated, dumping more

than $7.1 billion in unfunded liabilities onto the PBGC. In addition to these record-breaking

cases, since 2000 the PBGC has also become responsible for paying the pension benefits for

several other steel companies (including LTV Steel, National Steel, Weirton Steel), airlines (like

US Airways, Trans World Airlines and most recently, the Delta pilots’ plan), and firms from

other industries (including Polaroid and Kemper Insurance) which added billions more in

unfunded liabilities. When combined with numerous smaller plans during this period, more than

80 percent of all PBGC claims have occurred since 2000 (PBGC, 2005).

        The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation was, by statute, supposed to be self-financing.

It receives no tax revenue and is not officially backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S.

government. Rather, the PBGC relies on premiums paid by sponsors of defined benefit pension

plans, assets acquired from terminated plans, investment returns, and bankruptcy recoveries.

Because Congress, and not the PBGC, has the sole authority to set premiums, the PBGC itself

had little ability to prevent the significant deterioration of its net financial position as the record

claims have accumulated since the start of this decade. The PBGC had a peak surplus--assets in

excess of liabilities--of $9.7 billion at the end of fiscal year 2000. Since then, the net financial

position of the PBGC turned to an $18.9 billion deficit as of the end of fiscal year 2006, with

assets of $61.1 billion and liabilities of $80.0 billion (PBGC, 2006a).




                                                                                                          2
         The net financial position of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation seems likely to

deteriorate further in the coming decades. Many analysts and policy makers have been

wondering aloud whether the PBGC might eventually need an infusion of taxpayer dollars, a

worry that has invited uncomfortable comparisons to the large taxpayer bailout in the late 1980s

of the federal government program that insured deposits in the U.S. savings and loan industry,

and which, like the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, was originally intended to be self-

financing.

         In response to such concerns, President Bush signed into law the Pension Protection Act

of 2006, which made substantial changes to the PBGC insurance system.1 By the time of the

signing, the PBGC had gone from being a relatively obscure federal government organization to

an entity followed closely in the press by elected officials, corporate executives, labor unions,

and many of the 44 million American workers and retirees participating in the more than 30,000

defined benefit pension plans insured by the PBGC (PBGC, 2006). Participants in underfunded

plans had learned from much-publicized stories that just because their benefits were insured by

the PBGC, they still had much to fear.2 Indeed, between worries over the long-term solvency of

Social Security, the substantial underfunding of public state and local pension plans (which are

not covered by the PBGC), high profile losses in 401(k) plans at firms like Enron, and the fact

that defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $350 billion as of September, 2006,

public confidence in the nation’s retirement system was low.



1
  The Pension Protection Act of 2006 also made significant changes to the rules governing defined contribution
plans, including numerous provisions to encourage automatic enrollment. While these other features of the act may,
in the long-run, turn out to be far more important to overall worker retirement security, a discussion of these changes
is beyond the scope of this paper.
2
  One particularly poignant story was about Ellen Saracini who “lost her husband, United Airlines Captain Victor
Saracini, when his Flight 175 crashed into the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001.” Due to United
Airlines’ subsequent bankruptcy and failure to adequately fund its pensions, combined with PBGC benefit
limitations, Mrs. Saracini estimated that she would lose 50 to 70 percent of her widow’s pension (Russakoff, 2005).


                                                                                                                     3
         How did a government corporation created to insure the pensions of workers and retirees

in bankrupt firms end up facing its own financial distress? How did an organization designed to

strengthen retirement security come to be seen as contributing to retirement insecurity?

         The superficial answer is that the current funding problem is the result of the decline in

stock market prices in 2000, which reduced pension assets, and the fall in interest rates at about

the same time that boosted the present value of pension liabilities. But the deeper answer

requires an understanding of why pension plan sponsors exposed themselves to these financial

market fluctuations in the first place. Much of the blame for the poor financial state of the

PBGC, as well as the defined benefit system more generally, lies in the some major design flaws

of the PBGC pension insurance program.3 Specifically, the PBGC has: 1) failed to properly

price insurance and thus encouraged excessive risk-taking by plan sponsors; 2) failed to promote

adequate funding of pension obligations; and 3) failed to promote sufficient information

disclosure to market participants.4 Together, these three flaws produced a system in which many

firms fail to adequately fund their pension obligations, knowing that in financial distress, they

can dump their pension liabilities onto the PBGC.

         Though the Pension Protection Act of 2006 made some progress in improving the PBGC

program, it failed to fully correct these three major problems. Consequently, absent further

reform, substantial problems will continue to plague the private defined benefit pension system

in decades to come. This paper discusses to advantages and disadvantages of Congress




3
  Another factor contributing to defined benefit funding problems is the set of flawed accounting standards that have
largely hidden the true economic costs of firms’ pension funding and investment decisions. The Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued new standards in September 2006 to change the method of accounting
for pensions on corporate balance sheets. A full analysis of the role of accounting is beyond the scope of the current
paper; readers interested in more detail may consult Belt (2006a), Coronado and Sharpe (2003), Gold (2000), and
references therein.
4
  These shortcomings have been well-documented elsewhere, e.g., Belt (2005), CBO (2005a), and Wilcox (2006).


                                                                                                                    4
transferring much of the responsibility for defined benefit pension insurance to compulsory

private markets in order to prevent further deterioration.



2. The U.S. Corporate Pension Landscape

       Since the introduction of the first corporate pension plans in the United States in the late

1800s, most participants in private pension plans were covered by defined benefit plans, which

promise an employee a specified monthly benefit at retirement. This promised benefit is usually

calculated with formula based on years of service and earnings. For example, a plan might offer

a benefit that is equal to 1.5 percent of average salary for the last three years of employment

times the number of years of service with the employer. Thus, an employee with 30 years of

service who retires at the plan’s normal retirement age would receive a benefit that is 45 percent

of that employee’s final three-year average salary. There are a myriad of formula variations, but

plans must meet specific legal requirements in order to be “qualified” for favorable tax

treatment. Benefits from traditional defined benefit plans were typically paid as life annuities,

meaning that they paid benefits for as long as the participant lives.



2.1 The Shift Away from Defined Benefit Pension Plans

       Figure 1 shows the steady shift over the last three decades away from defined plans and

towards defined contribution plans. In a defined contribution plan, the employer specifies

contributions, rather than benefits. In 401(k) plans, the most common type of defined

contribution plan, employee participation is voluntary, employees make their own portfolio

allocation decisions, and account balances are rarely turned into annuities at retirement. A

defined contribution pension plan only promises to pay out whatever was contributed, plus the




                                                                                                      5
return on the investment, and therefore such plans are not insured by the Pension Benefit

Guaranty Corporation.

       Munnell and Sunden (2004) provide an overview of the many reasons behind the shift

from defined benefit to defined contribution plans. For example, many employers like knowing

exactly what their pension contributions need to be in any given year, rather than needing to

increase or decrease contributions each year to a defined benefit plan depending on external

changes in equity markets and interest rates. Many employees prefer the portability of defined

contribution pensions. But in addition to these and other reasons, the structure of the PBGC

itself may have contributed to the shift from defined benefit to defined contribution pension

plans because a firm can avoid paying PBGC premiums by terminating its defined benefit plan

or never offering one in the first place. Many employers have stopped offering defined benefit

plans, and most younger firms establish 401(k) or other defined contribution plans (or no plan at

all). As a result, most of the approximately 30,000 private defined benefit plans remaining in the

PBGC system are primarily concentrated in “old economy” industries that face an aging work

force and lower growth opportunities.



2.2 Should Economists Care about the Decline of the Defined Benefit Plan?

       Should economists care whether defined benefit pension plans are diminishing? Many of

the benefits of a defined benefit pension plan can be achieved with a defined contribution

scheme. For example, workers may prefer for tax reasons to receive a pension contribution that

won’t be taxed until after retirement, and either defined benefit or defined contribution plans can

accomplish that goal. Workers may be attracted to defined benefit pensions as a self-control

device if they might otherwise have difficulty making ongoing contributions for retirement.




                                                                                                  6
However, appropriately designed defined contribution plans can also help workers address self-

control problems, so this advantage of defined benefit plans may not be as substantial as it may

at first seem.

        Defined benefit pension plans can arguably claim two more specific advantages over

defined contribution plans. First, defined benefit plans can provide many individuals with access

to more favorable group, rather than individual, annuity prices. This is a potentially important

benefit because insurance against the risk of outliving one’s assets is generally welfare-

enhancing in standard economic models (for example, Davidoff, Brown, and Diamond, 2005).

However, given the strong trend toward allowing lump-sum withdrawals from traditional defined

benefit plans, this advantage is diminishing. Further, if encouraging greater annuitization of

retirement wealth is deemed desirable, there are a number of ways that the government and/or

employers could do so through the defined contribution system.

        Second, defined benefit plans may provide a device to encourage workers to make a

long-term commitment to an employer, in which case the employer will be more willing to invest

in the human capital of that employee, whereas more portable defined contribution pension plans

do not provide such an incentive. A rich theoretical literature has provided several models of

such an interaction (for example, Lazear, 1979; Harris and Holmstrom, 1982; Bulow and

Scholes, 1983). For example, in the Lazear model, a worker agrees to accept current pay that is

less than his marginal product in the early years if that worker is paid more than his marginal

product (via deferred compensation) in later years. Workers agree to this pay profile in return

for the firm’s investment in human capital. Firms benefit because deferred compensation

reduces a worker’s incentive to change jobs. As noted by Bulow and Scholes (1983), a

shortcoming of implicit contract models is firms will wish to renege on their implicit liabilities at




                                                                                                    7
some point. This is especially relevant in the case of unfunded pension liabilities because these

are considered unsecured debt in bankruptcy proceedings, meaning that bondholders get paid

before pension plan participants. One way that a firm can make a defined benefit pension

promise secure for workers is to set aside assets in a separate legal entity—a pension fund—that

operates in the sole interest of the pension plan beneficiaries. When contributions plus

accumulated investment returns equal the present value of the accrued pension liabilities, then

workers’ accrued pension benefits are “safe,” even if the corporation fell into bankruptcy. To be

risk-free, of course, one must do more than compare the market value of pension assets and

liabilities at a single point in time; one must also hedge against changes in those liabilities, such

as those arising from changes in long-term interest rates.5

         However, there are reasons for practical concern over whether defined benefits pension

plans are an efficient institution for creating a long-term connection between workers and firms.

These pension contracts are very long-term: for a 20 year-old worker, the payments from a

defined benefit pension plan will not even begin for approximately four decades, and once

begun, may continue for several more decades. Many workers within companies offering a

defined benefit pension plan will not stay with the firm long enough to receive a substantial

pension, or even any pension at all. Clearly, it is a challenge for the average worker to forecast

their own career, together with the financial health of a pension plan for decades into the future.

Even sophisticated financial market participants have some difficulty properly valuing firms’

pension liabilities (Coronado and Sharpe, 2003), which emphasizes that the task would be quite

difficult for the typical worker.

5
  Many authors have argued that an all-bond portfolio, with durations that match the duration of the pension
liabilities, is the appropriate hedging portfolio for defined benefit pensions (for example, Bulow, 1982; Bulow and
Scholes, 1983; Bodie, 1990, 2006; Gold and Hudson, 2003; Wilcox, 2006). Others, like Lucas and Zeldes (2006)
have noted that if workers’ earnings growth and stock returns are positively correlated over long horizons, then
stocks can serve as a hedge against future pension benefits linked to earnings.


                                                                                                                      8
       Overall, it is possible to make a case that many workers would prefer some element of

defined benefit in their retirement plans so that they need not manage all retirement income risk

through a personal account. However, there are also important advantages to defined

contribution plans, including portability and the certainty of costs for employers. The immediate

question for this paper is whether the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation is an appropriate

policy response in this setting. Thus, we now turn to a description of the PBGC program.



3. How Does the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation Operate?

3.1 The Insurance Programs

       The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation is headed by a Director who reports to a

Board consisting of the Secretaries of the U.S. Commerce, Labor, and Treasury Departments,

with the Secretary of Labor serving as Chairman (PBGC, 2007). The PBGC runs two insurance

programs for private sector defined benefit pension plans. The “single-employer program”

insures the pensions of more than 34 million workers and retirees in approximately 28,800

pension plans (PBGC, 2006a). The “multiemployer program” insures the benefits of

approximately 9.9 million workers in about 1,540 multiemployer plans. A “multiemployer plan”

is a collectively bargained pension plan that covers workers from multiple employers, often in a

common industry such as construction. The multiemployer program is funded separately from

the single-employer program and operates under different rules. For example, unlike in the

single-employer program, the PBGC makes loans to insolvent multi-employer plans. At the end

of fiscal year 2006, the multi-employer program had assets of $1.17 billion and liabilities of

$1.91 billion. This paper focuses on the single employer program, which is the much larger of

the two programs and has been the subject of most of the policy focus.




                                                                                                    9
         Firms that offer defined benefit pension plans are required to participate in the Pension

Benefit Guaranty Corporation single-employer pension insurance program. For a claim to be

made against the PBGC, the plan sponsor must be in severe financial distress and the pension

plan must be underfunded – that is, the assets held by the plan must be insufficient to cover the

liabilities of the pension plan. The firm “must prove severe financial distress, for instance the

likelihood that continuing the plan would force the company to shut down” (PBGC, 2006b). In

such a case, the PBGC will pay guaranteed pension benefits and attempt to subsequently recover

the funds from the employer if the firm continues to operate. The PBGC may also choose to

terminate a plan without the consent of the employer if it believes that doing so will better

protect the interests of the workers, the plan, or PBGC’s insurance fund.

         When an underfunded pension plan terminates, the Pension Benefit Guaranty

Corporation takes responsibility for paying monthly benefits to retirees. In fiscal year 2006, the

PBGC paid $4.1 billion in benefits to nearly 612,000 retirees in 3,683 terminated pension plans

(PBGC, 2006a). Another 660,000 people expect benefits from the PBGC in the future, or are in

multiemployer plans receiving financial assistance from the PBGC. The PBGC guarantee is

limited: for plans terminating in 2007, the maximum benefit paid to participants retiring at age

65 is $49,500—although the amount is higher for those retiring later and lower for those retiring

earlier. The maximum insurance benefit is set by law. 6 While more than 90 percent of

participants in plans taken over by the PBGC fall below this benefit limit (PBGC, 2006a), in



6
  Two additional legal limits on PBGC insurance coverage can also affect participants’ benefits. First, the PBGC is
prohibited from guaranteeing benefits that exceed the amount payable at the plan’s normal retirement age. Second, a
limit is imposed on PBGC’s guarantee of benefit increases made within the five years prior to plan termination.
Under the PBGC’s single-employer insurance program, retirees sometimes can receive more than the maximum
guaranteed benefit. In general, three conditions must apply: 1) the participant earned a benefit in excess of the
maximum guaranteed amount; 2) the participant retired or was eligible to retire three years prior to plan termination;
and 3) the plan had sufficient assets to pay benefits above the guaranteed amount. For details, see
<http://www.pbgc.gov/media/news-archive/news-releases/2006/pr07-07.html>.


                                                                                                                   10
some prominent cases, including those of some airline pilots, workers lose a substantial fraction

of their promised retirement income.



3.2 Sources of Revenue

       The operations of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation are financed from four

sources: insurance premiums paid by sponsors of defined benefit plans; assets from defined

benefit plans under PBGC trusteeship; asset recovery from bankrupt companies; and investment

income on PBGC assets. Notably absent from this list is any funding from general tax revenue,

as there is no provision in current law for any taxpayer backing of the Pension Benefit Guaranty

Corporation. However, many analysts believe that there is an implicit political guarantee, in that

Congress might very well choose to use taxpayer dollars to bailout the PBGC if pensioners’

benefits were at immediate risk.

       Congress sets the employer’s pension insurance premium. The single-employer premium

was initially set in 1974 at $1 per pension participant; it has been increased by Congress on an

irregular basis, reaching $30 per participant for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2006.

Starting in 2007, this basic premium amount will be indexed to wage inflation. In addition to

this flat-rate premium, underfunded pension plans pay an additional premium of 0.9 percent of

the unfunded vested benefits and must also make additional contributions according to a

specified schedule. During 2006, premium income totaled $1.5 billion (PBGC, 2006a).

       Strikingly, aside from the extra premium paid for being underfunded, PBGC premiums

contain no risk adjustment. A financially distressed firm with its pension plan assets invested in

a portfolio of risky assets that is mismatched with the plan’s liabilities pays the same annual




                                                                                                   11
premium as an AAA-rated firm that has fully immunized its pension liabilities from financial

market fluctuations. The implications of this pricing model will be discussed in detail below.



3.3 Historical and Projected Financial Status

       The official measure of the PBGC’s financial status is a comparison of the market value

of its assets and liabilities. The liabilities are calculated using group annuity prices, an approach

that is meant to assure “parity between the valuation of liabilities in plans taken over by PBGC

and the cost of providing annuities when a company voluntarily terminates a plan, and by law,

provides annuities through the purchase of annuities in the marketplace” (PBGC, 2006b). In

addition to including losses from plans that have already terminated, the PBGC’s official liability

measure also includes “probable” terminations. This means that a plan is included if the PBGC

determines that the plan is likely to terminate because the plan sponsor is in liquidation, has filed

for bankruptcy, or is likely to be involuntarily terminated by the PBGC. When liabilities exceed

assets, the PBGC is said to have a deficit.

       As indicated in Figure 2, the PBGC’s single employer program has been in deficit most

of its existence. From 1980 through 1995, the PBGC had continual but small deficits each year –

less than $5 billion. From 1996 to 2001, with the help of a booming stock market, the program

moved into surplus. Then as a result of the wave of large bankruptcies from 2001-2005, detailed

in Table 1, the PBGC’s net financial position deteriorated to a nearly $23 billion deficit at the

end of fiscal year 2005, before recovering slightly – to an $18.9 billion deficit – by the end of

2006. The improvement from 2005 to 2006 owes more to accounting changes than to any

change in the underlying economics. A review of the PBGC’s financial disclosures suggests that




                                                                                                    12
certain provisions in the Pension Protection Act of 2006 resulted in some large airline plan

liabilities being taken off the books without any change in the real health of the plans.

       While the PBGC’s methods for calculating its liabilities have been subject of some

criticism, the general finding that the program is in poor fiscal health has been reinforced by

independent analyses. For example, the Congressional Budget Office (2005a) estimated that the

present value of the PBGC’s future shortfalls (including already sunk costs as well as the present

value of prospective costs minus future premiums paid) totaled $91 billion, using a 20-year time

horizon. Despite Congress’ intent that the PBGC be self-financing, the large projected shortfalls

have led many analysts to note that there may be an implicit political guarantee should Congress

choose to bailout the PBGC if its financial situation continues to deteriorate.

       That the PBGC ended up in financial distress is not a surprise. Numerous pension

experts have raised warning flags: for example, a Secretary of the Department of Labor (and thus

former Chairman of the PBGC Board) made a direct comparison of the PBGC’s risks with the

savings and loan bailout of the 1980s, stating in the PBGC’s 1992 annual report: “One would

have to be an ostrich with its head buried in the sand to ignore the warnings and not learn from

the analogy of the savings and loan crisis.” In a prescient article, Zvi Bodie (1996) explored “the

uncomfortable parallel” of the PBGC to the savings and loan bailout, explaining that:

    “The possible ‘doomsday’ scenario for the defined-benefit pension system would be an
    event such as a sharp and prolonged drop in stock prices that causes a sharp decline in the
    market value of pension asset portfolios. Underfunding becomes more prevalent. Several
    major defaults of underfunded pension plans lead the PBGC to significantly raise premiums
    on the remaining plans in the system. Expectations of even higher premiums in the future
    lead sponsors of the well-funded plans to terminate their defined-benefit plans to avoid to
    the PBGC ‘tax.’ They buy annuities to settle all benefits accrued under the terminated plans
    and replace them with generous defined-contribution plans, thus avoiding criticism from
    their employees or from the public. Ultimately, the United States could be left only with
    bankrupt defined benefit plans with benefits financed directly by taxpayers.”




                                                                                                   13
       In the early 2000s, much of Bodie’s (1996) scenario came to pass. The U.S. stock market

did indeed experience a sharp drop in stock prices that caused a decline in the market value of

pension assets. A decline in interest rates increased the present value of future pension

liabilities. These events caused underfunding to become widespread. Several major defaults of

underfunded pension plans, primarily in the steel and airline industries, led Congress to raise

premiums from $19 per plan participant to $30 per plan participant on the remaining plans in the

system. Numerous companies have terminated their defined benefit plans. While it is still too

early to know if Bodie’s full “doomsday” scenario will unfold in its complete glory, the trends

are not comforting.



4. Flaws in the Pension Insurance System

       As noted in the introduction, at least three major flaws of the structure of the PBGC

insurance program have contributed to the program’s financial problems. This section discusses

these flaws in more detail.



4.1 The Failure to Price Pension Insurance Properly

       The PBGC levies a simple premium equal to $30 per participant in a defined benefit

pension plan. It also imposes additional premium of $9 per every $1000 of underfunding,

although prior to the Pension Protection Act of 2006, as much as 90 percent of the true amount

of underfunding escaped this premium due to various exemptions written into the law (Center on

Federal Financial Institutions, 2005a). This premium schedule fails to adjust for the probability

that the firm will experience financial distress, or for the full extent of underfunding, or for any

mismatch in risk characteristics between plan assets and plan liabilities. In fact, the PBGC is




                                                                                                   14
prohibited by Congress from charging risk-adjusted premiums. Indeed, the PBGC’s mission

statement is at odds with engaging in appropriate risk-based pricing; it states that part of its

mission is to “keep pension insurance premiums at a minimum.” Congress has implemented this

mission by keeping average premiums well below their implicit market price.

       To understand why premiums are too low on average, note that the extent to which

pension plans are well-funded typically declines during periods of equity market downturns,

because the value of the assets of the pension plan diminish. These periods tend to correspond to

periods in which there is an above-average incidence of financial distress by firms. Thus, much

of the risk being borne by the PBGC is what financial economists alternatively refer to as

systematic, market, or non-diversifiable risk. A private market insurer would charge plan

sponsors a risk premium to bear these non-diversifiable risks. As such, the appropriate market

price for bearing this risk will be such that the provider of the insurance will report expected

premium revenue in excess of expected losses. Therefore, as noted by Pennacchi (2006) in the

context of federal deposit insurance, charging a risk-based premium would result in accounting

profits for the government on average. The PBGC has certainly not run persistent accounting

profits in its history, providing suggestive evidence that its premiums are too low.

       A number of academic studies have attempted to make direct calculations of the market

would charge to provide PBGC-like insurance. Boyce and Ippolito (2002) calculate that the

private sector would charge twice as much as the PBGC to provide the same type of insurance,

while the Congressional Budget Office (2005b), Lewis and Pennacchi (1999) and VanDerHei

(1990) find that the appropriate market-based premium would be even higher, at four to six times

current levels. Of course, these much higher premium levels are those that would be necessary

to reflect the risk of the current PBGC system, not an efficiently designed system (Wilcox, 2006;




                                                                                                   15
Boyce and Ippolito, 2002). If sponsors were faced with risk-adjusted premiums and were

simultaneously subject to tighter funding rules and portfolio investment restrictions, the

premiums could be lower, on average, than those currently charged (Boyce and Ippolito, 2002).

       The PBGC premium schedule also fails to differentiate between high- and low-risk

pension plan sponsors – that is, its insurance premiums are not linked to firm creditworthiness.

Even if Congress were to grant such powers to the PBGC, which seems unlikely, there are

reasons to be concerned about how well it would be executed, especially in a political

environment; for example, Stiglitz (1993) discusses the government’s disadvantage in assessing

risks and charging premiums based on risk differences. While the Pension Protection Act of

2006 made significant changes in the rules that govern the regulation of pensions, no authority

was granted to the PBGC to improve its risk adjustment of premiums. Thus, the problems that

have arisen from the PBGC program’s naïve approach to insurance pricing will continue for the

foreseeable future.



4.2 Funding Requirements are Inadequate

       Prior to passage of the Pension Protection Act of 2006, the Executive Director of the

PGBC stated in testimony before the U.S. Senate Budget Committee that “the current defined

benefit pension funding rules … are in need of a complete overhaul. Current rules are needlessly

complex, don’t reflect economic reality, and don’t ensure that plans become well funded” (Belt,

2005). To make such calculations even more complex, many of the assumptions and methods

used in the funding calculations for the PBGC differ from those used for tax purposes, which in

turn differ from those used in financial statements.




                                                                                                   16
       There are too many examples of flaws in the PBGC funding rules to provide a complete

list here, but here are a few examples of the flaws that existed prior to the Pension Protection Act

of 2006. First, in practice, firms were only required to fund 90 percent of their liabilities. Second,

the rules for calculating liabilities were subject to considerable discretion, which allowed firms to

game the system. Third, pension plans were permitted to “smooth” interest rates over four years,

which allowed firms to report smaller liabilities than they should have in periods of declining

interest rates (Government Accountability Office, 2005). Fourth, plans were allowed to use the

smoothed “actuarial” value, rather than the market value, of plan assets, with up to a 20 percent

deviation from actual market values permitted (Government Accountability Office, 2005). Fifth,

firms were allowed to avoid making cash contributions to their pension plan by making use of

various accounting credits, even if the plan was under-funded. For example, if a firm contributes

more than the minimum required in a given year, this created a “credit balance” that, once

created, increased each year with an interest credit chosen by the plan to reflect expected long-

run returns on plan assets. Firms were allowed to use these credits in lieu of cash contributions

even when the value of plan assets had declined. Sixth, changes in plan liabilities due to

amendments to the pension plan benefit structure were allowed to be amortized over a 30-year

period, even though the PBGC’s insurance coverage of the new benefits was effective

immediately (Belt, 2005). Finally, sponsors of badly underfunded plans were often permitted to

increase benefits.

       As a result of these and other flaws in the funding rules, Bethlehem Steel was able to

report a funding status of 84 percent, despite having a market value of assets that, upon

termination, equaled only 45 percent of the market value of the plan’s liabilities. The passage of

the Pension Protection Act of 2006 addressed some of the most egregious shortcomings. For




                                                                                                    17
example, minimum contribution rules will, after a phase-in period, be based on 100 percent,

rather than 90 percent, of a plan’s liabilities. The time period for smoothing assets and liabilities

was reduced to two years. Several new restrictions were imposed on the use of “credit

balances,” although the 2006 law stopped short of eliminating their use. Plans deemed by the

PBGC to be “at risk” of future default will now be required to use more conservative methods of

calculating future liabilities, such as assuming that all employees who are eligible to retire within

the next 10 years do so on the earliest possible dates and that they will elect to receive benefits in

whatever form would create the highest liability (Warshawsky, 2007). Further, the 2006 law

added restrictions against increasing benefits when a plan is underfunded.

       Despite these improvements, the PBGC insurance program will continue to operate with

significant flaws. For example, assets and liabilities still do not reflect market values. A

coalition of powerful industry groups fought extremely hard against the elimination of smoothing

techniques, arguing that their elimination would increase “the volatility and unpredictability of

the funding rules” (Eickelberg, 2005). Furthermore, although Congress limited the use of

various accounting credits that are used by firms to avoid paying premiums, these credits were

not eliminated.

       While most of the provisions of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 were steps in the

right direction, at least one set of provisions constituted a giant leap backwards – the special

rules for airlines. Airlines that agree to freeze the accruals in their pension plans are allowed 17

years to fund their initial pension deficits and are permitted to use a discount rate for valuing

their liabilities that is 2-3 percentage points higher than what other firms will use (Center on

Federal Financial Institutions, 2006). Given the poor financial health of many of the nation’s

airlines, including Northwest and Delta (whose pilot plan was subsequently terminated in




                                                                                                    18
January 2007), which pushed hard for these and other special provisions, these provisions may

well increase the future liability of the PBGC. In addition, these provisions set a troubling

precedent for industries that become financially distressed in the future to seek similar treatment.



4.3 Plan Funding Status is Not Transparent to Market Participants

        In efficient financial and labor markets, firms would be appropriately rewarded for good

behavior or penalized for bad behavior with respect to pension plan funding. For example,

financial markets would place a lower value on firms with poorly funded pensions, knowing that

these pension obligations will eat into future cash flows. Unfortunately, most of the information

needed to make informed decisions about a plan’s funding status is not readily available to

workers, investors, or other market participants. While pension plan sponsors are required

annually to file a Form 5500, which provides detailed information on pension plan assets and

liabilities, this public information is often quite stale by the time it is available for public

consumption. This point was succinctly and clearly made by the PBGC Executive Director in

2005 testimony before the Senate Budget Committee (Belt, 2005):

        “Because ERISA provides for a significant lapse of time between the end of a plan year
        and the time when the Form 5500 must be filed, when PBGC receives the complete
        documents the information is typically two-and-a-half years old. It is exceedingly
        difficult to make informed business and policy decisions based on such dated
        information, given the dynamic and volatile nature of markets.”

        While the PBGC does receive more detailed and timely information for a limited number

of plans which face the greatest risk of insolvency, the statute governing this disclosure prevents

the information from being made publicly available. The Pension Protection Act of 2006 did

increase requirements for disclosure of pension plan information, including certain actuarial and

financial reports, upon request of any plan participant or beneficiary. However, it did not




                                                                                                   19
substantially alter the amount or timeliness of information that will be made available to the

PBGC itself, nor did it allow the more detailed information on under-funded plans to become

public. Indeed, one can argue that the Pension Protection Act reduced the information available

to the PBGC because fewer companies will now be required to file a supplemental form through

which firms disclose a plan’s termination liability to the PBGC.



4.4 A Case Study: Bethlehem Steel

       To see just how poorly the PBGC rules can operate in practice, it is instructive to

consider the case of Bethlehem Steel in more detail. This company’s experience from 1996

through 2002 is summarized in Table 2.

       For calculating a plan’s liabilities, the PBGC requires that firms use a concept called

“current liability.” By this measure, in 1996, Bethlehem Steel was only 78 percent funded, and

was therefore required to make deficit reduction contributions as well as pay a variable rate

premium on the amount of underfunding. Further, because of its poor funding status, the

company was required to send out a written notice to plan participants informing them of the

pension’s funding status. However, as a result of rising equity markets and the $354 million

contribution made during 1996, by 1997 Bethlehem Steel’s official funding status had risen to 91

percent, enough to be considered “fully funded.” As such, Bethlehem Steel was no longer

required to make deficit reduction contributions, to pay variable rate premiums, or to send out

participant notices.

       But reality was less rosy than these figures suggested. Bethlehem Steel’s funding ratio

had risen during the late 1990s in large part because of rising equity prices – and thus the plan’s

funding status was at risk of declining just as quickly when equity markets declined. Moreover,




                                                                                                  20
during this period Bethlehem Steel’s overall financial health was deteriorating. However, the

PBGC continued (as required by law) to charge the same $19 per participant premium that it

charged to every other firm. As a result of being deemed fully funded and its use of accounting

credits, in the three years from 1997 to 1999, the cumulative payments made by Bethlehem Steel

to the PBGC totaled less than $75 million. By 2001, Bethlehem Steel’s funding ratio has slipped

to 84 percent and its debt rating to D. Even so, thanks to the firm’s reliance on accounting

credits from prior contributions, the firm made no additional premium payments to the PBGC in

2000 or 2001.

       When the pension plan terminated in 2002, it turned out that the assets held by the

Bethlehem Steel pension plan were equal to only 45 percent of the termination liabilities of the

plan. As a result, the present value of unfunded benefit liabilities totaled $4.3 billion.

       The Bethlehem Steel case illustrates all three structural flaws of the PBGC. First,

Bethlehem Steel did not have to pay higher premiums despite the risk it posed. Indeed, the

cumulative premiums paid by Bethlehem Steel in the five years prior to bankruptcy totaled less

than 2 percent of the amount of ultimate underfunding, despite the increasingly obviously

likelihood that the firm was sliding towards bankruptcy. Second, the plan was inadequately

funded, as evidenced by the $4.3 billion funding shortfall, and yet Bethlehem Steel was not

required to make additional contributions in the years prior to bankruptcy. Third, Bethlehem

Steel was not even required to notify plan participants of its financial status in the years

immediately prior to bankruptcy.

       Nor was Bethlehem Steel an isolated case. The US Airways’ pension plan for its pilots

was 94 percent funded according to the PBGC formula, but when the plan was terminated, it

actually was only 33 percent funded, resulting in a $2.5 billion shortfall. Nor was US Airways




                                                                                                   21
subject to a deficit reduction contribution for six years leading up to the year of termination. In

these and numerous other cases, the design flaws of the PBGC have become apparent.



5. The Way Forward

       There are at least three reasons that policymakers may wish to fix the PBGC. First, as of

September 2006, the PBGC estimated that there was still over $350 billion of underfunding in

PBGC-insured plans. It may be too late to change the fate of plans of firms that are already

financially distressed and have underfunded plans, but thousands of other pension plans are at

firms not currently in financial distress, and policymakers should be concerned abut the growth

of future PBGC liabilities. Second, many firms are turning to various “hybrid” plans,

combinations of defined benefit and defined contribution, to provide retirement benefits to

employees. Most hybrid plans are legally considered defined benefit plans and thus insured by

the PBGC, so it would be premature to argue that the PBGC will become obsolete once

traditional defined benefit plans have disappeared. Third, employers and employees will be able

to make economically appropriate decisions about compensation only if firms are forced to face

the full economic consequences of their defined benefit pension plan funding decisions.

       In examining options for reforming the PBGC, some costs will not be recovered no

matter how the program is reformed. As succinctly noted by a former director of the

Congressional Budget Office: “[T]hose sunk costs cannot be avoided, and policy decisions can

determine only who will bear them” (Congressional Budget Office, 2005a). Useful reforms of

the PBGC can broadly be divided into two categories: those that seek to insert some additional

market incentives into PBGC, and those that would eliminate the PBGC in favor of (perhaps

mandatory) private insurance for pension plans.




                                                                                                  22
5.1 Adding Market Incentives to Government Pension Insurance

        One approach would be to have a round of reforms that further tighten funding rules and

implement risk-based pricing. For example, Wilcox (2006) has proposed many additional

reforms to safeguard pensions, including restricting pension portfolios to ensure better asset-

liability matching. These proposals as a group would make the pension promise risk-free,

compensate taxpayers at market rates for insuring the plans, and stop cross-subsidization of low-

risk by high-risk sponsors.

        Other options might try to bring some outside market discipline to bear on PBGC. For

example, the PBGC could be permitted to use private reinsurance markets to lay off some of its

exposure or to securitize its assets or revenue streams, either of which would bring market

pricing to bear on the insurance program (Belt, 2006b).

        Another approach would begin by having the government mandate that pension plan

sponsors fully disclose relevant information about liabilities and assets to employees and

financial markets on a regular and timely basis. Then, the government could give pension

promises seniority over other liabilities in bankruptcy proceedings. Bondholders, including

sophisticated institutional investors, would then have a greater incentive to require that pension

promises are fully funded, so as to avoid having greater risk imposed on them. Such an approach

might help to reduce the moral hazard that exists when financially distressed firms reduce cash

contributions to their defined benefit plans.7 By itself, such an approach would still not make the

promise of a benefit plan promise risk-free; from 1981 to 2000, the average default recovery rate


7
 Coronado and Liang (2006) find that riskier firms make lower cash contributions to their defined benefit plans and
have lower funding ratios, even after controlling for excess cash flow. Consistent with the findings of Rauh (2006),
however, they do not find that firms closer to bankruptcy invest more in equities to maximize the value of what is
effectively a put option on the PBGC.


                                                                                                                 23
from senior secured bonds of all ratings was only just over 50 percent (Hamilton, Gupton, and

Berhault, 2001). Also, the experience of Republic Steel, as described in a study by Bodie and

Merton (1993), suggests that elevating the PBGC’s status in bankruptcy proceedings might not

be sufficient, given the cleverness of plan sponsors in devising ways of stripping assets from the

pension fund. Nonetheless, such an approach could bring greater market discipline to bear.



5.2 Eliminating the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation

       Private markets could provide pension insurance. As noted by Bodie (1996),

“[E]conomic reasoning establishes a rationale for insuring defined-benefit pensions against the

risk that the plan sponsor will default on its promise to provide benefits. It does not establish a

rationale for the government to provide such insurance. The federal government is probably not

in the best position to carry out such a task.” Indeed, the U.S. government’s poor record of

properly pricing a wide variety of insurance programs—including terrorism risk insurance, flood

insurance, and deposit insurance--illustrates just how difficult it is for the government to be an

efficient insurance provider.

       Instead of providing insurance, the government could mandate that firms insure their

defined benefit plans in the private market. Private insurers would risk-adjust the premiums that

they charge to defined benefit plans. Such an idea is hardly new. While serving as the chief

economist for the PBGC, Ippolito (1987) wrote that one approach to solving the PBGC’s

problems would be “to simply eliminate the PBGC.” He expounded on this idea further in book

form, noting that the government might develop an assigned risk pool to cover the highest risk

companies (Ippolito, 1989). Other authors supportive of this approach include Sharpe (1976),

Pesando (1982), Smalhout (1993), and Weaver (1997).




                                                                                                      24
       Replacing the PBGC with mandatory private insurance would be criticized by those who

believe that the PBGC should be viewed as a social insurance program with intentional subsidies

to the defined benefit system, rather than as a standard insurance contract (for example, Salisbury

1996). Even if one were to accept the view that defined benefit subsidies are desirable, however,

implementing such a policy with non-risk-adjusted premiums and questionable accounting rules

would make little economic sense. A second potential criticism is that it is more difficult for

private sector insurers to insure systematic risk than non-systematic risks, thus potentially

exposing the insurers themselves to financial distress if many underfunded defined benefit plans

terminate during an economic downturn. This claim ignores that fact that insurers have access to

a wide range of financial instruments for hedging market risk. Further, unlike some sources of

systematic risk that are beyond the control of the insurers, such as terrorism or natural

catastrophes, the risk of pension underfunding can be substantially mitigated if private insurers

impose tight funding and portfolio restrictions. A third criticism is that the transition to a private

insurance system would be difficult for firms that are already substantially underfunded. Indeed,

the cost of paying market premiums for some firms might be enough to trigger bankruptcy (for

further discussion of these transition issues, see Center on Federal Financial Institutions, 2005b).

Of course, if a company depends on a large government subsidy in the form of under-priced

pension insurance to prevent bankruptcy, it is unlikely that the efficient long-run solution is to

continue the subsidy. Nonetheless, in light of the transition difficulties, Wilcox (2006) argues

that it would be desirable to first reform the PBGC further, including imposing portfolio

restrictions on plan sponsors.




                                                                                                     25
6. Conclusion

       While the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation has protected thousands of workers and

retirees who might have otherwise experienced devastating losses to their pensions after their

employer declared bankruptcy, it has also created perverse economic incentives due to the

program’s failure to price the insurance according to economic principles, its failure to provide

adequate funding incentives, and its failure to disclose important information to market

participants. Recent legislation has improved the program rules, but the reforms did not

eliminate the structural problems facing the PBGC. This paper outlines the reasons why

policymakers may deem further reform of the PBGC necessary and desirable, and discusses the

potential pros and cons of forcing defined benefit plans into a competitive insurance market.




                                                                                                    26
References

Belt, Bradley D. 2006a. “Through the Looking Glass: Adventures in Pension Land.” Remarks
before the National Association for Business Economics, March 13, 2006. Available at
www.pbgc.gov/media/news-archive/speeches/sp15669.html.

Belt, Bradley D. 2006b. “’Look Ahead’ Part IV – Longer-Term Strategic and Structural
Issues.” Memo from the PBGC Executive Director to the PBGC Board of Directors, the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Director of the National Economic
Council. May 30, 2006.

Belt, Bradley D. 2005. “Testimony of Bradley D. Belt, Executive Director, Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation, Before the Committee on Budget, U.S. Senate.” June 15.

Bodie, Zvi. 1990. “The ABO, the PBO, and Pension Investment Policy.” Financial Analysts
Journal. September/October.

Bodie, Zvi. 1996. “What the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation Can Learn from the Federal
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.” Journal of Financial Services Research. Vol. 10, No.
1 (March): 83 – 100.

Bodie, Zvi. 2006. “On Asset-Liability Matching and Federal Deposit and Pension Insurance.”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review. 88(4), pp. 323-29.

Bodie, Zvi and Robert C. Merton. 1993. “Pension Benefit Guarantees in the United States: A
Functional Analysis.” In Ray Schmitt, Editor, The Future of Pensions in the United States.
Philadelphia: Pension Research Council.

Boyce, Steven and Richard A. Ippolito. 2002. “The Cost of Pension Insurance.” Journal of Risk
and Insurance. 69(2): 121-70.

Bulow, Jeremy I. 1982. “What are Corporate Pension Liabilities?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 97(3): 435-52.

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Myron Scholes. 1983. “Who Owns the Assets in a Defined Benefit
Pension Plan? In Zvi Bodie and John Shoven, Editors, Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension
System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Center on Federal Financial Institutions. 2006. “Pension Reform: Summary of Final 2006 Bill.”
www.coffi.org.

Center on Federal Financial Institutions. 2005a. “PBGC: Premium Hike Possibilities.”
www.coffi.org.

Center on Federal Financial Institutions. 2005b. “PBGC: Policy Options.” www.coffi.org.




                                                                                             27
Congressional Budget Office. 2005(a). Statement of Douglas Holtz-Eakin, CBO Director,
before the U.S. Senate Committee on the Budget, “The Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation: Financial Conditions, Potential Risks, and Policy Options.” June 15.

Congressional Budget Office. 2005(b). “Risk Exposure of the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation.” September.

Coronado, Julia Lynn and Nellie Liang. 2006. “The Influence of PBGC Insurance on Pension
Fund Finances.” In David Blitzstein, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Utkus, editors:
Restructuring Retirement Risks. Oxford University Press.

Coronado, Julia Lynn and Steven A. Sharpe. 2003. “Did Pension Plan Accounting Contribute to
a Stock Market Bubble?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1).

Davidoff, Tom, Jeffrey R. Brown and Peter A. Diamond. 2005. “Annuities and Individual
Welfare.” The American Economic Review. Vol 95. No. 5. December: 1573 – 1590.

Eickelberg, Henry. 2005. “Testimony on Behalf of the American Benefits Council, American
Council of Life Insurers, Business Roundtable, Committee on Investment of Employee Benefit
Assets, ERISA Industry Committee, Financial Executives International, National Association of
Manufaturers, and US Chamber of Commerce before a Hearing of the House Ways and Means
Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures on the Administration’s Proposals for Single-
Employer Pension Funding Reform.” March 8, 2005. Available at
www.businessroundtable.org/pdf/20050308001TestimonyWMsPensionHearing.pdf.

Gold, Jeremy and Nick Hudson. 2003. “Creating Value in Pension Plans (or, Gentlemen Prefer
Bonds.)” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance. 15(4): 51-57.

Gold, Jeremy. 2000. “Accounting/Actuarial Bias Enables Equity Investment by Defined Benefit
Pension Plans.” Pension Research Council Working Paper 2001-5.

Government Accountability Office. 2005. “Private Pensions: Recent Experiences of Large
Defined Benefit Plans Illustrate Weaknesses in Funding Rules.” GAO-05-294, May.

Hamilton, David T., Greg Gupton, and Alexandra Berhault. 2001. “Default and Recovery Rates
of Corporate Bond Issuers.” New York: Moody’s Investor Service.

Harris, M. and Bengt Holmstrom. 1982. “Ability, Performance and Wage Dynamics.” Review
of Economic Studies. 49(3). No. 157: p. 315-34.

Ippolito, Richard A. 1987. “Pension Security: Has ERISA Had Any Effect?” Regulation 2: 15-
22.

Ippolito, Richard A. 1989. The Economics of Pension Insurance. University of Pennsylvania
Press.




                                                                                             28
Isadore, Chris. 2001. “Bethlehem Steel in Chapter 11.” CNNMoney.com, October 15.

Lazear, Edward. 1979. “Why is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy.
87: 1261 – 64.

Lewis, Christopher M. and George G. Pennacchi. 1999. “Valuing Insurance for Defined-Benefit
Plans.” In Phelim Boyle, George Pennacchi and Peer Ritchken, Editors, Advances in Futures
and Options Research. Vol. 10. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Lucas, Deborah and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2006. “Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension
Obligations – The Role of Stocks Revisited.” Working Paper.

Munnell, Alicia H. and Annika Sunden. 2004. Coming Up Short: The Challenge of 401(k)
Plans. Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution Press.

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. 2007. “Who We Are.” Fact sheet available at
www.pbgc.gov.

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. 2006a. “Annual Management Report: Fiscal Year 2006.”
Issued November 15, 2006.

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. 2006b. Fact sheets available at www.pbgc.gov.

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. 2005. Pension Insurance Data Book.

Pennacchi, George. 2006. “Deposit Insurance, Bank Regulation and Financial System Risks.”
Journal of Monetary Economics. 53(1): 1-30.

Pensando, James E. 1982. “Investment Risk, Bankruptcy Risk, and Pension Reform in Canada.”
Journal of Finance. 37(3): 741-49.

Rauh, Joshua D. 2006. “Risk Shifting versus Risk Management: Investment Policy in Corporate
Pension Plans.” University of Chicago working paper. Version September 18, 2006.

Russakoff, Dale. 2005. “Human Toll of a Pension Default.” Washington Post, June 13, page
A1.

Salisbury, Dallas. L. 1996. “Comments” (on James Pesando’s “The Government’s Role in
Insuring Pensions.”) In Zvi Bodie, Olivia S. Mitchell, and John A. Turner, Editors, Security
Employer-Based Pensions: An International Perspective. Philadelphia: Pension Research
Council.

Sharpe, William F. 1976. “Corporate Pension Funding Policy.” Journal of Financial Economics
3(3): 183-93.




                                                                                               29
Smalhout, James H. 1993. “Avoiding the Next Guaranteed Bailout: Reforms for the Pension
Insurance Program.” Brookings Review. 11(2): 12-15.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1993. “Perspectives on the Role of Government Risk-Bearing within the
Financial Sector.” In Mark S. Sniderman, Editor, Government Risk-Bearing. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

Sutkowski & Rhoads Law Offices. 2006. “What is the Origin of ERISA?” Available at
www.erisalawfirm.com/faq/q/origin_of_erisa.asp.

VanDerHei, Jack L. 1990. “An Empirical Analysis of Risk-Related Insurance Premiums for the
PBGC.” Journal of Risk and Insurance. 57(2): 240-59.

Warshawsky, Mark. 2007. “The New Pension Law and Defined Benefit Plans: A Surprisingly
Good Match.” Watson Wyatt working paper. Version: January 11, 2007.

Weaver, Carolyn L. 1997. “Government Guarantees of Private Pension Benefits: Current
Problems and Market-Based Solutions.” In Sylvester J. Schieber and John B. Shoven, Editors,
Public Policy Towards Pensions, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Wilcox, David W. 2006. “Reforming the Defined-Benefit Pension System.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity. 1: 235-285.

Wooten, James A. 2001. “’The Most Glorious Story of Failure in the Business:’ The
Studebaker-Packard Corporation and the Origins of ERISA.” Buffalo Law Review. Vol. 49: 683
– 739.




                                                                                              30
     Table 1: Top 10 Firms Presenting PBGC Claims (1975 – 2005)

                                                       Vested       Average
               Number     Fiscal Year   Claims      Participants   Claim per     Percent
  Top 10       of Plans     of Plan        ($       (thousands)      Vested      of total
  Firms                   Termination   millions)                  Participant   Claims

1. United         4          2005        $7,094           123       $57,889       22.7
Airlines
2. Bethlehem      1          2003        3,654            97         37,668       11.5
Steel
3. US             4       2003, 2005     2,862            59         48,653         9
Airways
4. LTV Steel      6       2002, 2003,    1,960            81         24,205        6.2
                             2004
5. National       7          2003        1,161            35         32,793        3.7
Steel
6. Pan            3       1991, 1992      841             37         22,438        2.7
American
Air
7. Weirton        1          2004         690              9         75,052        2.2
Steel
8. Trans          2          2001         668             34         19,511        2.1
World
Airlines
9. Kemper         2          2005         566             12         46,324        1.8
Insurance
10. Kaiser        3          2004         565             18         32,165        1.8
Aluminum
Top 10 Total     33                     $20,062         505          39,689       63.3
All Other       3,553                    11,646        1179          9,880        36.7
Total
TOTAL           3,585                   $31,708        1684         $18,826        100

Source: PBGC Pension Insurance Data Book 2005 Table S-5




                                                                                         31
          Table 2: Bethlehem Steel Pension Funding 1996 – 2002
                    1996      1997     1998      1999      2000     2001         2002
Current
Liability           78%       91%      99%       96%       86%      84%           NR
Funding Ratio
(“official” ratio
of plan assets to
liabilities)
Was Company
Required to          Y         N         N         N        N        NR           NR
Make Deficit
Reduction
Contribution?
Was company
obligated to         Y         Y         N         N        N         N            N
send out a
participant
notice?
Did the
company pay a       $15       $17        N         N        N         N            N
Variable Rate       mil.      mil.
Premium for
being
underfunded?

Actual              $354      $32       $31      $8         $0        $0           $0
contributions to    mil.      mil.      mil.     mil.
PBGC


Debt Rating          B+        B+       BB-      BB-        B+        D      Withdrawn
   Source: Testimony of Bradley D. Belt, PBGC Executive Director, Before the U.S. Senate
                         Committee on the Budget, June 15, 2005




                                                                                           32
       Figure 1: Pension Participation Rates by Plan Type, 1980-1999

                                                       60
% o f P riv a te W a g e a n d S a la ry W o rk e rs


                                                       50


                                                       40


                                                       30


                                                       20


                                                       10


                                                        0
                                                       19 0
                                                       19 1
                                                       19 2
                                                       19 3
                                                       19 4
                                                       19 5
                                                       19 6
                                                       19 7
                                                       19 8
                                                       19 9
                                                       19 0
                                                       19 1
                                                       19 2
                                                       19 3
                                                       19 4
                                                       19 5
                                                       19 6
                                                       19 7
                                                       19 8
                                                          99
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          8
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                          9
                                                       19




                                                            DB Only   Both DB & DC   DC Only
                         Source: U.S. Department of Labor Employee Benefits Security Administration
                         Private Pension Plan Bulletin, Abstract of 1999 Form 5500 Annual Reports,
                         Number 12, Summer 2004 (Table E4)




                                                                                                      33
 Figure 2: Net Financial Position of the PBGC’s Single-Employer
                       Program, 1980-2006
                $15




                $10




                 $5




                 $0
                       80
                            81
                                 82
                                      83
                                           84
                                                85
                                                     86
                                                          87
                                                               88
                                                                    89
                                                                         90
                                                                              91
                                                                                   92
                                                                                        93
                                                                                             94
                                                                                                  95
                                                                                                       96
                                                                                                            97
                                                                                                                 98
                                                                                                                      99
                                                                                                                      00
                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                                  02
                                                                                                                                       03
                                                                                                                                            04
                                                                                                                                                 05
                                                                                                                                                      06
                  19
                        19
                             19
                                  19
                                       19
                                            19
                                                 19
                                                      19
                                                           19
                                                                19
                                                                     19
                                                                          19
                                                                               19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                         19
                                                                                              19
                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                     20
  B illio n s




                 -$5




                -$10




                -$15




                -$20




                -$25

                       Source: PBGC Pension Insurance Data Book 2005 supplemented with FY 2006
Results




                                                                                                                                            34
