                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      REASSESSING THE WIC EFFECT:
      EVIDENCE FROM THE PREGNANCY NUTRITION SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM

                                         Theodore Joyce
                                        Andrew D. Racine
                                      Cristina Yunzal-Butler

                                       Working Paper 13441
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13441


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2007




The research was supported by grants from the Institute for Research on Poverty and United States
Department of Agriculture (IRP-USDA) Small Grants program to Baruch College and from the USDA
Food and Nutrition Research Program to the National Bureau of Economic Research (# 59-5000-6-0102).
We thank participants at the Small Grant Conference at the University of Wisconsin and the Small
Grant conference at USDA Economic Research Service in Washington D.C. We thank Karen Dalenius
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for help with the PNSS file and special
thanks to WIC Program administrators in various state offices. These include Najmul Chowdhury
(North Carolina), Patrice Wolfla (Indiana), Nancy Hoffman (Missouri), Penny Roth (Illinois) and Lisa
Armstrong (Virginia). We would also like to acknowledge input from John Karl Scholz at the University
of Wisconsin and Jay Hirschman at the USDA Food and Nutrition Bureau and three anonymous referees.
All opinions are those of the authors and do not represent those of the various state WIC programs,
the CDC, the USDA, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Theodore Joyce, Andrew D. Racine, and Cristina Yunzal-Butler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reassessing the WIC Effect: Evidence from the Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System
Theodore Joyce, Andrew D. Racine, and Cristina Yunzal-Butler
NBER Working Paper No. 13441
September 2007
JEL No. I12,I38

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent analyses differ on how effective the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants
and Children (WIC) is at improving infant health. We use data from nine states that participate in
the Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System to address limitations in previous work. With information
on the mother's timing of WIC enrollment, we test whether greater exposure to WIC is associated
with less smoking, improved weight gain during pregnancy, better birth outcomes, and greater likelihood
of breastfeeding. Our results suggest that much of the often-reported association between WIC and
lower rates of preterm birth is likely spurious, the result of gestational age bias. We find modest effects
of WIC on fetal growth, inconsistent associations between WIC and smoking, limited associations
with gestational weight gain, and some relationship with breast feeding. A WIC effect exists, but on
fewer margins and with less impact than has been claimed by policy analysts and advocates.

Theodore Joyce                                       Cristina Yunzal-Butler
Baruch College and NBER                              Graduate Center, City University of New York
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor                          365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309                              New York, New York 10016
ted_joyce@baruch.cuny.edu                            cyunzal@gmail.com

Andrew D. Racine
Albert Einstein College of Medicine Children's Hos
Division of General Pediatrics
1621 Eastchester Road
Bronx, NY 10461
and NBER
aracine@montefiore.org
                                                 Introduction


        The conclusion among policy analysts has been that “WIC works.” The 1992 General

Accounting Office report concluded that every $1.00 spent on WIC saves the government $3.50

in averted newborn costs (General Accounting Office, 1992). A more recent review of WIC’s

31-year history reached similar conclusions, 1 and a new study based on data from 19 states found

that participation in WIC was associated with a 29 percent reduction in low birth weight and

more than a 50 percent reduction in very low birth weight [Bitler and Currie (BC), 2005a].

         However, Besharov and Germanis (2001) and more recently Joyce, Gibson and Colman

[(JGC), 2005] have challenged the prevailing wisdom. Besharov and Germanis (2001) reviewed

the literature and concluded that evidence linking WIC to improved birth outcomes was dated

and based on weak designs that were vulnerable to contamination by selection bias. Joyce,

Gibson and Colman (2005) analyzed over 800,000 births to women on Medicaid in New York

City between 1988 and 2001. They found little association between WIC and fetal growth.

They did find that WIC was strongly associated with preterm birth, but concluded that the

association was likely spurious, since there is little support in the clinical literature for such an

association.

        Bitler and Currie (2005b) challenged such skepticism, arguing that WIC provides more

than nutritional supplementation and that the bundle of services associated with WIC creates

health-enhancing synergies:

        It is entirely possible that the main benefit of WIC is not the provision of food per se, but
        the fact that the “carrot” of food packages induces women to initiate prenatal care earlier,
        follow it more faithfully and receive more continuous care than they otherwise would. It
        is also possible that women who want to get WIC are less likely to smoke or use illegal

1
 “What is cause for celebration is WIC’s extraordinary record of accomplishments for the nutrition and health of the
nation’s children, and that record has grown as the program has grown.” Food Research and Action Center 2005, p.
1. http://www.frac.org/WIC/2004_Report/Summary_Report.pdf.


                                                         1
       drugs in part because they get into care earlier, receive better advice, and are more
       closely monitored than other similar women. These are important issues that deserve
       investigation (Bitler and Currie, 2005b).


Ludwig and Miller (2005) reviewed the studies by JGC (2005) and BC (2005a) in an effort to

reconcile the conflicting conclusions. Ludwig and Miller (2005) noted that the lack of clinical

evidence linking nutritional supplementation and preterm birth did not rule out the possibility

that addressing the constellation of risk factors targeted by WIC might be protective of preterm

birth. They also stressed that neither JGC nor BC could determine the timing of WIC enrollment

but could only compare women who participated in WIC during pregnancy to those who did not.

A dichotomous indicator of WIC, argued Ludwig and Miller, will tend to overestimate the

protective effect of participation, since women whose pregnancies last longer for reasons

unrelated to WIC will have more opportunity to enroll. However, adjustment for the length of

gestation tends to “over-fit” the data and underestimates the effect of WIC, if participation

prolongs gestation.

       In this paper, we address several of the issues raised by Bitler and Currie (2005b) and

Ludwig and Miller (2005). With data from the Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System (PNSS),

we provide new evidence that the association between WIC participation and preterm birth is

likely spurious. A major advantage of the PNSS is that we know the woman’s exact date of WIC

enrollment in both the prenatal and postpartum periods. We show that the rates of low birth

weight and preterm birth fall the longer women delay prenatal enrollment in WIC. Moreover,

women who enroll into WIC after delivery experience much higher rates of preterm birth than

women who enroll during pregnancy. The relatively low rate of adverse birth outcomes among

third trimester WIC enrollees suggests a form of fetal selection in which healthier pregnancies

endure for reasons unrelated to WIC. The elevated rate of adverse birth outcomes among



                                                 2
postpartum enrollees may be driven, in part, by women who would have enrolled in WIC

prenatally had they not delivered prematurely. The interpretation that WIC is not protective

against premature delivery is consistent with the clinical literature, where trial after trial has

failed to produce a reliable intervention to prevent preterm birth (Institute of Medicine, 2007).

        In the second half of the paper, we analyze the association between WIC and fetal growth.

We argue that nutritional supplementation, health education and timely referrals are more likely

to be protective against intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) than against preterm birth. In

addition, we also analyze changes in maternal smoking, breastfeeding and weight gain during

pregnancy in the belief that we should be able to support any association between WIC and

IUGR with changes in maternal behavior and health.

        In the end, we find that prenatal participation in WIC is positively associated with fetal

growth, though the association is difficult to support with substantive changes in maternal

behavior and health. We conclude that, at least with respect to birth outcomes, WIC works, but

on fewer margins and with less impact than has been claimed by policy analysts and advocates.

We also argue that linking the success or failure of WIC to its impact on birth outcomes may be

myopic. Greater emphasis on affecting life-long habits such as smoking, or behaviors with

known benefits to mother and child such as breastfeeding, iron supplementation, and childhood

immunizations, may be sufficient to justify additional funding.



                                      Background and Issues

        The notion that “WIC works” is based primarily on WIC’s protective association against

preterm birth. The association between WIC and measures of fetal growth is less robust. Bitler

and Currie (2005a), for example, found that prenatal WIC participation was associated with a 29




                                                   3
percent decrease in the odds of a preterm birth (< 37 weeks) and a 53 percent decline in the odds

of a very preterm birth (< 32 weeks), but only a 13 percent decline in intrauterine growth

retardation. This pattern is common in the literature. Researchers find large and robust

associations between WIC and birth outcomes unadjusted for gestational age, but more modest

and even non-existent associations with measures of fetal growth. 2 Most researchers have

interpreted this pattern as evidence that WIC is strongly protective against preterm birth. Yet

there is little in the clinical literature to suggest that nutritional supplementation exerts such an

effect. The recently released report on preterm birth by the Institute of Medicine summarizes the

literature as follows: “Randomized studies in both developed and developing countries have

noted an absence of benefit from dietary supplementation in preventing preterm birth (Berkowitz

and Papiernik, 1993). Furthermore, protein supplementation specifically has not been found to

reduce the risk of preterm birth and possibly increases the risk (Berkowitz and Papiernik, 1993;

Rush et al., 1980) as does multivitamin supplementation (Villar et al., 1998).” (Institute of

Medicine 2007, p. 94)

        The association between WIC and fetal growth, although less consistent than the

association between WIC and preterm birth in the empirical literature, is more plausible. In one

recent study, researchers use data from linked administrative and birth certificate files in New

York State in 1995 (Lazariu-Bauer et al., 2004) and find that early WIC enrollment is strongly

associated with increased fetal growth. The study has a number of strengths. First, the exact

dates of WIC enrollment are available. This allows testing of whether fetal growth is directly

related to the amount of time a woman participates in WIC. Second, the authors use propensity

score matching to minimize observable differences between early and late WIC enrollees. They


2
 See Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore 1992; Gordon and Nelson 1995; Kotelchuck, Schwartz, Anderka and Finison,
1984; Stockbauer, 1987; Buescher and Horton, 2000; Joyce, Gibson and Colman, 2005).


                                                     4
find that early enrollment in WIC is associated with an increase of 70 grams in birth weight

among full-term deliveries. Gains among blacks and Hispanics are twice as large as those of

whites. Yet despite its methodological sophistication, the study lacks evidence of a plausible

mechanism. There is no attempt to associate WIC participation with decreased smoking,

improved nutritional intake, greater maternal weight gain or other maternal behaviors consistent

with fetal growth.

       Those who argue that WIC is protective against preterm birth contend that WIC is more

than nutritional supplementation. It is, they maintain, the combination of nutritional

supplementation, behavior counseling, and timely referrals that explains WIC’s protective effect.

However, a recent trial of comprehensive prenatal care failed to show a positive association with

improved birth outcomes (Klerman et al., 2001). Components of the augmented care included

specific interventions targeted at smoking cessation, weight gain, and vitamin/mineral

supplementation, as well as appointment reminders, free transportation, no waiting time for visits,

child care, evening office hours, and individualized care with the same practitioner. The focus

on access was clearly effective as women in the treatment group averaged almost two more

prenatal visits than women in routine care. The study is important because the augmented care

was directed at the “constellation of risk factors” that Ludwig and Miller (2005) argue may be

lacking from more narrowly targeted clinical trials for preterm birth. Indeed, the effort to

enhance access in addition to the augmented prenatal care services went well beyond what could

be expected from a typical WIC program.

       The WIC program is now over 34 years old. Approximately 35 percent of all pregnant

and postpartum women participated in 1998 (Bitler, Currie and Scholz, 2003). The program’s

often-cited association with improved birth outcomes is predicated on a protective effect against




                                                 5
preterm birth, but is unsupported by evidence from the clinical literature. The few studies that

report a substantive association between WIC participation and enhanced fetal growth do not

provide corroborating evidence on intermediate outcomes such as reduced smoking and

improved maternal weight gain. In this study, we update and extend the literature with the

largest population-based study of WIC participants ever assembled. Because of the size, recency,

and detail of the data, we are able to analyze an array of birth outcomes and behaviors by the

timing of WIC enrollment in order to provide a broader assessment of WIC’s effectiveness.



                                      Empirical Implementation

Data

       Our data are from the Pregnancy Nutritional Surveillance System (PNSS). The PNSS is

“…..a program-based surveillance system that monitors the nutritional status of low-income

infants, children and women in federally funded maternal and child health programs”

(http://www.cdc.gov/pednss/). The PNSS collects information from all WIC program

participants at the points of prenatal and postpartum enrollment. At the prenatal interview, WIC

intake workers collect demographic information along with indicators of maternal health and

behavior. At the postpartum visit, information on infant health and postpartum behaviors is

added. The PNSS combines the advantage of administrative data and its detailed information on

the timing of WIC enrollment with that of survey data and its information on health outcomes

and behaviors. PNSS data on maternal health and behaviors are richer than those available from

birth certificates, which have been the primary source of outcomes in previous prenatal WIC

evaluations using secondary data (Schramm, 1985, 1986; Stockbauer, 1986, 1987; Devaney,




                                                6
Bilheimer and Schore, 1992; Buescher and Horton, 2000; Ahluwalia, et al. 1998; Lazariu-Bauer,

et al. 2004).

         The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) organize the PNSS data from the

twenty-two states and three Indian tribal governments into a central file. We obtained

permission to access the PNSS file from the relevant institutional review board or from the

supervising WIC agency in each of the 10 states with the largest WIC caseloads in 2004. These

include Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina,

Ohio and Virginia. Illinois data were discarded because information on the timing of WIC

enrollment was incomplete. Thus, we have PNSS data from nine states over multiple years in

all states except Virginia, for which we only have data from 2004 (see Table 1).                   The nine-state

file has 3,311,976 women who enrolled in WIC during pregnancy or postpartum. We included

all women who enrolled in WIC during pregnancy and who re-certified for WIC postpartum.

Without a postpartum interview, we lacked information on the birth outcome, breastfeeding, and

postpartum smoking. Re-certification also suggests that women were enrolled continuously

during pregnancy. 3 The comparison group was women who enrolled in WIC after delivery and

thus were unexposed to WIC during pregnancy.


         We excluded all women who enrolled in WIC during pregnancy but did not return to re-

certify after delivery (n=441,945 or 13.3%). This raises two potential issues. First, if these

woman had better (worse) birth outcomes, on average, than women who re-certified for WIC

postpartum, then our estimates of WIC’s effectiveness will be biased downwards (upwards).

Second, by excluding these women, our estimates become less comparable to those from studies


3
  A better measure of continuous participation would be the dollar amount of redeemed food vouchers. Relatively
few studies have had such data, but he the results from these tend to be consistent with estimates based on month of
enrollment (see Kotelchuck et al., 1984).


                                                         7
that compare all prenatal WIC enrollees to eligible non-participants. Fortunately, the PNSS data

from North Carolina have also been linked to birth certificates. This linkage provides

information on birth outcomes and prenatal smoking for the prenatal WIC enrollees from that

state who did not re-certify postpartum. We refer to these women as lost to follow-up. Thus, we

compare estimates from models for North Carolina with and without woman who were lost to

follow-up. This provides some insight into the potential bias from excluding women who do not

re-certify postpartum from the larger sample. Three other studies have also used North Carolina

data to analyze WIC (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore, 1992; Buescher et al., 1993; Buescher and

Horton, 2000). In each study, researchers linked WIC administrative data to Medicaid claims for

newborn deliveries and then to birth certificates. The comparison group in each was women

whose births were paid for by Medicaid, but who were not enrolled in WIC during pregnancy.

By contrast, our comparison group is women who did not participate in WIC during pregnancy,

but who enrolled in WIC postpartum. There is likely to be substantial overlap in our comparison

group and the one frequently used in the literature. We try to replicate the results from those two

studies by limiting our sample to women in WIC who were also covered by Medicaid at the time

of enrollment.



Econometric Model

       The canonical test of WIC is as follows:

                 (1)         H = α 0 + α1 WIC + Xβ + e

       Let H be a birth outcome such as birth weight and let WIC be a dichotomous indicator of

whether the woman enrolled in WIC during pregnancy. The omitted category usually includes

eligible non-participants such as women on Medicaid (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore, 1992;



                                                  8
Bitler and Currie, 2005a). Let X be a matrix of other relevant variables, including demographic

and socio-economic characteristics of the mother, and let e be the error term. The vast majority

of research has found that α 1>0 for favorable outcomes such as birth weight and gestational age

and α 1<0 for adverse outcomes such as low birth weight and preterm birth (Fox, Hamilton and

Lin, 2004).

        With data on the timing of WIC enrollment, the specification in equation (1) can be

expanded as follows:

                  (2)           H = α 0 + α 1 WIC_1 + α 2 WIC_2 + α 3 WIC_3 + Xβ + e

The WIC indicators designate the trimester of pregnancy in which a woman enrolled in WIC.

The omitted category is again eligible non-participants (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore, 1992;

Gordon and Nelson, 1995; Lazariu-Bauer et al., 2004). In the PNSS, the omitted category is

postpartum enrollees. If greater exposure to WIC improves infant health, then we would expect

α1>α2> α3>0, or the reverse if H is an adverse outcome. Thus, we follow previous evaluations of

WIC and use Equation (2) to test for a dose-response effect. 4 We also present estimates of

Equation (1) to link our results with past work.

        Our test for a dose-response effect has two caveats. First, if nutritional supplementation

can be expected to produce improvements in fetal weight gain only if administered at the time of

greatest fetal growth, then third trimester enrollment might well turn out to be equally efficacious

compared to first trimester enrollment when little fetal growth is occurring. Second, although

we know the timing of WIC enrollment, we have no information about the continuity or intensity

of treatment. 5 However, if WIC is more than nutritional supplementation—if women who enroll


4
  See Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore (1992) Gordon and Nelson (1995), Ahluwalia et al. (1998) and Lazariu-Bauer
et al. (2004) for tests of a dose-response between the timing of WIC enrollment and birth outcomes.
5
  Earlier studies of prenatal WIC used redeemed vouchers per month to proxy intensity (Kennedy and Kotelchuck
1984; Schramm 1985; Stockbauer 1986) Thus, those who had 7-9 months of redeemed vouchers during pregnancy


                                                      9
early smoke and drink less, eat more nutritiously and receive timely referrals for additional

care—then early and continuous participation in WIC should be protective against adverse birth

outcomes. Thus, we would expect to find changes in maternal behavior and possibly increases in

weight gain during pregnancy.

Outcomes

        Most studies have emphasized the association between WIC and the probability of a low

birth weight birth. However, low birth weight can be broadly divided between preterm births—

those that occur before the 37th week of gestation—and those that are small for gestational age

(SGA). The latter is an indication of fetal growth retardation. The causes of preterm birth are

largely unknown and few interventions, if any, appear effective (Institute of Medicine, 2007). A

stronger case can be made for an association between intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) and

prenatal supplementation, since the latter is more closely linked to nutritional intake, smoking

and maternal weight gain (Kramer, 1987; Institute of Medicine, 1990).

        We divide our analyses of birth outcomes along these two dimensions. We use birth

weight (in grams) and dichotomous indicators of low birth weight (<2500 grams), very low birth

weight (<1500 grams) and preterm birth (< 37 weeks gestation). These four outcomes allow for

comparisons with previous research and are mostly determined by gestational age.

        We also analyze three measures of fetal growth. The first is birth weight adjusted for

gestational age. 6 The second measure is a dichotomous indicator of infants below the 10th

percentile in weight for gestation, within gender, based on all singleton births to US residents in

1995 (Alexander et al., 1998). These births are referred to as small for gestational age (SGA).



had to have enrolled in the first trimester. However, a woman could have enrolled in first trimester but only
redeemed three months of vouchers. Thus, early enrollment is a necessary condition for more prolonged treatment,
but it is not a guarantee.
6
  In other words, we include gestational age as a right-hand side determinant in a birth weight regression.


                                                      10
Our final measure of fetal growth is an indicator of infants that are term, low birth weight (> 37

weeks gestation and < 2500 grams).

       We study three indicators of maternal behavior. The first is a dichotomous variable of

whether women who smoked three months before pregnancy indicate that they are not smoking

at the time of the postpartum interview. The second is whether a woman ever breastfed. Lastly,

we analyze maternal weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds), adjusted for pre-pregnancy BMI

and length of gestation.



Sources of bias

   Although the statistical estimation of Equations (1) and (2) is straightforward, identification

of treatment effects associated with WIC is quite challenging. In econometric terms, the

coefficient on WIC, α1, estimates the average effect of treatment on the treated under two

assumptions: first, that the decision to participate in WIC, conditional on X, is uncorrelated with

the outcome in the absence of participation (H0); and second, that the expected gains to

participation are constant across individuals (Heckman, 1997; Wooldridge, 2002). These are

strong assumptions, and yet we know of no study that has been able to instrument credibly for

WIC participation.

        One fallback strategy has been to include a rich set of controls to lessen selection bias

from omitted variables (Gordon and Nelson, 1995; Bitler and Currie, 2005a). For instance,

favorable selection occurs if early WIC enrollment is just one manifestation of healthy behavior.

These same women may be less likely to smoke, drink, use illicit drugs, and may be less likely to

experience vaginal infections. If we only partially control for these factors, then we will

overestimate the treatment effect of WIC. Adverse selection may also contaminate estimates.




                                                 11
In this case, women with a history of reproductive health problems may seek out WIC and

prenatal care early in order to lessen the likelihood of an adverse birth outcome. Such pre-

pregnancy conditions are poorly measured in population-based data files, which results in down-

biased estimates of treatment effects.

            Selection bias is only one challenge to identifying credible WIC effects. Others have

recognized the importance of gestational age bias (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore, 1992;

Gordon and Nelson, 1995; Lazariu-Bauer et al., 2004). Women whose pregnancies last longer

have more opportunity to enroll in WIC. In other words, even if fetal and/or reproductive health

is randomly distributed among WIC participants, less healthy fetuses/women are more prone to

premature delivery. As a result, women who would have enrolled in the third trimester but

deliver prematurely may register for the program during the postpartum period instead. This can

generate a mechanical correlation between postpartum enrollment -- or a lack of prenatal

exposure to WIC -- and adverse birth outcomes. 7



Approaches to selection bias

            As with previous studies, we lack a convincing instrument for WIC participation. We

therefore focus on creating a comparison group that is as similar as possible to women exposed

to WIC prenatally. For instance, we will use women who enrolled in WIC postpartum to identify

the prenatal effects of WIC on maternal behavior and birth outcomes. One advantage of this

comparison group is that everyone is eligible for WIC and everyone participates. Stigma or

other barriers to participation in publicly funded nutrition programs are thus unlikely to be

factors in our analysis.



7
    Jeffrey Harris (1982) referred to this as fetal selection.


                                                                 12
         Second, we have very large samples that enable us to stratify the analysis along key

dimensions. We will estimate separate models for non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks,

and Hispanics. This considerably enhances the specification. The standard regression in the

literature pools all races and ethnicities and includes dichotomous indicators for each. Our

specification is equivalent to a fully interacted model by race and ethnicity. The difference is

important because treatment effects can vary substantially by race and ethnicity (Lazariu-Bauer

et al., 2004; Joyce, Gibson and Colman, 2005). We also analyze important subgroups whose

pre-pregnancy characteristics may put them at elevated risk for anemia, low weight gain and

intrauterine growth retardation. Examples include women whose pre-pregnancy body mass

index (BMI) is less than 19.8, women who smoked three months before pregnancy, and women

with multiple gestations (Rush, Stein and Susser, 1980; Institute of Medicine, 1996). Twinning

is a useful risk factor because, unlike smoking, it is exogenously assigned conditional on age (see

Joyce, Gibson and Colman, 2005).

         Third, we estimate Equation (2) but further limit the sample to first births and early

initiators of prenatal care. 8 As we show below, there is substantial variation in the timing of

WIC enrollment by trimester of prenatal care. The objective of the stratification by first births

and early care is to lessen potential heterogeneity among WIC enrollees. Few of the women in

this sub-sample will have enrolled in WIC in a prior pregnancy; this should lessen adverse

selection from women whose difficulties in a previous pregnancy motivated them to enroll in

WIC early. Fourth, we will use propensity score methods (PSM). Following Imbens (2004), we


8
  Registration for prenatal care almost invariably precedes enrollment in WIC. In our data, 86 percent of women
with no previous live births registered for prenatal care in the month prior to enrollment in WIC, 13 percent
registered in the same month they enrolled in WIC and in only 1.3 percent of cases did WIC enrollment precede
early prenatal care. These data are significant because Ludwig and Miller (2005) argue that WIC can affect birth
outcomes by encouraging early enrollment in prenatal care. Thus, stratification by early prenatal care risks “over-
controlling.” However, our data suggest this is highly unlikely given that registration for prenatal care precedes
enrollment in WIC.


                                                         13
weight regressions by the propensity score associated with prenatal versus postpartum

enrollment in WIC. 9 Weighting improves the balance of observed characteristics between

“treated” and “untreated” women. However, given that selection bias is likely driven by

unobservables, we view PSM as primarily a diagnostic and robustness check. Finally, we will

use specification and falsification checks as a means of flagging potential contamination from

omitted variable bias. 10

                                                           Results

         Characteristics of women by the timing of WIC enrollment for our nine-state sample are

shown in Table 1. The last column displays the differences between women who enroll during

pregnancy and women who do not enroll until postpartum. Given the number of observations,

almost all differences are statistically significant. In general, compared with postpartum

enrollees, women who enroll in WIC during pregnancy are more likely to be white non-

Hispanics, unmarried, teens, high school dropouts, on Medicaid and receiving food stamps

Differences by trimester of pregnancy among women who enrolled in WIC during pregnancy are

more muted. Table 1 also points out some limitations of the data. Smoking three months prior

to pregnancy is poorly reported among postpartum enrollees: in nearly half these cases, pregravid


9
  Let PSi be the propensity score associated with the probability that a woman enrolls in WIC during pregnancy as
compared with postpartum. The weight for all postpartum enrollees is [PSi/(1-PSi)] while the weight for prenatal
enrollees is simply 1 (see Hirano and Imbens (2001) for an application).
10
   For instance, Bitler and Currie (2005b) have argued that WIC may increase the likelihood that a woman stops or
limits her smoking. If true, then WIC enrollment must precede changes in smoking. We can explicitly test this
with the PNSS. At enrollment, women are asked if they smoke, and if so, whether they have reduced their smoking
or quit altogether. One of the possible responses is, “Stopped smoking before my first prenatal care visit.” The
clinical literature indicates that most pregnant smokers who quit do so when they realize that they are pregnant and
are often referred to as “spontaneous quitters” (Quinn, Mullen and Ershoff, 1991; Sexton and Hebel, 1984; Secker-
Walker et al., 1995; Windsor et al., 1993). We regress our measure of spontaneous quitting on the timing of WIC
enrollment. Any association between the timing of WIC enrollment and spontaneous quitting is likely spurious,
since quitting precedes enrollment. Similarly, if gestational age bias is present, then the likelihood of preterm birth
should fall the longer a woman delays enrollment in WIC. This presumes, of course, that early enrollment in WIC is
not protective against preterm birth. If WIC is protective, then our test is biased towards the null as the treatment
effect of WIC works to offset the gains from fetal selection.



                                                          14
smoking is unknown. In addition, the percentage of postpartum enrollees in Georgia (62.2%) is

clearly greater than in other states. 11 In analyzing smoking, we therefore limit the sample to

prenatal enrollees and include state and year fixed effects in all regressions. Finally, there are

substantially more missing observations for gestational age among postpartum enrollees than

there are among prenatal enrollees. This is a potential source of bias that we discuss in the

presentation of the results.

        Appendix Table 1 indicates that the age and poverty distributions of the women in eight

of our states in 2000 are very similar to those reported by the USDA Food and Nutrition Service

(2000). However, we have proportionally more non-Hispanic blacks and fewer Hispanics. In

addition, women in our sample tend to enroll later in pregnancy. State-specific comparisons,

where available, are also reassuring in terms of mean weight gain, parity and birth weight (see

Appendix Table 2).



Replication of early work

        In Table 2, we show adjusted differences in birth outcomes by the timing of WIC

enrollment. The even-numbered columns show estimates for all women on WIC. The odd-

numbered columns show estimates from the sub-sample of women who also were enrolled in

Medicaid at either the prenatal or postpartum interview. The latter is our attempt to replicate the

samples used by Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore (1992), Buescher and Horton (2000), Bitler

and Currie (2005a), and Joyce, Gibson and Colman (2005). The first row shows the estimates of

α1 from Equation (1), while the next three rows show estimates of α1, α2, and α3 from Equation

(2). We also display differences by trimester of enrollment. We use ordinary least squares for


11
  We have spoken with officials in Georgia who are aware of the high number of enrollees but who feel it reflects
the situation in the state.


                                                        15
continuous dependent variables and maximum likelihood probit for dichotomous outcomes.

       The estimates in general are remarkably similar to those reported in the literature.

Prenatal participation in WIC is associated with an adjusted mean difference of 63 grams in birth

weight based on the sub-sample of women on Medicaid and WIC. This is the same estimate

obtained by Bitler and Currie (2005, Table 2). The results in Table 2 also indicate that prenatal

WIC participation is associated with decreases in the rates of low birth weight (2.7 percentage

points), very low birth weight (0.9 percentage point) and preterm birth (2.8 percentage points),

These represent declines of between 30 and 72 percent evaluated at the means of the respective

birth outcomes, or relative risks of between 0.70 and 0.27. Estimates from the sample of all

women on WIC regardless of Medicaid status are slightly smaller in absolute magnitude (even-

numbered columns). Given the similarity of the estimates between the two samples, we include

all women on WIC in succeeding tables but adjust for participation in Medicaid, TANF and the

Food Stamp Program.

       Differences by trimester of WIC enrollment suggest a more complex story. Women who

enroll in the third trimester of pregnancy have higher mean birth weights and lower rates of low

birth weight, very low birth weight, and preterm birth compared with both postpartum and first-

trimester enrollees. Consider preterm birth. Women who delay enrollment into WIC until the

third trimester have rates of preterm birth that are 6.1 percentage points lower than postpartum

enrollees and 4.8 percentage points less than first-trimester enrollees.



Fetal selection and gestational age bias

       As noted previously, the clinical literature has found no consistent reproducible

intervention that can prevent preterm birth (Institute of Medicine, 2007). It would therefore




                                                 16
seem implausible for WIC to be responsible for the very large differences in preterm birth

observed between prenatal and postpartum enrollees. In addition, we find the very large

differences in preterm birth between first and third-trimester WIC enrollees to be

counterintuitive. Early enrollment in WIC should be associated with more nutritional

supplementation, more health education and more timely referrals. An alternative hypothesis,

therefore, is that a large portion of the association between WIC and improved birth outcomes is

an artifact of fetal selection or what others have termed gestational age bias (Devaney, Bilheimer

and Schore, 1992; Gordon and Nelson, 1995). Women who carry into the third trimester have

healthier fetuses for reasons largely unrelated to WIC. They also have the opportunity to enroll

in WIC late in pregnancy, while their unenrolled counterparts who deliver prematurely do not.

To illustrate, Figure 1 shows the rates of low birth weight and preterm birth by the week of

pregnancy in which women enrolled in WIC. The unadjusted rate of low birth weight among

women who enrolled in WIC in the 11th week of pregnancy is approximately 7 percent. The rate

climbs modestly to just under 8 percent by the 23rd week, after which it starts to decline. A

similar pattern is observed for preterm birth. 12

           As points of comparison, we have also included the mean rates of low birth weight and

preterm birth for all postpartum enrollees. The regression results in Tables 2 and 3 now become

clear. Women who enrolled in WIC at 33 weeks experienced, as a group, rates of premature

delivery of 8.6 percent, considerably below the 11.9 percent associated with women who

enrolled at 23 weeks. WIC participation cannot have been responsible for the prolongation of

their gestations to 33 weeks, since these women had not enrolled and so were unexposed to WIC

until then. Rather, these women’s gestations lasted long enough for them to still be in a

“prenatal state” at the time of their enrollment. Some women who would have enrolled in WIC
12
     By definition the rate of preterm birth is zero by the 37th week of pregnancy.


                                                            17
at 33 weeks from the time of conception, but who had already delivered, are likely part of the

postpartum cohort. This is a possible explanation for why rates of low birth weight and preterm

birth are 10.8 and 14.0 percent, respectively, among postpartum enrollees. These are well in

excess of the rates for prenatal enrollees at almost every week of enrollment. The pattern is even

more dramatic for very low birth weight and is consistent across race and ethnicity (Figure 2).

Very low birth weight is a well-measured proxy of extreme prematurity. Our conclusion is that

gestational age bias is impossible to eliminate in the analysis of outcomes that are directly

determined by the length of gestation. We turn, therefore, to the analysis of fetal growth and

outcomes that condition on gestational age. 13



WIC and fetal growth

         In Table 3 we show regression results for three measures of fetal growth: birth weight

adjusted for gestation, SGA, and term low birth weight. We show estimates for all women and

then by race and ethnicity.        As in the previous tables, the first row in each panel shows adjusted

mean differences between prenatal and postpartum enrollees. The next three rows break down

the prenatal enrollees by trimester of enrollment. Differences between prenatal and postpartum

enrollees are substantive, consistent across race and ethnicity, and precisely estimated.

Specifically, mean birth weight, conditional on gestational age, is 40 grams greater among




13
   One concern raised above is the disproportionate number of missing observations for gestational age among
postpartum relative to prenatal WIC enrollees. However, we are confident that the missing are not a major factor in
our estimates. First, the rate of low birth weight among postpartum enrollees with missing gestational age is 8.4
percent versus 9.0 percent among those with known gestational age. Second, birth weight is well-measured and 98
percent of all very low birth weight births are born preterm. Thus, our story is the same for VLBW as it is for
preterm birth. Finally, the PNSS data for North Carolina are linked to birth certificates and less than 0.2 percent of
cases are missing for either outcome. As we show below, the results for North Carolina (Table 6) also tell the same
story as do the estimates from the larger sample in Tables 2 and 3.



                                                         18
prenatal as compared to postpartum enrollees; rates of SGA and term low birth weight are 1.7

and 0.7 percentage points less, respectively.

        Differences by trimester of WIC enrollment are more modest, but unlike results for birth

outcomes unadjusted for gestation, earlier exposure to WIC is generally associated with better

outcomes. Thus, mean birth weight is 14 grams greater among women who enroll in the first

trimester relative to the third; similarly, the rates of SGA are modestly lower among first as

opposed to third-trimester enrollees.

        If WIC works, then we would expect women with potentially greater need for nutritional

supplementation and health education to benefit more from early and persistent participation in

WIC than women who receive less exposure during pregnancy or none at all. The next set of

results is for three subgroups of women at risk for fetal growth retardation (Table 4). These

include women who are underweight prior to pregnancy (BMI < 19.8), women who smoked

three months before pregnancy, and women who carry multiple gestations. 14 The estimates are

similar to those in Table 3. There are substantial differences in outcomes between women who

enroll in WIC during pregnancy compared with women who enroll postpartum, but more

moderate gains between first and third-trimester enrollees. Adjusted mean birth weight is 7.7

grams greater among infants of underweight women who enroll in WIC in the first compared

with the third trimester.

        Figure 3 offers another perspective on the rather modest association between the timing

of WIC enrollment and fetal growth. We show the rate of SGA and term low birth weight by the

week of prenatal enrollment in WIC. The difference between Figures 2 and 3 is stark. First,




14
 See Joyce, Gibson and Colman (2005) for a discussion of why multiple gestations may be a particularly apt test of
WIC’s effectiveness.


                                                       19
there is no apparent advantage to women who enrolled in the 33rd week of pregnancy relative to

women who enrolled in the 11th week.

       The larger point from Figure 3 is that once you condition away fetal selection, the gains

to WIC appear modest. We based this assessment on two recent studies which use twin

deliveries in the US and Norway to analyze the effect of differences in birth weight—a direct

measure of fetal growth since twins are born simultaneously—on short and long-term outcomes.

Both studies find within-twin differences in fetal growth have relatively small effects on infant

mortality (Almond, Chay and Lee 2005; Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2007). In Norway,

however, researchers are able to follow the twins into their 20s given the country’s detailed

registries (Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2007). They find that a 280-gram increase in birth

weight is associated with a one percentage point increase in high school graduation, a one

percent increase in wages, and a 1.5 percent increase in the birth weight of the first-born child of

the twins. Our estimates of WIC’s effect on fetal growth are roughly one-tenth as large, which

suggests that the longer-term effects of WIC on schooling, labor market outcomes, and the birth

weight of offspring are likely to be small. It is possible that WIC has important effects on child

nutrition and immunization rates, but whatever these impacts, data from Norway suggest that it

takes very large gains in fetal growth to affect long-term outcomes that would be part of a

complete cost-benefit analysis.



Maternal health and behavior

       The most consistent finding to this point has been the protective effect of prenatal

compared to postpartum WIC enrollment on birth outcomes. We believe that fetal selection

explains much of the association, but even when we adjust for gestational age, we report gains to




                                                 20
prenatal enrollment in WIC. We next test the association between prenatal WIC participation

and maternal health and behavior. If WIC improves fetal growth, then we are likely to find

associations between WIC and weight gain during pregnancy, smoking and breastfeeding. In

Table 5, we show adjusted differences in these three outcomes for all women and then stratify by

race and ethnicity. As in previous tables, we display differences between prenatal and

postpartum enrollees and then show differences by trimester of WIC enrollment.

         Consider the results for breastfeeding among all women (column 1). Prenatal enrollees

are 2.6 percentage points more likely to have ever breastfed than postpartum enrollees. The

mean for all women is 50 percent. We also find meaningful differences by trimester of care.

Women who enroll in WIC in the first trimester are 3.9 percentage points more likely to have

ever breastfed than women who enrolled in WIC in the third trimester. We next display

differences in ever breastfed within race and ethnicity because the prevalence of breastfeeding

varies greatly among our three groups. For each racial and ethnic group, we find statistically

significant differences between prenatal and postpartum enrollees, as well as meaningful

differences by trimester of care.

         The second set of estimates in Table 5 shows differences in smoking quit rates (columns

5-8). A woman is coded as having quit if she smoked three months before pregnancy but reports

not smoking when she recertifies for WIC postpartum. 15 Note that we only include women who

enrolled in WIC during pregnancy. The omitted category is therefore third trimester enrollees.

As with breastfeeding, we show differences in quit rates for all women, and then separately by



15
  We cannot evaluate whether WIC is associated with quitting during pregnancy because smoking is ascertained at
the time of enrollment. Women who enroll in the first trimester have less opportunity to quit relative to women who
enroll in the third trimester, which creates a potentially spurious relationship between delayed enrollment and higher
quit rates. We use the absence of smoking at the postpartum interview, given that a woman smoked prior to
pregnancy, as an alternative indicator of whether the smoking cessation message received earlier in pregnancy is
associated with less maternal smoking.


                                                         21
race and ethnicity because the prevalence of pre-pregnancy smoking varies dramatically. For

instance, 53 percent of white non-Hispanic women who enrolled in WIC during pregnancy

smoked three months prior to conception compared with only 13 percent of Hispanics. The

association between early WIC enrollment and quitting is statistically significant but clinically

inconsequential. 16 Quit rates are about one percentage point greater among early enrollees

relative to later enrollees, a relative change of less than 3 percent. Quit rates among whites are

even smaller, but those among blacks are greater.

        The last set of estimates reflects differences in weight gain during pregnancy by the

timing of WIC enrollment (columns 9-12). We show results from two specifications—with and

without controls for gestational age—and two samples, all women and the sub-sample of

underweight women (pregravid BMI < 19.8). Among all women, late WIC enrollees gain more

weight, while first-trimester women gain less weight than postpartum women. After adjustment

for length of gestation, however, all groups of prenatal women have lower weight gains than

postpartum counterparts.        Weight gain for underweight women is more robust. Prenatal

enrollees and those who enroll in the first trimester gain one pound more than postpartum

enrollees. When we adjust for gestation, the gains associated with first relative to third trimester

enrollment are a pound (1.02). Taken together, there is some evidence that early enrollment in

WIC is associated with changes in maternal behavior and health. The changes, like those

observed in fetal growth, are modest, and impossible to distinguish whether they result from

exposure to WIC or from favorable selection.



16
  In the seminal trial of smoking cessation and birth weight, researchers found that quit rates of pregnant women in
the treatment were 23 percentage points greater than women in the control group (Sexton and Hebel 1984). This
decline was associated with a 92 gram increase in mean birth weight. The small differences in quit rates that we
found would not be expected to affect birth outcomes in a meaningful manner. It should also be noted, however,
that we are comparing first and second trimester WIC enrollees to those who enrolled in the third trimester and not
to women who were unexposed to WIC during pregnancy.


                                                        22
        We re-estimated the regressions of fetal growth and maternal behaviors using propensity

score weights and the results were largely unchanged. We limited our sample to only first births

and to only women who began prenatal care in the first trimesters. Differences in fetal growth

between prenatal and postpartum enrollees were more modest, but qualitatively the same (results

available upon request). We also found no association between spontaneous quitting of

smoking and early enrollment in WIC, a falsification test designed to flag potential selection bias

(see footnote 9).



Analysis of North Carolina

        Another potential source of bias is that 13.3 percent of our sample was lost to follow up.

These are women who enrolled in WIC prenatally, but never re-enrolled postpartum. As noted

previously, the PNSS data from North Carolina have been linked to birth certificates, which

enable us to assess the likely impact of excluding these women. In Table 6 we re-estimate the

models from Tables 3 and 4. For each outcome we show estimates with and without women

lost to follow-up. We further limit the sample to women on Medicaid at the time of enrollment in

order to make our results more comparable to previous analyses of WIC with North Carolina

data.

        The first point to note is that the estimated increase in mean birth weight and the decrease

in the rates of low birth weight and preterm birth among WIC participants in North Carolina are

greater in absolute value than the estimates obtained in all nine states. However, the pattern of

the results is very similar to those from the larger sample. The association between WIC and

adverse birth outcomes is primarily driven by the association between WIC and preterm birth.




                                                 23
Once we condition on gestational age, the association between WIC and fetal growth becomes

more modest.

         The second point about Table 6 is that estimates based on samples that include women

lost to follow-up are almost identical to the estimates based on samples that exclude these

women. Women lost to follow-up have worse birth outcomes (unadjusted) than women who

participate in WIC before and after pregnancy.17 If the results from North Carolina generalize to

the larger sample, then the exclusion of women lost to follow up is unlikely to change the

estimates in Tables 2 and 3 appreciably. The third point is that our estimates are close to those of

Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore (1992), Buescher et al. (1993) and Buescher and Horton (2000).

In each study, authors analyzed linkages of WIC administrative and Medicaid claims data in

1987, 1988 and 1997, respectively. Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore report that prenatal WIC

participation was associated with a 117-gram increase in mean birth weight and a decline of 5.1

and 5.4 percentage points in low birth weight and preterm birth, respectively. 18 Moreover, the

estimated effects of WIC on these outcomes in North Carolina as reported by Devaney,

Bilheimer and Schore (1992) were almost double those for Florida, Minnesota and Texas, three

other states in their analysis. The similarity of our estimates for North Carolina based on the

PNSS to those from studies that used linkages of WIC administrative data with Medicaid claims

files suggests that our reference group--postpartum WIC enrollees--is likely comparable to the

reference group used in those studies: women on Medicaid who did not participate in WIC

during pregnancy.

17
   The rates of low birth weight and very low birth weight are 12.3 and 4.6 percent, respectively, among those lost to
follow up versus 7.9 and 1.3 percent among women who enrolled prenatally and re-certified postpartum and 11.6
percent and 2.7 percent among those who enrolled postpartum.
18
   If we estimate the models in Table 6 using only the individual-level data as did Devaney, Bilheimer and Shore
(1992), then our estimate for North Carolina are even closer to theirs. Similarly, Buescher and Horton (2000)
reported an adjusted odds ratio of 1.36 and 1.90 for low and very low birth weight, respectively, based on 1997
data. We estimated a similar specification based on our PNSS data for 1997 and obtained an adjusted OR of 1.41
and 1.93 for low birth weight and very low birth weight, respectively.


                                                         24
       Finally, we show the association between WIC participation and smoking during

pregnancy (Table 6, last column). The smoking indicator is based on birth certificates, which

tend to underreport smoking prevalence. However, the smoking screen on birth certificates is

available for all women and unlike the prenatal smoking indicator in PNSS does not depend on

when the women enrolled in WIC. The estimates indicate that the adjusted mean prevalence of

smoking during pregnancy among women who enroll in WIC prenatally is greater than those

who enroll postpartum, but differs by less than a percentage point.



                                               Conclusions

       The causes of preterm birth have baffled clinicians for several decades as few

interventions have proven to be protective. Despite pessimism among clinicians, social

scientists have reported strong associations between participation in WIC and lower rates of

preterm birth. A recent conjecture for the discrepancy between clinical and social research is

that WIC represents a multifaceted approach to preterm birth that clinical trials neglect in their

focus on a single factor (Bitler and Currie, 2005b; Ludwig and Miller, 2005).

       This study uses data on the timing of WIC enrollment to correct limitations in previous

observational studies. We are able to replicate the strong protective association between

prenatal WIC participation and preterm birth frequently reported by social scientists (GAO, 1992;

Bitler and Currie, 2005a). We conclude that the association is largely an artifact. We show that

the rates of low and very low birth weight decline dramatically for women who enroll in WIC

later in pregnancy relative to women who enroll in the first trimester. At the same time, preterm

delivery postpones enrollment for some women from the prenatal to the postpartum period. The




                                                 25
result is a correlation between prenatal WIC enrollment, especially third trimester enrollment,

and improved birth outcomes that is largely devoid of causal content.

       With observational data, it is practically impossible to disentangle the potential effect of

WIC at preventing preterm birth from what is termed gestational age bias. Thus, we have

emphasized the relationship between prenatal WIC participation and fetal growth, an outcome

that conditions away gestational age bias. Moreover, associations between WIC and fetal growth

are more plausible clinically and easier to corroborate, given the well-documented relationship

between smoking and intrauterine growth retardation. We did find that early WIC participation

is associated with lower rates of fetal growth retardation, but the gains are modest. In addition,

we were unable to show that WIC was associated with meaningful reductions in smoking. We

did find an association between WIC and maternal weight gain during pregnancy, but it was

limited to women who were underweight prior to pregnancy. In sum, the association between

WIC and fetal growth is modest and hard to substantiate.

       The limited association between WIC and measures of fetal growth, however, is a

common result in the literature (See Kotelchuck, Schwartz, Anderka and Finison, 1984;

Stockbauer, 1987; Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore, 1992; Gordon and Nelson, 1995; Buescher

and Horton, 2000; Bitler and Currie, 2005a; Joyce, Gibson and Colman, 2005). Clinical studies

identify both fetal and maternal factors that influence fetal growth (Das and Sysyn, 2004). Many

of these factors, including chromosomal abnormalities, mother’s own history of being small for

gestational age, and abnormalities of placental vascular development may not be amenable to

environmental adjustment at the time of pregnancy (Svensson, Pawitan, Cnattingius, Reilly and

Lichtenstein, 2006).




                                                26
       In the end, we conclude that WIC may work to improve birth outcomes, but on fewer

margins and with less impact than has been claimed by policy analysts and advocates. These

findings do not constitute an argument for the elimination of WIC; instead, they indicate the need

for greater emphasis and resources to be devoted to aspects of the WIC program that target either

life-long habits such as smoking, or behaviors with known benefits to mother and child such as

breastfeeding, iron supplementation for infants, and childhood immunizations.




                                               27
Acknowledgements

       The research was supported by grants from the Institute for Research on Poverty and

United States Department of Agriculture (IRP-USDA) Small Grants program to Baruch College

and from the USDA Food and Nutrition Research Program to the National Bureau of Economic

Research (# 59-5000-6-0102). We thank participants at the Small Grant Conference at the

University of Wisconsin and the Small Grant conference at USDA Economic Research Service

in Washington D.C. We thank Karen Dalenius from the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention (CDC) for help with the PNSS file and special thanks to WIC Program administrators

in various state offices. These include Najmul Chowdhury (North Carolina), Patrice Wolfla

(Indiana), Nancy Hoffman (Missouri), Penny Roth (Illinois) and Lisa Armstrong (Virginia). We

would also like to acknowledge input from John Karl Scholz at the University of Wisconsin and

Jay Hirschman at the USDA Food and Nutrition Bureau and three anonymous referees. All

opinions are those of the authors and do not represent those of the various state WIC programs,

the CDC or the USDA.




                                               28
                                           References

Ahluwalia, I. B., Hogan, V. K., Grummer-Strawn, L., Colville, W. R. and A. Peterson (1998).
      “The Effect of WIC Participation on Small-for-Gestational-Age Births: Michigan, 1992.”
      American Journal of Public Health 88(9): 1374-1377.

Almond, Doug, Chay, Kenneth and David Lee (2005). “The Costs of Low Birth Weight.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics CXX(3):1031-1083.

Alexander, G. et al. (1998). “What are the Fetal Growth Patterns of Singleton, Twins and
      Triplets in the United States?” Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology 41 (1): 115-125.

Berkowitz, G.S. and E. Papiernik (1993). “Epidemiology of preterm birth.” Epidemiologic
      Review 15(2): 414-443.

Besharov, D. J. and P. Germanis (2001). Rethinking WIC: An Evaluation of the Women, Infants,
      and Children Program. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.

Bitler, Marianne, Currie, Janet and John Karl Scholz (2003). “ WIC Eligibility and
        Participation.” The Journal of Human Resources 38(Supplement): 1139-1179.

Bitler, Marianne and Janet Currie (2005a). “Does WIC Work? The Effects of WIC on
        Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(1):73-
        91.

Bitler, Marianne and Janet Currie (2005b). “The Changing Association between Prenatal
        Participation in WIC and Birth Outcomes in New York City: What Does It Mean?”
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(4):688-690.

Black, Sandra, Devereux, Paul, and Kjell Salvanes (2007). “From the Cradle to the Labor Market?
       The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXXII
       (1): 409-439.

Buescher, Paul A. and Stephanie J. Horton (2000). “Prenatal WIC Participation in Relation to
      Low Birth Weight and Medicaid Infant Costs in North Carolina—a 1997 Update.” Center
      for Health Information and Statistics, North Carolina Department of Health and Human
      Services.

Buescher, Paul A., et al. (1993). “Prenatal WIC participation can reduce low birth weight and
      newborn medical costs: A cost-benefit analysis of WIC participation in North Carolina.”
      Journal of the American Dietetic Association 93(2): 163-166.

Das, U.G. and G.D. Sysyn (2004). “Abnormal fetal growth: intrauterine growth retardation,
       small for gestational age, large for gestational age.” Pediatric Clinics of North America
       51: 639-654.




                                                29
Devaney, B., Bilheimer, L. and J. Schore (1992). “Medicaid Costs and Birth Outcomes: The
      Effects of Prenatal WIC Participation and the Use of Prenatal Care.” Journal of Policy
      Analysis and Management 11(4): 573-592.

Fox, M.K, Hamilton, W. and B. Lin (eds.) (2004). Effects of Food Assistance and Nutrtion
      Programs on Nutrition and Health Volume 3, Literature Review. Food and Rural
      Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food
      Assistance and Nutrition Research Report No. 19-3. Available at:
      http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/fanrr19%2D3/.

General Accounting Office (1992). “Early Intervention: Federal Investments Like WIC Can
      Produce Savings” (GAO/HRD-92-18). Washington DC: United States General
      Accounting Office.

Gordon, Anne and Lyle Nelson (1995). “Characteristics and Outcomes of WIC Participants and
      Non-participants: Analysis of the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey.”
      Princeton: Mathematica Policy Institute.

Harris, Jeffrey (1982). “Prenatal Medical Care and Infant Mortality.” In V. Fuchs (ed.),
        Economic Aspects of Health Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Heckman, J. (1997). “Instrumental Variables.” Journal of Human Resources. 32(3):441-462.

Hirano, Keisuke and Guido Imbens (2001). “Estimation of Causal Effects using Propensity
       Score Weighting: An Application to Data on Right Heart Catheterization.” Health
       Services & Outcomes Research Methodology 2:259-278.

Imbens, Guido (2004). “Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Under
      Exogeneity: A Review.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(1):4-29.

Institute of Medicine (1990). Nutrition During Pregnancy. Washington, D.C: National Academy
        Press.

Institute of Medicine (1996). WIC Nutrition Risk Criteria: A Scientific Assessment. Washington,
        D.C: National Academy Press.

Institute of Medicine (2007). Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences and Prevention. Washington,
        D.C: National Academy Press.

Joyce, T., Gibson, D. and S. Colman (2005). “The Changing Association between Prenatal
       Participation in WIC and Birth Outcomes in New York City.” Journal of Policy Analysis
       and Management 24(4):661-685.

Kennedy, E.T. and M. Kotelchuck (1984). “The effect of WIC supplemental feeding on birth
      weight: a case-control analysis.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 40:579-585.




                                               30
Klerman, L. et al. (2001). “A Randomized Trial of Augmented Prenatal Care for Multiple-Risk,
      Medicaid-Eligible African American Women.” American Journal of Public Health
      91(1):105-111.

Kotelchuck, M. et al. (1984). “WIC Participation and Pregnancy Outcomes: Massachusetts
       Statewide Evaluation Project.” American Journal of Public Health 74(10):1086-1092.

Kramer, M. (1987). “Intrauterine Growth and Gestational Duration Determinants.” Pediatrics
      80(4): 502-511.

Lazariu-Bauer, V., Stratton, H., Pruzek, R., and M.L. Woelfel (2004). “A Comparative Analysis
       of Effects of Early Versus Late Prenatal WIC Participation on Birth Weight: NYS,
       1995.” Maternal and Child Health Journal 8(2): 77-86.

Ludwig, J. and M. Miller (2005). “ Interpreting the WIC Debate.” Journal of Policy Analysis
      and Management 24(4):691-701.

Quinn, V., Mullen, P. and D. Ershoff (1991). “Women Who Stop Smoking Spontaneously Prior
       to Prenatal Care and Predictors of Relapse Before Delivery.” Addictive Behavior 16:29-
       40.

Rush, David, Stein, Zena and Mervyn Susser (1980). Diet in Pregnancy: A Randomized
       Controlled Trial of Nutritional Supplements. New York: Alan R. Liss, Inc.

Schramm, W. F. (1985). “WIC Prenatal Participation and Its Relationship to Newborn
      Medicaid Costs in Missouri: A Cost/Benefit Analysis.” American Journal of Public
      Health 75(8): 851-857.

Schramm, W. F. (1986). “Prenatal Participation in WIC Related to Medicaid Costs for Missouri
      Newborns: 1982 Update.” Public Health Reports 101(6): 607-615.

Secker-Walker, R. H. et al. (1995). “Smoking Relapse Prevention Counseling During Prenatal
       and Early Postnatal Care,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 11: 86-93.

Sexton, M. and R. H. Hebel (1984). “A Clinical Trial of Change in Maternal Smoking and Its
       Effect on Birth Weight,” Journal of the American Medical Association 251(7): 911-915.

Stockbauer, J. (1986). “Evaluation of the Missouri WIC Program: Prenatal Components.”
      Journal of the American Dietetic Association 86: 61-67.

Stockbauer, J. W. (1987). “WIC Prenatal Participation and Its Relation to Pregnancy Outcomes
      in Missouri: A Second Look.” American Journal of Public Health 77(7): 813-818.

Svensson, A.C., Pawitan, Y., Cnattingius, S., Reilly, M. and P. Lichtenstein (2006). “Familial
      aggregation of small-for-gestational-age births: The importance of fetal genetic effects.”
      American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 194: 475-9.



                                               31
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis, Nutrition and
       Evaluation (2000). “WIC Participant and Program Characteristics 2000”, WIC-02-PC.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2000). Healthy People 2010. 2nd ed. With
       Understanding and Improving Health and Objectives for Improving Health. 2 vols.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. House of Representatives: Committee on Ways and Means (2000). 2000 Green Book.
      Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

United States Department of Agriculture (2000). WIC Participant and Program Characteristics
       1998. Report No. WIC -00-PC. http://www.abtassociates.com/reports/ES-
       20006343640181.pdf

Villar, J., et al. (1998). “Nutritional and antimicrobial interventions to help prevent preterm
        birth: An overview of randomized controlled trials.” Obstetrics and Gynecology Survey
        53: 575-585.

Windsor, R. A. et al. (1993). “Health Education for Pregnant Smokers: Its Behavioral Impact
      and Cost Benefit,” American Journal of Public Health 83: 201-6.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
      MA: M.I.T. Press.




                                               32
                                        Figure 1: Proportion of LBW and Preterm Births by Timing of WIC Enrollment

                         0.18


                         0.16
                                                                                                                   mean preterm
                                                                                                                   postpartum enrollees
                         0.14


                         0.12
Proportion LBW/Preterm




                                                                                                                  mean LBW postpartum
                                                                                                                  enrollees
                          0.1


                         0.08


                         0.06


                         0.04


                         0.02


                           0
                                5   7   9    11   13    15   17    19    21     23      25    27   29   31   33      35    37     39
                                                                  Week of Pregnancy at WIC Enrollment

                                                                              Preterm        LBW
                              Figure 2: Proportion of VLBW by Race/Ethnicity &Timing of WIC Enrollment

                   0.03




                  0.025



                                                                                                         Mean VLBW,
                                                                                                         postpartum enrollees
                   0.02
Proportion VLBW




                  0.015




                   0.01




                  0.005




                     0
                                      11



                                           13



                                                15



                                                     17



                                                          19



                                                                 21



                                                                        23



                                                                                   25



                                                                                          27



                                                                                                    29



                                                                                                         31



                                                                                                                 33



                                                                                                                          35



                                                                                                                                37



                                                                                                                                               39
                          5



                              7



                                  9




                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                            rtu
                                                                                                                                         pa
                                                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                                                     Po
                                                           Week of Pregnancy at WIC Enrollmen

                                                               Whites     Blacks        Hispanics
                                          Figure 3: Proportion SGA & Full Term LBW by Timing of WIC Enrollment


                       0.18
                                                                                                                     mean SGA postpartum
                                                                                                                     enrollees

                       0.16


                       0.14


                       0.12
Proportion SGA/FTLBW




                        0.1


                       0.08

                                                                                                                       mean FTLBW
                       0.06                                                                                            postpartum enrollees



                       0.04


                       0.02


                         0
                              5


                                  7


                                      9

                                           11


                                                 13


                                                      15


                                                            17


                                                                 19


                                                                        21


                                                                              23


                                                                                    25


                                                                                           27


                                                                                                 29


                                                                                                      31


                                                                                                           33


                                                                                                                35


                                                                                                                         37


                                                                                                                                 39


                                                                                                                                            st
                                                                                                                                         po
                                                                  Weeks Pregnant at WIC Enrollment

                                                                      SGA Actual     FTLBW Actual
Table 1. Characteristics of Women by Trimester of WIC Enrollment: Nine PNSS
States, 1995-2004*
                               First      Second      Third
                           Trimester   Trimester   Trimester Postpartum      Prenatal-
                             (WIC1)      (WIC2)      (WIC3)      (WIC4)    Postpartum
Birth Outcomes
Birth weight (g)             3289.7      3268.4      3297.7      3231.0           51.9
LBW                              6.5         7.2         5.6         8.7          -2.1
VLBW                             0.9         1.0         0.3         1.5          -0.7
Unknown                         7.2         5.9         5.8         7.2           -0.8
N                           782,255     809,996     446,852     742,596

Gestation (weeks) 1             38.9        39.0       39.3        38.9            0.1
        1
Preterm                        12.1        11.4          7.3       10.0            0.8
Unknown                         5.4         4.2         4.1        24.4          -19.8
Term LBW 1                       2.6         2.8         2.7         2.3           0.4
Unknown                        18.8        16.8        12.7        38.4          -21.7
N                           650,319     656,826     357,169     607,287

SGA 2                          13.3        13.9        14.0        12.3            1.4
Unknown                         6.1         5.0         5.0        22.9          -17.5
N                           579,538     607,857     335,287     425,371

Maternal Behaviors
Ever Breastfed                 46.9        47.9        45.8        50.4           -3.4
Unknown                         6.2         5.3         5.4         2.2            3.5
Weight gain (lbs)              30.5        30.8        30.9        30.5            0.2
Unknown                         5.8         6.8         6.9         6.6           -0.2
N                           782,255     809,996     446,852     742,596

Smoked Before Pregnancy,
Quit Postpartum 3              31.3        31.4        30.0        15.3           15.7
Unknown                         6.1         6.8         6.7         5.8            0.7
N                           293,746     251,743     138,229     126,653
Characteristics
      Race/Ethnicity
Non-Hispanic White         63.4   49.6   49.8   48.6     6.4
Non-Hispanic Black         23.3   31.3   32.4   32.5    -4.0
Native American             0.6    0.6    0.4    0.4     0.1
Asian                       0.9    1.2    1.4    1.7    -0.6
Hispanic                   10.9   16.2   14.9   15.6    -1.7
Other/Unknown               0.9    1.1    1.1    1.1    -0.1

      Marital Status
Married                    34.2   30.3   31.7   37.4    -5.3
Unknown                     4.3    5.6    5.4    5.3    -0.3

          Parity
0                          46.0   45.4   44.9   40.0     5.5
1-3                        42.1   45.4   46.8   27.5    17.0
4+                          3.0    3.7    3.8    2.6     0.9
Unknown                     8.9    5.5    4.4   29.9   -23.3

              Age
Under 20                   26.1   25.1   22.5   18.5     6.4
20-29                      58.7   58.2   60.5   60.8    -1.9
30 and over                15.2   16.7   17.0   20.7    -4.5

 Education (Mothers >=20
         years old)
<12 years                  27.3   27.9   26.0   24.5     2.9
12 years                   48.4   47.5   47.8   46.3     1.6
>12 years                  21.3   21.6   23.1   25.7    -4.0
Unknown                     3.1    3.1    3.1    3.5    -0.5

   Prepregnancy BMI
Underweight (BMI<19.8)     11.7   12.6   13.0   10.8     1.6
Normal weight              36.7   41.1   43.6   37.3     2.6
Overweight                 12.2   12.6   12.6   11.0     1.5
Obese (BMI>29)             27.3   24.4   22.7   19.8     5.4
Unknown                    12.1    9.2    8.1   21.1   -11.0

    Pregravid Smoking
Smoked 3 months bef
pregnancy                  39.6   33.0   32.8   17.1    18.4
Unknown                    11.5   10.1    9.5   46.4   -35.9
Medicaid                              77.7          71.7         65.1         50.4              22.2
AFDC/TANF                             14.2          15.2         14.8          9.1               5.6
Food Stamps                           27.1          26.3         24.4         14.1              12.1

    Standardized Poverty
          Distribution
0 - 50                                34.1          36.5         36.6         32.9               2.8
51 - 100                              24.8          23.6         21.7         22.0               1.6
101 - 130                             12.0          11.1         10.9         11.7              -0.3
131 - 150                              6.0           5.5          5.9          6.4              -0.7
151 - 185                              5.7           5.5          6.3          7.6              -1.9
186 - 200                              1.1           1.1          1.4          1.2              -0.1
Over 200                               2.0           2.0          2.4          1.9               0.2
Unknown or adjunctive
eligibility                           14.5          14.8         14.7         16.2              -1.5

   States (Years) Across
         Trimesters
Florida (2000-2004)                   19.7          30.9         17.5         31.9
Georgia (1999-2004)                   20.7          12.4          5.3         61.5
Indiana (1995-2004)                   30.0          28.6         15.4         26.0
Michigan (1996-2004)                  28.6          33.2         19.4         18.9
Missouri (1995-2004)                  37.9          26.3         13.4         22.5
North Carolina (1996-2003)            32.2          32.6         16.9         18.3
New Jersey (2000-2004)                19.5          37.0         19.0         24.5
Ohio (1999-2004)                      29.6          31.9         20.5         17.9
Virgina (2004)                        25.2          32.4         16.4         26.0

N                                782,255        809,996    446,852      742,596
*Singleton births. Excludes women lost to follow-up.
1
  Excludes MI, postpartum VA, and postpartum NJ. Gestation unknown for these groups.
2
    Excludes MI, GA, VA, and postpartum NJ. Gestation and/or gender unknown for these groups.
3
 Women who smoked pre-pregnancy only. Excludes FL, GA, postpartum VA. Pregravid and/or
postpartum smoking unknown for these groups.
Table 2. Adjusted Differences in Birth Outcomes by the Timing of WIC Enrollment

                                        BW                             LBW                             VLBW                             Preterm
                                 (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
Enrolled in WIC…
During pregnancy                  63.3**          59.4**       -0.027**        -0.026**        -0.009**       -0.008**          -0.027**         -0.025**

1st trimester                     60.2**          55.5**       -0.023**        -0.021**        -0.005**       -0.005**          -0.013**         -0.009**
2nd trimester                     55.6**          51.3**       -0.019**        -0.018**        -0.005**       -0.004**          -0.021**         -0.018**
3rd trimester                     85.4**          79.9**       -0.034**        -0.032**        -0.009**       -0.009**          -0.060**         -0.056**

Difference by
trimesters
1st-3rd                          -25.2**         -24.4**        0.011**         0.011**         0.004**        0.004**           0.047**          0.047**
1st-2nd                              4.7             4.3        -0.004*        -0.003**            0.000          0.000          0.008**          0.009**

Medicaid only                       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No                                            Yes               No
Mean dep var                     3,250.4   3,268.9    0.080     0.077     0.011     0.011                                          0.118            0.115
Observations                  1,712,216 2,571,723 1,712,216 2,571,723 1,712,216 2,571,723                                      1,374,239        2,025,047
R-squared                           0.05      0.05

+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Estimates show the difference in birth outcomes based on the timing of WIC enrollment. Estimates for birth weight (BW) are from ordinary least squares.
Estimates for low birth weight (LBW), very low birth weight (VLBW) and preterm birth are marginal effects obtained by maximum likelihood probits. Standard
errors (not shown) are adjusted for grouping at the state-year level (G=60) with Stata's cluster procedure. Estimates in the top row of each panel compare
outcomes among women who enrolled in WIC during pregnancy to women who enolled in WIC postpartum. Estimates in the next three rows compare outcomes
among women who enrolled in WIC in either the first, second or third trimester of pregnancy relative to women who enrolled in WIC postpartum; differences
between trimesters follow. Estimates are adjusted for age, marital status, mother's schooling, parity, pre-pregnancy BMI, income categories, participation in
Medicaid, AFDC and the Food Stamp Program. All models include state and year fixed effects. The samples in odd-numbered columns include all women in WIC
whereas the even numbered columns include only women who were also on Medicaid. Data are from 9 states and various years. See Table 1.
Table 3. Adjusted Differences in Measures of Fetal Growth by Race &
Ethnicity
                               All          White-NH        Black-NH       Hispanic
                                            BW given gestational age

During pregnancy                  39.5**         30.8**          49.2**        55.8**

1st trimester                     47.1**         34.7**          59.8**        77.7**
2nd trimester                     35.4**         26.5**          45.2**        51.5**
3rd trimester                     33.6**         30.0**          41.5**        35.8**
Difference by trimesters
1st-3rd                           13.5**              4.7       18.2**         41.9**
1st-2nd                           11.7**           8.2**        14.6**         26.2**
Mean dep var                      3,262.8        3,311.4        3,141.5        3,327.6
Observations                   1,971,133      1,050,394        573,738        288,289

                                        Small for Gestational Age (SGA)
During pregnancy                -0.017**       -0.012**        -0.023**      -0.025**

1st trimester                   -0.018**       -0.012**        -0.026**      -0.028**
2nd trimester                   -0.015**       -0.011**        -0.022**      -0.023**
3rd trimester                   -0.014**       -0.012**        -0.019**      -0.016**
Difference by trimesters
1st-3rd                         -0.004**          0.000        -0.007**      -0.012**
1st-2nd                          -0.003*         -0.001        -0.004**      -0.005**
Mean dep var                        0.148         0.138            0.187         0.113
Observations                   1,749,900        957,027         482,566       256,201
                                            Term Low Birth Weight

During pregnancy                -0.007**       -0.005**        -0.011**      -0.008**

1st trimester                   -0.007**       -0.005**        -0.011**      -0.008**
2nd trimester                   -0.005**       -0.003**        -0.009**      -0.007**
3rd trimester                   -0.008**       -0.006**        -0.011**      -0.007**
Difference by trimesters
1st-3rd                             0.001        0.001*            0.000      -0.001*
1st-2nd                         -0.002**        -0.002*        -0.002**      -0.001**
Mean dep var                        0.034         0.031            0.046         0.022
Observations                   1,744,828        942,762         492,410       257,143
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
See notes to Table 2.
Table 4: Adjusted Differences in Measures of Fetal Growth by Risk Factors
                                   Pre-pregnancy BMI < 19.8             Pre-pregnancy smokers              Multiple gestations
                               BW|gest       SGA        FTLBW       BW|gest      SGA      FTLBW        BW|gest SGA FTLBW
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)

During pregnancy                  31.9**      -0.013**   -0.008**      41.8**    -0.018**   -0.009**     52.2**    -0.001   -0.024*

1st trimester                     36.2**      -0.014**   -0.008**      46.5**    -0.018**   -0.009**     73.7** -0.035**    -0.030*
2nd trimester                     29.9**      -0.014**   -0.006**      37.2**    -0.017**   -0.006**     41.1**     0.001    -0.016
3rd trimester                     28.5**       -0.009*   -0.010**      41.0**    -0.015**   -0.011**     41.9** 0.045**     -0.030*

Difference by trimesters
1st-3rd                             7.7+       -0.005*     0.002         5.5+      -0.003     0.002+     31.8**   -0.08**    0.000
                                          +
1st-2nd                             6.3         0.000      -0.002       9.3**      -0.001   -0.003**     32.6** -0.036**     -0.014

Mean dep var                      3,105.2       0.216      0.057       3,203.1     0.185      0.045      2351.5    0.345     0.303
Observations                     246,551      221,153    213,303      626,992    617,995    557,294      32,235   30,757    13,372
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
See notes to Table 2.
Table 5: Adjusted Differences in Maternal Behaviors and Health

                                                Ever Breastfed                                                      Quit Smoking Postpartum #                                                   Pregnancy Weight Gain (lbs)

                       All Women                Whites             Blacks         Hispanics All smokers                    Whites              Blacks         Hispanics                All women                           Underweight
                                   (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)                (9)              (10)               (11)                 (12)
During
pregnancy                   0.026**               0.008           0.031**            0.046**                                                                                          0.075          -0.503**            0.640**                  0.045

1st trimester               0.039**            0.022**            0.039**            0.057**            0.009**              0.002           0.035**               0.009             -0.225          -0.516**            0.699**             0.450*
2nd trimester               0.030**             0.010*            0.037**            0.047**            0.012**           0.007**            0.028**               0.010              0.234           -0.452*            0.696**              -0.004
3rd trimester                  0.000          -0.022**               0.012           0.024**                                                                                          0.304          -0.569**             0.460*           -0.524**

Difference by
trimesters
1st-3rd                     0.039**            0.044**            0.027**            0.033**                                                                                      -0.529**               0.053              0.239           0.974**
1st-2nd                     0.009**            0.012**               0.002           0.010**            -0.003+            -0.005*             0.007*             -0.001          -0.458**              -0.064              0.003           0.454**

Adj for
gestation                        na                na                  na                 na                 na                na                 na                  na                No                Yes                 No                Yes
Mean dep var                  0.503             0.488               0.405              0.737              0.332             0.293              0.448               0.569              30.7               31.5               34.2               35.3
Observations              2,622,599         1,388,006             779,194            380,646            628,327           489,529            108,039              20,297         2,573,008          1,921,156            314,054            244,546
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                             0.08                 0.1              0.06               0.08
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Coefficients for ever breastfed and quit smoking show differences in the proportion by timing of WIC enrollment, while weight gain differences are in pounds. The omitted category is postpartum WIC enrollees, except for smoking in which the
omitted category is third-trimester enrollees; pre-pregnancy smoking is poorly reported among postpartum enrollees. Underweight women are those with pre-pregnancy BMI < 19.8. Estimates for smoking and breastfeeding are marginal effects
obtained by maximum likelihood probit. Also see notes to Table 2.
# FL, GA dropped due to missing data.
Table 6. Adjusted Differences in Birth Outcomes by the Timing of WIC Enrollment in
North Carolina 1996-2003

                                       BW                           LBW                           VLBW                          Preterm
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)
Enrolled in WIC…
During pregnancy                76.0**         75.6** -0.033** -0.033**                  -0.011** -0.011** -0.047**                   -0.047**

1st trimester                   59.3**         59.1** -0.026** -0.026**                  -0.006** -0.006** -0.035**                   -0.035**
2nd trimester                   63.9**         63.4** -0.027** -0.026**                  -0.008** -0.008** -0.041**                   -0.041**
3rd trimester                  128.3**        128.2** -0.059** -0.059**                  -0.024** -0.024** -0.080**                   -0.079**

Difference by
trimesters
1st-3rd                        -69.0**        -69.1** 0.033**             0.033**         0.018**        0.018**        0.045**         0.044**
1st-2nd                            -4.6           -4.3  0.001                0.000        0.002**        0.002**        0.006**         0.006**

Includes lost to
follow-up                         Yes              No            Yes             No             Yes            No            Yes              No
Mean dep var                   3,215.2         3,225.4         0.095          0.091           0.019         0.016          0.108           0.104

                                                                                                                         Smoked during
                                    BW|gest                         SGA                      Term LBW                      Pregnancy

During pregnancy                  9.4**          9.5**       -0.001          -0.001      -0.004** -0.004**                0.004+         0.003*

1st trimester                   20.1**         20.3**       -0.003*        -0.003*       -0.005** -0.005**              0.007**         0.006**
2nd trimester                    5.4**          5.5**         0.000          0.000       -0.003** -0.003**                 0.000           0.000
3rd trimester                      -2.1           -2.1        0.002          0.001       -0.006** -0.006**              0.006**         0.005**

Difference by
trimesters
1st-3rd                         22.2**         22.4** -0.005** -0.004**                      0.001         0.001          0.001           0.001
1st-2nd                         14.7**         14.8** -0.003* -0.003*                      -0.002*        0.002*        0.007**         0.006**

Includes lost to
follow-up                         Yes              No           Yes              No             Yes            No            Yes              No
Mean dep var                   3,215.3         3,225.5          0.14          0.139           0.034         0.034          0.324           0.319

+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Estimates are from the same specifications as in Tables 2 and 3 but were obtained in a two-step procedure to allow for within-group correlation
among categories of WIC within each year. In the first stage, outcomes regressed on all covariates (see notes to Table 2) except for the timing of
WIC enrollment. Residuals from this first stage are aggregated by year and WIC participation (N=16) and are regressed on an indicator of WIC
and year dummies. The figures and standard errors (not shown) are from these second-stage regressions. The sample is limited to women in North
Carolina who were on Medicaid at the time of enrollment. The odd-numbered columns include all prenatal and postpartum WIC enrollees
regardless of whether the women who enrolled prenatally re-certified for WIC postpartum. The even-numbered columns include all prenatal and
postpartum enrollees; they exclude those who enrolled in WIC prenatally but did not re-certify postpartum. This reflects the PNSS samples in
Tables 2 and 3.
Appendix Table 1. Characteristics of Prenatal & Postpartum WIC Participants, 2000

                                  Selected States, PNSS                   U.S.

Trimester of WIC
Enrollment (Prenatal
Only)
First Trimester                                      37.6                48.4
Second Trimester                                     39.1                39.6
Third Trimester                                      23.4                11.9
N                                                 311,949             883,559

Race/Ethnicity
Non-Hispanic White                                   48.6                39.5
Non-Hispanic Black                                   32.3                20.8
Native American                                        0.5                 1.3
Asian                                                  1.3                 3.2
Hispanic                                             16.3                34.5
Other/Unknown                                          0.9                 0.9
N                                                 466,907           1,895,353

Age
Under 15 years                                         0.6                 0.5
15-17                                                  8.3                 7.5
18-34                                                85.1                84.8
35 or older                                            6.1                 7.2
N                                                 466,907           1,893,458


Poverty Distribution
0-50                                                41.06                30.2
51-100                                              28.09                32.9
101-130                                             13.61                16.3
131-150                                              6.89                  8.6
151-185                                              7.02                10.6
186-200                                              1.31                  0.5
Over 200                                             2.03                  0.9
N                                                 416,163           1,614,841
Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System data from FL,GA,IN,MI,MO,NC,NJ,OH. U.S. data from
"WIC Particpant and Program Characteristics 2000", USDA.
Appendix Table 2. Comparison of Selected State Variables, PNSS vs USDA, 2000

                                     Florida                   Georgia                    Indiana                    Michigan                   Missouri                   New Jersey                North Carolina                 Ohio
                                   PNSS         USDA          PNSS     USDA             PNSS         USDA           PNSS      USDA             PNSS      USDA              PNSS       USDA            PNSS        USDA            PNSS         USDA

Trimester of Care (Among
Prenatal Participants)
First Trimester                     77.9          71.5         85.2                      71.0          89.6          72.1                       69.4                        72.9          77.9         78.9                        81.3
Second Trimester                    18.7          25.6         11.4                      24.6           8.5          13.7                       10.5                        23.2          19.9         18.0                        14.0
Third Trimester                       3.4          2.9           1.4                       4.4          1.9            1.3                        1.0                        3.9           1.9           2.7                         1.9
No Care                               0.0                        2.1                       0.0                       12.8                       19.2                                                     0.3                         2.8
N                                 55,627        35,618       19,194                    10,828         7,452        42,243                     30,344                      15,542        11,826       39,442                      50,191

Mean Weight Gain                    31.1          30.8         30.1                      33.7          31.2          27.0         31.6          32.4          32.5          31.2          30.8         29.9          28.1          32.0          32.7
N                                 68,379        29,746       47,391                    18,795        16,512        51,322       22,628        38,291        20,605        29,396        18,101       48,410        21,128        59,784        28,514

Parity (Among Prenatal Participants)
Zero                                 43.5         42.9                                   42.8          33.7          67.4         40.1          43.5          45.0          45.3                       43.4                        39.2          40.9
N                                 59,981        41,434                                 13,828        12,251        45,226       24,581        30,547        15,927        22,317                     39,735                      46,169        26,177

Mean Birthweight***              3,269.1        3,258.3      3,255.1     3,236.6       3,271.2      3,278.7       3,308.0                     3,265.6      3,271.7       3,290.3       3,261.5       3,224.1      3,254.7       3,248.6       3,240.0
LBW                                  8.0            8.3          8.1         8.9           8.1          8.0           7.1                         8.2          8.3           7.3           8.6           9.9          9.1           8.8           9.3
N                                81,152        104,904       41,759      63,493        17,475       40,022        48,538                      38,584       35,846        23,626        33,180        49,993       59,248        60,156        61,840


***
   For USDA, based on Infant WIC Participants, not Women WIC Participants
PNSS figures exclude women lost to follow-up. Percentages for both PNSS & USDA do not account for missing values.
Source for USDA figures: WIC Participants and Program Characteristics, 2000
There are substantial discrepancies in sample sizes between the USDA and PNSS. The USDA measures prenatal participation based on redeemed vouchers in April 2000. The PNSS figures are based on births to WIC women in 2000. Thus, the USDA
figures would capture about 75% of the prenatal enrollees given a 9-month window for pregnancy. Second, the USDA misses another 8 percent of prenatal enrollees who do not redeem their vouchers in that that month. Finally, the comparisons in
Table 2 are based on the 16-item Supplemental Data Set. These data are in addition to the 20-item Minimum Data Set reported by all WIC agencies. Only 80 percent of WIC agencies report SDS and not all items are reported. Finally, the USDA did not
have information on birth outcomes for pregnant women. Thus, the sample sizes for birth weight in the USDA are based on the birth weights of infants participants, whereas the PNSS uses births to women who enrolled in WIC. Pregnant women made
up 11 percent of participants in 2000 and infants constituted 18 percent.
