NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL INTEGRATION WITHIN EU COUNTRIES:
THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONS, CONFIDENCE AND TRUST
Mehmet Fatih Ekinci
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Bent Sorensen
Working Paper 13440
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13440

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2007

We thank our discussants Phil Hartman, Phil Lane and Enrique Mendoza and the participants at the
2007 AEA Meetings, at the EU Commission Seminar, and at the 2007 NBER International Seminar
on Macroeconomics.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Mehmet Fatih Ekinci, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Bent Sorensen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Integration within EU Countries:The Role of Institutions, Confidence and Trust
Mehmet Fatih Ekinci, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Bent Sorensen
NBER Working Paper No. 13440
September 2007
JEL No. F21,F41
ABSTRACT
We investigate the degree of financial integration within and between European countries. We construct
two measures of de-facto integration across European regions to capture "diversification" and "development"
finance in the language of Obstfeld and Taylor (2004). We find evidence that capital market integration
within the EU is less than what is implied by theoretical benchmarks and also less than what is found
for U.S. states. We ask - why is this the case? Using country-level data for economic institutions, we
find that these are not able to explain differences between countries. Using regional data from the World
Values Surveys, we investigate the effect of "social capital" on financial integration among European
regions. We find regions, where the level of confidence and trust is high, are more financially integrated
with each other.
Mehmet Fatih Ekinci
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
mekinci@troi.cc.rochester.edu
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu

Bent Sorensen
Department of Economics
University of Houston
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
bent.sorensen@mail.uh.edu

Introduction

1

Financial markets are becoming more integrated as countries lower barriers to trading in
financial assets such as stocks and bonds. Such integration will tend to equate expected
returns to investing in different countries but the ownership of physical capital in a country
may still be mainly in the hand of domestic residents. In this paper, we investigate the
degree of financial integration within Europe using a measure suggested by Kalemli-Ozcan,
Reshef, Sørensen, and Yosha (2007), who find that ownership of physical capital among the
50 U.S. states is almost perfectly diversified across the entire United States.1
We find little evidence of capital market integration— defined as diversification of ownership of physical capital—between EU countries, except for Ireland. Our main focus is to
examine if regions within EU countries are integrated. We find stronger evidence of capital
market integration for EU regions within countries. However, the amount of this integration
is still less than what is implied by a simple benchmark model with fully diversified ownership of physical capital. We examine if the degree of capital market integration depends on
“social capital” proxied by confidence and trust and we discover that regions where the level
of confidence and trust is high are more financially integrated with each other.
Standard neoclassical models predict that capital will move to regions where the marginal
product of capital is higher. Within a fully integrated capital market with no “frictions”
this implies that capital will flow to regions with the highest productivity. As shown by
Blomstrom, Lipsey, and Zejan (1996) and Clark and Feenstra (2003), in a world of completely
mobile capital the amount of physical capital installed in a country relative to the world
average is fully explained by total factor productivity (TFP). In reality, the actual return may
deviate from the marginal product of capital for numerous reasons. Risk-adjusted returns to
investment may not be as high as suggested by low capital-labor ratios. Countries with low
capital-labor ratios might receive less foreign investment than implied by benchmark models
1

Cross-ownership across states can take the form of direct ownership through stocks but in most cases
cross-ownership is indirect through financial intermediaries and through corporations with branches in many
states. We have not explored channels of ownership but in the United States direct stock holdings appear
to be too small to explain near-perfect diversification.

1

due to their low productivity. Recent research show a positive relation between capital flows
and various determinants of productivity, such as property rights (Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan,
Volosovych, 2007), low cost of physical capital (Hsieh and Klenow, 2007; Caselli and Feyrer,
2007), and low risk of default (Gertler and Rogoff, 1990; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004). As
shown by Kraay and Ventura (2000) low productivity countries’ implied risk premiums on
foreign investment are quite high. Current productivity depends on the broader institutional
framework which is a function of the historical past of countries as shown by Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (2001). Hence, history may influence current financial performance
through institutions. In the EU, laws and institutions are intended to secure the free flow of
capital; however, these de-jure laws may only be a part of investor protection de-facto.
Our goal here is to examine EU regions within EU countries, a similar setting to U.S.
states, where the conditions of the basic neoclassical model with diversified ownership are
likely to hold. We also consider EU countries although it is well known that net flows at
the country level are small and country assets are not well diversified.2 La Porta, Lopezde-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997) show that countries with different historical legal
traditions differ in financial performance. This may affect the level of within-country capital
market integration. However, we find little evidence that country level institutions matter
for intercountry capital market integration. Maybe institutional differences are too minor
too matter in the EU or maybe formal institutions function differently in different cultural
environments.3
Why may identical institutions in different societies have different impacts? Regions
within countries often differ in the levels of “social capital” even if laws and formal institutions
are identical. People will likely to invest less if they trust each other less and have no
confidence in institutions; i.e., when the level of “social capital” is low. Hence, in this
2

For a recent treatment of these issues see Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) and Sørensen, Wu, Yosha, and
Zhu (2007) respectively. The phenomenon of no-diversification is often refereed as“home bias” and was first
documented by French and Poterba (1991). Home bias has declined significantly in the last decade but
important deviations from full diversification still exist.
3
There is two-way causality between culture and institutions as argued by Inglehart (2000). Thus, Fernandez (2007) argues that, work that attempts to undercover whether institutions or culture is the most
important determinant of economic development may not be fruitful.

2

paper we proxy “social capital” with trust and confidence. Specifically, our “trust” variable
is measured as whether respondents in the World Values Survey agree with the statements
“most people can be trusted” and “I trust other people in the country” and our “confidence”
variable is measured as whether the respondents agree to have confidence in the courts, the
parliament, and other institutions.4
We display in Figure 1 and Figure 2 the relative (to the country average) degree of trust
and confidence, respectively, in the EU countries for which the data are available. In the
figures, the darker the color, the higher the level of trust or confidence. There are systematic
differences within countries, for example, Scotland displays high trust and confidence and
the level of trust is higher in northern than in southern Germany while the level of confidence
is higher in western than in eastern Germany. Early studies by political scientists on the
effects of “social capital” were inspired by the differences in the levels of trust in northern
versus southern Italy. This pattern be readily seen from Figure 1.5 Motivated by the early
findings for Italy and the regional variation in the endowments of social capital across Europe,
Tabellini (2005) investigates the effect of culture (measured as trust and confidence) on per
capita output levels of European regions controlling for country effects. He aggregates to
the regional level the individual responses collected in the opinion polls of the World Values
Survey in the 1990s (Inglehart, 2000). In this paper, we attempt to explain the differences
in financial integration among European regions rather than the output differences studied
by Tabellini.6
Our regional dataset is ideal for examining de-facto versus de-jure financial integration
within Europe since we can exploit variation among European regions and control for national legal systems and institutions. We investigate the effect of trust and confidence on
4

See data appendix for the exact definitions.
See Banfield (1958) and Putnam (1993) who have argued that the differences in social and economic
behavior between northern and southern Italy can be traced back to their distant histories and traditions, and
that these different endowments of “social capital” in turn contribute to explain the economic backwardness
of southern Italy.
6
Beugelsdijk and von Schaik (2001) and Knack and Keefer (1997) perform an analysis similar to that of
Tabellini for European regions studying the correlation between indicators of social capital and per capita
output.
5

3

Figure 1: Trust within EU

4

Figure 2: Confidence within EU

5

financial integration among the European regions controlling for country level effects. In
correspondence with the dictum that “culture matters,” we find that regions with high levels of confidence and trust are more financially integrated with similar regions within the
same country.7
Recently, there has been extensive research effort put into answering the question, “do
differences in beliefs and preferences vary systematically across groups of individuals over
time and do these differences explain differences in outcomes?”8 In some cultures banks are
not trusted and cash (or precious metals) is the only accepted store of value. Such savings
vehicles are not optimal for financial intermediation and, thus, capital market integration.
Financial contracts are typically trust-intensive—even if a wronged party can rely on the
courts this may be too expensive in terms of money and time to be worthwhile. Therefore,
social capital may have major effects on financial development. Guiso et al. (2004a) study
the effects of social capital on domestic financial development using household data from
Italy and find that individuals with high social capital in Italy make different financial
choices than individuals with low social capital in the use of checks or portfolio allocation.
They argue that, for financial exchange, not only legal enforceability of contracts matters but
also the extent to which the financier trusts the financee.9 Guiso et al. (2004b) investigate
the relationship between trust and trade and portfolio investment in a bilateral country
setting. Since more trade increases growth which in turn will raise trust, they use exogenous
variation in trust proxied by common language, border, legal system, and genetic-ethnic
7

The phrase “culture matters” was first popularized by Landes (1998). We use the terms social capital
and culture as synonyms in this paper and assume trust and confidence are important determinants of both.
Fukuyama (2002) argues that there is no agreement on what social capital is. He defines it as cooperation
among people for common ends on the basis of shared informal norms and values. Hence social capital is a
utilitarian way of looking at culture. He also argues that in some forms social capital can be destructive to
development if it creates family networks that are resistant to change and involves mistrust of strangers as
in Latin America (as also argued by Banfield for Italy). In Fukuyama’s words: “It is not sufficient to go into
a village, note the existence of networks, label it social capital, and pronounce it a good thing.” A detailed
analysis of social capital is beyond the scope of this paper. However, we emphasize that the questions on
which we base our measures of social capital involves confidence and trust in collective institutions such as
the EU rather than confidence and trust in narrow networks such as families.
8
See Fernandez (2007) and Guiso et al. (2006) for excellent surveys on this topic.
9
They measure regional social capital by electoral participation and by the frequency with which people
in a region donate blood.

6

distance between two countries’ populations. They find that a country that trust another
country less, trade less with and invest less in that county. Others have looked at the effect
of culture on various individual decisions such as fertility and labor supply.10
Greif (1994) stresses the interaction between culture and institutions and describes how
the different cultures of Maghribi traders (who set up horizontal relations where merchants
served as agents for traders) and Genoese traders (who set up a vertical relation where
individuals specialized as merchants) in the late medieval period led them to develop different
institutions, and how this mattered for their subsequent development paths.11 Providing
causal evidence of the influence of culture on development turns out to be the key issue in
this literature.12 At the country level it is hard to identify causal effects because differences
in beliefs may be the consequence of different economic and institutional environments. Also,
as argued by Inglehart (2000), culture is endogenous to development and changes over time
as a result of “modernization.”13
Financial integration may take two forms. Agents and regions may use financial markets
1) to diversify risk or 2) to invest net capital in highly productive regions. This process
has been referred to as “diversification versus development finance” by Obstfeld and Taylor
(2004). We propose two metrics for measuring diversification and development finance both
of which are based on the net capital income flows between regions. In the country-level
national accounts net capital income flows are approximately equal to the difference between Gross National Income (“income”) and Gross Domestic Product (“output”).14 GDP
10

See Fernandez et al. (2002, 2004), Fernandez (2007), and Glaeser et al. (2000).
Zak and Knack (2001) investigate the relation between trust and growth in a cross-country setting while
La Porta et al. (1997) investigate the effect of trust in the working of large organizations. Fukuyama (2002)
argues that one of the reasons why the “Washington Consensus” to development of transitional economies
failed in 1990s was because it fails to incorporate the role of social capital.
12
Fernandez (2007) points out that the usual practice of exploiting religious composition of a country as
the source of exogenous variation may be problematic since it may explain the aggregate outcome through
other channels than directly through social capital.
13
Another problem is measuring the change in culture. As argued by Fukuyama (2002), even the most
ambitious study of social capital by Putnam (2000) cannot convincingly identify the sign of the change in
social capital in the United States over the last 40 years. Inglehart (2000) argues that some cultural values are
very persistent in spite of modernization and some may not change at all. He concludes that modernization
theory is probabilistic and not deterministic.
14
In the country-level national accounts, the difference between GDP and Gross National Income is net
11

7

is observed for European regions but the region-level equivalent of GNI is not. We use approximations to regional-level GNI based on observed regional personal income and the ratio
of GDP to GNI (“output/income”) is then an indicator of net capital income.15
We estimate two sets of regressions using data from 168 NUTS2 level regions and, due
to lack of data for some variables, 105 regions composed of NUTS1 and NUTS2 regions
as a mixed sample.16 The first set of regressions examine whether the change of the output/income ratio is positive for regions with high growth. Intuitively, if capital ownership
is fully diversified, the capital in a region will mainly be owned by non-residents. Assuming
that the income share to capital is 0.33, a relative increase in growth should be associated
with a increase in the ratio of output to income of about one third times the relative change
in growth because a fraction 0.33 of the growth in output is generating capital income which
is diffused over the whole country.17 Thus we interpret the slope coefficient from the regression of the change in the output/income ratio on regional growth as the de-facto measure of
financial integration; i.e., a measure of diversification finance.
If capital flows to high growth regions we should, everything else equal, see that high
output regions run current account deficits and hold negative net asset positions.18 On the
other hand, poorer regions might become competitive due do “recent” changes in technology
or human capital accumulation and “catch-up growth” may be observed where low output
factor income which includes net foreign income to capital and net earnings of domestic residents (not
citizens) abroad. However, foreign earnings of domestic residents are usually fairly small compared to capital
income.
15
In the national accounts, personal income can be found (approximately) from Gross National Income by
subtracting corporate profits and net personal interest payments and adding transfers. Subtracting personal
taxes gives disposable personal income. In the present paper we have data for regional income that does not
include transfers, making it closer to Gross National Income—see the appendix for a more precise description
of our data.
16
NUTS refers to Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics.
17
This result is derived in more detail in Section 2.
18
Kraay and Ventura (2002) develop a model where investment risk is high and diminishing returns are
weak. The implication of their model is such that current account response should be equal to the savings
generated by the positive productivity shock multiplied by country’s share of foreign assets in total assets.
This implies that positive productivity shocks lead to deficits in debtor countries and surpluses in creditor
countries. Our model is consistent with this, though in our case debtor countries can will have higher output
than in their model because we assume full diversification while they assume no diversification and therefore
high required risk premia.

8

regions have higher growth than more developed regions and, as a result, are attracting
capital from other regions; an example is the U.S. southern states in the 1950s.19 We run
a second set of regressions that are informative about net capital flows and examine the
relationship between the level of the output/income ratio and the level of output. We
interpret the ratio as a proxy for past net flows; i.e., a measure of development finance.
One caveat of the measure for development finance is that it is not tied as closely to
the model as the measure of diversification finance. Even if capital is flowing to rich and
productive regions this measure may fail to account for this for the following reasons: 1)
Profits paid from a region may be temporarily large relative to past investments (leading to
a low output/income ratio), for example in case of oil rich regions receiving wind-fall gains
due to sudden surges in world oil prices and 2) governments may interfere with income flows
which will distort our measure. For example, governments may support private investment
or engage in public investment in declining coal mining regions. In such a scenario capital
ownership may be well diversified (high degree of diversification finance) but net capital
flows are minor (low degree of development finance). It is also feasible that governments
systematically divert funds to poorer regions for development reasons. Indeed we find that
high output regions hold negative asset positions in northern Europe but not in the South
(Portugal, Italy, and Spain). Comparing results using income before and after transfers and
subsidies indicate that the result for the South is, at least partly, due to government subsidies
and taxation channelling money to low output regions.
Overall, we find evidence that capital market integration within the EU is less than what
is implied by theoretical benchmarks and less than what is found for U.S. states.20 We also
find little evidence that institutions matter for intercountry capital market integration in
the EU while we find that regions with high confidence and trust levels are more financially
19

Note that Gourinchas and Jeanne (2007) and Prasad et al. (2007) find exactly the opposite in a developing country context; i.e., they find capital goes to less productive countries and a positive correlation
between current account and growth, respectively.
20
We focus on integration through flows of production capital and thus our results are complementary to
those found in the ECB (2007) report, which show increased integration among money and bond markets but
less integration in the banking sector. See also Giannone and Reichlin (2006) for risk sharing and volatility
within EU and Lane (2006) for a survey on the effects of the EMU.

9

integrated with each other within countries.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model, where details are presented
in the Appendix. Section 3 lays out the econometric specifications and Section 4 describes
the data. Section 5 undertakes the empirical exercise and Section 6 concludes.

Benchmark Model

2

Consider regions i = 1, ..., N , with labor force Lit . Output at time t is Cobb-Douglas:
GDPit = Ait Kitα L1−α
, where Kit is capital installed in state i. The aggregate (the sum of
i
all the regions considered) capital stock installed is Kt and Kt is also total capital owned .
Region i owns a positive share φit of the total so capital owned φit Kt where Σφit = 1 and
and Kt = ΣKit . Productivity levels differ across states. The ex ante rate of return to
investment is Rt for all states and the relative amount of capital installed in each region will
be determined by the equilibrium condition that the marginal return to capital equals the
interest rate.
The equilibrium condition is illustrated in Figure 3. The MPK schedule shows how
marginal product varies as the capital stock increases. For given labor force, productivity,
and depreciation rate (δ), an increase in the capital stock will reduce its marginal product
due to the law of diminishing returns.21 The aggregate interest rate is constant (assumed
to be 0.06). The interest rate can be a world interest rate or an endogenously determined
equilibrium interest rate but in our application with many regions the interest rate can be
considered given for individual regions, akin to a small open economy assumption. The
domestic capital stock is determined by the equation M P K = R. The equilibrium capitallabor ratio is higher in region 2 with higher productivity than in region 1. In Figure 3, the
MPK schedule for the high productivity region is given by the dashed line and the MPK
schedule for the lower productivity region is given as the solid line. The level of productivity
is set to be 1.5 times higher in the high productivity region; i.e., A2 = 1.5A1 .
21

Note that the return to capital, α is assumed to be 1/3.

10

MPK

Figure 3: Equilibrium Capital Stock as a Function of Productivity

α-1

MPKi= Ai(Ki/Li) -δ

(A2=1.5 A1)

R=0.06

K1

K2

K

11

We show the deterministic version of our model for simpler exposition. A more detailed
model would allow for uncertainty but under the assumption that capital ownership is fully
diversified risk premiums would be negligible. Kraay and Ventura (2002) argue that countries
tend to hold all physical capital installed in their own country and this lack of diversification
is an important explanation for international investment patterns. This may well be true
for countries but in this paper we measure the deviation from our simple benchmark model
and do not attempt to explain why country-level data may deviate.22
The aggregate capital income is Rt Kt and the wage rate in region i is wit = (1 −
α)Ait Kitα L−α
it . Income, GNI, in region i is, therefore, GN Iit = φit Rt Kt + wit Li = φit Rt Kt +
and the GDP/GNI ratio is
(1 − α)Ait Kitα L1−α
i
GDPit
Ait Kitα L1−α
GDPit
i
=
.
1−α =
α
GN Iit
φit Rt Kt + (1 − α)GDPit
φit Rt Kt + (1 − α)Ait Kit Li

(1)

We allow for changes in the labor force due to migration. We consider two cases: a) migrants
bring no assets and b) migrants bring average assets. Other cases can easily be interpolated
or extrapolated from these. In case a) dGN P/dL is (1 − α) dGDP/dL as migrants will only
receive labor income while in case b) dGN P/dL = dGDP/dL. When capital instantly flows
to restore the capital labor ratio, dGDP/dL = (GDP/L)dL because the per capita capital
stock will be unchanged leaving per capita output unchanged. We get in case a)
GDPit
d(GDP it/Lit )
)≈α
,
GN Iit
GDPit /Lit

(2)

GDPit
d(GDP it/Lit )
)≈α
− α dLit /Lit .
GN Iit
GDPit /Lit

(3)

d(
and in case b)
d(

It is obvious that the ratio of output to income will be decreasing in the ownership share
φit of region i for given output. The ratio will be temporarily increasing when a region is
hit by a productivity shock but Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2007) show that for typical parameter
22

Recall that we find in earlier work that our benchmark model fits U.S. intra-national investment patterns
well.

12

values a region’s output/income ratio will converge back to the equilibrium value of unity if
no further productivity shocks hit, with a half-life for the deviation of about 15 years.23
Consider for simplicity the case where all ownership shares initially are identical and
equal to 1/N = Lit /Lt , where depreciation is nil, and where Lt is aggregate population and
where regions j outside of region i has Ajt = At and region i is negligible in the total. For
φit = 1/N , we have φit Rt Kt =

1
RK
N t t

=

1
αGDPt ,
N

and the predicted GDP/GNI ratio for

identical ownership shares and varying productivity levels is GDPit /GN Iit =

1
α

GDPt /N
GDPit

+(1−α)

;

i.e., after controlling for ownership shares, regions with relatively high output per capita
will have high values of the output/income ratio. We do not observe ownership shares by
region so we are limited to examining the relation of the output/income ratio to output.
We can imagine three cases: 1) the output/income ratio is high in high output states—we
expect to find this where capital markets are highly integrated, output has little correlation
with ownership, and the government doesn’t interfere with geographical flows of income
or investment; 2) the output/income ratio has a negative relation to output—we expect
to find this relation during “catch-up” growth where formerly poor regions (with current
low ownership shares) grow fast; or 3) little relation between the output/income ratio and
output—we expect to find this where government tend to direct income flows or where
markets are badly integrated.
Finally, we show how the output/income ratio varies with productivity in the simple case
1

it 1−α
where state different from i are identical:. Since Kit = Lit ( αA
)
, we get
Rt

Kit
Kjt

1

= ( AAjtit ) 1−α

1

and when Kjt = K/N , this implies Kit = Kt /N ∗ ( AAitt ) 1−α and we have the output/income
ratio in terms of productivity levels

GDPit
GN Iit

1

=

1

. See Kalemli-Ozcan et al.

φit N α(At /Ait ) 1−α +(1−α)

(2007) for more details.
23

More precisely, they assume that the saving rate is constant across regions at 15 percent, α = 0.33, and
a depreciation rate of 5 percent per year.

13

Econometric Model

3

We describe our regression specifications at the regional level. The country level regressions
are quite similar. The regressions are motivated by our benchmark model. The model
assumes that capital ownership is fully diversified across regions and that capital adjusts to
the equilibrium level within one period following productivity shocks. The model ignores
adjustment costs and business cycle patterns and is intended as a model for the “medium
run.” The main implication of the model is that when capital ownership is diversified then an
increase in productivity will lead to an increase in growth. But the increase in output will be
followed by a lower increase in income because the share of income going to capital—typically
found to be one-third—is going to capital owners in other regions. The output/income ratio
will, therefore, be expected to increase by about one-third times the increase in output.
We calculate the ratio of output to income for each region i in each year t. We compute
it / INCit
(OUTPUT/INCOME)it = GRP
, where
GRPt / INCt

regional GDP of region i,

INC

GRPt

= Σi GRPit ,

INCt

= Σi INCit and

GRPi

is gross

is personal income, and the summation is over the regions of

all EU countries in our sample. We scale the ratio because personal income is systematically
lower than GDP which includes depreciation and because EU-wide aggregate current account
deficits and surpluses may change the ratio.24 The ratio (OUTPUT/INCOME)it captures region
i’s output/income ratio in year t relative to the aggregate output/income ratio of the EU.

3.1

Change Regressions

Our main regression tests if capital ownership is fully diversified. The specification takes the
form
∆(OUTPUT/INCOME)i = µc + α ∆ log GDPi + ei ,
where ∆(OUTPUT/INCOME)i = (OUTPUT/INCOME)i,2003 −(OUTPUT/INCOME)i,1996 and ∆ log GDPi =
log GDPi,1994 − log GDPi,1991 . The sample for growth and for the output/income ratio are nonoverlapping to prevent measurement errors in output to enter on both sides of the equality
24

As is clear from Table 2 non-scaled output/income ratios are much bigger than unity.

14

sign because that would create a spurious correlation between the left- and right-hand sides.
The change in the output/income ratio is calculated for 7 years, rather than 1, in order
to capture “medium run” changes and to minimize noise. We use the longest sample of
consistent data available to us. GDP growth on the right-hand side is per capita for 3
years in order to minimize the impact of short term fluctuations.25 The period 1991–1994
is fairly short for our purpose but fortunately growth in Europe was quite high during this
period with significant regional variation after the unification of Germany.26 µc is a dummy
variable for each country—if countries within the EU were fully integrated the coefficients to
the dummy variables would be identical but the data clearly rejects this assumption. This
is consistent with the country-level results presented below.
We also estimate the relation
∆(OUTPUT/INCOME)i = µc + αc ∆ log GDPi + ei ,
where we allow the coefficient to regional growth to vary across countries and we will test
if the statistical hypothesis αc = α (i.e., that the slope coefficients are identical) can be
accepted.
We further add variables on the right hand side as suggested by our model. We add
population growth from 1992 to 1994. If population growth is dominated by migrants arriving with few assets then this increase the output but not income and therefore boost the
output/income ratio. If changes in population are dominated by wealthy retirees moving
out (or dying) this will lower income and also increase the output/income ratio. We further
include the lagged, 1995, output/income ratio. The output/income ratio is mean reverting
if the saving rate is constant and the same for labor and capital income: when a (relative)
positive productivity shock hits a region, output goes up more than income, but wages also
go up and higher wages, in connection with a constant saving rate, will lead to higher in25

We have available 4 years of regional output constructed using a different base year than the later data.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Reshef, Sørensen, and Yosha (2007) find that the results for the United States are not
very sensitive to the period length as long as it is not very short.
26

15

come and saving and eventually the output/income ratio will approach unity in the absence
of further shocks. Hence the lagged ratio will have a negative coefficient.
If ownership of capital is fully diversified, we expect to find an estimated α-coefficient of
about 0.33. If we find a coefficient smaller than this, we may ask if some regions are better
integrated than others. For example, are regions where individuals endowed with higher
levels of social capital more diversified than other regions? We examine this question by
estimating the regression

∆(OUTPUT/INCOME)i = µc + δXi + α ∆ log GDPi + γ (Xi − X) ∆ log GDPi + ei , ,
where Xi refers to an “interaction” variable that measures the average level of social capital
(measured by confidence or trust) in the region and the coefficient γ to the interacted term
captures whether the output/income ratio reacts more to growth where the level of social
capital is high.27 If γ is positive and significant we interpret this as showing that capital
markets are more integrated between regions with high trust and confidence. We include
the non-interacted effect of X because the non-interacted effect might have a direct effect
on income and/or output via savings and if the X-term is left out this could spuriously be
captured by the interaction term. As interactions, we will also use indicators of institutional
quality, available at the country level.28

3.2

Level regressions

The level of capital income flows, approximated by the level of the output/income ratio will
typically reflect past net capital flows (i.e., development finance). The level regressions take
the form
(OUTPUT/INCOME)i = µc + αG log GDPi + ei ,
27

The interaction variable X is demeaned in order to keep the interpretation of the γ coefficient unchanged
as explained by Ozer-Balli and Sorensen (2007).
28
In this case there will not be a direct main effect of X because it gets absorbed by the country dummies.

16

where the output/income ratio is averaged over 1995 to 2003 and log GDPi on the right hand
side, which we refer to as “initial GDP” in this setting, is averaged over 1991–1994.29 αG
varies across groups of countries and we test if this model can be accepted against a model
where the coefficient αc vary across all countries.30 We also estimate regressions of the form
(OUTPUT/INCOME)i = µc + δXi + αG log GDPi + γ (Xi − X) log GDPi + ei ,
in order to examine if “X” variables, such as trust or confidence, are related to whether the
output/income ratio is high or low in countries with different levels of initial output. Again,
we include the non-interacted effect of X since the non-interacted effect might have a direct
effect on income and/or output via savings and if the X-term is left out this could spuriously
be captured by the interaction term.

Data

4

Our analysis is performed for the 168 NUTS2 regions including the countries for which we
have data with more than one region. If regions are too small income patterns may reflect
commuting rather than capital income flows and we, therefore, also performed most of our
regressions at the 65 larger NUTS1 level regions and found similar results. An exception to
this is Greece, which also has the character of an outlier, being less economically developed
than most of the other countries in our sample. Statistical tests for pooling of data also found
that Greece didn’t fit the pattern of other countries. Therefore, we decided to exclude Greece
from the analysis. We construct a mixed sample of 105 NUTS1 and NUTS2 regions for the
regressions that uses data from World Values Survey to match the regional specification
in World Values Survey. We describe the World Values Survey in more detail in the data
appendix but the data we use are based on individual level surveys which we aggregate to the
29

The 1992–1994 growth rates used in the change regressions are based on 1991–1994 levels data.
We initially tested if the coefficients for all countries could be accepted to be identical, this statistical
hypothesis was clearly rejected.
30

17

Figure 4: Regional Growth and Output Income Ratio

Sachsen-Germany

Year
London-UK

0.40%
0.20%
0.00%

1.01
1
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.91

Growth

Output/Income

0.96
0.92

Year

Growth

0.98
0.94

0.38%
0.37%

Output/Income

Growth

0.60%

Output/Income

0.39%

95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03

1.40%

0.80%

1

0.40%

Região Autónoma dos Açores-Portugal

1.00%

1.02

Growth

0.41%

95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03

1.60%
1.20%

1.04
Output/In
come

0.42%

0.70%
0.60%
0.50%
0.40%
0.30%
0.20%
0.10%
0.00%

1.2

Output/Income

1.15
Output/Incom
e

Output/Income

0.43%

Growth

Growth

Zuid-Netherland
1.06
1.04
1.02
1
0.98
0.96
0.94
0.92

Output/Income

Growth

1.40%
1.20%
1.00%
0.80%
0.60%
0.40%
0.20%
0.00%

1.1

Growth

1.05
1

0.95
0.9
95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03

95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
Year

Year

NUTS1 and NUTS2 level as a mixed sample. We also take the average over the 2 questions
in the survey involving trust and over 11 relevant questions involving confidence in order to
minimize noise—for robustness we also examine an average of 3 questions about confidence,
the trade-off is that using less variables may lead to a more noisy measure while the benefit
of using only 3 question is that these questions may be the more relevant.

4.1

Graphical Evidence

In Figure 4, we display the regional output/income ratio versus regional relative growth (the
regional growth rate minus the growth rate of the country to which the region belongs) for
a selection of NUTS1 regions for 4 selected regions from sample. We selected regions, from
18

different countries, that display changes in growth in order to get a visual impression of
whether changing growth is reflected in changing output/income ratios. One can observe
from Figure 4 that a region with high relative growth such as Sachsen of Germany have
experienced an increasing output/income ratio. London of the UK is an example where
relative growth went down 1% yearly and output/income ratio went from 1.15 to 1.05.31

4.2

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports the mean and standard deviations (across the 14 countries) of the dependent
and independent variables used in our country-level regression and also the averages of three
institutional variables that will be used as interaction terms—these institutional variables
are not available by region. The GDP/GNI ratio has a mean of about 1 and has a standard
deviation of 0.04. A value of, e.g., 1.04 means that 4 percent of value produced shows up
as income in other countries on net. Capital inflows (the sum of current accounts with sign
reversed) and net assets have large standard deviations of 34 and 9 percent, respectively.
GDP growth 1992–1994 has a standard deviation of about 1 percent. Average population
size of the NUTS2 regions varies from a low of 870,000 in Austria to a high of 3.32 million
in Portugal. We report the mean values of principal components for the institutional quality
indicators, “property rights institutions,” “legal regulations,” and “financial regulations.”
The value of the principal components are not interpretable but we report these numbers
chiefly to evaluate the variation and we see that the financial regulations variable shows the
highest variation across countries.32
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for NUTS2 regions of every country. Within countries, the output/income ratio shows larger variation compared with that found between
countries, except for Italy and Spain. (The country-level average value of the income/output
31

Such patterns are more clear for U.S. data, see Kalemli-Ozcan, Reshef, Sørensen, and Yosha (2007).
A principal component for a group of variables is the variable that is a linear function of the original
variables and maximize the variation over time. While it doesn’t have a very clean interpretation it is a
commonly used method to summarize information in a group of variables that are not practical to all include
in a regression.
32

19

ratio is not going to affect our regression results which all include dummy variables for each
country.) Average GDP is fairly similar across countries with Spain being in the low range
and Portugal having substantially lower output than other countries. Per capita growth from
1991 to 1994 varies from negative in Spain, Italy, and Sweden, to 8.32 percent in Germany.
Trust is highest in the Netherlands and Germany and lowest in Italy and France. Trust
shows the highest variation within Spain. Confidence is highest in Portugal and lowest in
Germany and Spain with Germany showing the largest amount of variation. This is partly
due to several regions in the former DDR displaying low confidence. Factor shares show some
variation, especially the share of manufacturing which is 23 percent in the UK but only 9
percent in Portugal who also have the largest share of agriculture. The fraction of retirees
is largest in Sweden and lowest in Portugal. Measured by population regions are smallest in
Belgium and the Netherlands and largest in Portugal.

4.3

Correlation between Regressors

Tables 3 and 4 display the matrix of correlations between the regressors (and the regressand)
in levels and in changes for countries and NUTS2 regions, respectively. For countries, past
capital inflows (cumulated current account deficits) and net asset variables are negatively
correlated and so are past growth and the output/income ratio. Current growth and the
output/income ratio are very highly correlated but this may reflect that these numbers are
constructed using the exact same output series.
For NUTS2 regions most correlations are fairly small, the highest correlations being the
output/income ratio with finance share at 0.43 and finance share with manufacturing share
at –0.32. Note that the social capital variables, trust and confidence, have a correlation of
only 0.04. Growth has been high in regions with high confidence but not in regions with
high trust.

20

5
5.1

Empirical Analysis
Does the output/income ratio capture past current accounts?

We perform regressions where countries are the units of observation in order to establish
that the ratio of output to income is a reasonable measure of past capital flows. We can
check this because current accounts and asset holdings are available at the country level
but not at the regional level. In Table 5, we examine the relations between past current
accounts, net asset holdings and output/income ratios. We show results with and without
Ireland since Ireland is well known to have a substantially more open economy than most
other countries; however, the Irish data may also have some problems due to tax arbitrage of
multinational corporations. In the first two columns, we examine if net foreign asset holdings
are correlated with past current accounts. As expected, we find a positive relation—with
or without Ireland—with significance levels of about 5 percent. We further examine if past
current accounts are negatively correlated with the ratio of output to income in the next two
columns. We find the expected negative relation when Ireland is left out, but a non-significant
positive coefficient when Ireland is included. While our focus is on EU countries, in the last
two columns we verify that past current accounts typically predict negative output asset
ratios using a sample of 24 OECD countries. We find in the last column that such a relation
is highly significant statistically, even though Ireland is a strong outlier that including her
brings the level of significance down below the 5 percent level. Overall, the results of Table 5
confirm that the income/output ratio is able to capture past current accounts even though
countries with strongly divergent growth patterns, such as Ireland, may obscure the pattern.

5.2

Capital Flows between EU countries

In Table 6, we examine the prediction that relatively high output growth leads to an increase
in the output/income ratio. When Ireland is included in the sample, we find a coefficient
of 0.35 which is exactly the predicted magnitude. The coefficient is not significant and
the reason can be inferred from the second column which shows that when Ireland is left
21

out, the positive relation totally disappears and high growth countries show no tendency to
attract capital from other countries. Columns (3) and (4) include population growth and the
lagged ratio of output/income. When Ireland is included, we find a very large coefficient to
population growth, which indicates strong immigration of individuals with low assets (likely
young people) who contribute more to output than to income (although the coefficient is
imprecisely estimated and the point estimate seems too big to be meaningful). We find that,
when Ireland is left out, the output/income ratio reverts almost fully to unity in the absence
of further shocks but this finding is likely due to the small overall amount of capital flows.
In columns (5) and (6), we examine if high growth is associated with large current account
deficits and we find no significant patterns. In the last two columns of Table 6, we regress
the level of the output/income ratio on output and find an insignificant coefficient near
0. These findings are consistent with the well-known observation of Feldstein and Horioka
(1980) that saving and investment are highly correlated at the country level.33 Blanchard
and Giavazzi (2002) point out that in recent years the developing economies of Greece and
and Portugal have received large capital inflows and suggest that this might herald the “end
of the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle” at least within the EU, but our results indicate that the
process still may need some time before capital adjusts as freely as between U.S. states.34

5.3
5.3.1

Change Regressions: NUTS2 Regions
Tests for Pooling

Our regressions using NUTS2 regions are all performed with a dummy variable included for
each country. Country-level capital flows do not appear to follow the open economy model
well due to reasons that are beyond the scope of this paper. By including the dummies all
our results have the interpretation of capturing within country flows rendering any country
33
In our model, a productivity shock leads to capital inflows; i.e., investment, financed by the entire EU
(if integrated) while the savings rate is constant. Therefore, savings and investment are not correlated.
34
See also Abiad et al. (2007) who find results similar to those of Blancard and Giavazzi in the sense that
capital in Europe flows “downhill” from rich countries to poor countries in accordance with the neoclassical
model.

22

specific feature irrelevant. The patterns of within country capital flows may be similar in
different countries, in which case we can pool the countries. We are mainly interested in
whether high growth regions attract capital and whether high output regions are net debtors
or creditors. We will turn to the latter question later but we present all tests for pooling in
Table 7. The first two columns show regressions of the change in the output/income ratio
on growth and the last two columns treat the regression of the level of the output/income
ratio on the initial level of output.
In the first column, we allow for the coefficient to initial growth to vary across countries.
The point estimates vary substantially by country but the country-level intercepts are not
precisely estimated. In the second column, we impose the restriction that the coefficient
to initial growth is identical in all regions, independently of country. We find that this
restriction can be accepted statistically.35 In the third column, we see that net capital flows
between regions display large differences between countries. There is a strong tendency
for regions with high output to have a high output/income ratio in the Netherlands and
Belgium, a significant but somewhat lower tendency in Austria, France, Germany, Sweden,
and the UK. In Portugal and Spain, there is no tendency for the output/income ratio to
be related to output, while in Italy the estimated coefficient is positive and tiny but very
precisely estimated. In column (4), we show the coefficients to output when the Netherlands
and Belgium are pooled into a “North1” group, Austria, France, Germany, Sweden, the UK
are grouped into a “North2” group, and Italy, Portugal, and Spain are combined into a
“South” group. Countries can be accepted statistically to be identical with each of these
groups.36 There are clear differences in the patterns of net capital flows between northern
and southern Europe which will be explored in the next Section.
35

We calculate an F-statistic of 0.77, which is below the F(148,9) 5 percent critical value of 1.94 (148 is
the number of observations minus the number of parameters estimated in the unconstrained model and 9 is
the number of restrictions imposed in the constrained model).
36
We calculate an F-statistic, finding a value of 2.00. The F-statistic is below the F(148,7) 5 percent
critical value of 2.07 implying that this hypothesis is not rejected.

23

5.3.2

Change Regressions, Population Growth, and Lagged Output/Income

Table 8 displays the pooled coefficient to initial growth in the first column. The coefficient
is positive and significant, consistent with high growth regions receiving capital from other
regions in the country. However, the coefficient is clearly (and statistically significantly)
below 0.33 indicating that capital ownership is not fully diversified within EU countries. In
the second column, we add population growth and find a negative (not quite significant)
coefficient. This coefficient may indicate that migration is dominated by high net worth
residents, possibly retirees. Finally, we include the initial level of the output/income ratio
and find a negative coefficient consistent with mean reversion, although the coefficient is
smaller than expected and not quite significant.
Why may EU countries have less integrated regions than the United States? There are
few formal barriers to capital flows between regions within EU countries but we suspect
that financial and industrial development may explain the differences. If EU countries have
more independent farmers and proprietor-owned small firms we might expect regional income to be tighter related to regional output than in the United States where more firms
are incorporated and listed on exchanges where ownership shares are traded in nationwide
market. Financial development may, however, also matter for small firms, for example, if
nationwide insurance companies insure the value of farm output against, say, hail damage,
the insurance companies to some extent become “owners” of a part of output. “Insurance”
of the value of output through trading on futures markets for hogs or grains have a similar
effect and even nationwide banks to some extent share in output by giving loans to small
firms—even if loans have a fixed interest rate the repayment become partly state-contingent
if the loans are not repaid due to default in periods of low output. We do not attempt
to directly measure differences in these types of financial instruments between the United
States and Europe—maybe such a task is infeasible—but our hunch is such differences are
behind the divergence of the U.S. and EU results.

24

5.3.3

Regional Social Capital and Within Country Financial Integration

We turn to the major focus of our investigation, namely whether trust and confidence are
important determinants of capital mobility. We address this question by interacting the
level of trust or confidence with initial growth. If the coefficient to the interacted variable is
positive this indicates that capital flows more readily to high growth regions in areas within
countries where the level of trust (confidence) is high and capital leaves slow growth regions
more rapidly. We also include confidence and trust in non-interacted form because a potential
left-out non-interacted variable might spuriously make the interaction term significant. We
present the correlation matrix for our variables in Table 9. We can observe, among other
things, that trust and confidence are positively correlated, as also found in the previous
sample, but the two variables measure quite different things as the correlation is only 0.22. In
general, the correlations between these regressors are fairly low implying that the regression
analysis should be able to identify the effect of the individual variables.
Table 10 presents the regression of the change in the output/income ratio on initial growth
and initial growth interacted. We find with a 10 percent level of significance that regions
with higher confidence tend to have a lower output/income ratio; i.e., export capital to other
regions. This result is not unreasonable but given the borderline level of significance and
because it is hard to verify the robustness of this result we hesitate to stress it. Our main
object of interest is the interaction term and we here find a highly significant coefficient of
the expected sign: capital flows much more freely from low to high growth regions in areas
of high confidence. The t-statistic is a high 3.88 and the coefficient implies that the regions
with the highest confidence37 (a logged and demeaned value of 0.38) has a coefficient to
growth of 0.24*0.38+0.19=0.28—very close to the expected value from our benchmark model.
Individuals need to feel confident in the institutions that provide financial intermediation, in
the ultimate recipients of capital, and in the legal system, so the result is perfectly intuitive
and in support of Guiso et al. (2004) and (2005).
37
The demeaned interaction term for confidence has a range from –0.71 to 0.38 and the range for trust is
from –1.81 to 0.79.

25

Alternatively, in column (3), we use trust as an interaction variable. We find the expected
sign for this variable with a significance level of between 5 and 10 percent but the point
estimate is substantially lower than that found for confidence. In columns (4)-(6) we include
the lagged output/income ratio and population growth but these variables appear quite
orthogonal to the interaction terms and do not change the results.
In Table 11, we include the trust and confidence variables together. Trust now becomes
less significant while the confidence variable is estimated at the same order of magnitude
and still with high significance—clearly the data can separate between these two variables
and clearly confidence matters more.38
Table 12 examines robustness. We first examine if the estimated effect of confidence is
sensitive to the exact choice of questions asked. One might expect that confidence in such
institutions as parliament, major companies, and the justice system might be more important
for financial integration. We therefore in column (1) show the regression obtained using a
“core confidence” measure constructed from the subjects expressing confidence in these three
institutions. The coefficient to the interaction term is smaller than for the “full” confidence
index, maybe reflecting more noise when averaging over a lower number of variables, but
the coefficient is still clearly significant. Also, the range of the “core confidence” measure is
larger implying that the smaller coefficient only partly implies less variation explained.39
One might worry that social capital can be endogenous to economic development. In this
case our results simply reflect that high growth, or more developed, regions have high trust
and also a high level of financial integration between themselves. In order to examine if the
interaction of confidence and initial growth may act as a “stand-in” for an interaction of, say,
high output and initial growth, we include an interaction term of initial output and growth
and see if this renders the interaction of confidence and growth insignificant. The results
are clearly at odds with this idea, the interaction term with initial output is very small with
a minuscule t-value. Alternatively, we include a squared term in growth. If confidence and
38

It is feasible that confidence simply is more precisely measured as the index of confidence is based on
the answer to 11 questions while the index of trust is based on 2 questions.
39
The range of the demeaned core confidence measure is from –1.22 to 0.41.

26

growth are correlated and the relation between output/income and growth is non-linear the
interaction term might simply capture a left-out quadratic term.40 However, the data do not
support a quadratic term in growth. The regressions using trust as the interaction terms are
also robust to these potential problems.41

5.3.4

Country Institutions and within Country Financial Integration

The quality of institutions in a country may be crucial for the patterns of capital flows. We
have three sets of indices for the institutional environment, namely principal components
for variables measuring the security of property rights, the quality of the legal system, and
regulations affecting financial markets directly. The variables are available to us by country
only and our main goal is to examine if these institutional indices might explain why some
countries are more financially integrated within than others; i.e., we use the country-level
indices interacted with regional-level initial growth or (in the levels regressions) with the
initial regional output level.42 Table 13 shows the correlation matrix for the interacted
indices with each other and with initial growth and output and with the change and level of
the output/income ratio. The most notable correlation is the one between property rights
institutions interacted with growth (initial output) and legal regulations at 0.85 (0.89).
We report results for institutional indices in Table 14. These results have a different
interpretation than the regressions involving trust and confidence where we searched for
differences between regions. Here we attempt only to find differences between countries in
the patterns of within-country interregional capital flows. However, none of the indices are
40

See Ozer-Balli and Sørensen (2007) about potential problems in the use of interaction terms.
Another worry might be reverse causality although it is not so obvious why the interaction of growth with
attitudes might be caused by net capital flows. In an attempt to examine this issue we try to instrument the
social capital variables with religious composition and got significant results—however, the point estimates
are large and hence hard to interpret. We do not tabulate these results.
42
Guiso et al. (2004) measure domestic financial development for Italian regions as the probability that
the household will be shut out from the credit market. They find that local financial development matters
for firm growth even in a de-jure integrated market such as Italy. Their Feldstein-Horioka regressions show
positive correlations between saving and investment for Italian regions, which makes Italy a de-facto nonintegrated market. They interpret this as follows: even if money easily can be moved from a bank in Milan
to a bank in Naples, it can not finance projects in Naples without the help of a local intermediary who
screens good from bad projects.
41

27

significant in explaining differences in diversification. Of course, this is consistent with the
test reported in Table 7 where the assumption of identical slopes across countries could not
be rejected.

5.4

Level regressions: Net capital Flows across NUTS2 Regions

Our results in Table 7 indicate large differences in net ownership between countries in northern and southern Europe. To recapitulate: in Belgium and the Netherlands (“North1”) high
output regions are debtors, in Austria, France, Germany, and the UK (“North2”) this is also
true but the pattern is less strong and in Italy, Portugal, and Spain (“South”) we find no
correlation between output and the output/income ratio.

5.4.1

Does Trust and Confidence Explain Net Capital Flows Across Regions?

Table 15 examines if the differences between net flows in the north and south of Europe can
be explained by differences in trust and confidence. The first column shows the regression
with the two North dummies, redone for the smaller sample where the trust and confidence
variables are available. The econometric setup is slightly different here than in Table 7. Here,
we include initial income and initial income interacted with the North1 and North2 dummies
rather than initial income interacted with each of the three dummies. The coefficient to
initial income will be the same as to the South dummy in the previous table but now the
coefficients to the North dummies captures the difference between these regions and the
South regions. The reason for this change is that we are interested in testing if the inclusion
of variables, such as confidence, may explain the differences between countries and in the
present formulation a variable can be said to explain the difference between the countries if
it makes the interaction of initial output with the North1 or North2 dummies insignificant
as measured by the t-statistic. On the contrary, if the regression with both dummy variables
and, say, confidence shows significant coefficients for the North dummies and an insignificant
coefficient to confidence then confidence cannot be said to explain the north/south pattern—
28

it may be part of the explanation but not the full explanation.
In column (1), we present the regression of the output/income ratio on initial output
and initial output multiplied by the North1 and North2 dummies. Country dummies are
also included but not displayed. For this sample the coefficient to initial output (i.e., the
non-interacted term) is positive and insignificant but both the North1 and North2 dummies
are significant indicating a larger tendency for capital to flow to high output states in the
northern countries. Including an interaction term for confidence results in a positive coefficient but it is not significant at the 10 percent level. Including the term together with the
North1 and North2 dummies renders the coefficient very small. Trust has a small coefficient
in column (4) but a negative coefficient when the North/South dummies are included. Overall, confidence and trust do not seem to explain the relation between regional output and
net capital flows.

5.4.2

Do Country Level Institutions and Regulations Explain the Difference
between Northern and Southern Europe?

In Table 16, which uses the full sample of 168 regions, we examine the role of institutions
related to 1) property rights such as corruption or expropriation risk), 2) legal variables
such as duration of check collection or enforceability of contracts, and 3) financial regulation
variables such as investor protection and disclosure requirements.43 In order to summarize the information within each group of institutional variables, we calculate the principal
components which summarize the information in the constituent variables. Table 16 shows
the results when the principal component is interacted with initial output and the regression is done with or without the North dummy interactions. (The principal component in
non-interacted form are not included as they would be perfectly collinear with the country
dummies.) We find that property rights are highly significant with high output regions in
countries with good property rights being net debtors consistent with capital moving to high
output regions in countries with better property rights. When we include the North dum43

See Table 22 in the appendix for the complete list.

29

mies we see that the property rights principal component can explain the difference between
North2 countries and South countries (and the difference to the North1 counties of Belgium
and the Netherlands become slightly smaller). Legal variables are highly significant when
the North dummies are not included but clearly not significant when they are—it appears
that the legal variables are not the full explanation of North/South differences. Financial
regulation variables are not significant even when the North/South dummies are left out and
do not appear to explain net capital flows.
It is somewhat hard to interpret principal components so, in Table 17, we study the role
of the property right variables in more detail. Ideally, one would like to know which of the
5 components of “property rights” are the relevant ones for capital flows and a multiple
regression that allows for all the variables in the same regression should point to the more
important variable or variables. Due to the high collinearity we didn’t get significant robust results in such regressions. (This is to be expected because we are trying to infer this
from the difference between 8 countries and with 5 components, which leaves few degrees
of freedom.) We, therefore, in Table 17 examine which components have explanatory power
for capital flows when the components are included one-by-one. When the North dummies
are left out all components are significant so we cannot rule out that all the components
may play a role. However, when we include the North dummies we find that the Bureaucratic Quality variable is no longer significant. Likely, this variable is less important. The
No Corruption variable changes sign and the coefficient to the North1 interacted dummy
becomes very large which indicates that the No Corruption variable is too highly correlated
with this variable to be estimated precisely. Therefore, we doubt that the negative estimated
coefficient is meaningful. Law and Order, No Expropriation Risk, and Government Stability all remain significant when the dummies are included, and each of these variables have
enough explanatory power to render the North2 variable insignificant. In other words, these
variables all have the potential to explain the difference in the patterns of within-country
capital flows in the south and the north of Europe. Unfortunately, we cannot separate out
if one (or more) of these three variables is the more important variable(s).

30

5.5

Net Capital Flows and Industrial Structure

In Table 18, we explore if net capital tends to flow to regions with a certain industrial
structure. We explore this by including in the regressions the regions’ share of manufacturing,
agriculture, finance, and mining, respectively. In steady state the output/income ratio is
unity and the factor shares would only be significant if recent productivity changes have
favored a sector in relative terms. We see that only the share of agriculture is significant, with
a negative coefficient. This might reflect that agricultural regions have become relatively less
productive and capital has been flowing to other regions. However, in the case of agriculture
it is well known that the EU provides extensive income support to farmers under the Common
Agricultural Policy and we suspect that this is reflected in the output/income ratio. Next,
we examine if high output regions tend to have attracted more outside capital if they are
focused in a particular sector. We examine this question by interacting the sector share
with initial output. We find a large positive and significant coefficient to the interaction of
finance share and initial output consistent with high growth areas concentrating in finance
having attracted outside capital. The coefficients to the interactions with manufacture and
agriculture are negative and significant at the 10 percent level indicating that high output
manufacturing or agricultural regions on average are capital exporters. Finally, we find a
positive significant coefficient to the interaction of mining share with initial output. This is
not surprising, regions that see an increase in the value of oil or minerals typically attract
capital with little delay.

5.6

The Role of Government Subsidies and Taxes

Our data set allows us to use personal income pre-tax and transfers, as we have done so
far, but we also have data for disposable income defined as personal income minus taxes
plus transfers. An analysis of whether the patterns of income flows differs according to the
income definition will help us understand the role of government income transfers in crossownership across within-country regions. We perform regressions (without interaction terms)
of the output/income ratio on sector shares and including the share of retirees and migration.
31

Such regressions, and in particular, the comparison of the results for income versus disposable
income will elucidate whether governments channel income flows to regions dominated by
certain industries. Because we could not statistically pool the countries we perform the
regressions for the North1, North2, and South groups of countries one by one.

5.6.1

Belgium and the Netherlands

Table 19 analyzes the North1 group of countries. We find that the output/income ratio is
robustly related to output levels but this is partly explained by industrial structure: large
financial, manufacturing, and mining shares all predict a high output/income ratio. Migration and retirement are not significant but we see a lower output/income ratio in regions
with many retirees in the last column consistent with retirees receiving substantial transfers.

5.6.2

Austria, France, Germany, Sweden, and the UK

As shown in Table 20, for the North2 countries the relation between the output/income
ratio and output is robustly estimated and none of the indicators of industrial structure are
significant. It is not obvious why sectoral structure matters in Belgium and the Netherlands
and not in the North2 countries but exploring this topic will take us too far afield. The
impact of retirement is positive and insignificant when income does not include transfers but
turns significantly negative when transfers are included, consistent with retirees contributing
little to output but receiving government transfers. Migration has large negative coefficients
which seems to indicate that migrants arriving with high savings are more important for
patterns on income flows.

5.6.3

Italy and Spain

Table 21 shows that in Italy and Spain there is a significant but very weak relation between
the output/income ratio and output. The effect of industrial structure depends strongly
on the income concept used: regions with a large financial sector have low output/income
ratios before taxes and transfers but high output/income ratios after taxes and transfers.
32

Mechanically this means that regions with large financial sectors pay relatively high net
taxes. The share of mining is insignificant for primary income but positive and significant for
income after taxes indicating these regions pay high taxes. The share of mining turns strongly
negative and significant when income after taxes and transfers are used which indicates that
mining regions receive large income transfers that dominates the effect of taxes. Italy and
Spain are not large oil producers and the coal mining industry in Spain is struggling to be
competitive and government transfers play an important role in income maintenance. In Italy
various minerals are mined and it appears that government transfers also here are important.
The results for agriculture are consistent with agricultural regions paying relatively low taxes
and receiving large transfers. We find that retirees receive positive transfers, while migration
in Italy and Spain has the opposite sign of that found for the North2 countries indicating
that low net worth individuals may be dominating migration in Italy and Spain.

6

Conclusion

Culture matters for financial integration. We showed that ownership of capital for European
regions are less than fully diversified within countries (not to speak of between countries)
but for regions with high confidence or trust the level of financial integration is consistent
with full integration.
We find large net capital flows to high productivity regions within countries of northern
Europe, whereas we find weak evidence for regions of southern Europe. The differences in
the findings for the northern and southern countries are correlated with variables such as
expropriation risk, government stability, and law and order. However, these variables do not
fully explain the differences. In Italy and Spain net income flows appear to be influenced
significantly by patterns of government taxes and transfers.

33

Data

7
7.1

Statistical Regions of Europe and Data Sources

Due to increasing demand for regional statistical data, Eurostat set up the system of “Nomenclature of Statistical Territorial Units” (NUTS) as a single, coherent regional breakdown of
the European Union. This division is also used for distribution of the Structural Funds to
regions whose development is lagging behind. For practical reasons of data availability and
policy implementations, the division favors the “normative criteria” which are based on political will, and fixed boundaries stated by member countries, rather than some “functional
criteria” which specifies the regional breakdown with geographical criteria such as altitude
or soil type, or by economic and social criteria such as the homogeneity, complementarity,
or polarization of regional economies. NUTS subdivides each member state into a number
of regions at the NUTS1 level. Each of these is then subdivided into regions at NUTS level
2, and these in turn into regions at NUTS level 3. The minimum and maximum thresholds
for the average population size of the NUTS regions at each level is reported below.
Thresholds for the Average Size of NUTS Regions
Level
Minimum
NUTS1
3 million
NUTS2
800 000
NUTS3
150 000

Maximum
7 million
3 million
800 000

Data sources are the Eurostat electronic database, the World Bank World Development
Indicators (WDI), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006),44 , the International Country Risk Guide
(ICRG), various papers for institutional variables cited in the descriptions, and the World
Values Survey data for social capital regressions. For regional regressions, we use the data
from Eurostat. WDI and LM data are used for the country level current account regressions.
44

Henceforth LM data.

34

7.2

Regional Data for Level and Change Regressions

Availability of output and population data for the initial years 1991-1994 to calculate the
initial per capita output, and Gross Domestic Product and Personal Income at the regional
level to calculate output/income ratio for years 1995–2003 are the main criteria for the specification of the regions. By considering this constraint, we make the following changes to the
original NUTS1 and NUTS2 specification:

NUTS1:
We delete the FR9 region, which is the overseas French region. Due to the availability of
data, we also exclude Luxembourg. Total number of NUTS1 regions we have in our dataset
is 70. A list of the regions in the dataset is given at the end of this section.

NUTS2:
4 NUTS2 regions that are part of the FR9 NUTS1 region and Luxembourg is deleted from
the NUTS2 level data. Another important aspect here is the missing data for NUTS2 regions.
Each NUTS1 region consists of a number of NUTS2 sub-regions. In the case of missing data
to calculate initial output between 1991-1994 or output/income ratio between 1995-2003 for
NUTS2 regions, we do the following specifications to organize NUTS2 level data.

First, if we don’t have any data for NUTS2 regions of a particular NUTS1 region, we drop
these NUTS2 regions and use the data for the NUTS1 region which contains these NUTS2
regions. Those regions are as follows:

DE4 = DE41+DE42 (Brandenburg = Brandenburg Nordost + Brandenburg - Südwest)
DEA = DEA1+ DEA2+ DEA3+ DEA4+ DEA5 ( Nordrhein-Westfalen = Düsseldorf +
Köln + Münster + Detmold + Arnsberg )
DED = DED1+ DED2+ DED3 (Sachsen = Chemnitz + Dresden + Leipzig)
IE0 = IE01+ IE02 (Ireland = Border, Midlands and Western + Southern and Eastern)
35

FI1 = FI13+FI18+FI19+FI1A (Manner-Suomi = Itä-Suomi + Etelä-Suomi + Länsi-Suomi
+Pohjois-Suomi )
PT1 = PT11+PT15+PT16+PT17+PT18 ( Continente = Norte + Centro + Lisboa + Alentejo + Algarve)
UKI = UKI1+UKI2 (London= Inner London + Outer London)
UKL = UKL1+UKL2 (Wales = West Wales and The Valleys + East Wales )
UKM = UKM1 + UKM2 + UKM3 + UKM4 ( Scotland = North Eastern Scotland+ Eastern Scotland + South Western Scotland + Highlands and Islands)

Secondly, another specification is done when we do not have data for some of the NUTS2
sub-regions of a NUTS1 region, but we have the data for the corresponding NUTS1 region.
We drop the NUTS2 regions with missing data and define a new region as the “rest of the
NUTS1 region.” 3 regions are defined as follows:

Rest of ES6 or (ES63+ ES64) = ES6 - ES61 -ES62
(Ciudad Autónoma de Ceuta (ES) + Ciudad Autónoma de Melilla (ES))
Rest of ITD or (ITD1+ ITD2) = ITD - ITD3 - ITD4 - ITD5
(Provincia Autonoma Bolzano-Bozen + Provincia Autonoma Trento)
Rest of SE0 or (SE09+ SE0A) = SE0 - SE01 - SE02- SE04 - SE06 - SE07 - SE08
(Småland med öarna + Västsverige)
After these changes, the total number of NUTS2 regions we have in our data set is 185.

Gross Regional Product: GRP is Gross Regional Product for NUTS1 and NUTS2 regions. This data is collected from two sources. The first part is received from the internal
Eurostat database by request, and contains the 1991-1994 period according to the ESA79
system,45 which we use to calculate the initial output for the 1991-1994 period. After 1995,
45

In the European System of Accounts ESA79 takes 1979 and ESA95 takes 1995 as the reference year in
the national accounts.

36

data is published according to ESA95 standards and available as a public database. Data is
reported in ECU until 1998 and after 1999 all series are in Euros.

Gross Domestic Product: Collected from the same sources as regional level GDP data
to calculate the GDP/GNI ratio. We use real per capita GDP series at constant 2000 US
dollars for initial output and initial growth calculations for country level regressions.

Gross National Income: GNI at the country level is taken from the Eurostat database to
calculate the output/income ratio for 1995-2003.

Regional Personal Income: RPI is the income of households for NUTS1 and NUTS2
regions. We use the term personal income but more precisely we use what is called “Primary Income” in the dataset. Primary income is the compensation of employees received
plus mixed income (or the operating surplus from their own-account production of housing services) of resident households, plus property income received minus property income
payable by resident households. Note that primary income differs from the usual definition
of personal income which usually includes transfers.

Regional Personal Disposable Income: We construct an “Intermediate Income” level as
primary income − taxes. “Disposable income” is the income level after taxes and transfers
which is primary income − taxes + transf ers.

Population: Annual average population data from Eurostat.

Total Value Added: Gross value added at basic prices series is used.

Sector Shares: 1995 is taken as the initial year to compute the sector shares. We have a full
set of data on sectoral activity for NUTS1 regions, but data is not complete for NUTS2 re-

37

gions. The International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities(ISIC)
is the international standard for classification by economic activities. It is used to classify
each enterprise according to its primary activity. The primary activity is defined in that
activity that generates the most value added. NACE46 is the compatible EU equivalent.
Eurostat uses NACE classification to report sectoral data. NACE classification for sectors
is reported in the table. Sectors we used for the regressions are as follows:

Agriculture share: Ratio of “A B Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing” NACE branch
to the total value added from the Eurostat database. Data for all regions are available in
NUTS1, NUTS2 and country level.

Mining share: Ratio of “C Mining and Quarrying” NACE branch to the total value added
from the Eurostat database. Data for Denmark and Germany data are missing at the
NUTS1, NUTS2, and country levels.

Manufacturing: Ratio of “D Manufacturing” NACE branch to the total value added from
the Eurostat database. Data for Denmark and Germany data are missing at the NUTS1,
NUTS2, and country levels.
Finance: Ratio of “J Financial Intermediation” NACE branch to the total value added from
the Eurostat database. Data for Denmark and Germany data are missing at the NUTS1,
NUTS2, and country levels.

Retirement: The share of population over age 65 is used. Average of the years 19921994 are used due to availability of data. All regions are available in NUTS1 and country
level, Germany, Ireland, Finland and ukk3 (Cornwall and Isles of Scilly) and ukk4 (Devon)
regions from UK is missing at the NUTS2 level.
46

Nomenclature générale des Activités Economiques dans les Communautés Européenes– - General Industrial Classification of Economic Activities within the European Communities

38

Migration: Net migration is calculated by subtracting the departures from the arrivals.
We use the internal migration which is the movements within the country. When we sum
up net migration of the regions for a particular country we find zero. Data is not available
for Denmark, Germany, Greece, France, Ireland, Portugal, Finland and ukk3 (Cornwall and
Isles of Scilly) and ukk4 (Devon) regions from UK. We use the 1992-1994 average share of
population who migrated over 1992-1994 by excluding these missing regions.

7.3

Country Level Data

Net assets: Data is based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) dataset. Assets and liabilities
are available under the categories of portfolio equities, foreign direct investment, debt and
financial derivatives. Total liabilities is the sum of these categories. Total assets include
total reserves besides these assets. Net assets are the difference between the total assets and
total liabilities of the particular country, and they enter the regressions as a ratio of GDP.

Current Account: The current account balance is the sum of net exports of goods and
services, income, and current transfers. Data is from the World Development Indicators,
reported in terms of current US dollars.

GDP and GNI data at country level for these regressions are also collected from WDI
dataset.

Property Rights Institutions: The data source is the ICRG variables from the PRS
Group. The ICRG model for forecasting financial, economic, and political risk was created
in 1980 by the editors of “International Reports,” a weekly newsletter on international finance
and economics. The editors created a statistical model to calculate country risks, which later
turned into a comprehensive system that enables measuring and comparing various types of
39

country level economic and political risks. In 1992, ICRG (its editor and analysts) moved
from “International Reports” to “The PRS Group.” Now, “The PRS Group” professional
staff assigns scores for each category to each country. We use the average of 1991-1994 data.

No Corruption: Assessment of corruption within the political system. Average yearly
rating from 0 to 6, where a higher score means lower risk.

Law and Order: The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of the legal system; the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance
of the law. Average yearly rating from 0 to 6, where a higher score means lower risk.

Government Stability: The government’s ability to carry out its declared program(s),
and its ability to stay in office. Average yearly rating from 0 to 12, where a higher score
means lower risk.

Bureaucratic Quality: Institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy is another
shock absorber that tends to minimize revisions of policy when governments change. Average yearly rating from 0 to 4, where a higher score means lower risk.

No Expropriation Risk: This is an assessment of factors affecting the risk to investment that are not covered by other political, economic and financial risk components. It is
the sum of three subcomponents, each with a maximum score of 4 points and a minimum
score of 0 points. A score of 4 points equates to Very Low Risk and a score of 0 points to
Very High Risk. The subcomponents are: Contract Viability/Expropriation, Profits Repatriation, Payment Delays.

Legal System Regulations:
Total duration of checks collection: Data is based on the calculations of Djankov et al.

40

(2003). The total estimated duration in calendar days of the procedure under the factual
and procedural assumptions provided. It is the sum of: (i) duration until completion of
service of process, (ii) duration of trial, and (iii) duration of enforcement.

Duration of enforcement: Data is based on the calculations of Djankov et al. (2003).
Duration of enforcement (from notification to actual enforcement) is the estimated duration,
in calendar days, between the moment of issuance of judgement and the moment the landlord repossesses the property (for the eviction case) or the creditor obtains payment (for the
check collection case).

Formalism index: Data is based on the calculations of Djankov et al. (2003). The index
measures substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases at lower-level
civil trial courts, and is formed by adding up the following indices: (i) professionals vs.
laymen, (ii) written vs. oral elements, (iii) legal justification, (iv) statutory regulation of
evidence, (v) control of superior review, (vi) engagement formalities, and (vii) independent
procedural actions. The index ranges from 0 to 7, where 7 means a higher level of control
or intervention in the judicial process.

Enforceability of contracts: Data is based on the calculations of Djankov et al. (2003).
The relative degree to which contractual agreements are honored and complications presented by language and mentality differences. Scale for 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating
higher enforceability.

Creditor Rights: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al. (2006). An index aggregating different creditor rights. The index is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the
country imposes restrictions, such as creditors consent or minimum dividends to file for
reorganization; (2) secured creditors are able to gain possession of their security once the
reorganization petition has been approved (no automatic stay); (3) secured creditors are

41

ranked first in the distribution of the proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets
of a bankrupt firm; and (4) the debtor does not retain the administration of its property
pending the resolution of the reorganization. The index ranges from 0 to 4.

Shareholder Rights: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al. (2006). An
index aggregating the shareholder rights which we labeled as anti-director rights. The index
is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the country allows shareholders to mail their proxy vote
to the firm; (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their shares prior to the General
Shareholders Meeting; (3) cumulative voting or proportional representation of minorities in
the board of directors is allowed; (4) an oppressed minorities mechanism is in place; (5) the
minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call for an Extraordinary
Shareholders Meeting is less than or equal to 10 percent (the sample median); or (6) shareholders have preemptive rights that can only be waved by a shareholders vote. The index
ranges from 0 to 6.

Financial Regulations:
Disclosure requirements: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al. (2006).
The index of disclosure equals the arithmetic mean of: (1) Prospect; (2) Compensation; (3)
Shareholders; (4) Inside ownership; (5) Contracts Irregular; (6) and Transactions.

Liability standard: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al. (2006). The
index of liability standards equals the arithmetic mean of: (1) Liability standard for the
issuer and its directors; (2) Liability standard for the distributor; and (3) Liability standard
for the accountant.

Public enforcement: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al. (2006). The
index of public enforcement equals the arithmetic mean of: (1) Supervisor characteristics
index; (2) Rule making power index; (3) Investigative powers index; (4) Orders index; and

42

(5) Criminal index.

Investor Protection: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al. (2006). Principal component of disclosure, liability standards, and Anti-director rights. Scale from 0 to 10.

Government ownership of banks: Data is based on the calculations of La Porta et al.
(2006). Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country owned by the government
of that country in 1970 and 1995. The percentage of the assets owned by the government in
a given bank is calculated by multiplying the share of each shareholder in that bank by the
share the government owns in that shareholder, and then summing the resulting shares.

7.4

Individual Level Data from World Values Survey

The World Values Survey first emerged out of the European Values Study in 1981, when the
methods of a successful European study were extended to 14 countries outside Europe. The
1981 study covered only 22 countries worldwide. After the extension of the survey around
the world, it is coordinated by an organization of a network of social scientists, the World
Values Survey Association.
World Values Surveys were designed to enable a cross-national, cross-cultural comparison of
values and norms on a wide variety of topics and to monitor changes in values and attitudes
across the globe. There are four waves of the World Values Survey carried out 1981-1984,
1990-1993, 1995-1997, and 1999-2004. We use the survey data from the second wave, surveys
conducted 1990–1991, for our sample countries.
Broad topics covered including perception of life, family, work, traditional values, personal
finances, religion and morale, the economy, politics and society, the environment, allocation
of resources, contemporary social issues, national identity, and technology and its impact on
society. All surveys are carried out through face-to-face interviews, with a sampling universe
consisting of all adult citizens, ages 18 and older.
We use 15 questions from the survey. We construct a mixed sample of NUTS1 and NUTS2
43

regions considering the regional specification in World Values Survey. The Dataset uses
NUTS1 regions for Germany, France, Portugal, UK, and NUTS2 regions for Belgium, Spain,
Italy, Netherland, Austria to indicate the location of the individual. As explained below, we
construct regional indices of confidence and trust. The following sections describe the survey
questions and the construction of the indices used in the regressions.

Confidence Index:
Questions 1-11: Confidence Scale of 1 to 4, higher values indicate less confidence in the
institution named in the question. The institution is armed forces in question 1; education
system in question 2; press in question 3; labor unions in question 4; police in question
5; parliament in question 6; the civil services in question 7; the social security system in
question 8; major companies in question 9; justice system in question 10 and the European
Union in question 11.
We take the average of individual responses over the regions, and divide by the maximum
value of the regional averages in our sample. Confidence index is constructed as multiplying
the sum of these rescaled values of regional averages by (−1/11). We reverse the sign in
order to make the interpretation easier. For the final value of confidence index, higher values
of confidence index indicates higher confidence.
“Core Confidence” index is constructed based on only questions 5, 8, and 9.

Trust Index:
Question 12 : Most people can be trusted Takes values 1 or 2, 1 means that individual
trusts most people.

Questions 13: Trust: Other people in country Scale of 1 to 5, where lower values
mean more trust.

Average of individual responses over the regions are divided by the maximum value in the

44

sample to rescale between 0 and 1. Trust index is constructed using these rescaled regional
series by −1/2 ∗ (Q12 + Q13). For the final value of trust index, higher values of trust index
indicates higher trust.

Due to data availability, we exclude Centre-Est and Northern Ireland regions from the sample
and construct a sample of 105 regions to perform our analysis.

45

NACE Classification

AB
A
B
CDE
C TO F
C
D
E
F
G TO P
GHI

G
H
I
JK
J
K
L TO P

L
M
N
O
P

Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing
Agriculture, hunting and forestry
Fishing
Total industry (excluding construction)
Industry
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Electricity, gas and water supply
Construction
Services
Wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles,
motorcycles and personal and household goods; hotels and
restaurants; transport, storage and communication
Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles,
motorcycles and personal and household goods
Hotels and restaurants
Transport, storage and communication
Financial intermediation; real estate, renting and
business activities
Financial intermediation
Real estate, renting and business activities
Public administration and defence, compulsory social
security; education; health and social work; other
community, social and personal service activities;
private households with employed persons
Public administration and defence; compulsory social
security
Education
Health and social work
Other community, social, personal service activities
Activities of households

46

List of Countries

BE
DK
DE
GR
ES
FR
IE
IT
NL
AT
PT
FI
SE
UK

Belgium
Denmark
Germany
Greece
Spain
France
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Austria
Portugal
Finland
Sweden
United Kingdom

47

List of NUTS1 Regions
BE
BE1

Belgium(3 regions)
Région de Bruxelles-Capitale
Brussels Hoofdstedlijk Gewest
BE2 Vlaams Gewest
BE3 Région Wallonne
DK Denmark (1 region)
DK0 Denmark
DE
Germany (16 regions)
DE1 Baden-Württemberg
DE2 Bayern
DE3 Berlin
DE4 Brandenburg
DE5 Bremen
DE6 Hamburg
DE7 Hessen
DE8 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
DE9 Niedersachsen
DEA Nordrhein-Westfalen
DEB Rheinland-Pfalz
DEC Saarland
DED Sachsen
DEE Sachsen-Anhalt
DEF Schleswig-Holstein
DEG Thüringen
GR Greece (4 regions)
GR1 Voreia Ellada
GR2 Kentriki Ellada
GR3 Attiki
GR4 Nisia Aigaiou, Kriti
ES
Spain (7 regions)
ES1 Noroeste
ES2 Noreste
ES3 Comunidad de Madrid
ES4 Centro (ES)
ES5 Este
ES6 Sur
ES7 Canarias (ES)

FR
FR1
FR2
FR3
FR4
FR5
FR6
FR7
FR8
IE
IE0
IT
ITC
ITD
ITE
ITF
ITG
NL
NL1
NL2
NL3
NL4
AT
AT1
AT2
AT3
PT
PT1
PT2
PT3
FI
FI1
FI2
SE
SE0

48

France (8 regions)
Île de France
Bassin Parisien
Nord - Pas-de-Calais
Est
Ouest
Sud-Ouest
Centre-Est
Méditerranée
Ireland (1 region)
Ireland
Italy (5 regions)
Nord Ovest
Nord Est
Centro (IT)
Sud (IT)
Isole (IT)
Netherlands (4 regions)
Noord-Nederland
Oost-Nederland
West-Nederland
Zuid-Nederland
Austria (3 regions)
Ostösterreich
Südösterreich
Westösterreich
Portugal (3 regions)
Continente (PT)
Região Autónoma dos Açores (PT)
Região Autónoma da Madeira (PT)
Finland (2 regions)
Manner-Suomi
Åland
Sweden (1 region)
Sverige

List of NUTS1 Regions
UK
UKC
UKD
UKE
UKF
UKG
UKH
UKI
UKJ
UKK
UKL
UKM
UKN

United Kingdom (12 regions)
North East
North West (including Merseyside)
Yorkshire and The Humber
East Midlands
West Midlands
Eastern
London
South East
South West
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland

49

List of NUTS2 Regions

BE
BE10

Belgium(11 regions)
Région de Bruxelles-Capitale
Brussels Hoofdstedlijk Gewest
BE21 Prov. Antwerpen
BE22 Prov. Limburg (B)
BE23 Prov. Oost-Vlaanderen
BE24 Prov. Vlaams Brabant
BE25 Prov. West-Vlaanderen
BE31 Prov. Brabant Wallon
BE32 Prov. Hainaut
BE33 Prov. Liège
BE34 Prov. Luxembourg (B)
BE35 Prov. Namur
DK
Denmark (1 region)
DK00 Denmark
DE
Germany (34 regions)
DE11 Stuttgart
DE12 Karlsruhe
DE13 Freiburg
DE14 Tübingen
DE21 Oberbayern
DE22 Niederbayern
DE23 Oberpfalz
DE24 Oberfranken
DE25 Mittelfranken
DE26 Unterfranken
DE27 Schwaben
DE30 Berlin
DE4
Brandenburg
DE50 Bremen
DE60 Hamburg
DE71 Darmstadt
DE72 Gießen
DE73 Kassel
DE80 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern

50

DE91
DE92
DE93
DE94
DEA
DEB1
DEB2
DEB3
DEC0
DED
DEE1
DEE2
DEE3
DEF0
DEG0
GR
GR11
GR12
GR13
GR14
GR21
GR22
GR23
GR24
GR25
GR30
GR41
GR42
GR43
ES
ES11
ES12
ES13
ES21
ES22

Braunschweig
Hannover
Lüneburg
Weser-Ems
Nordrhein-Westfalen
Koblenz
Trier
Rheinhessen-Pfalz
Saarland
Sachsen
Dessau
Halle
Magdeburg
Schleswig-Holstein
Thüringen
Greece (13 regions)
Anatoliki Makedonia, Thraki
Kentriki Makedonia
Dytiki Makedonia
Thessalia
Ipeiros
Ionia Nisia
Dytiki Ellada
Sterea Ellada
Peloponnisos
Attiki
Voreio Aigaio
Notio Aigaio
Kriti
Spain (18 regions)
Galicia
Principado de Asturias
Cantabria
Pais Vasco
Comunidad Foral de Navarra

List of NUTS2 Regions
ES23
ES24
ES30
ES41
ES42
ES43

La Rioja
Aragón
Comunidad de Madrid
Castilla y León
Castilla-la Mancha
Extremadura

Italy (20 regions)
Piemonte
Valle d’Aosta/Valle d’Aoste
Liguria
Lombardia
Rest of ITD

Cataluña
Comunidad Valenciana
Illes Balears
Andalucia
Región de Murcia
Rest of ES6

IT
ITC1
ITC2
ITC3
ITC4
ITD77
(ITD1+ITD2)
ITD3
ITD4
ITD5
ITE1
ITE2
ITE3

ES51
ES52
ES53
ES61
ES62
ES677
(ES63+ES64)
ES70
FR
FR10
FR21
FR22
FR23
FR24
FR25
FR26
FR30
FR41
FR42
FR43
FR51
FR52
FR53
FR61
FR62
FR63
FR71
FR72
FR81
FR82
FR83
IE
IE0

Canarias (ES)
France (22 regions)
Île de France
Champagne-Ardenne
Picardie
Haute-Normandie
Centre
Basse-Normandie
Bourgogne
Nord - Pas-de-Calais
Lorraine
Alsace
Franche-Comté
Pays de la Loire
Bretagne
Poitou-Charentes
Aquitaine
Midi-Pyrénées
Limousin
Rhône-Alpes
Auvergne
Languedoc-Roussillon
Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur
Corse
Ireland (1 region)
Ireland

ITE4
ITF1
ITF2
ITF3
ITF4
ITF5
ITF6
ITG1
ITG2
NL
NL11
NL12
NL13
NL21
NL22
NL23
NL31
NL32
NL33
NL34
NL41
NL42
AT
AT11
AT12
AT13

Lazio
Abruzzo
Molise
Campania
Puglia
Basilicata
Calabria
Sicilia
Sardegna
Netherlands (12 regions)
Groningen
Friesland
Drenthe
Overijssel
Gelderland
Flevoland
Utrecht
Noord-Holland
Zuid-Holland
Zeeland
Noord-Brabant
Limburg (NL)
Austria (9 regions)
Burgenland
Niederösterreich
Wien

51

Veneto
Friuli-Venezia Giulia
Emilia-Romagna
Toscana
Umbria
Marche

List of NUTS2 Regions
AT21
AT22
AT31
AT32
AT33
AT34
PT
PT1
PT20
PT30
FI
FI1
FI20
SE
SE01
SE02
SE04
SE06
SE07
SE08
SE077
(SE09+SE0A)
UK
UKC1
UKC2
UKD1
UKD2
UKD3
UKD4

Kärnten
Steiermark
Oberösterreich
Salzburg
Tirol
Vorarlberg
Portugal (3 regions)
Continente
Região Autónoma
dos Açores (PT)
Região Autónoma
da Madeira (PT)
Finland (2 regions)
Manner-Suomi
Åland
Sweden (7 regions)
Stockholm
Östra Mellansverige
Sydsverige
Norra Mellansverige
Mellersta Norrland
Övre Norrland
Rest of SE0

UKD5
UKE1
UKE2
UKE3
UKE4
UKF1
UKF2
UKF3
UKG1
UKG2
UKG3
UKH1
UKH2
UKH3
UKI
UKJ1
UKJ2
UKJ3
UKJ4
UKK1

United Kingdom (32 regions)
Tees Valley and Durham
Northumberland, Tyne and Wear
Cumbria
Cheshire
Greater Manchester
Lancashire

52

UKK2
UKK3
UKK4
UKL
UKM
UKN

Merseyside
East Riding
and North Lincolnshire
North Yorkshire
South Yorkshire
West Yorkshire
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire
Leicestershire
Rutland and Northants
Lincolnshire
Worcestershire and Warks
Herefordshire
Shropshire and Staffordshire
West Midlands
East Anglia
Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire
Essex
London
Berkshire, Bucks
and Oxfordshire
Surrey, East and West Sussex
Hampshire and Isle of Wight
Kent
Gloucestershire, Wiltshire
and North Somerset
Dorset and Somerset
Cornwall and Isles of Scilly
Devon
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland

8

References

Abiad, Abdul, Daniel Leigh and Ashoka Mody (2007), “International Finance and Income
Convergence: Europe is Different,” IMF Working Paper.
Acemoglu, Daron , James A. Robinson and Simon Johnson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
volume 91, pp. 1369-1401.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych (2007), “Why does not Capital Flow from Poor to Rich Countries? An Empirical Investigation” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Banfield, Edward (1958), “The Moral Basis of a Backward Society,” New York: The Free
Press.
Beugelsdijk, Sjoerd and Anton B.T.M. van Schaik (2001), “Social capital and regional economic growth,” Tilburg University Discussion Paper 102.
Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi (2002), “Current Account Deficits in the Euro
Area: The End of the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 147–186.
Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta and Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes (2004), “The
Regulation of Labor” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119(4),1339-1382 .
Caselli, Francesco and James Feyrer (2007), “The Marginal Product of Capital” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Clark, Gregory and Robert Feenstra (2003), “Technology in the Great Divergence” Globalization in Historical Perspective, Univ. of Chicago and NBER, 2003, 277-314.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer(2002), “The
Regulation Of Entry” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117(1),1-37 .
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer(2003), “Courts”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118(2),453-517 .
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh and Andrei Shleifer(2005), “Private Credit in 129 Countries” NBER Working Papers 11078 .
European Central Bank (2007), “Financial Integration in Europe,” March 2007 Report.
European Central Bank (2007), “Financial Integration in Europe,” March 2007 Report.

53

Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka (1980), “Domestic Savings and International Capital
Flows” Economic Journal 90, 314–29.
Fernandez, Raquel (2006), “Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family Experience,” Journal
of European Economic Association.
Fernandez, Raquel (2007), “Culture and Economics,” Palgrave Dictionary.
French, Kenneth and James Poterba (1991), “Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 81, 222–226.
Fukuyama, Francis (2002), “Social Capital and Development: The Coming Agenda” SAIS
Review 21, (Winter-Spring 2002).
Gertler, Mark and Kenneth Rogoff (1990), “North-South Lending and Endogeneous Domestic Capital Market Inefficiencies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 245–266.
Giannone, D., and L. Reichlin (2006), “Trends and Cycles in the Euro Area: How much
Heterogeneity and Should We Worry About It?” ECB Working Paper.
Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Jose Scheinkman and Christine Soutter (2000), “Measuring
Trust” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3) (2000): 811-846.
Glick, Reuven and Kenneth Rogoff (1995), “Global versus Country-Specific Productivity Shocks
and the Current Account” Journal of Monetary Economics 35(1), February 1995.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne (2006), “Capital Flows to Developing Countries : The Allocation Puzzle” University of California, Berkeley, mimeo.
Greif, Avner (1994), “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and
Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies” Journal of Political
Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 102(5), pages 912-50, October.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2004a), “The Role of Social Capital in Financial Development” American Economic Review vol: 94:3, pages 526–556.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2004b), “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange” NBER Working Paper No. 11005.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2005), “Trusting the Stock Market” NBER
Working Paper No. 11648.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2006), “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?” NBER Working Paper No. 11999.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow (2007), “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
54

Inglehart, R. et al. (2000), “World values surveys and European values surveys, 1981- 1984,
1990-1993 and 1995-1997” Ann Arbor-Michigan, Institute for Social Research, ICPSR
version
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Ariell Reshef, Bent Sørensen and Oved Yosha (2007), “Why Does
Capital Flow to Rich States?” University of Houston mimeo.
Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1997), “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff?
A Cross-Country Investigation” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol.
112(4), pages 1251-88, November.
Knack, Stephen and Paul Zak (2001), “Trust and Growth” The Economic Journal, vol.
111, pages 295-321.
Landes (1998) The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, Norton and Company Inc., New York.
Lane, Philip (2006), “The Real Effects of European Monetary Union” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 20, Number 4, 4766.
Lane, Philip and Gian Milesi-Ferretti (2006), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004” IMF Working Paper No. 06/69.
La Porta, Rafael, F. Lpez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1997). “Legal Determinants
of External Finance” Journal of Finance, July 1997.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer (2006), “What works in securities law?” Journal of Finance, vol. 61(1), 1-32.
Nicoletti Giuseppe, Stefano Scarpetta and Olivier Boylaud(1999), “Summary Indicators of
Product Market Regulation with an Extension to Employment Protection Legislation”
OECD Economics Department Working Papers 226.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor (2004), “Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis and
Growth” Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Hatice Ozer-Balli and Bent E. Sørensen (2007), “The Use of Interaction Effects in Econometrics” University of Houston mimeo.
Prasad, Eswar, Rajan Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian (2007), “Patterns of International
Capital Flows and Their Implications for Economic Development” Brookings, forthcoming.
Putnam, Robert (1993), “Making Democracy Work. Civic traditions in modern Italy” PrincetonNJ: Princeton University Press.

55

Putnam, Robert (2000), “Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community” Simon and Schuster Inc.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff (2004), “Serial Default and the “Paradox” of Richto-Poor Capital Flows”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 94, 53–
59.
Tabellini, Guido (2005), “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions
of Europe”, CESifo Working Paper Series No. 1492.

56

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for EU Countries
Number of Observations

14

Average GDP/GNI, 1995–2003

1.02
(0.04)

GDP/GNI in 1995

1.01
(0.03)

Capital Inflows / GDP, 1995–2003 (%)

–3.15
(34.05)

Capital Inflows / GDP, 1991–1994 (%)

0.38
(8.62)

Avg. Net Assets/GDP, 1995–2003 (%)

–15.24
(25.86)

Average GDP, 1991–1994

19.67
(8.22 )

Change in GDP/GNI Ratio
from 1996 to 2003

0.22
(2.73)

GDP Growth, 1992–1994 (%)

0.77
(1.18)

Population Growth, 1992–1994 (%)

1.52
(0.70)

Property Rights Institutions, 1991–1994

0.31
(0.03)

Legal Regulations in 1999

0.31
(0.04)

Financial Regulations in 1999

0.31
(0.08)

Notes: Means and standard deviations (in parenthesis) are reported. GDP is Gross Domestic
Product and GNI is Gross National Income. GDP/GNI is the ratio of those. Capital Inflows /
GDP is the ratio of the sum of current account balance (sign reversed) to the average GDP over the
given years. Net Assets/GDP is the ratio of the net asset position to the GDP, averaged between
1995 and 2003. Average GDP is in thousands of constant 2000 U.S. dollars averaged between 1991
and 1994. Growth rate of GDP is the cumulative growth in the real per capita GDP between 1992
and 1994. Population growth is the cumulative growth rate of population between 1992 and 1994.
Institution and regulation variables are the principal component of each group of variables reported
in Table 22, see data appendix for further details.

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for NUTS2 Regions
Belgium
11

Germany
34

Spain
18

France
22

Italy
20

Nether.
12

Austria
9

Portug.
3

Sweden
7

UK
32

Avg. Out./Inc.
1995–2003

1.29
(0.48)

1.36
(0.15)

1.44
(0.02)

1.37
(0.06)

1.35
(0.03)

1.51
(0.22)

1.39
(0.21)

1.66
(0.18)

1.55
(0.09)

1.36
(0.14)

Avg. GRP
1991–1994

16.89
(4.18)

18.92
(6.49)

11.12
(2.00)

16.17
(2.99)

19.62
(20.31)

16.36
(2.49)

18.12
(4.86)

5.88
(1.12)

20.28
(2.26)

13.37
(1.99)

Chg. Out./Inc.
1996–2003

0.07
(0.05)

0.01
(0.06)

0.04
(0.08)

–0.04
(0.04)

0.12
(0.05)

0.04
(0.07)

0.02
(0.04)

0.13
(0.07)

–0.01
(0.03)

–0.01
(0.07)

GDP Growth (%)
1992–1994

5.77
(0.93)

8.32
(6.80)

–1.89
(0.71)

4.25
(0.80)

–2.77
(0.84)

5.24
(1.30)

6.22
(0.80)

5.66
(1.05)

–5.55
(0.52)

1.49
(0.88)

Agr. Share (%)
in 1995

2.01
(1.14)

1.73
(1.03)

5.41
(3.65)

4.67
(2.42)

3.99
(1.70)

4.62
(2.54)

3.25
(2.41)

7.25
(4.01)

3.56
(1.94)

2.81
(2.51)

Finance Share (%)
in 1995

4.83
(4.23)

–
–

4.88
(1.09)

4.01
(1.02)

4.17
(0.97)

4.70
(2.52)

5.76
(1.50)

5.20
(1.07)

3.71
(2.32)

4.52
(2.01)

Manuf. Share (%)
in 1995

19.77
(6.82)

–
–

17.33
(8.30)

20.13
(6.66)

18.73
(7.62)

18.82
(6.67)

20.23
(6.17)

9.41
(8.05)

22.67
(5.66)

23.98
(6.39)

Mining Share (%)
in 1995

0.31
(0.39)

–
–

0.86
(1.72)

0.28
(0.23)

0.32
(0.31)

3.67
(7.93)

0.42
(0.26)

0.38
(0.16)

0.70
(1.37)

0.73
(0.74)

Avg. Migrat.(%)
1992–1994

0.10
(0.15)

0.34
(0.41)

0.13
(0.15)

–
–

0.22
(0.39)

0.32
(0.79)

0.13
(0.16)

–
–

0.31
(0.38)

0.27
(0.34)

Avg. Retirem. (%)
1992–1994

15.13
(1.63)

15.17
(1.32)

14.89
(2.77)

15.50
(2.57)

16.59
(2.96)

13.01
(1.78)

14.31
(2.16)

12.94
(1.20)

17.82
(1.65)

15.95
(1.76)

Avg. Pop.
1991–1994

0.91
(0.44)

2.38
(2.88)

2.17
(2.04)

2.61
(2.19)

2.84
(2.28)

1.27
(0.97)

0.87
(0.51)

3.32
(5.32)

1.24
(0.74)

1.82
(1.28)

Trust

–0.89
(0.04)

–0.80
(0.04)

–0.84
(0.05)

–0.91
(0.03)

–0.91
(0.03)

–0.80
(0.02)

–0.81
(0.03)

–0.85
(0.02)

–
–

–0.82
(0.02)

Confidence

–0.83
(0.01)

–0.84
(0.03)

–0.84
(0.03)

–0.82
(0.02)

–0.85
(0.03)

–0.80
(0.02)

–0.80
(0.03)

–0.81
(0.00)

–
–

–0.83
(0.02)

Number of
Regions

Notes: Means of the variables are reported (standard deviations in parenthesis). Avg. Out./Inc. is the ratio
of regional gross domestic product (GRP) to regional personal income (RPI), averaged between 1995 and
2003. Avg. GRP 1991–1994 is GRP in thousands of ECU divided by population, averaged between 1991 and
1994. GDP growth is cumulative growth rate of per capita GDP, for 1992 and 1994. All the sector shares
are the percentages of total value added in 1995. Avg. Migrat. is the absolute value of the net population
movements within the given country as percent of the total population, averaged between 1992 and 1994.
Avg. Retirm. is the share of population over age 65 as percent of the total population, averaged between
1992 and 1994. Avg. Pop. is population in millions of people, averaged between 1991 and 1994. Trust
and Confidence indices are calculated using a mixed regional sample based on World Values Survey regional
specification. We use the 1990–1991 wave of the survey. See data appendix for details.

58

Table 3: Correlation Matrix for EU Countries

∆ GDP/GNI 96–03
GDP/GNI 95–03
GDP 91–94
CI / GDP 91–94
CI / GDP 95–03
NA/GDP 95–03
Growth 92–94
Growth 95–03
GDP/GNI 95
Pop. Gr. 92–94

NA/GDP 95–03
Growth 92–94
Growth 95–03
GDP/GNI 95
Pop. Gr. 92–94

∆ GDP/GNI
96–03

GDP/GNI
95–03

GDP
91–94

CI/GDP
91–94

CI/GDP
95–03

1.00
0.61
–0.50
–0.37
0.29
0.18
0.44
0.67
0.29
0.22

1.00
–0.10
–0.12
–0.03
–0.01
0.55
0.83
0.93
–0.09

1.00
–0.28
–0.81
0.26
0.32
–0.36
0.17
-0.08

1.00
0.30
–0.54
–0.54
0.01
0.00
0.07

1.00
–0.06
–0.17
0.08
–0.25
0.09

NA/GDP
95–03

Growth
92–94

Growth
95–03

GDP/GNI
95

Pop. Gr.
92–94

1.00
0.52
–0.21
–0.06
–0.16

1.00
0.34
0.49
–0.29

1.00
0.68
0.14

1.00
–0.21

1.00

Notes: All variables are demeaned. See Table 1 for definitions. CI is Capital Inflows, NA is Net Assets.
GDP/GNI, GDP 1991–1994, CI/GDP and NA/GDP are in logs.

59

Table 4: Correlation Matrix for Pooled NUTS2 Regions

Out/Inc
GRP
AgrSh
FinSh
ManSh
MinSh
Ret
Mig

Change in Ratio
Growth
Out/Inc 1995
Pop. Growth

Out/Inc

GRP

AgrSh

FinSh

ManSh

MinSh

1.00
0.26
–0.15
0.43
–0.11
0.26
–0.02
–0.29

1.00
–0.32
0.23
–0.01
0.06
0.08
–0.03

1.00
–0.31
–0.12
0.06
0.10
0.29

1.00
–0.32
–0.16
0.01
–0.23

1.00
–0.08
0.25
–0.03

1.00
–0.01
–0.06

Change in
Ratio

Growth
92–94

Out/Inc
1995

Pop.
Growth

1.00
0.00
–0.31
–0.24

1.00
–0.17
–0.14

1.00
–0.07

1.00

Ret

Mig

1.00
–0.06 1.00

Notes: The top panel reports correlations for level regressions. AgrSh is agriculture, FinSh is finance, ManSh
is manufacturing, and MinSh is mining shares of total value added in 1995. Ret is Retirement and Mig is
Migration. See Table 2 for the detailed definitions of the variables. All variables in this panel are in logs.
The bottom panel reports correlations of variables in change regressions. Change in Ratio is the change in
the Output/Income ratio between 1996 and 2003, Growth is the cumulative real per capita GDP growth
between 1992 and 1994, Out/Inc 1995 is the output/income ratio in 1995, and Pop. Growth is the cumulative
population growth between 1992 and 1994. All variables are demeaned.

60

Table 5: Net Capital Income Flows, Net Assets and Current Account: Countries

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dep. Var.:

NA/GDP
95–03

NA/GDP
95–03

Out/Inc
95–03

Out/Inc
95–03

Out/Inc
95–03

Out/Inc
95–03

Countries
Ireland

EU 14
Yes

EU 13
No

EU 14
Yes

EU 13
No

24 OECD
Yes

23 OECD
No

CF / GDP
1991-1994

–2.49
(1.94)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

CF / GDP
1991-1994

–
–

–2.50
(1.86)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

CF / GDP
1991-1994

–
–

–
–

–0.05
(0.38)

–
–

0.10
(1.56)

–
–

CF / GDP
1991-1994

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.08
(2.46)

–
–

0.14
(4.27)

0.29

0.27

0.01

0.29

0.10

0.53

R2

Notes: See Table 1 for the definition of the variables. t-statistics in parentheses. NA denotes net assets
and CF denotes net capital flows defined as the ratio of sum of current account balance (sign reversed) to
the average GDP over the given years. The OECD sample includes Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and the United
States. For the OECD sample, the Output/Income ratio has a mean of 1.013 with standard deviation of
0.037 and the CI/GDP ratio has a mean 0.015 with standard deviation 0.113.

61

Table 6: Capital Flows: EU Countries

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Dep. Var.:

∆Out/Inc
1996–2003

∆Out/Inc
1996–2003

∆Out/Inc
1996–2003

∆Out/Inc
1996–2003

CF/GDP
1995–2003

CF/GDP
1995–2003

Out/Inc
1995–2003

Out/Inc
1995–2003

Countries
Ireland

14
Yes

13
No

14
Yes

13
No

14
Yes

13
No

14
Yes

13
No

0.35
(1.15)

–0.12
(0.49)

0.35
(1.68)

–0.18
(1.60)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

Population Growth
1992–1994

–
–

–
–

1.57
(1.56)

0.06
(0.13)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

Output/Income
in 1995

–
–

–
–

0.13
(0.53)

–0.84
(4.71)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

GDP Growth
1995–2003

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–0.14
(0.12)

1.48
(0.22)

–
–

–
–

Log Average GDP
1991–1994

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–0.02
(0.70)

0.00
(0.11)

0.18

0.03

0.36

0.68

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.00

GDP Growth
1992–1994

R2

Notes: See Table 1 for the definition of the variables. t-statistics in parentheses. NA denotes net assets and
CF denotes net capital flows defined as the ratio of sum of current account balance (sign reversed) to the
average GDP over the given years.

62

Table 7: Net Capital Income Flows: Pooled NUTS2 Regions

Specification
Number of Regions
IGrowth
IOut * North1
IOut * North2
IOut * South
IGrowth / IOut * Belgium
IGrowth / IOut * Germany
IGrowth / IOut * Spain
IGrowth / IOut * France
IGrowth / IOut * Italy
IGrowth / IOut * Netherland
IGrowth / IOut * Austria
IGrowth / IOut * Portugal
IGrowth / IOut * Sweden
IGrowth / IOut * UK

R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Changes

Changes

Levels

Levels

168
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.02
(0.08)
0.13
(6.16)
0.64
(1.09)
–0.10
(0.32)
0.29
(1.16)
0.70
(2.03)
0.29
(0.84)
1.25
(3.92)
–0.61
(2.61)
0.08
(0.22)

168
0.14
6.14
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

168
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1.16
(4.73)
0.15
(3.20)
0.00
(–0.15)
0.23
(10.60)
0.01
(2.55)
0.89
(7.22)
0.56
(11.91)
–0.15
(0.65)
0.34
(2.80)
0.32
(3.82)

168
–
–
1.07
(5.70)
0.21
(4.90)
0.01
(1.99)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

0.49

0.48

0.68

0.64

Notes: Change regressions use the change in the Output/Income ratio between 1996 and 2003 while level regressions use the log average output/income ratio between 1995 and 2003 as the dependent variable. IGrowth
is the cumulative growth rate of per capita GDP between 1992 and 1994, used in the change regressions
and IOut is the logarithm of average GDP between 1991 and 1994 used in the level regressions. Country
names and group names correspond to dummy variables. The group North1 consist of the Netherlands and
Belgium; North2 consists of Germany, France, Austria, Sweden, and the UK; while South includes Spain,
Italy, and Portugal. Greece is excluded from the sample. t-statistics in parentheses. For change regressions,
to test if the coefficients for all countries can be accepted statistically to be identical, the F-statistic is 0.75
whereas the 5 percent critical value of the F(148,9) distribution is 1.94, implying that this hypothesis is not
rejected. For level regressions, we perform similar tests, and we can not reject the hypothesis of having 3
slopes, with an F-test value of 2.00. The F(148,7) 5 percent critical value is 2.07.

63

Table 8: Change in Net Capital Income Flows: Pooled NUTS2 Regions

Dependent Variable: Change in Output/Income, 1996–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

168
Yes

168
Yes

168
Yes

0.14
(6.14)

0.11
(2.66)

0.07
(1.57)

Population Growth
from 1992 to 1994

–
–

–0.33
(1.32)

–0.49
(1.73)

Output/Income
in 1995

–
–

–
–

–0.07
(1.43)

0.47

0.47

0.49

Number of Regions
Country dummies
IGrowth

R2

Notes: Greece is excluded from the sample. t-statistics in parentheses. Regressions include country dummies.
IGrowth is the cumulative growth rate of per capita GDP between 1992 and 1994. See Table 2 for definitions.

64

Table 9: Correlation Matrix for Mixed Sample

Change in Ratio
Confidence
Trust
Confidence*IGrowth
Trust*IGrowth
IGrowth
Out/Inc 1995–2003
Confidence*IOut
Trust*IOut
N1*IOut
N2*IOut
IOut

Out/Inc 1995–2003
Confidence*IOut
Trust*IOut
N1*IOut
N2*IOut
IOut

Change in Ratio

Confidence

Trust

Conf*IGrowth

Trust*IGrowth

IGrowth

1.00
–0.34
–0.28
0.19
0.33
–0.18
–0.09
–0.27
–0.15
0.03
–0.38
–0.29

1.00
0.22
0.09
–0.27
0.07
0.01
0.12
0.15
0.07
0.16
–0.05

1.00
–0.20
–0.19
0.37
0.13
0.12
–0.02
0.06
0.06
0.04

1.00
–0.11
–0.57
0.06
–0.34
0.03
0.00
0.25
0.21

1.00
0.24
–0.09
0.05
0.02
–0.08
–0.28
–0.12

1.00
–0.10
0.30
–0.16
0.11
–0.19
0.01

Out/Inc 1995–2003

Conf*IOut

Trust*IOut

N1*IOut

N2*IOut

IOut

1.00
–0.02
0.01
0.51
0.29
0.19

1.00
0.36
0.09
–0.05
–0.25

1.00
–0.08
0.38
-0.04

1.00
–0.07
0.27

1.00
0.58

1.00

Notes: We report the correlations for a mixed sample of NUTS1 and NUTS2 regions. Trust and Confidence
are indices constructed using the World Values Survey questions. See the data appendix for further details.
We use log transformed indices. IGrowth is the cumulative growth rate of per capita GDP between 1992
and 1994. IOut is the logarithm of average GDP between 1991 and 1994. N1 is the North1 and N2 is
the North2 group of countries. North1 includes the Netherlands and Belgium; North2 consists of Germany,
France, Austria and the UK while the South group is the countries of Portugal, Spain, and Italy. Out/Inc
1995–2003 is the logarithm of the output/income ratio averaged between 1995 and 2003. Change in Ratio is
the change in the output/income ratio from 1996 to 2003.

65

Table 10: Change in Net Capital Income Flows and Regional Social Capital: I
Dependent Variable: Change in Output/Income Ratio, 1996–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Yes
107

Yes
105

Yes
105

Yes
107

Yes
105

Yes
105

Confidence

–
–

–0.03
(1.67)

–
–

–
–

–0.03
(1.66)

–
–

Trust

–
–

–
–

0.00
(0.66)

–
–

–
–

0.00
(0.64)

Confidence * IGrowth

–
–

0.24
(3.42)

–
–

–
–

0.23
(3.40)

–
–

Trust * IGrowth

–
–

–
–

0.06
(1.80)

–
–

–
–

0.06
(1.92)

Country dummies
Number of Observations

IGrowth

0.14
0.19
(6.04) (5.85)

0.12
(5.21)

0.11
0.16
(3.22) (3.89)

0.08
(2.40)

Population Growth
from 1992 to 1994

–
–

–
–

–
–

–0.33
(1.68)

–0.23
(1.11)

–0.32
(1.57)

Output/Income
in 1995

–
–

–
–

–
–

–0.02
(0.57)

–0.02
(0.46)

–0.02
(0.54)

0.65

0.68

0.64

0.65

0.68

0.65

R2

Notes: IGrowth is the cumulative growth rate of per capita gross domestic product between
1992 and 1994. Country dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses.
The sample is constructed using the regional specification in World Values Survey. We use
the 1990-1991 wave of the survey. The dataset uses NUTS1 regions for Germany, France,
Portugal, and the UK and NUTS2 regions for Belgium, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, and
Austria. The pooled sample excludes Greece and Sweden. See data appendix for detailed
description of variables that compose the indices. We use log transformed values of the
indices for regressions. The demeaned log confidence index has a standard deviation of 0.19,
a maximum value of 0.43, and a minimum value of –0.55. The demeaned log trust index has
a standard deviation of 0.47, a maximum value of 0.79, and a minimum value of –1.81.
66

Table 11: Change in Net Capital Income Flows and Regional Social Capital: II
Dependent Variable: Change in Output/Income Ratio, 1996–2003
(1)

(2)

Yes
105

Yes
105

Confidence

–0.03
(1.70)

–0.03
(1.68)

Trust

0.00
(0.35)

0.00
(0.34)

Confidence * IGrowth

0.22
(2.94)

0.21
(2.85)

Trust * IGrowth

0.03
(0.78)

0.03
(0.85)

IGrowth

0.17
(4.16)

0.14
(2.80)

Population Growth
from 1992 to 1994

–
–

–0.23
(1.13)

Output/Income
in 1995

–
–

–0.02
(0.46)

0.68

0.68

Country dummies
Number of Observations

R2

Notes: IGrowth is the cumulative growth rate of per capita gross domestic product between
1992 and 1994. We use log transformed values of indices for regressions. Country dummies
are included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses. See Table 10 for further details.

67

Table 12: The Role of Social Capital: Robustness
Dependent Variable: Change in Output/Income Ratio, 1996–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

–0.02
(1.18)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–0.03
(1.68)

–0.03
(1.66)

–
–

–
–

0.12
(3.25)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

Confidence * IGrowth

–
–

0.22
(3.39)

0.24
(3.14)

–
–

–
–

Trust

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.00
(0.31)

0.00
(0.66)

Trust * IGrowth

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.07
(1.96)

0.06
(1.81)

Core Confidence

Confidence

Core Confidence * IGrowth

IGrowth

0.19
0.28
(5.29) (1.68)

0.18
(2.05)

0.33
0.11
(1.96) (1.42)

IGrowth2

–
–

–0.13
(0.66)

–
–

–0.29
(1.35)

–
–

IOut

–
–

–
–

–0.01
(0.37)

–
–

0.00
(0.22)

IOut * IGrowth

–
–

–
–

0.01
(0.06)

–
–

–0.03
(0.30)

0.67

0.68

0.68

0.65

0.64

R2

Notes: IGrowth is the cumulative growth rate of per capita GDP between 1992 and 1994.
IOut is the logarithm of average GDP between 1991 and 1994. We use log transformed
values of the indices. Column (1) uses a core confidence index, constructed using confidence
in parliament, major companies, and the justice system. Other columns are based on the
confidence index using all 11 confidence questions, described in data appendix. Country
dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses. See Table 10 for further
details.

68

Table 13: Correlation Matrix for Institutions

Change in Ratio
PRI*IGrowth
LR*IGrowth
FR*IGrowth
IGrowth
Out/Inc 1995–2003
PRI*IOut
LR*IOut
FR*IOut
N1*IOut
N2*IOut
IOut

PRI*IOut
LR*IOut
FR*IOut
N1*IOut
N2*IOut
IOut

Change in Ratio

PRI*IGrowth

LR*IGrowth

FR*IGrowth

IGrowth

Out/Inc 1995–2003

1.00
0.49
0.43
–0.02
–0.01
–0.02
–0.08
0.00
–0.15
0.06
–0.22
–0.14

1.00
0.85
–0.24
–0.22
–0.10
0.01
0.02
–0.17
–0.05
–0.14
–0.10

1.00
–0.44
–0.24
–0.07
–0.03
0.07
–0.14
–0.02
–0.02
0.05

1.00
0.72
–0.11
–0.04
–0.04
–0.26
–0.06
–0.37
–0.24

1.00
–0.16
–0.05
0.03
–0.28
0.07
–0.26
–0.07

1.00
0.13
0.02
0.16
0.50
0.33
0.21

PRI*IOut

LR*IOut

FR*IOut

N1*IOut

N2*IOut

IOut

1.00
0.89
–0.37
0.05
0.12
–0.58

1.00
–0.59
–0.01
0.05
–0.59

1.00
–0.04
0.49
0.53

1.00
–0.03
0.20

1.00
0.62

1.00

Notes: Change in Ratio is the change in Output/Income ratio between 1996 and 2003 and Out/Inc 1995–
2003 is the logarithm of the average output/income ratio between 1995 and 2003. IGrowth is the cumulative
growth rate of per capita GDP between 1992 and 1994, and IOut is the logarithm of average GDP between
1991 and 1994. N1 is the North1 dummy for regions of the Netherlands and Belgium; N2 is the North2
dummy for Germany, France, Austria, Sweden, and the UK. The principal component for each group of
variables reported in Table 22 is interacted with initial growth and initial output. PRI denotes property
rights institutions, LR denotes legal regulations and FR is financial regulations. See data appendix for
details. All variables are demeaned.

69

Table 14: Change in Net Capital Income Flows and Country Institutions
Dependent Variable: Change in Output/Income Ratio, 1996–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Yes
168

Yes
168

Yes
168

Yes
168

PRI*IGrowth

–
–

–0.04
(-0.02)

–
–

–
–

LR*IGrowth

–
–

–
–

0.27
(0.15)

–
–

FR*IGrowth

–
–

–
–

–
–

–1.00
(0.72)

0.14
(6.14)

0.14
(5.00)

0.14
(5.62)

0.23
(1.75)

0.47

0.47

0.47

0.47

C dummies
N of Obs

IGrowth

R2

Notes: Principal component for each group of variables reported in Table 22 are used in the regressions. We
use property rights institutions in column (2), legal regulations in column (3), and financial regulations in
column (4). IGrowth is the cumulative growth rate of per capita gross domestic product between 1992 and
1994. Greece is excluded from the sample. Country dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in
parentheses.

70

Table 15: Net Capital Income Flows and Regional Social Capital
Dependent Variable: Log of Output/Income Ratio 1995–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

C dummies
N of Obs

Yes
105

Yes
105

Yes
105

Yes
105

Yes
105

Confidence

–
–

–0.01 –0.06
(0.16) (1.51)

–
–

–
–

Confidence*IOut

–
–

0.53
0.03
(2.40) (0.40)

–
–

–
–

Trust

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.00
(0.07)

–0.04
(1.70)

Trust*IOut

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.05
(0.32)

–0.10
(1.38)

IOut*N1

1.06
(5.67)

-

1.05
(5.53)

-

1.08
(6.75)

IOut*N2

0.22
(4.28)

-

0.23
(4.71)

-

0.27
(4.89)

IOut

0.01
0.21
(0.87) (3.34)

0.00
(0.02)

0.16
(3.39)

–0.02
(1.06)

0.75

0.34

0.76

R2

0.74

0.39

Notes: IOut is the logarithm of average GDP between 1991 and 1994. We use log transformed values of
indices for regressions. See Table 10 for details. The pooled sample excludes Greece and Sweden. N1 is
North1, and N2 is North2 group of countries. The North1 group includes the Netherlands and Belgium, the
North2 group Germany, France, Austria, and the UK and the South group includes Portugal, Spain, and
Italy. Country dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses.

71

Table 16: Net Capital Income Flows and Country Institutions: I
Dependent Variable: Log of Output/Income Ratio 1995–2003

N of Obs
PRI*IOut

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

168

168

168

168

168

168

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

1.48
1.00
(5.38) (1.60)

LR*IOut

–
–

–
–

1.29
(4.94)

–0.31
(0.89)

–
–

–
–

FR*IOut

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

–0.49
(0.94)

–0.22
(0.57)

IOut*N1

-

0.85
(3.20)

-

1.09
(5.35)

-

1.05
(5.37)

IOut*N2

-

0.01
(0.04)

-

0.24
(3.44)

-

0.20
(5.09)

0.23
(5.10)

–0.03
(0.64)

0.16
(3.26)

0.02
(1.16)

0.38

0.64

0.31

0.64

IOut

R2

0.26
0.18
(5.23) (1.70)
0.46

0.64

Notes: Principal component for each group of variables reported in Table 22 are used in the regressions.
We use property rights institutions in columns (1)-(2), legal regulations in columns (3)-(4), and financial
regulations in columns (5)-(6)6. The sample is the pooled NUTS2 regions excluding Greece. N1 is the North1
and N2 is the North2 group of countries. The North1 group includes Belgium and the Netherlands while
the North2 group includes Germany, France, Austria, Sweden, and the UK. IOut is the logarithm of average
per capita GDP between 1991 and 1994. Country dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in
parentheses.

72

Table 17: Net Capital Income Flows and Country Institutions: II
Dependent Variable: Log of Output/Income Ratio 1995–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

N of Obs
Inst

168
NoCorr

168
NoCorr

168
LawOrd

168
LawOrd

168
GStab

168
GStab

168
BQual

168
BQual

168
No-Exp

168
No-Exp

Inst*IOut

1.20
(4.38)
0.22
(4.66)
0.40

–1.66
(2.58)
1.33
(5.51)
0.50
(3.96)
–0.23
(2.41)
0.65

5.51
(4.69)
0.30
(5.16)
0.51

3.78
(2.37)
0.74
(3.19)
–0.02
(0.16)
0.22
(2.47)
0.65

2.06
(6.41)
0.28
(5.90)
0.47

1.14
(2.97)
0.89
(4.16)
0.06
(0.83)
0.15
(3.12)
0.65

3.52
(4.39)
0.20
(4.74)
0.43

0.50
(0.95)
1.02
(5.34)
0.16
(2.82)
0.04
(1.45)
0.64

2.91
(5.76)
0.26
(5.63)
0.49

1.86
(3.75)
0.83
(3.81)
0.02
(0.27)
0.17
(3.92)
0.66

IOut*N1
IOut*N2
IOut
R2

Notes: The sample is the pooled NUTS2 regions excluding Greece. NoCorr is No-Corruption, LawOrd is Law
and Order, GStab is government stability, BQual is Bureaucratic Quality, and No-Exp is No Expropriation
Risk variable. See the data appendix for details on these variables. N1 is the North1 and N2 is the North2
group of countries. The North1 group includes Belgium and the Netherlands while the North2 group includes
Germany, France, Austria, Sweden, and the UK. IOut is the logarithm of average per capita GDP between
1991 and 1994. Country dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses.

73

Table 18: Net Capital Income Flows and Industrial Structure
Dependent Variable: Log of Output/Income Ratio 1995–2003
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sector

Agr

Fin

Man

Min

Country dummies
N of Obs

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

Yes
134

–0.22
(1.08)
–1.40
(1.87)
0.11
(2.53)
0.37

–0.20
(0.37)
3.52
(2.70)
0.13
(2.75)
0.35

Sector Share

–1.75 –0.43
(3.75) (0.56)
Sector Share *IOut –3.60
8.93
(1.89) (4.44)
IOut
0.07
0.09
(2.18) (2.98)
R2
0.41
0.58

Notes: The sample is the pooled NUTS2 regions excluding Greece. German data for sector shares are
not available and Germany is excluded from sample. Agr is the agriculture, Fin the Finance, Man the
manufacturing, and Min the mining sector shares. Sector shares are log transformations of the ratio of the
sector value added to total value added in 1995. IOut is the logarithm of average per capita GDP between
1991 and 1994. Country dummies are included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses.

74

Table 19: Net Capital Income Flows and Industrial Structure: NORTH 1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Out/Inc I

Out/Inc I

Out/Inc II

Out/Inc II

Out/Inc III

Out/Inc III

23

23

23

23

23

23

Log Avg. GRP
1991–1994

1.07
(5.71)

0.56
(3.67)

1.10
(5.59)

0.44
(2.99)

1.10
(6.60)

0.71
(10.67)

Log Fin. Share
in 1995

–
–

4.36
(3.78)

–
–

5.02
(4.54)

–
–

3.62
(4.83)

Log Man. Share
in 1995

–
–

0.84
(2.12)

–
–

0.98
(2.72)

–
–

0.43
(2.00)

Log Min. Share
in 1995

–
–

1.43
(3.50)

–
–

1.71
(4.37)

–
–

0.85
(3.34)

Log Agr. Share
in 1995

–
–

0.66
(0.59)

–
–

–0.42
(0.36)

–
–

–0.12
(0.19)

Log Avg. Retirement
1992–1994

–
–

1.26
(1.66)

–
–

1.31
(1.67)

–
-

–0.19
(0.35)

Log Avg. Migration
1992–1994

–
–

2.51
(0.63)

–
–

2.36
(0.59)

–
–

3.43
(1.40)

0.83

0.92

0.81

0.93

0.89

0.96

Dependent Variable
Regions

R2

Notes: Sector shares are log transformations of the ratio of the sector value added to total value added in
1995. Migration is the ratio of net population movements within the given country to the total population,
averaged between 1992 and 1994. Retirement is the ratio of population over age 65 to the total population,
averaged between 1992 and 1994. The income measure is primary income for columns (1)-(2), intermediate
income defined as primary income-taxes for columns (3)-(4), and disposable income defined as primary
income-taxes+transfers for columns (5)-(6). The North1 sample consists of regions of Belgium and the
Netherlands. Dummies for these countries included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses.

75

Table 20: Net Capital Income Flows and Industrial Structure: NORTH 2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Out/Inc I

Out/Inc I

Out/Inc II

Out/Inc II

Out/Inc III

Out/Inc III

46

46

46

46

46

46

Log Avg. GRP
1991–1994

0.41
(6.22)

0.48
(5.60)

0.42
(4.98)

0.53
(5.44)

0.63
(14.70)

0.60
(8.08)

Log Fin. Share
in 1995

–
–

–1.73
(1.51)

–
–

–2.25
(1.81)

–
–

–0.84
(1.08)

Log Man. Share
in 1995

–
–

0.08
(0.21)

–
–

0.03
(0.07)

–
–

0.06
(0.17)

Log Min. Share
in 1995

–
–

–1.25
(0.58)

–
–

–0.17
(0.07)

–
–

–1.29
(0.80)

Log Agr. Share
in 1995

–
–

–0.46
(0.71)

–
–

–0.65
(0.95)

–
–

–0.68
(1.53)

Log Avg. Retirement
1992–1994

–
–

0.27
(0.32)

–
–

0.84
(0.88)

–
-

–1.53
(2.86)

Log Avg. Migration
1992–1994

–
–

–13.31
(2.97)

–
–

–18.11
(3.29)

–
–

–6.73
(1.84)

0.36

0.55

0.33

0.56

0.65

0.80

Dependent Variable
Regions

R2

Notes: Sector shares are log transformations of the ratio of the sector value added to total value added in
1995. Migration is the ratio of net population movements within the given country to the total population,
averaged between 1992 and 1994. Retirement is the ratio of population over age 65 to the total population,
averaged between 1992 and 1994. The income measure is primary income for columns (1)-(2), intermediate
income defined as primary income-taxes for columns (3)-(4), and disposable income defined as primary
income-taxes+transfers for columns (5)-(6). The North2 sample consists of Germany, France, Austria,
Sweden and the UK. Retirement data for Cornwall, Isles of Scilly, and Devon of the UK are missing and
these regions are excluded from the regressions. Regions of Germany and France are not included due to
missing data. Country dummies countries included in all regressions. t-statistics in parentheses.

76

Table 21: Net Capital Income Flows and Industrial Structure: SOUTH

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Out/Inc I

Out/Inc I

Out/Inc II

Out/Inc II

Out/Inc III

Out/Inc III

38

38

38

38

38

38

Log Avg. GRP
1991–1994

0.01
(2.33)

0.01
(3.52)

0.04
(3.11)

0.02
(2.19)

0.05
(2.28)

0.03
(1.84)

Log Fin. Share
in 1995

–
–

–0.52
(3.05)

–
–

1.41
(2.92)

–
–

1.08
(2.33)

Log Man. Share
in 1995

–
–

–0.05
(1.29)

–
–

–0.03
(0.30)

–
–

0.30
(2.99)

Log Min. Share
in 1995

–
–

0.09
(0.92)

–
–

1.20
(6.32)

–
–

–1.20
(5.27)

Log Agr. Share
in 1995

–
–

–0.04
(0.46)

–
–

–0.44
(2.07)

–
–

–0.90
(4.05)

Log Avg. Retirement
1992–1994

–
–

–0.20
(1.68)

–
–

0.02
(0.10)

–
-

–0.55
(2.11)

Log Avg. Migration
1992–1994

–
–

1.46
(3.37)

–
–

4.30
(4.65)

–
–

4.22
(1.84)

0.17

0.49

0.22

0.60

0.18

0.70

Dependent Variable
Regions

R2

Notes: Sector shares are log transformations of the ratio of the sector value added to total value added in 1995.
Migration is the ratio of net population movements within the given country to the total population, averaged
between 1992 and 1994. Retirement is the ratio of population over age 65 to the total population, averaged
between 1992 and 1994. The income measure is primary income for columns (1)-(2), intermediate income
defined as primary income-taxes for columns (3)-(4), and disposable income defined as primary incometaxes+transfers for columns (5)-(6). The South sample consists of regions of Spain and Italy. Regions of
Portugal are excluded due to missing data. Country dummies included in all regressions. t-statistics in
parentheses.

77

Table 22: Variables for the Principal Component Analysis (Appendix Table)

PROPERTY RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS
No Corruption
Law and Order
Government Stability
Bureaucratic Quality
No Expropriation Risk
LEGAL REGULATIONS
Total duration of checks collection
Duration of enforcement
Formalism index
Enforceability of contracts
Creditor Rights
Shareholder Rights
FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
Disclosure requirements
Liability standard
Public enforcement
Investor Protection
Government ownership of banks in 1970
Government ownership of banks in 1995
Notes: See the data appendix for a description of variables.

78

