NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO LONG—TEEM INTEREST RATES OVERREACT
TO SHORT—TERM INTEREST RATES?

N. Gregory Mankiw
Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 13145

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 19814

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper fl3)45
May l98t

Do Long—Term Interest Rates Overreact
to Short—Term Interest Rates?

ABSTRACT

This paper

examines the hypothesis that financial markets are myopic

by studying the term structure of interest rates. White

rejecting deci-

sively the traditional expectations hypothesis regarding the term structure,
our statistical results also lead us to conclude that long term interest
rates do not overreact to either the level or the change in short term

rates. This finding suggests that participants in bond markets are not
myopic or overly sensitive to recent events. Our statistical results also
suggest that most variations in the yield curve reflect changes in liquidity
premia rather than expected changes in interest rates.

N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
M.I.T.
Cambridge, MA 02139

Lawrence H. Surimiers

Department of Economics
Littauer Center 229
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

The term structure of interest rates has been extensively studied

by economists. It is of interest to financial economists because of
its close connection with the pricing of bonds of different maturities.

important, understanding the term structure of interest rates is

More

also critical to the evaluation of the effects of'

alternative

macroeconomic policies. For example, it is widely believed that the
monetary authority can most directly control short—term interest rates,
but that aggregate demand depends primarily on long—term interest
rates.' If this conviction is correct, the monetary transmission niecha—
nism relies on the behavior of the term structure of interest rates.
During the first few months of 198h, the yield curve has been very

steep by historicial standards. The yield on twenty—year bonds has been
about 300 basis points above the yield on three—month Treasury bills.

Only rarely have such large spreads been observed in the past.2 The

yield

curve

is widely interpreted as reflecting market participants'

conviction that interest rates will rise over the next several years

under the pressure of large Federal deficits. It is sometimes even
suggested that because of such expectational effects, prospective
Federal deficits are exerting a dampening effect on the current level of

economic activity. These arguments presume that long rates reflect

1For example, in the simple IS—LM irodel of Richard H. Clarida and
Benjamin M. Friedman, "Why Have Short—Term Interest Rates Been So High?,"
BPEA 2:1983, pp. 553—578, the short rate enters the LM curve but the
long rate enters the IS curve.

2The average spread between twenty—year bond yields and three—month
bill yields over the past two decades is 96 basis points; the standard
deviation is 136 basis points. The average since October 1979 is 110;
the standard deviation is 206.

—2—

market expectations of future short rates.

In

this paper, we examine

this view of the yield curve.
Most work on the term structure is based on some variant of the

expectations hypothesis. This hypothesis holds that the long—term
interest rate is a weighted average of present and expected future

short—term interest rates. An approximately equivalent form of the
hypothesis holds that the expected one period holding returns on
riskiess bonds of all maturities are the same or differ by constant

risk premia.3 Unfortunately, many investigators using various
techniques and data sets reject the joint hypothesis of rational expectations and the expectations theory of the term structure.
The failure of interest rates to Trove as the theory predicts is

not a new phenomenon. In 1938 Frederick Macaulay wrote the following:5

3The approximate nature of the equivalence is discussed extensively
by John Cox, John Ingersoll and Stephen Ross, "A He—examination of
Traditional Hypotheses about the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
Journal of Finance, September 1981. As demonstrated by Robert J. Shiller,
John Y. Campbell and Kermit J. Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates and Future
Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates," EPEA, 1:1983,
the equivalence is exact after linearization.

There are many recent examples. David S. Jones and V. Vance Roley,
"Rational Expectations and the Expectations Model of the Term Structure:
A Test Using Weekly Data," Journal of Monetary Economics 12, September
1983, perform regression tests on the holding returns on T—Bills of different maturities. Robert Shiller, "The Volatility of Long—Term Interest
Rates and Expectations Models of the Term Structure," Journal of
Political Economy, December 1979, performs volatility tests using six
different data sets on American and British interest rates. Shiller,
Campbell and Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates," find that long—term interest
rates have almost no predictive power for future short—term interest
rates.

5Frederick R. Macaulay, Some Theoretical Problems Suggested
Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields and Stock Prices in the United

States Since 1856, New York: NBER, l938 p. 33.

—3—

To preserve the thoeretical relationship between long
term and future short term interest rates, the 'yields'
of bonds of the highest grades should fall during a
period in which short term rates are higher than the
yields on bonds and rise during a period in which short
term rates are lower. Now experience is ntre nearly the
opposite.

As we show below, the test of the expectations theory derived under
the assumption of rational expectations is exactly the test Macauley

suggested almost fifty years ago. Moreover, the behavior of long rates
in

the recent period we examine is also "nearly the opDosite" from that

implied by the theory.

While statistical rejections of

the expectations theory are ubi-

quitous, previous research has not made clear the substantive signifi-

cance of the failure of the theory. One problem with interpreting
previous test results is the absence of an economically meaningful

alternative hypothesis. In this paper, we embed the expectations
theory of the term structure within two wider classes of hypotheses.
We can thus form judgments as to whether the empirical deviation from
the expectations hypothesis is substantively important.

The

first class of hypotheses includes a quantitative expression of

the notion that the long rate responds "too itch" to the contemporaneous

short rate. This alternative hypothesis is suggested by work on the

volatility

of long—term interest rates. Since the long rate is, under

the expectations hypothesis, a weighted average of expected future short
rates, the long rate should be a itch smoother series than the short

rate. Robert Shiller examines this smoothing property of the expec—

_14 —

tations

hypothesis and finds that long rates are too volatile to be con-

sistent with the theory.6 The excess sensitivity hypothesis we examine
here is one possible explanation for this excess volatility.

The excess sensitivity hypothesis is also suggested by evidence
that the response of interest rates to money supply announcements is

similar at all turities, even though standard theories suggest that
the response of long rates should be ouch more attentuated. Moreover,
this view appears to be widely held among participants in the bond
market, where it
rates."

is

conventional wisdom that "long rates follow short

This hypothesis is also implicit in the popular claim that

financial narkets "overreact" to news or are in some sense "myopic".

Whether long rates are excessively sensitive to short rates has
important implications for macro—economic policy. Excess sensitivity,
for

example, would increase the potency of' monetary policy. A reduc-

tion in short rates would have a greater impact on long rates than

under the expectations hypothesis. Such an expansionary action by the
Federal Reserve would therefore have a greater impact on aggregate
demand.

To our surprise, the results of our tests decisively reject the

notion that long rates are overly sensitive to short rates. The
results taken literally imply that current interest rates have a ouch
lower (sometimes negative) weight than theory would suggest and that
expected future short rates exert a disproportionate influence on long—

6Shiller, "Volatility," 1979.

—5—

tern rates. This literal interpretation of the results, however, does
not seem satisfactory. Alternatively, the results nay reflect the
failure of the assumption that market forecasts of future interest

rates represent rational expectations. These conclusions appear
robust, with similar results obtained from analyses of yields on short—
term and long—term bonds, and three—month and six—month Treasury bills.
Using data on three—month arid six—month bills, we are also able to

examine the possibility that expectations are formed irrationally, with
excessive weight placed on the current short rate in forecasting future

short rates. We show that the observed behavior of the term structure
is also inconsistent with this view. Our estimates taken literally
imply that market participants place too little weight on the current
short rate in forecasting future yields.

Having found that the excess sensitivity hypothesis cannot explain

the term structure, we turn to a second alternative hypothesis. This
second hypothesis assumes that the expectations theory holds except for

a random unexplained liquidity premium. The results suggest that, at
least at the short end of the term structure, the expectations theory is
not very useful in explaining the spread between long—term and short—

term interest rates. In particular, only one quarter of the variation
in the spread between six—month and three—month Treasury bill yields is

attributable to expected movements in short rates. The remainder is
attributable to movements in what are tautologically labelled liquidity

premia. Large and highly variable liquidity premia, especially within

the

very short end of the maturity spectrum, are not easy to understand.

—6—

EXCESS SENSITIVITY

In this section, we consider the hypothesis that long rates

overreact to short rates. We first examine the behavior of twenty—year
bonds and three—month bills. We then turn to examining the behavior of
three—month and six—month bills.

Long Rates an Short Pates

Let rt be the one—period yield and Rt be the yield on a consol,

i.e., an infinitely—lived bond paying a fixed coupon each period. We
consider the following class of hypotheses of which the standard expec-

tations lpothesis is one special case:

=

(i)

6

+

(i—y)

)

k3
where 0 <

'y' < 1.

1k Etrt+k

Et denotes the rational expectation conditional on

information available at time t. The term 6 is the risk premium. For
this section, we assume 6 is constant; in the next section, however, we consider the possibility that the risk premium changes through time.

The expectations theory of the term structure implies that

I =

l/(l+R*),

where R* is an average interest rate around which the

linearization is made. For lower values of I ,

greater

weight is given

to the contemporaneous short rate. The alternative hypothesis of excess
sensitivity is thus represented in equation (1) by a low value of I
Informally, excess sensitivity arises either if agents place too little

—7—

weight

on rationally expected future short rates or if agents irra-

tionally place too much weight on the current short rate in forecasting
future short rates.
Equation (1) is easily transformed into a simple regression test

of the ixdel. Note that Ci)

(2)

=

iRt+i

+

yO

implies

(l—y)

(2):

1k+l +lrt+k
k=l

Subtract (2) from (1) to obtain equation (3):

= (i—y)Q

t —

(3)

(l—y)

where 6t+l =

k1
The term

+

(l_r)rt

yk(Er

—

—

t+l

Etrt+k)

reflects new information about future short rates that

becomes available between time t and time t+l. Algebraic nipulation
of (3) yields (1k):

—

R)

=

—(l—y)O
I

Equation

(4)

provides

+

(i—i)

I

(R. —

rt)

+

6t+1/y

a simple test of the model (i).

How should we estimate equation V-i)?

Ordinary least squares

produces consistent estimates only if the error term in the regression
is uncorrelated with the variables on the right hand

side.

The assump-

tion of rational expectations implies that this condition is satisfied

—8—

here.

The error term

measures the "news" that arrived between

time t and time t+l. The right hand side variable, (Rt —

rt),

is

known at time t. If expectations are rationally formed, "news" should
not be predictable Iron known information. In this case, rational

expectations implies (R —

rt)

and

are uncorrelated. We can thus

estimate equation (14) using ordinary least squares.
Equation (14) embodies both the standard expectations theory of the

term structure and the possibility of excess sensitivity of long rates

to current short rates. Under the expectations hypothesis, the coef-

ficient on (n —

rt)

is R*, i.e., roughly O.O2. If excess sensitivity

of long rates to short rates explains the failure of' the expectations

hypothesis, the estimated coefficient should exceed R*, implying an
estimate of I below l/(l+E*).
The logic of equation (14)

is

fairly intuitive. Ignoring the risk

premium, equation (1) states that the long rate is a weighted average
of short rates, with tore recent short rates given greater weight than

more distant ones. If Et is greater than rt, then the short rate must
be rising. Next period's long rate Rt+1 must be higher than this
period's, as it gives greater weight to the higher future short rates.

Thus, according to both the expectations theory and the excess sensitivity hypothesis, when the current long rate exceeds the current
short rate, the long rate will (on average) rise.

TWith

quarterly data, the appropriate R* is the nean quarterly

interest rate,

which with our sample is 0.019.

—9—

We can give equation (14)

another intuitive interpretation. The

holding period return on long bonds is approximately

Rt —

t+i

—

The first term in this expression is the coupon yield, while the second
term is the capital gain or loss attributable to changes in the long
rate.

If' we regress this holding return less the short rate on

available information, we learn whether there are exploitable profit

opportunities. Rejecting the null }'pothesis that the coefficient in
(14) is R* is equivalent to finding statistically significant profit
opportunities.
If markets were m,çopic, then when the short rate is high relative

to the long rate, the long rate would nonetheless be "too" high and the

price of a long bond "too" low. Holding long—term bonds would be a
profitable strategy. This would imply that, when regressing the excess
holding return on the spread, we would obtain a negative coefficient.
Finding a negative coefficient in this regression is precisely equivalent to estimating a coefficient in (14) greater than R.
Equation (14), and thus the original equation (1), is a consequence

of a variety of dels of asset returns. For example, It follows from
the now popular "consumption beta" model of asset returns. If all the

relevant variables in this del are jointly log—normal and homoske—
dastjc, then the ndel implies that excess return are not forecastable.8
In other words, except for a constant term that depends on variances and

8See Lars Peter Hansen and
Consumption, Risk Aversion and
Returns,t' Journal of Political
only after linearization; that

Kenneth J. Singleton, "Stochastic
the Temporal Behavior of Stock Market
This is strictly true
Econoit, 1983.
is, we are approximating log(1+r) as r.

—10—

covariances, there are no expected profit opportunities in this model.

Any empirical failure of this implication implies either that the
"consumption beta" theory is wrong or that the relevant variances and

covariances change through time.9
We estimate equation V4) using U.S. quarterly data from 1963:1 to
1983:14.

is the yield at the first week of the quarter on Treasury

securities of a constant maturity of twenty years. rt is the yield on
three—month Treasury bills. Table 1 presents the results.

The coefficient on the spread (R —

rt)

has the wrong sign.

Regression (1.1) is the OLS estimate using th entire sample. The null
hypothesis that the slope coefficient is 0.02 is rejected at the five

percent level using a one—tailed test. Since the coefficient is negative, the hypothesis that it is larger than 0.02 is also rejected.
Thus, we reject the standard expectations theory of the term stucture,
but we also nist reject the excess sensitivity of long rates to current
short rates.

In October of 1979,

the

Federal Reserve changed its operating pro-

cedure and began relying sore on targetting monetary aggregates and less

on targetting interest rates. One might suspect that this change in the
policy rule altered the relationship between interest rates of different

maturities. In fact, an examination of the residuals from regression
(1.1) indicates substantial heteroskedaticity coinciding with this

change in mDnetary regime. After the change in October 1979, the resi—

9For a discussion of this point, see Robert J. Shiller, "Consumption,
Asset Markets, and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," Journal of Monetary
Economics Supplement, Carnegie—Rochester Conference, Volume 17, 1982.

—11—
dual variance is much greater.

In regressions (1.2) and (1.3), we split the sample to examine
whether the change in policy rule affected the relation between long

rates and short rates. The estimates suggest there has been no shift in
this relation. In both subsaxnples, the coefficient has the incorrect

sign. The hypothesis that it is 0.02 is rejected for the earlier
period. It is not rejected for the latter period, since there are many
fewer observations and much greater residual variance. The residuals

from the split samples appear Gaussian. In particular, an examination
of the third and fourth inents indicates no skewness nor unusual kur—
tosis that might lead one to distrust the reported standard errors. The
rejection of the theory for the first subsample appears statistically

sound. Moreover, the point estimate for the second subsample indicates

that the theory has worked no better since 19T9)°
Regression (i.1) uses the entire sample, but weights the two sub—

samples to correct for the heteroskadasticity. The weight is the
reciprocal of the root mean squared residual from equation (1).
Again, the coefficient is negative, and the null hypothesis that it is

or larger is rejected at the five percent level. The data support
neither the expectations hypothesis nor the excess sensitivity hypothe0.02

sis.

These empirical results cannot be interpreted within the context

of equation (1). Equation (1) is valid only if y is between zero and
10The change in the Fed operating procedures in 1979 roughly coinwith the introduction of future markets in Treasury bills. While
one might have expected that the availability of future markets would,
by facilitating "yield curve arbitrage," improve the performance of the
expectations hypothesis, the point estimates suggest otherwise.

cides

Table 1: Long Rates (R) and Short Rates Cr)
Dependent Variable:

—

Rt)
(1.)*

(1.1)

(1.2)

(1.3)

Period

63:l83:1

63:1—79:2

79:383:i

63:l—83:

Constant

0.18

0.11

0.29

0.13

(.09)

(.05)

(.311)

(.06)

—0.086

—O.0l

—0.136

—0.055

(.055)

(.3311)

(.166)

(.0110)

2.119

2.31

2.59

2.111

0.611

0.30

1.32

—

D.W.

rt)

Standard errors are in parentheses.

Asterisk (*) denotes weighted least squares.

—12—

one. The coefficient estimates taken literally, however, imply that
is greater than one.

Nonetheless, we are left with the conclusion

that n,ropia does not explain the excess volatility of long—term

interest rates and the other rejections of the expectations theory.

While our results imply that an investor could, on average, make
money by taking advantage of the failure of the expectations theory, the

risks involved are very large. For example, at the present time, the

profitable strate suggested by regression (l.4)

is

to go short in

three—month Treasury bills and to use the proceeds to buy twenty—year

bonds. The estimates indicate that a $1000 investment of this sort
would yield an expected profit of $28 in three nnths Less any transac-

tions Costs. Such an investment, however, is very risky. At the level
of uncertainty observed since 19T9, the standard deviation of this $28

profit is $165. The probability that this strategy would actually produce a loss exceeds forty percent. Thus, the failure of the expectations theory does not imply the presence of relatively riskiess profit
opportunities.

Potential problems with sample selection and data mining always

make the evaluation of statistical results difficult. For example, one
might argue that our results are attibutable to an unusual sequence of

inflation surprises over our sample period. A standard practice is to

check the validity of the conclusion on an independent data set. One
can view our regressions as just such a validity check. As we point out
in the introduction, Macaulay was aware that long rates do not ive as

—13—

the theory predicts. Moreover, he made his observation many years prior
to the beginning of our data set. Furthermore, Shiller reports estimates of a regression equation parallel to (14) for six different data sets

covering a variety of different sample periods and interest rates.11 In
five of the six cases, the estimates slope coefficient is negative, and

in the sixth it is close to zero. In all cases, his results are con—
sisent with our finding that the failure of the expectations theory can-

not be related to excess sensitivity of the long rate. The results in
Table 1 are not just an artifact of recent experience, but appear to be
an empirical regularity.

Short Rates and Shorter Rates

There are a number of potential objections to the test in the pre-

ceding subsection using long—term and short—term yields. The linearization on which the derivation depends may be an unsatisfactory

approximation for such long—term yields. It is also possible that
there is significant segmentation between the short—term and long—term
bonds markets, as investors may have differing "preferred habitats."
We can address both

of

these objections by examining yields only at the

short end of the term structure. Moreover, the use of short—term
instruments obviates the need to ndel expectations over a long horizon,
making possible the examination of a broader range

of

issues. This sec-

tion therefore develops tests of the term structure hypotheses similar

Shiller, "Volatility," 19T9. The data sets SMiler uses extend
back to 1919 for the United States and to 18214 for the United Kingdom.
All his data sets end before 1978. As we point out above, recent data
appears to confirm the historical pattern.

—

to

those in the preceding section for three—month and six—month Treasury

bills.

Let rt be the one—period yield and Rt. be the two—period yield. We
consider this class of hypotheses:

=0

(5)

+

A

(l—x) Etrt+i.

rt +

For pure discount bonds, the expectations hypothesis posits that A =

In

this case, the yield from holding a two—period bond equals the

expected yield from holding two one—period bonds in sequence plus a

constant risk premium. Under the alternative hypothesis that the long
is excessively sensitive to the short rate r, the current short

rate

rate receives greater weight than under the expectations theory. That
is, the excess sensitiviety hypothesis implies A > 1/2.
We can explicitly derive the excess sensitivity tdel for one arid
two—period bills under the assumption that expectations are partly

myopic. Let us suppose that the expectations theory of the term.truc—
ture holds hxt with expectations that are not necessarily rational.
That is,

(6)

Rt

=

0

+

l,rt

+

where r+i is the rrket expectation of rt+l. Let us also suppose
that the nrket expectation is partly rational and
myopic:

partly

—15—
(7)

(1-u)

w rt +

r,1

Etrt+i.

If w = 0, expectations are purely rational, If u

1, expectations are

purely riop1c. Combiting (6) and (7), we obtain

(8)

Rt

$ +

+ (i)2 Etrt+i,

(!..)
2

Equation (8) is identical to eq4ation (5), where A

expectations re partly 'opic (

' 0),

(14w)/2, If

then A exceeds one half

and the two—period yie.d is excessively sensitive to the one—period

yield.

We nov wish to manipulate (5) to derive a test of the ndel. As
in the last subsection, the properties of rational expectations permit

such a test. We first write the realized value

as the sum of the

expected value Et?t+i and Hnewste £t÷1.

—

(9)

We now combine (5) and

(rt.1 —

(10)

R.)

(9),
—

Simple algebraic rearrangement yields:

._L. + __. ( — r.)

As discussed above in connection with equation (14), the error term

is uncorrelated with the right hand side variable, since
(Rt —

rt)

is known at time t Hence, we can estimate (10) using ordi-

nary least 8quares.

Equation (10) provides another simple test of the standard expec—

—i6—

tations

theory arid the excess sensitivity model. Under the expec-

tations theory, the coefficient on (Et —

rt)

1.

is one, since A =

Ir

there is excess sensitivity, this estimated coefficient should exceed
one, implying A > 1t2. Thus, as in the previous subsection, a simple OLS
regression is capable of measuring the excess sensitivity of the
longer—term rate to the current short rate.

Equation (10) is also intuitive. Ignoring the risk premium, (5)
implies that the two—period rate is a weighted average of the two con-

secutive one—period rates. Therefore, when the current long rate is
above the current short rate, the current long rate should be below

next period's short rate. A regression of (rt+l —

R)

on (Ft —

rt)

should yield a positive coefficient.

We can write equation (io) in two other equivalent ways. First,

by adding C;

—

rt)

to both sides of the equation, we obtain a

regression of (rt+1 —

rt)

on (Ft —

rt).

This new equation relates the

spread to the change in short rates. Second, by subtracting
from both sides of (10), we obtain a regression of (rt —
on (mi, —

rt).

Under the null Fwpothesis that A =

lj,

—

rt)

— rt+l))

the coefficient in

this regression is zero. This second equivalent form has a natural

interpretation. Since (2Rt —

rt+l)

is the one—period holding return on

a two—period bond, the left hand side variable is the difference in

holding return between short and long bonds. Under the expectations
theory, this excess return is not forecastable. The failure to find a
zero coefficient in this regression, or (equivalently) a coefficient of

—17—

one in equation (10) ,

indicates

the existence of expected profit

opportunities.

If' nrkets were
to

the

Irrjopic, then when the short rate is high relative

long rate, the long rate would nonetheless be "too" high and

the price of a long bond would be "too" low. Long bonds would thus be
profitable when the short rate is relatively high. A regression of the
excess return (rt —

(2R

—

rt+l))

on the spread (R —

rt)

would yield a

positive coefficient. Finding a positive coefficient in this
regression is exactly equivalent to estimating A >

We

l933:.

in equation (10).

estimate equation (10) with U.S. quarterly data from 1963:1 to
Rt is the yield at the first week of the quarter on six—ninth

Treasury bills, while rt is the yield on three—month bills. Table 2

presents the results.
The coefficient on the spread has the wrong sign. Regression

(2.1) is the OLS estimate for the entire sample. The null hypothesis

that the coefficient

is one is rejected at the one percent level. The

parameter estimates, taken literally, imply insufficient rather than
excessive sensitivity of longer—term interest rates to short yields.

The

residuals in regression (2.1), like those of regressions

(1.1), indicate
change

substantial heteroskadasticity associated with the

in Federal Reserve operating procedure in 1979. Regressions

(2.2) and (2.3) split the sample. In both subsamples, the sign of the
coefficient is incorrect. As for equation (4), the recent subsample has
too few observations to reject the expectations

hypothesis. Yet the

Table 2: Short Rates (B) and Shorter Rates (r)

Dependent Variable: (rt+1 —

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

Period

63:1_83:14

63:1—79:2

79:3_83:1

63:1—83:).

Constant

0.02

—O.0

—0.01

—0.02

(.19)

(.13)

(.68)

(.15)

—0.719

—0.0T

—0.996

—0.70

(.556)

(.I28)

(1.536)

(.!21)

D.W.

2.15

1.82

2.61

2.05

s.e.

1.39

0.69

2.82

0.80

—

rt)

Standard errors in parentheses.

Asterisk (*) denotes weighted least squares.

—18—

theory

is rejected for the earlier subsample, and the point estimates do

not indicate any structural change caused by the change in nnetary
policy regime. An examination of the residuals from regression (2.2)
indicates no skewness nor unusual kurtosis, suggesting they are at least

roughly Gaussian. As in the previous section, the rejection of the
expectations theory and

the

excess sensitivity trjpothesis appears sta-

tistically sound.12

Regression (2.) again uses the entire sample, but weights the two
subsamples by the reciprocal of the root mean squared residual from

regression (2.1) to correct for heteroskedasticity. Again, the null
hypothesis that the coefficeitn is one or larger is rejected at the one

percent level. Again the estimate implies A <

0,

which taken literally

implies that the current short rate has a negative weight in forming

longer—term yields. This finding is clearly implausible, and we do not
suggest acceptance of this literal conclusion. This finding does indicate, however, that the data are consistent with neither the expectations hypothesis nor the excess sensitivity hypothesis.13
As we note above, the excess sensitivity nodel for one and two—

period bills is equivalent to a xdel in which expectations are partly

myopic. The estimate in regression (2.) implies A is —0.89 and

is

12These results raise the question of whether the results in the preceding subsection are due only to the failure of the expectations
hypothesis at the very short end of the term structure. This possibility was tested by replicating the previous tests with one—year and
20—year bonds. Very similar results were obtained.
-3David Wilcox has recently performed regression (2.1) using weekly
data, correcting for the implied moving average error. He obtains a
slope coefficient of —0.040, with a standard error of 0.385. He also
examines the quarterly samples beginning at different weeks in the
quarter. For each subsample, the slope estimate is well below one,

—19—

—2.8. Thus, in the nwopic expectations interpretation of the model, the
market expectation gives a negative weight to the current short rate and

an excessively large weight to the rational expectation. This interpretation of the results is again implausible. It does indicate, however,
that the failure of the expectations theory cannot be easily explained
by an appeal to naive expectation formation.
Observers of financial markets often comment that these markets

are Ijopic. The empirical results in both subsections decisively
reject a simple quantitative expression of this view. The implausibi—
lity of the results suggest that equations (1) and

(8)

are not satis-

factory models of the term structure. Taken on face value, the results
imply

that the market is hyperopic. They indicate that the market

gives

too little weight to contemporaneous fundamentals and too niich

weight to future fundamentals.
A parallel phenomenon has been observed in the stock market.
Shiller finds that when current dividends are high relative to the

current price, the holding return on the stock market is high. Using
an argument similar to that used with regard to equation (i), this
suggests that the market gives too little weight to contemporaneous

dividends. Similarly, Sanjoy Basu shows with cross—sectional data that
when a company's current earnings are high relative to its price, the

although for some subsamples, a coefficient of one could not be
rejected. David Wilcox, "Linear and Nonlinear Tests of the Expectations
Hypothesis in the Treasury Bill Market," MIT.

l4Robe J. Shiller, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by
Subsequent Changes in Dividends?," American Economic Review 71, 1981, pp.
12l...1i36.

—20—

company's stock will on average outperform the nErket.-5 Again, the
market price appears to give too little weight to contemporaneous ear-

nings. Thus, none of these violations of the efficient markets hjpothe—
sis is consistent with the alternative hypothesis of myopia.

An Alternative Model of Overreaction

As we explain above, the excess sensitivity model we examine is
equivalent to a model in which investors irrationally place too large a
weight on the current short rate in forecasting future short rates.
Although this formulation appears a natural model of "irrational" expec-

tations, it is not the only possible one. In this subsection, we consider another plausible model of overreaction. Instead of placing too
large a weight on the current level of the short rate, investors here
place too large a weight on the news contained in the current short
rate.

Let us again suppose that the expectation theory holds:

(ii)

Rt =

8

+ lrt + l/4+l

where r+i is the market expectation of rt+l. Let

be the innovation

in the short rate. In other words, Vt is the "news" about the path of
short rates that arrived in period t. Let us consider the possibility

15Sanjoy Basu, "Investment Performance of Common Stocks in Relation
to Their Price—Earnings Ratio: A Test of the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis," Journal of Finance, June 1977, pp. 663—682, and Sanjoy
Basu, "The Relationship Between Earnings' Yields, Market Value and
Return for NYSE Common Stocks: Further Evidence," Journal of Financial

—21—

that investors overreact to this news in forming their expectations.
That is, the following rule describes their expectations:

(12)

If

$

+

Etrt+l

=

4

V

0, then the market expectation is rational. If $ >

0,

then the

market overreacts to the current news about short rates.

Algebraic manipulation of (ii) and (12) produces an equation simi—
lar to the one we estimate above:

(13) rt+1 — Rt

=

—20

+

— rt)

—

• Vt +

Thus, we obtain equation (10) with an additional term: the innovation in
the short rate.16

This alternative nde1 of overreaction suggests a

slightly different regression test)7
To investigate this alternative model, we must obtain a measure of
the innovation in short rates. To do this, we InDdel the short rate as a
third order autoregressive process, although other specifications appear

to produce similar results. Estimation of this process yields:18

Economics 12, June 1983, pp. 129—156.

l6Note that under the null hypothesis, the news term equals the
following period's residual (i.e., Vt = Ct). Our estimation strategy,
however, does not exploit this fact.
1TThis test is analogous to the test of the permanent income hypothesis suggested by Marjorie A. Flavin, "The Adjustment of Consumption to
Changing Expectations of Permanent Income," Journal of Political Economy
89, 1981.
l8Sjnce we require three lagged short rates, the estimation in this
subsection is for the period 1963:4 to l983:1.

—22-

rt

=

0.60 +

0.614 rt_l

(0.37)

0.02 rt_2 + 0.30 rt_3 +
(0.13)

(o.ii)

s.e.

1.86

D.W.

—

=

1.30

(0.11)

Adjusted

=

0.81

We use the residuals from this regression as measures of the innovation
in the short rate.

Estimation of equation (13), with the heteroskadasticity correction, produces the following result:

= —0.05

rt+1 —

—

(0.13)

0.40

(Rt —

rt)

+

(0.11)

(o.14i)

D.W. = 2.04

s.e.

0.03 v.

0.79

Thus, contrary to the implications of this alternative model of
overreaction, the innovation has a positive and insignificant coef-

ficient. Moreover, the coefficient on the spread remains negative and
significantly different from one.

If we impose the restriction that the coefficient on the spread is
one, as implied by equation (13), the results are no more supportive of

the model. We find:

= —0.36

rt+1 —

+

1.0

—

(0.09)
D.W.

1.96

rt)

+

0.12 Vt
(0.11)

s.e. — 0.83

—23—

Again, the coefficient on the innovation has the wrong sign. The data
do not appear consistent with the view that investors place too rmich

weight in recent "news" in forecasting future short rates.19

VARIABLE LIQUIDITY PHEIA

The previous section demonstrates the failure of the expectations

theory of the term structure. The alternative hypothesis that long
rates respond too nuch to short rates cannot explain the rejection. The
purpose of this section is to show in another way that the failure is
substantively significant.

Consider the following slight rrdification of the expectations
theory for one and two—period bills:

(in) Rt =

St

+

1/

rt +

1

Etrt+i

In this formulation, the long rate Rt differs from an average of the

current and future short rates by the term O. Our test above assumes
is constant. In this section we make the less restrictive assumption

that S is uncorrelated with short rates.

The term

can be interpreted in two alternative ways. First, we

can view 0. as a time—varying liquidity premium, i.e., the extra compen-

sation required to induce a lender to hold the longer—term bond. Edward

Kane

finds, based

ticipants,

upon

surveys of the expectations of market par-

that liquidity premiums are positive and time varying.20 Note

test

can be derived for the case of short—term bills
analogous
and long—term bonds. The results were again not supportive of this
alternative ndel of overreaction.

20Edward J. Kane, "Nested Tests of Alternative Term Structure
Theories," Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1983.

—2k—

that once it is extended to include a time—varying liquidity premium,

the expectations theory becomes almost vacuous. The liquidity premium
is a deus ex rnachina. Without an explicit theory of why there is such a

premium and why it varies, it has no function but tautologically to

rescue the theory. If fluctuations in the liquidity premium are needed
to account for a large fraction of the variance in the slope of' the

yield curve, then the expectations theory fails to provide a useful

guide for understanding these fluctuations. Estimating the extent of
variations in

the

liquidity premium thus provides a way

of' evaluating

the power of the expectations theory as a vehicle for understanding the
term structure of interest rates.
A

second interpretation of the term O, is a

measure of the extent

which the nRrket fails to produce the "right" long rate given current

to

and expected future short
the

rates. In other

words, 0 is

the deviation of

nrket rate from the long rate based upon fundamentals.21 If the

variance of 0t is relatively small, we can conclude that the expectations theory is

tuations in O.
conclude

approximately correct.22 On

the other hand, if fluc-

dominate fluctuations in expectations, then we can

that the expectations theory fails to capture the primary

feature of fluctuations in long rates.

21The analysis here is parallel to that in Lawrence H. Summers, "Do

We Really Know That Financial Markets are Efficient?", NBER Working
Paper.

22Explaining a mean value significantly different from zero would
also pose problems.

—25—

The previous section derives a simple test of the expectations

theory. With the term 0t equation (10) becomes equation (15).

(15) (rt+1 —

R)

=

aUt

+

B(Rt

According to the theory, a =

—

—2

rt)

—

and B =

1.

Of course, 0 is not obser-

vable. The regressions in Table 2 thus omit this variable. Since 0 is
correlated with Re,, this omission leads to a biased estimate of B .

In

particular, the estimate of B is the following.

B + a Cov(Rt — rt,Ot)/Var(Rt —

(16)

rt)

the null hypothesis that the model is correct (a = —2, B =
and Ut is uncorrelated with rt), the estimate of B becomes:
Under

(17)

= 1 — 2 Var(Ot)!Var(Rt —

1,

rt)

Thus, so long as O. is not constant, the estimate of B is biased
downward.

Using (7) ,we can produce estimates of Var(Ut)/Var(Rt —

rt)

from

our estimates in Table 2. See Table 3. From regression (2.i.), which uses
the entire sample and corrects for heteroskedasticity, we find that

Var(Ot)/Var(Rt —

rt)

is 0.7 with a standard error of 0.21. This ratio

has a very natural interpretation. Maintaining our
is uncorrelated with short rates, equation (8)

(18) Var(Rt —

rt)

=

Var(Ot)

+

]

assumption

implies

Var(Etrt+i —

rt)

that

the following:

Table 3:

Regression:

Period:

Var(Ot)!Var(Rt —

rt)

Estiiriates of Var(Ot)/Var(Rt —

rt)

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

63:l—83:

63:1—79:2

T9:383:14

(2.1k)

63:l_83:14

0.86

0.70

1.00

0.714

(.28)

(.21)

(.77)

(.21)

Standard errors are in parentheses.

—26--

The variance of the spread between long and short rates is thus decom—
posed into variance in expected changes in short rates and Var(Ot).

This decomposition implies that expected changes in the short rate
account for only 26 percent of the variance in the spread between the

six—month and three—month Treasury bills. We can reject the null

0, while we cannot reject the null pothesis

hypothesis that Var(Ot)

that expected changes in the short rate account for none of the variance
in the spread between three—month and six—month bills.

It is important to note that, although this unexplained liquidity

premdum

e appears

central to the spread between long and short rates,

it is relatively unimportant to the level of long rates. In particular,
we

can decompose the variance in the long rates as follows:

(19) Var(Rt) = Var(6t)

+

Var(rt)

+

lVar(Etrt+i_rt)

+

Cov(rt,Etrt+i—rt)

Simple calculation demonstrates that Var(Rt) is nnich larger than

Var(Ot). In particular, Var(rt)/Var(Rt) is 1.05, while Var(Ot)/Var(Rt)
is only 0.01. Thus, although e is critical to ( — rt), its importance to understanding Rt is much less.23

CON CLU SI ONS

The data decisively reject the expectations hypothesis regarding the
term

structure of interest rates both statistically

and substantively.

23The reason for this is that both short and long rates are highly
is much greater than the
autocorrelated, and thus the variance of
For
example,
suppose
that rt followed an AR(i)
variance of (R —
process with parameter 0.8 and that the expectations tjpothesis held
would be one percent of
exactly. Then we can show that Var(Rt —

rt).

rt)

—27—

The alternative hypothesis that long rates are overly sensitive to short
rates is also decisively rejected. The expectations theory can be
modified to include an unexplained random liquidity premium, but then
expected interest rate nxvements account for only a small part of the

variance in the spread between interest rates of different maturities
reflect these changing liquidity premia or expectations that do riot

satisfy the standard postulates of rationality.

These results suggest the importance of developing idels capable

of explaining fluctuating liquidity premia.2 Presumably this would
involve in some way recognizing the heterogeneous liquidity positions of

different economic agents. They also raise important questions about

the inetary transmission mechanism. If, as usually thought, spending
decisions and capital assets valuations depend primarily on long—term

rates, nnetary policy may

operate

by changing liquidity premia as well

as by affecting short rates. Although the efficacy of open market
operations directed at shifting the yield curve, such as "Operation
Twist," is widely questioned, the issue is difficult to evaluate without

a fuller understanding of the deteminants of liquidity premia. The
failure of the expectations hypothesis does make ricre plausible the view

that the supplies of assets of different maturities influences yields.25

Var(Rt). Introducing a random liquidity premium increases both varianproportionally more.
ces equally and thus increases Var(Rt —

rt)

2)tFor work along these lines, see Zvi. Bodie, Alex Kane, and Robert
McDonald, "Why are Real Interest Rates So High?", NBER Working Paper
No. ll4l.

25For a discussion of this type of effect, see Benjamin M. Friedman,
"Financial Flow Variables and the Short—Run Determination of Long—Term
Interest Rates," Journal of
Economy 85, August 1977, pp.
661—690.

Political

—28—

it is,

however, difficult to understand why these effects would be

important in the market for three—month and six—month bills.
Our negative results provide an additional reason for uncertainty
in predicting the effects of alternative monetary and fiscal policies on

financial markets. They suggest that estimating the impact of policies
on future short—term rates

is

not likely to be a good guide

to

pre-

dicting their impact on long—term rates or asset valuations. These
effects may depend more on liquidity prernia than on expectations.

Without a satisfactory theory of liquidity premia, predicting the
effect of policies on the shape of the yield curve is almost impossible.

