NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DEVELOPMENT LEVELS DIFFER:
THE SOURCES OF DIFFERENTIAL ECONOMIC GROWTH IN A
PANEL OF HIGH AND LOW INCOME COUNTRIES
Charles R. Hulten
Anders Isaksson
Working Paper 13469
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13469

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

The views expressed in the paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position
of UNIDO or any other organization with which the authors are affiliated. We would like to thank
the participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2006, as well as Nobuya Haraguchi, for helpful comments
and suggestions. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Charles R. Hulten and Anders Isaksson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Why Development Levels Differ: The Sources of Differential Economic Growth in a Panel
of High and Low Income Countries
Charles R. Hulten and Anders Isaksson
NBER Working Paper No. 13469
October 2007
JEL No. O11,O47,O57
ABSTRACT
Average income per capita in the countries of the OECD was more than 20 times larger in 2000 than
that of the poorest countries of sub-Sahara Africa and elsewhere, and many of the latter are not only
falling behind the world leaders, but have even regressed in recent years. At the same time, other low-income
countries have shown the capacity to make dramatic improvements in income per capita. Two general
explanations have been offered to account for the observed patterns of growth. One view stresses
differences in the efficiency of production are the main source of the observed gap in output per worker.
A competing explanation reverses this conclusion and gives primary importance to capital formation.
We examine the relative importance of these two factors as an explanation of the gap using 112 countries
over the period 1970-2000. We find that differences in the efficiency of production, as measured by
relative levels of total factor productivity, are the dominant factor accounting for the difference in
development levels. We also find that the gap between rich and most poor nations is likely to persist
under prevailing rates of saving and productivity change. To check the robustness of these conclusions,
we employ different models of the growth process and different assumptions about the underlying
data. Although different models of growth produce different relative contributions of capital formation
and TFP, we conclude that the latter is the dominant source of gap. This conclusion must, however,
be qualified by the poor quality of data for many developing countries.
Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3105, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu
Anders Isaksson
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
Vienna International Centre
P.O. Box 300
A-1400 Vienna
AUSTRIA
a.isaksson@unido.org

The question of why economic growth differs among countries question has been asked
over and over again, with increasingly better data and ever more sophisticated analytical
techniques.1 However, the answer remains elusive despite the many advances and growing
insights into the problem. Average income per capita in the countries of the OECD was more
than 20 times larger in 2000 than that of the poorest countries of sub-Sahara Africa and
elsewhere, and many of the latter are not only falling behind the world leaders, but have even
regressed in recent years.2 At the same time, other low-income countries have shown the
capacity to make dramatic improvements in income per capita.
Two general explanations have been offered to account for the observed patterns of
growth. One view stresses differences in the efficiency of production are the main source of the
observed gap in output per worker, which is the primary determinant of income per capita. At
the heart of this view is the idea that improvements in technology and the organization of
production lead to higher levels of total factor productivity (TFP) in countries with institutions
that support innovation and promote economic efficiency, along with factors like favorable
geography, climate, and political stability. Lower levels of TFP are associated with institutions
that inhibit or retard innovation and the diffusion of technology, or which have unfavorable
environmental factors. In either case, differences in the level of TFP, and not differences in
capital formation, largely explain observed differences in income per capita in this view. 3
1

This question is the organizing theme of the 1998 volume by Landes “The Wealth and Poverty of Nations.” Landes
examines the historical and institutional context of the income disparities that are so apparent today, and describes
many of the theories and perceptions of the accompanied the emergence of this gap. All research on this issue owes
a great debt to the pioneering work of Simon Kuznets, both for his historical insights and for his contributions to the
development of the national accounting data that make quantitative analysis possible. The sources-of-growth
analysis emerged from this effort, greatly advanced by Solow (1957), and applied international growth by Edward F.
Denison (1967) and Maddison (1987).
2
These estimates are based on the country groupings shown in the appendix to this paper, and the data on income
per capita in derived from the Penn World Tables (Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002).
1

A competing explanation reverses this conclusion and gives primary importance to
capital formation. In this paradigm, capital is defined broadly to include human and knowledge
capital, infrastructure systems, as well as the traditional categories of structures and equipment.
TFP differences among countries are thought to be extinguished by the rapid diffusion of
knowledge, and many papers in this branch of the literature then assume that technology is the
same in every country. Some papers also treat technology growth as largely endogenous via
investments in knowledge and human capital, and stress the role of externalities. To the extent
that institutional differences play a role in explaining the income gap, they tend to be expressed
through the rate of capital formation.4
The apportionment of the income gap between capital formation and TFP is ultimately an
empirical issue. However, this issue has not proved easy to resolve, in part because of parallel
disputes about which theoretical models of growth are appropriate, the chief protagonists being
endogenous growth theory and neoclassical growth theory. There is also a question of whether it
is differences in the rate of growth of output per worker or the corresponding levels that should
be explained, and, with respect to the latter, the measurement of the TFP gap using Hicksian
versus Harrodian measures of technical change. Not surprisingly, the literature reveals that
different assumptions and methods give different results, and one goal of this paper is to examine

3

See Hall and Jones (1999) and Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) for recent examples of this approach, and for
the reviews of the literature. Bosworth and Collins (2003) also provide an extensive survey of recent work in this
area, though their own empirical work focuses on rates of growth rather than productivity levels. Contributions to
the measurement of international difference in the TFP levels were made by Dowrick and Nguyen (1989), while
Färe et al (1994) is an important paper that uses Data Envelopment Analysis to measure technical efficiency
(relative to best-practice) among countries. The translog index number approach used in this paper was developed
by Jorgenson and Nishimizu (1978), Christensen, Cummings, and Jorgenson (1981), and Caves, Christensen, and
Diewert (1982a, 1982b).
4
This literature is somewhat diverse. It includes Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992) and the other papers in what
Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) term the “Neoclassical Revival.” See, also, Gollin (2002) for an argument
supporting this view. Some of the AK endogenous growth models also fit into this category.
2

just how large the difference is for a sample of high and low income countries over the period
1970 to 2000. Our procedure is to decompose the growth rate of output per worker into its TFP
and capital-deepening components using competing methods, and compare the results. We
follow a similar procedure for the corresponding levels of output per worker, which we also
decompose into TFP and capital-deepening components. We then propose a similar
decomposition for the Solow steady-state growth model, in order to examine whether the current
gap in output per worker between rich and poor countries is likely to persist into the future given
current parameters and policies, or whether the process of convergence can be expected to
significantly narrow the gap.
The second goal of this paper is to examine the problem of data quality. If there is a
dispute about the size of the TFP gap between rich and poor countries, there can be little doubt
about the corresponding gap in the data quality. Low-income countries tend to have large nonmarket sectors for which data are problematic or non-existent, and a market sector with a large
family business component in which labor income can appear as profit. One result is an
implausibly low share of income attributed to labor in national income statistics of these
countries: labor’s share averages around 30 percent of income in the poorest countries in the
sample of this paper, compared to 50 to 60 percent in the richest. Income shares typically serve
as proxies for the corresponding output elasticities, which in turn are key determinants of the
growth path in most models in the literature (generally, the larger the share of capital, the more
important capital formation is relative to TFP as a source of growth). As a result, many
researchers reject the published data and either estimate the shares using econometric techniques
using the assumption that the shares are constant over time and the same for all countries, or
impose an external estimate of the labor and capital shares, typically two-thirds and one-third.
3

These procedures essentially imply that every country has a Cobb-Douglas production function,
which are identical up to a scalar multiple which is associated with the level of total factor
productivity (which is also assumed to be the same for all countries in some formulations).
There is a certain irony in this situation, in view the debate over the extent to which the variation
in output per worker is due to differences in technology versus differences in capital formation.
One objective of this paper is to reexamine the implications of the two-thirds/one-third share rule
and robustness of the various growth decompositions to changes in this rule.
II. Empirical Growth Modeling
The diverse models in the empirical growth literature share certain common features that
can be used to classify and compare them. One core assumption is that the production
possibilities of an economy can be characterized by a stable aggregate production function (or a
variant of the production function like the cost function or the factor demand equations). Since
many of the differences in the literature can be traced to variations on this theme, we will we
attempt to organize the various dimensions of the growth debate using this production
framework. Since the discussion is largely about fundamentals, we will use a simple graphical
exposition adopted by Solow in his seminal paper on the sources of growth.
A. The Aggregate Production Function
The aggregate production function relates aggregate output (Y) to total inputs of labor (L)
and capital (K), with allowance for improvements in the productivity of these inputs. This
formulation is so widely used that its implications have become almost invisible in the analysis
of growth. However, it is important to acknowledge any analysis based on the aggregate
production function asserts, in effect, that the complex technologies of the various firms and
sectors that make up an economy can be summarized accurately by a single functional
4

representation. The difficulty, here, is that the technical conditions for consistent aggregation are
so restrictive as to be intuitively implausible (see, for, example, Fisher (1965,1969)). Thus, the
use of the aggregate production functions can only be justified as a useful parable for organizing
the data in a way that makes economic sense, and as a framework for interpreting empirical
results. The debate in the literature over which specification of the aggregation production
function is ‘factually’ appropriate for the analysis of cross-national income differences must
therefore be viewed accordingly.
Technical change can be introduced into the aggregate production function in different
ways, but the most are variants of the model in which the production function is written as Yt =
F(Kt,Lt,t). The time index t allows the production function to shift over time in order to capture
improvements in the efficiency with which the inputs are used, and ‘technical change’ is
conventionally defined as the partial derivative of F(Kt,Lt,t) with respect to t. In the special case
in which technical change augments both input proportionately, the production function has the
Hick’s-neutral form Yt = AtF(Kt,Lt). This is the most common form used in empirical growth
accounting, following Solow (1957).
Under the assumption of constant returns to scale, the Hicksian production function can
be expressed in ‘intensive form’ as yt = AtF(kt), with the variables expressed relative to labor: yt
= Yt/Lt and kt = Kt/Lt. This form provides an explicit decomposition output per worker, yt, into
the two effects of interest, the level of total factor productivity, At , and the capital-deepening
effect, F(kt). The standard graphical representation of the production model is shown in Figure
1. This figure portrays an economy initially located at the point a on the production function
prevailing in that year (1970 in this example). An increase in the efficiency index, from A70 to
A00 in the year 2000, causes the production function to shift upward as in the figure. This is
5

often associated with the adoption of better technologies over time, but it actually represents a
costless improvement in the effectiveness with which capital and labor are used, and it is more
appropriately characterized as a change in total factor productivity (TFP).5
Output gets a further boost, in Figure 1, from an increase in the capital-labor ratio from
k70 to k00. Because of diminishing returns to capital, the production function is shown with a
concave shape. Each increment of capital per worker yields a proportionately smaller increase in
output per worker. With technology held constant, this increase is represented by the move from
point a to point b on the lower A70 branch of the production function. The total change in output
per worker in Figure 1 is from y70 to y00, that is, from point a to point c, and is the sum of the
capital deepening effect, from point a to point b, and the TFP effect, from point b to point c. The
relative size of these two effects is the point at issue in the capital versus efficiency controversy,
and Figure 1 provides a framework for interpreting and measuring the two effects.
B. Levels versus growth rates
The empirical growth literature provides two ways to implement the intuition of Figure 1,
one based on growth rates (growth accounting) and the other on levels (development
accounting). The answers can be very different, as the following example illustrates. Suppose
that there two economies, A and B, that both start with the same capital-labor ratio, k70.
However, A and B have different levels of output per worker, because they start with different
levels of productive efficiency, that is, Economy A is on the higher of the two production
functions in Figure 1 at point e, and economy B on the lower one at point a. Suppose that, from
5

TFP excludes the systematic development of technology paid for by R&D expenditures, but includes the part
resulting from R&D externalities, learning, or pure inspiration. In addition, it includes changes in organizational
efficiency, and institutional factors such as the legal and regulatory environment, geographic location, political
stability, as well as deeper cultural attitudes that affect the work place. It also sweeps in all other factors not
explicitly included in measured input: omitted variables like infrastructure capital, variations in the utilization of
capital and labor (e.g., unemployment), and measurement errors (for further discussion, see Hulten (2001)).
6

this staring point, both economies only grow by capital deepening, which proceeds at the same
rate of growth. They then move along their respective production functions at the same rate, but
neither experiences any growth in productivity (neither function shifts). In this example, the
entire growth rate in output per worker is due to capital deepening, but all the difference in the
level of output per worker is due to the different level of productive efficiency. Moreover,
economy B may become richer over time, but will never narrow the gap with economy A.
This simple example illustrates the insufficiency of studying comparative growth rates in
isolation from the corresponding levels. Studying comparative levels at a given point in time is
also insufficient, since it cannot indicate the growth dynamics and future prospects of the rich
and poor countries.
C. Econometrics versus Nonparametrics
A number of different estimation procedures have been used in empirical growth
analysis. Some studies use an econometric approach in which the production function in Figure
1 is given an explicit functional form and the parameters of that form are estimated.6 Flexible
functional forms like the translog and generalized-Leontieff forms are common in pure
production function studies (or dual cost function and factor demand studies), but are not entirely
suitable for the study of low-income countries, which tend to have both inadequate and
incomplete data. The Cobb-Douglas form Yt = A t Kt" Lt$ is often used, either explicitly or
implicitly.
Direct estimation of the production function suffers from another well-known problem.
The production function is only one equation in a larger system that determines the evolution of
6

The specification of the error structure of the production function is also an important issue in the growth and
production literature. The common approach is to assume an i.i.d. error structure, which is symmetrically distributed
around the production function. An alternative approach is to use a one-sided error term, which then allows the error
to be associated with departures from the efficiency frontier.
7

the system. Kt is determined endogenously in the larger system through the savings/investment
process, and direct estimation can lead to simultaneous equations bias. The use of instrumental
variables is one way to deal with this problem, while another approach is to estimate the reduced
form of the growth system. This second option is the used in Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992)
to estimate the parameters of a Cobb-Douglas function indirectly from the reduced form of the
Solow (1956) growth model.
However, both approaches have their drawbacks (e.g., it is difficult to find good
instruments) and nonparametric techniques provide an alternative. The two main alternatives are
the Solow (1957) growth-accounting model and the Data Envelopment Analysis approach,
although the former (as extended by Jorgenson and Griliches (1967)) is much more widely used
in the growth analysis. The Solow model provides an accounting framework, based on the
Divisia index, in which the growth rate of output per worker (yt) is equal to the growth rate of
capital per worker (kt) weighted by capital’s income share in GDP, plus a residual factor that
accounts for all the remaining growth in yt not explained by the weighted growth of kt.7 Solow
shows that, under the assumption that prices are equal to marginal costs, the income shares are
equal to output elasticities, and the share-weighted growth rate of kt is associated with the
movement along the production function from a to b in Figure 1, i.e., with capital deepening, and
the residual is associated with the shift in the production from b to c. The Solow sources-ofgrowth decomposition thus provides a method of resolving the growth rate of yt into the capitaldeepening effect and the TFP effect.

7

Since accounting data do not come in a continuous time format, the discrete time Törnqvist approximation is
typically used in the actual calculations. Growth rates are approximated by the change in the natural logarithms of
the variables, weighted by the average income share from one period to the next.
8

The non-parametric growth accounting approach was extended to the analysis of growth
rate to the analysis of the corresponding levels by Jorgenson and Nishimizu (1978), and
developed by Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (CCD, 1982a). The CCD model is a Törnqvist
index of the level of productivity in each country relative to the average of all countries. It
measures the TFP of any country, relative to the average of all countries, by comparing the
percentage deviation of yt from its international mean with the percentage mean deviation of kt,
weighted by the average of the country’s own income share and the international average.
Because deviations are computed relative the average of all countries, the frame-of-reference
problem implicit in using any one country as the base is avoided. The result is a non-parametric
decomposition of the relative gap in yt between into its TFP level and capital deepening
components, which complement the sources-of-growth rate analysis.8
D. Hicks versus Harrod neutrality.
The non-parametric approach also suffers from a form of simultaneous equations bias
implicit in the endogeneity of capital. A shift in the production function at a given capital-labor
ratio leads to an increase in output per worker and some of this extra output is saved, leading to
more output, more saving and so on. In Figure 1, the shift in technology from a to e is the
impetus to this effect, and the extra capital induced by the shift is represented by the movement
along the upper production function from e to c. This is the “induced accumulation effect”, and
it should be counted as part of TFP, not as exogenous capital formation, in assessing the
importance of TFP as a driver of growth (Hulten (1975)).

8

The non-parametric and functional form approaches are operationally separate, but Diewert (1976) shows that in
order to the Törnquist index to be exact representation of the technology, there must exist an underlying production
function of the translog form. This parallels the result by Hulten (1973) that there must be an underlying Hicksian
production function in order for the Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches index of total factor productivity to be path
independent.
9

The induced accumulation effect can be captured by measuring the shift in the production
function along a constant replacing capital-output ratio, rather than at a constant capital-labor
ratio as in the Hicksian case. This idea, which can be traced back to Harrod (1948), is
represented in Figure 1 by the movement along the pay from the origin (OP) from a to c. It is
clear from this figure that all of the growth in output is accounted for by the shift in the
production function, measured along the constant K/Y ray. However, since the Harrodian gap is
measured along a given K/Y ratio, it is not a pure measure of the efficiency with which existing
resources are used (the normal conception of productivity). Thus, it does not measure a
country’s distance to the best-practice technology frontier, nor the difference in the technological
opportunities separating two countries. It does, however, measure the consequence of a
country’s move to a higher level of technology.
The situation portrayed along the line OP in Figure 1 is one of balanced growth with
Harrod-neutral technical change. We will examine the growth implications of this case in more
detail in a subsection that follows, but the measurement implications are worth noting here.
Harrod-neutral technical change can be expressed analytically as pure labor-augmenting
technical change in the production function Yt = F(Kt,atLt). This is a restricted form of the more
general technology Yt = F(Kt,Lt,t), and is a different restriction from the Hicksian form Yt =
AtF(Kt,Lt) underlying the Solow residual.9 In the labor-augmenting case, the goal is to measure
the shift parameter at, which determines the evolution of technical efficiency.
However, it is important to recognize that technical change need not be Harrod neutral –
labor-augmenting technical change is a highly restrictive assumption in light of the IT revolution
An identification problem arises when the technology has the Cobb-Douglas form. In this case, Yt = Kt" (atLt$),
which can be written as Yt = at$ Kt" Lt$. This is equivalent in measurement terms to the Hicks-neutral form Yt = A t
Kt" Lt$. The identification problem is compounded when all countries are assumed to have a common $, the typical
case in international growth comparisons.
10
9

– and that, in any event, it is important to distinguish between the definition of technical change
and the parametric specification of technical change. The standard definition is given in terms of
the partial derivative of the production function with respect to time, holding inputs constant.
Under the Harrodian definition, the time derivative is assessed holding K/Y constant. Both
definitions can be applied to the same function, and this function need not exhibit either Hicksian
or Harrodian neutrality. For example, if the actual equilibrium point y00 were to lie somewhere
to the right of c in Figure 1, the shift in the function would still be measured along the line P
from a to c, regardless of the underlying technology. Under the Harrodian definition, the
increase in y00 beyond c would be attributed to autonomous capital formation, even though
technical change is Harrod-biased.
In practical terms, the residual estimate of TFP generated by the latter can be converted
to the Harrodian residual by diving by labor’s shares of income.10 The Hicksian and Harrodian
definitions therefore give very different results, leading to the question of which convention is
the ‘right’ one to use. The answer is that both are right, but for different questions. In order to
find out how efficiently existing labor and capital are used, the Hicksian approach is the right
way to proceed. However, if the question is about the relative importance of capital deepening
versus efficiency change as the cause of growth, the Harrodian model gives the better answer,
since capital formation is endogenous. Both are important and are complements rather than
substitutes, but it is also important not to lose sight of which question is being answered. Thus,
for example, in international comparisons of the technology gap that use the Harrodian
10

Hulten (1979) proposes a way to capture the induced accumulation effect without imposing either Hicksian of
Harrodian forms of technical change, by treating capital as an intertemporal intermediate good. The resulting
estimate of productivity change is shown to be the weighted sum of the Hicks-based residual, and to reduce to the
Harrod-based residual when technical change happens to be Harrod neutral. Empirical work based on this
framework reveals a substantial induced accumulation effect across countries (Hulten and Nishimizu, 1978).
11

convention, e.g., Klenow and Rodriquez-Care (1997) and Hall and Jones (1999), the estimated
gap should not be interpreted as a measure of the distance from the best-practice technologies of
the rich countries, since the size of it depends on the rate of saving.
E. Endogenous Growth
Capital is not the only growth factor that is endogenous. Much of technical innovation is
the result of systematic investments in education and research, and is thus part of overall
(endogenous) capital formation. Moreover, in the framework developed in Lucas (1988) and
Romer (1986), investments in education and research generate spillover externalities. These
externalities may be sufficiently large that growth becomes endogenously self-sustaining,
yielding the “AK” version of the model.11
All the growth rate of output is due to capital formation in the pure AK model. Thus, it
would appear that the sources-of growth analysis of this case would generate sources-of growth
estimates that attribute all of output per worker to capital, both in the rate of change and the level
(that is, the TFP column would contain nothing but zeroes). However, this presumes that the
extent of the externality is known. When it is not, and this is the normal case when growthaccounting data are derived from observed market transactions, it is not hard to show that the
Solow residual measures the externality component of capital’s contribution.12 The TFP residual
now registers the externality effect, and TFP is reinterpreted accordingly. By implication,
11

This can be illustrated by the Cobb-Douglas production on the preceding sections. That function can be expressed
as yt = Atktα, where α and β are the capital and labor output elasticities. In the standard neoclassical case of constant
returns to scale, α+β = 1. In the endogenous growth case, the capital variable also throws off an externality, γ, so
that yt = A0ktγ ktα. With α+γ = 1, the production function becomes yt = A0kt, a simple version of the “AK” model.
12
In the endogenous growth case, yt = A0ktγ ktα. The Solow residual is based on the formulation yt = At ktα, implying
that the TFP level index is At = A0ktγ. In other words, TFP growth is entirely a function of capital formation in a
pure endogenous growth situation. Conceptually, the apparent shift in the neoclassical production function is the
result of the spillover externality. Endogenous growth theory can therefore be regarded as supplying one rationale
for the shift in the production function, a shift that has been termed ‘a measure of our ignorance’ by Abramovitz
(1956).
12

differences in the growth rates and levels of TFP across countries are explained by externalities
and driven by capital formation.
F. Steady-State Growth Models
The decompositions discussed thus far provide a backward-looking diagnosis of
economic growth performance and its causes. Past performance is certainly a guide to the
economic future, but it is not sufficient for forecasting the path ahead. It may be the case that a
current income gap exists between two countries, but if they are converging to the same steadystate level of output per worker, their long-run economic futures will be the same. On the other
hand, if one country is on a higher level of technology than another, both now and in the future,
it will continue to be an income gap despite the convergence of kt to its steady-state path.
To study where countries are heading in the future requires a model that specifies more
that just the production function, since the evolution of capital, labor, and technology must also
be specified. The most fully developed empirical model that fits these requirements is the
Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992) – henceforth MRW – model of neoclassical steady-state
growth. MRW start with an augmented version of the Solow (1956) steady-state growth model
and assume that all countries have the same Cobb-Douglas production function. They then solve
the Solow model for its reduced form, which makes steady-state output per worker, y*, a
function of the following variables and parameters: the rate of saving in each country, σi, the
rate of growth in the labor force, ηi, the depreciation of capital, δ, and the Harrodian rate of
technical change, λ. MRW then observe that actual output per worker, yt, converges to the
steady-state value according to an error-correction process that involves the rate of convergence.
They proceed to use their reduced form equation to estimate the Cobb-Douglas output
elasticities, α and β, and the rate of convergence to steady state.
13

This approach is useful for the current purpose of decomposing steady-state output per
worker into its long-run technology and capital formation components. The left-hand variable,
y*, can be estimated for each country given estimates of σi, ηi, δ, λ, as well as estimates of the
elasticities α and β using income shares. The estimated y* is the level of output per worker
toward which the actual level at any point in time, yt, is converging. Like yt, the estimated y*
must necessarily satisfy the production constraint, y* = A0(k*)α, where k* is the steady-state
value of capital per worker. This provides a natural decomposition of y* into the two
components of interest, but one that is inherently forward looking. Moreover, the steady-state
income gaps for any two countries, or groups of countries, can be compared and the size of the
gap similarly decomposed into the two effects. We carry out both types of level comparison in
the empirical section which follows, along with a decomposition of the growth rate of y* into its
steady-state TFP and capital components.
III. Data and Empirics
The various theoretical approaches reviewed in the preceding section present a rich set of
options for empirical work. They also present a challenge, because they offer different views
and competing estimates of the same underlying growth process. We will explore, in this
section, just how much the competing estimates differ. We start with the neoclassical sourcesof-growth model and the Hicksian convention for measuring TFP. This is by far the most
common approach in the empirical growth literature and the one with the largest body of results.
A. The Data Sources and Data Problems
The sources-of-growth framework requires times series data on real output, labor input,
capital stocks, and labor’s share of income. These data are constructed for a total of 112
countries over the period 1970-2000. The list of countries, along with selected statistics, is
14

shown in Table A.1 of the Data Appendix. In order to facilitate comparison, these countries are
grouped into six ‘meta’ countries, mainly based on the World Bank classification by income per
capita (not output per worker, which is highly correlated but not identical). The 40 Low Income
countries are located in Africa, with eight exceptions. The 22 Lower-Middle Income countries
are developing economies spread throughout the world, as are the 17 Upper-Middle Income
countries. The 24 High-Income countries are basically those of the OECD. In addition, we have
constructed two small meta-countries: four “Old Tigers” (Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore,
and Taiwan), and five “New Tigers” (China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand).
Our principal data source is the Penn World Tables 6.1 (Heston, Summers and Aten,
2002), from which real GDP (chain weighted) and real investment are obtained (both in power
purchasing parity 1996 US dollars), as well as our labor force estimates. Real investment is used
to compute the capital stock in international prices (details of this computation are given in the
Appendix).13, 14
The PWT data yield the estimates of yt and kt required by the sources-of-growth model.
The final piece of data used in the paper, the country labor income shares, β, can be obtained
from the United Nations Statistical Yearbook (various issues) and is simply computed as

13

In the few cases where there were missing end years to the data series we have used the growth rate of real GDP
in US$, published in the World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2004, and extrapolated our data based on
these. For a more thorough discussion of the data and adjustments made to the data on labor force, we refer the
reader to Isaksson (2007).
14
Bosworth and Collins (2003) argue that capital goods valued in national prices are a better reflection of the
capital costs faced by each country. They show that PPP-based capital stocks estimates have higher growth rates
than the corresponding estimates using national prices, and that the former thus lead to an understatement of the TFP
performance of poor countries. As a result, we constructed estimates based on national prices obtained from World
Development Indicators (World Bank, 2004), for the 83 (out of 112) countries that had data for this comparison.
The results for these two versions of capital are shown in Table A2 of the Appendix, for our six meta countries.
While Table A2 generally supports the findings of Bosworth and Collins, the differences are not large enough to
alter the results based on the more widely accepted PPP approach. The main difference arises in the Low Income
meta country, where TFP growth does come to dominate. However, all of the growth rates for this case are quite
close to zero. We have therefore opted to use the conventional PPP approach in this paper, but note that this is yet
another area where data issues are importance, and where more work needs to be done.
15

Compensation to Employees in GDP. As noted in the introduction, these estimates of are
suspiciously low, ranging from 0.30 for the Low Income countries to 0.55 in the High Income
(see Figure A.2). As noted in the introduction, this situation undoubtedly reflects an undercount
of the income accruing to labor, especially in Low Income countries where there are many selfemployed and family workers, and many undocumented workers in the non-market economy.
This has led a number of researchers to work with an externally imposed estimate of the factor
shares, and a labor share of two-thirds and capital share of one-third is the typically employed.
There is evidence to support this assumption, but also evidence against it. In a recent paper,
Rodriguez and Ortega (2006) find that capital’s income share in manufacturing industry declines
by 6.25 percentage points for each log-point increase in GDP per capita.15 We will not attempt
to sort out this issue, but instead present three sets of sources-of-growth estimates, one set
calculated with a two-thirds labor share, another based on the average measured share, and a
third using the Rodriguez-Ortega rule.
B. Sources-of-Growth Estimates
These estimates of the conventional Solow residual are shown in Tables 1a, 1b, and1c,
respectively. The first column of Table 1a, which uses the two thirds/one third share rule as the
basis for comparison, indicates that output per worker grew strongly over the period 1970 to
2000 in the High Income countries, but was close to zero in the Low Income group. The Lower
Middle and Upper Middle Income meta countries display a positive growth experience, but still
lag the growth rate of High Income leader. The Old and New Tigers, on the other hand,
outperformed the leader in terms of growth. However, it is also the case that they started from a
lower level of output per worker.
15

By contrast, Duffy and Papageorgiou (2000) find that the elasticity of substitution – and hence the labor share –
falls with income.
16

The second and third columns of Table 1a show the sources-of-growth decomposition of
the growth rate of output per worker into its capital-deepening and TFP components. It is
apparent that capital deepening is the predominant source of growth in the Low, Lower Middle,
and Upper Middle Income countries, and that it accounts for about half of the growth in output
per worker in the High Income. The Tiger countries are the exception to this pattern with TFP as
the main source of growth, but not by a very large margin. These estimate speak directly to the
question posed in Figure 1 about the relative magnitudes of the growth rates associated with the
effects (a to b) and (b to c): capital deepening, not TFP, is the dominant effect in the poorer lowgrowth countries, but this changes as the growth rate of output per worker rises. These results
also speak to the debate whether capital deepening or productivity change is the main driver of
growth (the ‘perspiration versus inspiration’ issue, as Krugman (1994) puts it). The estimates of
Table 1a suggest that both perspiration and inspiration have important roles in a successful
program of economic development. The finding that TFP grew rapidly in the (Old) Tigers stands
in stark contrast to Young (1992, 1995), who argued that the contribution of TFP was only a
negligible part of the East Asian miracle.
However, there is an important caveat. A comparison of the Low Income and High
Income cases indicates that nearly sixty percent of the cross-sectional difference in the growth
rate of yt between the high income meta country and the others is due to difference in TFP
growth rates. In other words, capital deepening is the dominant source of growth over time in all
but the most rapidly growing countries, but TFP is a more important factor in explaining crosssectional differences in growth performance. These results are very consistent with the estimates
of Bosworth and Collins (2003), who use a similar set of assumptions and methods.

17

The results shown in Table 1b replay Table 1a using the average measured share of labor
income, β, as estimated from the data (see Table 6). Since the share in the sources-of-growth
model is a surrogate for the associated output elasticity, the shift to the measured β greatly
decreases the output elasticity of labor and increases that of capital, thereby giving greater
weight to the growth rate of kt and strengthening the capital-deepening effect. In the case of
Low Income countries, for example, the increase in the capital elasticity is from 0.33 to 0.71, and
the effect of this change is evident in the second and third columns of Table 1b. Capital
deepening is now the overwhelmingly dominant source of growth over time in all the meta
countries, although TFP is a still an important factor in explaining cross-sectional differences in
growth performance, with the exception of the most rapidly growing countries.
The estimates of Table 1c offer a view of the sources of growth that is intermediate
between the fixed 1/3-2/3 shares of Table 1a and the average measured labor shares of Table 1b.
The shares in this case are based on the Rodriguez and Ortega (2006) finding that capital’s
income share in manufacturing industry declines by 6.25 percentage points for each log-point
increase in GDP per capita. We apply this factor to the base value of capital’s share in the High
Income meta country, which we take to be 0.67. Because the Rodriguez-Ortega adjustment
generally increases capital’s weight, capital deepening is now the leading source of growth in
every meta country. However, estimates are much closer to those of Table 1a than 1b, and a
major change occurs only in the New Tiger countries.
These three tables are based on estimates of capital stock derived using PPP price
deflators. The Bosworth-Collins warning about the sensitivity of the results to the choice of
price deflator bears repeating here. The use of national price deflators does give a somewhat

18

different view of the problem, and this should be borne in mind when interpreting the results.
This is one more data issue to which more attention needs to be paid.
C. The Sources of Development Estimates
Tables 1a, 1b, and 1c approach the analysis of growth by examining the rate of growth of
yt and the fraction explained by capital deepening and TFP. The sources-of-development
analysis examines the parallel issue about the corresponding levels: what fraction of the level of
yt is explained by the level of the capital-deepening effect and the TFP effects, that is, what is the
actual magnitude of the distances (a to b) and (b to c) in Figure 1, and how much of the overall
gap (a to c) do they explain?
Recall, here, the example in which economies A and B grow by capital deepening alone,
but one starts at a higher level of TFP. In that example, the entire growth rate in output per
worker is due to capital deepening, but all the difference in the level of output per worker is due
to the different level of productive efficiency. Table 2, which is based on the conventional
income shares, 1/3-2/3, suggests that a weaker form of this phenomenon occurs for many of the
countries in our sample. The first column of this table reports the level of output per worker in
the first five meta countries relative to the level of the High Income countries. This column
conveys the same sense of the gap between rich and poor countries seen in Figure 2, which plots
the paths of yt over time for the four largest groups of countries and the Tigers. The second
column of Table 2 shows the relative levels of TFP, based on Caves, Christensen, and Diewert
(1982a). It is clear from this table that the level of TFP in the first five meta countries is
significantly below that of the High Income countries, and, while similar in pattern, are
somewhat more compressed than the relative levels of output per worker. The latter is 16 times
greater in the High Income countries compared to the Low, while the gap in productive
19

efficiency is ‘only’ a factor of 5. Figure 2 displays the time series trends that correspond to
column 2. It reveals the same general magnitude as the relative TFP estimates of Table 2, and
also indicates that the gap has widened over time for the Low, Lower Middle, and Upper Middle
countries, but that the Tiger countries (Old and New) are narrowing the gap in the relative TFP
level.
The last three columns of Table 2 decompose the level of output per worker into its
capital-deepening and TFP components. This decomposition is based on the assumption that the
production function has the simple constant-returns Cobb-Douglas form yt = Atkt(1-β) (again, this
is implicit in the assumption of a constant value of the labor share, β). The variable At is the
basis for TFP in the Solow model, and the level of TFP can thus be estimated by computing the
ratio yt/kt(1-β). This ‘CD’ index is not necessarily equivalent to the CCD index, but when the β
shares have the same value for each country, and the Cobb-Douglas index is normalized to the
High Income countries, it gives the same values as the CCD index (thus, the numbers in columns
2 and 3 are identical).
To assess the relative importance of capital deepening and TFP on the level of
(unnormalized) output per worker, the logarithm yt is divided between the logarithms of At and
k t(1-β). This decomposition is shown in the last three columns of Table 2, where it is apparent
that the TFP is the predominant factor explaining the level of output per worker. Moreover, a
little more than half of the cross-sectional variation among countries is explained by the
difference in the level of TFP. This is the disconnect between the growth-rate analysis of Table
1a and the level analysis of Table 2 noted above. For example, TFP growth explains none of the
growth rate in output per worker in the Low Income meta country, but the corresponding TFP
level explains 66% of the level of output per worker. For the Lower and Upper Middle meta
20

countries, these numbers are 40% and 65%, and for the High Income case, they are 49% and
64%. This disconnect is diminished, but not absent, in the high growth Tiger meta countries.
In other words, Table 1a suggests that their growth is propelled more by capital
deepening rather than TFP growth, but Table 2 indicates that the main factor in explaining the
large gap in output per worker is the persistently low levels of TFP in these countries (compare,
also, Figures 2 and 3). Not all of the 67 countries in the Low, Lower Middle, and Upper Middle
income meta groups are subject to this pattern. And, significantly, the Tiger countries display a
convergence toward the High Income case, in both output per worker and in TFP levels, powered
in part by a rapid rate of TFP growth. This pattern suggests that, in the large, successful
development programs are powered by an acceleration in TFP growth relative to that of the High
Income leaders, and that the gap in TFP levels in thereby narrowed. An acceleration in capital
per worker is also an important (albeit lesser) factor. Whether the former drives the latter, as in
the Harrodian view, or vice versa, as in the endogenous growth view, cannot be learned from
sources-of-growth estimates, but whatever the dynamics associated with TFP growth and levels,
the estimates of Tables 1a and 2 assign a centrally important role to measured TFP.
D. Empirical Results from the Harrodian and Endogenous Technology Approaches
The Harrodian version of the growth decomposition is shown in the last two columns of
Tables 1a-1c. In practical terms, Harrodian TFP in column 5 is computed by dividing the
corresponding Hicksian estimate in column 3 by labor’s income share. This procedure results in
a larger effect attributed to productivity, since part of the growth kt (the induced accumulation) is
reassigned to TFP. This result carries over from growth rates to levels, which are not shown,
since in the common-share Cobb-Douglas case, the Harrodian levels are a simple power
transformation (based on $) of the Hicksian level estimates of Table 2.
21

Endogenous growth theory implies a very different sources-of-growth decomposition.
Where the Harrodian approach reallocates the induced-accumulation part of capital formation to
TFP growth, the endogenous growth view reallocates the capital-induced part of TFP growth to
capital formation. In the most extreme form, all of TFP growth is endogenous. If additional
(endogenous growth) columns were added to Tables 1a, 1b, and 1c, with the capital-deepening
effect shown in a sixth column and the TFP effect in a seventh, the new column 6 would equal
the entire growth rate of output per worker, and the column 7 would contain nothing but zeroes.
Since this decomposition is essentially trivial, from an expositional standpoint, it is not included
in the various tables.
IV. The Predictions of Growth Theory
The insights offered in the preceding sections about the growth process and the income
gap are inherently retrospective. They are based on the experience of past decades, but do not
answer to the following question: if past trends persist into the future, will they be enough to lift
a poor nation out of poverty? Are the trends in TFP and capital formation such that the poorest
countries will ultimately converge to the levels achieved by the rich and thereby extinguish the
income gap? These questions are inherently about future outcomes, and the answers require a
fully-specified model of growth that takes into account the full range of factors that determine
the future growth path.
A. Decompositions Based on Growth Models
We have already encountered the two main contenders for this role: the endogenous
growth model and the neoclassical model of steady-state growth. The growth dynamics of the
former stress the role the capital formation and, in its AK form, predicts that those countries that
are able to build an initial lead in capital per worker will be able to exploit the advantage and pull
22

away from the others. This prediction accords well with the pattern seen in Figure 2, and implies
a fairly bleak outlook for the growth of the lower income countries. However, it does not fit well
with the experience of ‘transition’ economies like the Tigers that are able to accelerate growth by
a combination of increased capital formation and more importantly, according to Table 1a, by
even stronger TFP growth.
The neoclassical model, as interpreted by MRW (1992), does allow for some countries to
catch up to the leaders while others stagnate. MRW solve for the reduced form of the Solow
steady-state model when the technology of every country has the same Cobb-Douglas form and
output elasticities. They use the equation for steady-state output per worker, adjusted to allow
convergence to steady-state, to estimate the elasticities. In this paper, we take this equation to
estimate steady-state output per worker for each meta country, y*, by using the ‘two-thirds/onethird’ rule for the income share as an estimate of the Cobb-Douglas elasticities, and by
estimating the other variables in the reduced form: the investment rate, σ, the rate labor force
growth, η, the rate of depreciation, δ, the Harrodian rate of technical change, λ, and the level of
TFP in the comparison year 2000, A2000.
The MRW model assumes the Cobb-Douglas form with constant returns to scale, so that
y*t = Atk*t(1-β). The steady-state solution for y* in each of the six meta countries is shown in the
first column of Table 3 for the last year in our sample, 2000. The actual level of output per
worker in 2000 is shown for comparison in the adjacent column. The salient result is that there
is a huge gap in output per worker between the Low and High Income countries (a ratio of 17 to1
in 2000), and this gap is set to persist into the indefinite future. Moreover, this is true even if the
Low Income meta country’s rate of productivity growth λ were to improve to the rate prevailing
in the High Income case. In fact, the Low Income country would have to improve the growth rate
23

of TFP to that of the High Income country just to maintain the year 2000 gap. If the λ’s shown
in last column of Table 1a persist into the future, the gap will widen. Similar remarks apply, to a
lesser extent, for the Lower Middle and Upper Middle Income meta countries. The steady-state
picture is only bright for the Old Tiger countries, whose y*2000 is around one- half of the High
Income amount, and whose λ is larger.
The sources of the gap are examined in Table 4, which decomposes the gap between
steady-state output per worker in the rich and poor countries into the separate contributions of
capital-deepening and TFP. This analysis is parallel to the sources-of-development level
decomposition shown in Table 2, but the novelty here is that the decomposition refers to the
long-run equilibrium contributions of the two sources when capital formation is endogenous
(relative to a given rate of saving).
The sources of the income gap are further examined in Table 4. The difference in the
level of steady-state output per worker is in the High Income meta country (H) compared to the
Low Income (L) country is (y*H - y*L), which can be decomposed into two effects. The first is
the gap (y*L - yf), the distance between the L’s steady-state, y*L, and the point on its own
production function that economy L would attain if it operated with the saving and population
growth parameters rather than its own parameters, yf. The second component of the
decomposition is the distance between the two production functions, (yf - y*L), as measured in
the Harrodian way along the high income growth path. This decomposes the steady-state output
per worker gap into capital-deepening and efficiency effects based on the saving and population
growth parameters of the high income country.
A look at column 1 of Table 4 shows the dollar magnitude of the total gap (y*H - y*L) for
each of the meta countries in the year 2000, while the next columns gives capital-deepening, the
24

difference (yf - y*L), and technology effects, (y*H - yf). Several conclusions emerge from these
estimates. First, the large gap between the High Income countries and the others evident in
Figure 2 appears to be a long-run situation as long as the basic parameters of growth remain
unchanged (the exception here, as before, is the Tiger countries). Second, the gap in output per
worker is largely explained by the technology gap, not differences in the propensity to
accumulate capital relative to the growing labor force (this is also apparent in the first two
columns of Table 5, which express the Table 4 decomposition in percentage terms). Finally, the
forward-looking role played by TFP is even stronger than the role suggested by Figure 3.
However, this result must be qualified by the fact that the decomposition is not unique.
We could equally decompose the steady-state output per worker gap into capital-deepening and
efficiency effects based on the saving and population growth parameters of the low income
country. The third and fourth columns of Table 5 show the splits for these alternative paths (the
‘Actual Income Path” for each country). The alternative results are quite different, suggesting a
high degree of path dependence, and to arrive at a single index, the average values for the two
cases are shown in the last two columns of the table. The results support the overall conclusion
that the TFP effect is still the most important source for explaining the gap (y*H - y*L), as well as
the conclusion that the gap looks set to persist into the future.
B. Steady-State Sources-of-Growth Estimates
Tables 4 and 5 decompose the steady-state levels of output per worker into its long-run
capital and Harrodian TFP components. For the sake of completeness, we now return to Table
1a and add the sources-of-growth rates decomposition implied by the steady-state framework.
The steady-state analogue to Table 1a can be calculated from the basic parameters and estimates
of the steady-state growth, since, along the steady-state path, output per worker, y*, and capital
25

per worker, k*, grow at the same rate λ. In other words, Harrodian productivity is the sole
driver of the steady-state growth in output per worker in the neoclassical model. Thus, the first
column of a steady-state analogue to Table 1a would record the λ appropriate for each country,
and Harrodian decomposition in the fourth and fifth columns would have the values 0 (for the
capital-deepening effect) and λ (for the TFP effect), since all capital formation is induced
accumulation and is assigned to TFP. This represents the true picture of growth, conditional on
accepting the validity of the experiment with the neoclassical model.
In the steady-state version of the standard sources-of-growth model developed by Solow,
the growth rate of output per worker is y* and the capital-deepening effect is (1- β) k*, and the
TFP effect is the residual y* - (1- β) k*. This implies that the Hicksian decomposition would
record (1- β)λ for the capital effect and βλ for the TFP contribution. These are not the correct
numbers with which to assess the relative contribution of each effect, and this establishes the fact
the Solow residual growth model, so widely used in empirical growth theory, is asymptotically
biased. Again, this bias is the counterpart of the simultaneous equations bias arising is
econometrics from the endogeneity of capital.
V. Conclusion
Our analysis points to the persistently low levels of technological efficiency as the
proximate source of the gap between the rich and poorer countries. In this, we confirm many
other studies of this issue. We have not attempted to explain the causes of the technology gap,
be they due to institutional and environmental factors, the externalities associated with capital
formation, or whatever. We have chosen, instead, to examine the prior issue of how to measure
the gap, and have compared different techniques and assumptions using a common set of data.
This examination has led us to the following conclusions.
26

First, the conventional analysis of differential growth rates needs to be supplemented by a
parallel analysis of growth levels. Capital deepening explains more than half of the growth rate
of output per worker in a majority of countries, while TFP explains more than half of the
corresponding gap. Only in the rapid-growth Tiger countries does TFP growth outweigh capital
formation, and then only by a small margin.
Second, the Hicks and Harrod ways of measuring the relative levels of the technology
gap are both relevant, but they are relevant for answering different questions. The former
measures the extra output that could be obtained from the current quantities of capital and labor
by moving to a higher level of TFP, while the latter includes the additional output arising from
the savings generated by the gain in productive efficiency. The latter is larger and is relevant
from understanding the overall impact of TFP, but if the goal is to understand the causes of a low
level of productive efficiency, per se, the Hicksian approach seems better suited to the task.
Third, in the endogenous growth approach, the induced-technology effect appears as a
shift in the production function in the conventional Hicks-Solow measurement framework, so a
positive gap in measured TFP is not inconsistent with the endogenous growth model. Indeed,
endogenous growth effects are among the factors than can be adduced to explain the gap.
Fourth, the measurement procedures used in the literature to measure the income and
technology gaps are inherently backward looking. A large income gap between rich and poor
countries is less of a concern if the growth paths of the two will converge in the future. This can
only be learned from a modeling exercise that endogenizes the growth path, rather than taking
the sources of growth as being exogenously determined as in the Solow residual model. We use
the neoclassical model for this purpose, and develop a steady-state decomposition of output per
worker into capital deepening and Harrodian-TFP components. We find that this forward27

looking model predicts that the large gap will not close in the future for most of the developing
countries unless they are able to significantly improve both the growth rates of the capital per
worker and TFP. This conclusion must be tempered by the highly abstract nature of the
neoclassical growth model, but the size of the predicted long-run gaps are suggestive of the
potential magnitude of future income gaps. The steady-state analysis is also useful in pointing
out the existence of an asymptotic bias in the conventional Solow approach to the sources of
growth.
Finally, it is important to emphasize, once again, that there are significant gaps in the
data. The problem is most apparent in the implausibly low labor shares implied by national
accounting data for lower income countries, and the resulting practice of imposing a common
two-thirds share on all countries. The output elasticities of capital and labor, as proxied by the
share, are a key determinant of output growth, and the consequences of using different measures
of the labor share are evident in the estimates of Tables 1a, 1b, and 1c of this paper. It is
intellectually disturbing that our understanding of the growth process should rest on such shaky
data foundations. And, data issues are by no means limited to the problem with measured
income shares. The accuracy of capital measures is also an issue, particularly with the
Bosworth-Collins point about the large difference that arises when national prices are substitutes
for PPP price. It would be well, in closing, to recall the words of Zvi Griliches, who observed:
“We [economists] ourselves do not put enough emphasis on the value of data and data
collection in our training of graduate students and in the reward structure of our profession. It is
the preparation skill of the chef that catches the professional eye, not the quality of the materials
in the meal, or the effort that went into procuring them.” (AER 1994)

28

References
Abramovitz, Moses, "Resource and Output Trends in the United States since 1870," American
Economic Review, 46, 2, May 1956, 5-23.
Bosworth, Barry P., and Susan M. Collins, "The Empirics of Growth: An Update," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: 2, 2003, 113-206.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen, and W. Erwin Diewert, "Multilateral Comparisons of
Output, Input, and Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers," Economic Journal,
92, March 1982a, 73-86.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen, and W. Erwin Diewert, "The Economic Theory of
Index Numbers and the Measurement of Input, Output, and Productivity," Econometrica,
50, 6, November 1982b, 1393-1414.
Christensen, Laurits R., Diane Cummings, and Dale W. Jorgenson, "Relative Productivity
Levels, 1947-1973: An International Comparison," European Economic Review, 16,
1981, 61-94.
Denison, Edward F., Why Growth Rates Differ: Postwar Experiences in Nine Western
Countries, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1967.
Diewert, W. Erwin, "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers," Journal of Econometrics, 4, 1976,
115-145.
Dowrick Steven and Duc-Tho Nguyen, "OECD Comparative Economic Growth 1950-85:
Catch-up and Convergence," American Economic Review, 79(5), December 1989, 10101030.
Duffy, John and Chris Papageorgiou, "A Cross-Country Empirical Investigation of the
Aggregate Production Function Specification,” Journal of Economic Growth, 5(1), 87120, March 2000.
Fisher, Franklin, "Embodied Technical Change and the Existence of an Aggregate Capital
Stock," Review of Economic Studies, 1965, 326-388.
Fisher, Franklin, “The Existence of Aggregate Production Functions.” The Irving Fisher
Lecture at the Econometric Society Meetings, Amsterdam, September 1968;
Econometrica, Vol. 37, No. 4, October 1969, pp. 553–577.
Färe, Rolf, Shawna Grosskopf, Mary Norris, and Zhongyang Zhang, "Productivity Growth,
Technical Progress, and Efficiency Change in Industrialized Countries," American
Economic Review, 84, 1, March 1994, 66-83.

29

Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 2002,
458-74.
Griliches , Zvi, "Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint," American Economic Review, 84,
1, March 1994, 1-23.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
Per Worker Than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1), 1999, 83- 116.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for
International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002.
Hulten, Charles R., "Technical Change and the Reproducibility of Capital," American Economic
Review, 65, 5, December 1975, 956-965.
Hulten, Charles R., "On the 'Importance' of Productivity Change," American Economic Review,
69, 1979, 126-136.
Hulten, Charles R., "Total Factor Productivity: A Short Biography," in New Developments in
Productivity Analysis, Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J. Harper, eds.,
Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 63, The University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, 2001, pp. 1-47.
Isaksson, Anders, “World Productivity Database”, mimeograph, Vienna: UNIDO. January 2007.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches, "The Explanation of Productivity Change," Review of
Economic Studies, 34, July 1967, 349-83.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Mieko Nishimizu, “U.S. and Japanese Economic Growth, 19521974. An International Comparison.” Economic Journal, December, 1978, 707-726.
Klenow, Peter, and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” In National Bureau of Economic Research
Macroeconomics Annual 1997, edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997, 73-103.
Krugman, Paul, "The Myth of Asia's Miracle," Foreign Affairs, 73, 6, November/December,
1994, 62-77.
Landes, David S., The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Countries are So Rich and
Some So Poor, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 1998.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 22, 1988, 3-42.
30

Maddison, Angus, "Growth and Slowdown in Advanced Capitalist Economies: Techniques and
Quantitative Assessment," Journal of Economic Literature, 25, 2, June 1987, 649-698.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, "Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth, Harvard University," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
1992, 407-437.
Nishimizu, Mieko and Charles Hulten, “The Sources of Japanese Economic Growth,
1955-71,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 60(3), 1978, 351-361.
Rodriguez, Francisco and Daniel Ortega, “Are Capital Shares Higher in Poor Countries?
Evidence from Industrial Surveys,” Wesleyan Economics Working Papers, No: 2006-023,
2006.
Romer, Paul M., “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 94(5), 1986, 1002-1052.
Solow, Robert M., “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70, 1956, February, 65-94.
Solow, Robert M., “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 39, 1957, 312-320.
United Nations, National Accounts Statistics: Main Aggregates and Detailed Tables, Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division, United Nations, New York, various
years.
Young, Alwyn, "A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in
Hong Kong and Singapore, In Blanchard, O.J., and S. Fisher, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1992, Cambridge Mass: MIT Press, 1992, 13-54.
--------, “Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian
Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1995, 641-680.
World Bank, World Development Indicators 2004, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2004.

31

TABLE 1a
SOURCES OF GROWTH
COMMON SHARES
1970-2000
_________________________________________________________________
CONVENTIONAL (HICKS)
HARROD
_________________________________________________________________
META
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
COUNTRY
Y/L
K/L
TFP
K/L
TFP
__________________________________________________________________
Low Income
0.17%
0.25%
-0.07%
0.28%
-0.11%
Low-Middle
1.01%
0.61%
0.40%
0.41%
0.60%
Upper-Middle
0.99%
0.59%
0.40%
0.39%
0.60%
New Tigers
3.79%
1.70%
2.09%
0.68%
3.12%
Old Tigers
4.89%
2.37%
2.52%
1.13%
3.76%
High
1.95%
1.00%
0.95%
0.53%
1.42%
_________________________________________________________________
AAGR = Average Annual Growth Rate
TABLE 1 b
SOURCES OF GROWTH
1970-2000
MEASURED SHARES
______________________________________________________________
CONVENTIONAL (HICKS)
HARROD
______________________________________________________________
META
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
COUNTRY
Y/L
K/L
TFP
K/L
TFP
______________________________________________________________
Low Income
0.17%
0.52%
-0.35%
1.37%
-1.19%
Low-Middle
1.01%
1.17%
-0.16%
1.45% -0.44%
Upper-Middle
0.99%
1.05%
-0.06%
1.14%
-0.15%
New Tigers
3.79%
3.53%
0.26%
2.97%
0.83%
Old Tigers
4.89%
3.92%
0.97%
2.76%
2.13%
High
1.95%
1.36%
0.58%
0.88%
1.07%
______________________________________________________________
AAGR = Average Annual Growth Rate
32

TABLE 1c
SOURCES OF GROWTH
1970-2000
RODRIGUEZ-ORTEGA SHARES
______________________________________________________________
CONVENTIONAL (HICKS)
HARROD
______________________________________________________________
META
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
AAGR
COUNTRY
Y/L
K/L
TFP
K/L
TFP
______________________________________________________________
Low Income
0.17%
0.38%
-0.20%
0.59%
-0.41%
Low-Middle
1.01%
0.79%
0.22%
0.62%
0.39%
Upper-Middle
0.99%
0.68%
0.31%
0.49%
0.50%
New Tigers
3.79%
2.49%
1.31%
1.27%
2.52%
Old Tigers
4.89%
2.67%
2.23%
1.36%
3.54%
High
1.95%
1.00%
0.95%
0.53%
1.42%
______________________________________________________________
AAGR = Average Annual Growth Rate

TABLE 2
LEVELS OF GROWTH AND PRODUCTIVITY
1970-2000
COMMON SHARES
______________________________________________________________
META
LEVEL
LEVEL
LEVEL
LOG
LOG
LOG
COUNTRY
Y/L
CCD-TFP CD-TFP
Y/L
K/L
TFP
______________________________________________________________
Low Income
6.05%
19.84%
19.84%
7.76
2.61
5.15
Low-Middle
22.46%
43.41%
43.41%
9.08
3.14
5.93
Upper-Middle
44.47%
63.30%
63.30%
9.76
3.45
6.31
New Tigers
8.50%
23.57%
23.57%
8.09
2.78
5.31
Old Tigers
49.53%
67.24%
67.24%
9.83
3.48
6.35
High
100.00% 100.00%
100.00%
10.57
3.81
6.77
______________________________________________________________

33

TABLE 3
COMPARISON OF STEADY-STATE AND ACTUAL
LEVELS OF OUTPUT PER WORKER, 2000
COMMON SHARES
______________________________________________________________
STEADY
REMAINING
META
STATE
ACTUAL
GAP
COUNTRY
y*
y
(y*-y)/y*
______________________________________________________________
Low Income
$2,452
$2,340
5%
Low-Middle
$9,924
$8,811
11%
Upper-Middle
$18,617
$17,402
7%
New Tigers
$7,059
$3,531
51%
Old Tigers
$26,383
$20,905
23%
High
$48,538
$39,954
18%
______________________________________________________________

TABLE 4
DECOMPOSITION OF STEADY-STATE OUTPUT GAPS
INTO CAPITAL-DEEPENING AND TFP COMPONENTS
ALONG HIGH-INCOME GROWTH PATH
COMMON SHARES, 2000
______________________________________________________________
CAPITALHARROD
TOTAL
DEEPENING
TFP
META
GAP
GAP
GAP
(y*H – y*if)
(y*if – y*i)
COUNTRY
(y*H – y*i)
______________________________________________________________
Low Income
$56,783
$1,743
$55,040
Low-Middle
$48,393
$4,570
$43,823
Upper-Middle
$38,926
$5,282
$33,644
New Tigers
$47,648
$10
$47,639
Old Tigers
$16,029
$36
$15,993
High
$0
$0
$0
______________________________________________________________
34

TABLE 5
PERCENTAGE DECOMPOSITION OF STEADY-STATE INCOME GAPS
INTO CAPITAL-DEEPENING AND TFP COMPONENTS
WITH DIFFERENT GROWTH PATHS
COMMON SHARES, 2000
______________________________________________________________
HIGH INCOME ACTUAL INCOME
AVERAGE
PATH
PATH
PATH
META
%
%
%
%
%
%
COUNTRY
CAPITAL TFP
CAPITAL TFP
CAPITAL TFP
______________________________________________________________
Low Income
3%
97%
44%
56%
23% 77%
Low-Middle
9%
91%
36%
64%
23% 77%
Upper-Middle
14%
86%
31%
69%
23%
77%
New Tigers
0%
100%
0% 100%
0% 100%
Old Tigers
0%
100%
0% 100%
0% 100%
______________________________________________________________
TABLE 6
COMPARISON OF STEADY-STATE PARAMETERS
AVERAGE VALUES 1970-2000
______________________________________________________________________
META
COUNTRY

LABOR'S
SAVING
LABOR
POPULATION
SHARE
RATE
GROWTH GROWTH
βMEASURED βR-O
σ
η
βSTD
______________________________________________________________________
Low Income
0.667
0.294
0.493
0.093
0.024
0.026
Low-Middle
0.667
0.367
0.576
0.144
0.027
0.024
Upper-Middle 0.667
0.412
0.618
0.178
0.025
0.020
New Tigers
0.667
0.316
0.518
0.281
0.021
0.017
Old Tigers
0.667
0.455
0.630
0.281
0.024
0.013
High
0.667
0.548
0.667
0.231
0.011
0.007
______________________________________________________________________
βSTD = Standard approach; βMEASURED = As reported; βR-O = As implied by Rodriguez-Ortega
(2006)
35

Figure 1. Output per Worker, Level of TFP and Capital-deepening effect

OUTPUT/LABOR (y)
P
y
00

c

y = A00f(k)

b

y = A f(k)

e
y'
00
y
70

70

a
d

k

70

k

00

36

CAPITAL/LABOR (k)

Figure 2. Output per Worker, by Meta Country, 1970-2000

50000
40000
30000
20000
10000

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

0
19
70

Output per Worker, in PPP$

60000

Year
LOW

LOW-MID

UPPER-MID

TIGER OLD

37

HIGH

TIGER NEW

Figure 3. TFP Levels Relative to High Income, CCD Method, OECD=1.00
0.900
0.800

0.600
0.500
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100

LOW

LOW-MID

T IGER OLD

T IGER NEW

38

UPPER-MID

0

8

6

Ye ar

20
0

19
9

2

0

8

4

19
9

19
9

19
9

19
9

6

19
8

2

0

8

6

4

19
8

19
8

19
8

19
8

19
7

19
7

2

4
19
7

19
7

0

0.000
19
7

Relative TFP Index

0.700

Data Appendix
Table A.1. Basic Statistics and Countries, Organized by Meta Country
HIGH INCOME
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA
AVERAGE

DPOP
1970-2000
0.013
0.003
0.002
0.012
0.008
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.010
0.008
0.024
0.002
0.007
0.008
0.006
0.010
0.005
0.004
0.005
0.003
0.004
0.002
0.010
0.007

Y/L
1970
34747
26736
32427
34692
12603
33218
23899
28960
21755
25205
19079
24021
28883
18098
39277
33112
35083
27024
14823
23675
31990
43346
26272
38432
29108

Y/L
2000
51568
50591
56752
52295
39218
48255
47281
49136
33783
45055
65054
38762
53949
38737
103133
52230
39360
54032
35008
44113
45453
47412
44649
64537
52211

LOW INCOME (up to YPOP 3,000 in year 2000)
Angola
0.023
5767
3050
Bangladesh
0.022
2243
3187
Benin
0.028
2041
2489
Bolivia
0.022
6036
6829
Burkina Faso
0.022
1159
1939
Burundi
0.021
1467
990
Cameroon
0.026
2552
4125
Central African Rep.
0.022
3964
2144
Chad
0.024
2352
1837
Comoros
0.024
4811
3498
Congo
0.028
1612
3686
Cote d'Ivoire
0.034
4823
4679
DR Congo
0.029
1835
252
Ethiopia
0.026
1293
1483
Gambia
0.033
2104
2393
Ghana
0.026
2277
2775
Guinea
0.021
4304
5977
Guinea Bissau
0.027
577
1287
Haiti
0.017
1827
5569
Honduras
0.029
5608
5415
Kenya
0.031
1450
2476
Lesotho
0.021
1730
3365

DY/L
I/Y
K/L
1970-2000 1970-2000 1970
0.013
0.238
86703
0.021
0.260
66469
0.018
0.231
81200
0.013
0.228
61994
0.037
0.249
34347
0.012
0.229
83723
0.022
0.260
64823
0.017
0.246
65718
0.014
0.247
50713
0.019
0.258
77138
0.040
0.192
28880
0.015
0.271
54458
0.020
0.233
74156
0.025
0.322
34551
0.031
0.225 115514
0.015
0.234
84187
0.004
0.211
78165
0.022
0.318
91446
0.028
0.213
25056
0.020
0.242
47853
0.011
0.213
79456
0.003
0.266 129962
0.017
0.181
58109
0.017
0.197
60506
0.020
0.240
57171

-0.021
0.011
0.006
0.004
0.017
-0.013
0.015
-0.020
-0.008
-0.010
0.027
-0.001
-0.064
0.004
0.004
0.006
0.011
0.026
0.036
-0.001
0.017
0.021

0.075
0.098
0.074
0.094
0.099
0.057
0.078
0.045
0.089
0.078
0.173
0.076
0.052
0.041
0.064
0.073
0.113
0.206
0.051
0.127
0.108
0.189

39

4223
3193
816
8409
717
326
1445
2529
4196
3005
4476
3547
702
763
451
3091
10496
2628
523
6318
2072
536

K/L
DK/L
Y/POP
2000 1970-2000 1970
148660
0.017
14820
169797
0.030
11176
176457
0.025
12143
152421
0.029
14102
92786
0.032
5275
151198
0.019
16038
145963
0.026
11412
160775
0.029
12336
103785
0.023
8441
138571
0.019
10925
115744
0.045
7260
113059
0.024
8837
169291
0.027
11294
161357
0.050
11474
243753
0.024
15121
152928
0.019
13320
115780
0.013
13665
200385
0.025
11188
96372
0.043
6296
134732
0.033
9076
133786
0.017
14828
192283
0.013
20611
113065
0.021
12085
161391
0.032
16351
154321
0.033
13290

3428
3707
2079
9053
2509
1028
3981
1959
2285
4090
4968
4179
636
787
2044
2360
7794
2859
1834
10234
2743
10260

-0.007
0.005
0.030
0.002
0.040
0.037
0.033
-0.008
-0.020
0.010
0.003
0.005
-0.003
0.001
0.049
-0.009
-0.010
0.003
0.040
0.016
0.009
0.095

3329
1105
1094
2498
669
848
1580
2240
1180
2353
929
2391
1056
608
1113
1282
2282
332
930
1861
821
883

Y/POP DY/POP
2000 1970-2000
25559
0.018
23676
0.024
23781
0.022
26904
0.021
17742
0.039
26608
0.016
23792
0.024
22358
0.019
14614
0.018
24777
0.026
26381
0.042
16954
0.021
21780
0.021
24675
0.025
43989
0.034
24313
0.019
18816
0.010
27060
0.028
15923
0.030
18047
0.022
23635
0.015
26414
0.008
22190
0.020
33293
0.023
26595
0.023

1612
1684
1214
2724
957
523
2042
1045
909
1578
1808
1869
118
635
1217
1351
2831
688
2416
2050
1244
1592

-0.023
0.014
0.003
0.003
0.012
-0.016
0.008
-0.025
-0.008
-0.013
0.021
-0.008
-0.071
0.001
0.003
0.002
0.007
0.024
0.031
0.003
0.013
0.019

LOW INCOME
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mozambique
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Papua New Guinea
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Tanzania, U. Rep. of
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
AVERAGE

DPOP
1970-2000
0.026
0.027
0.023
0.024
0.020
0.023
0.028
0.031
0.028
0.023
0.027
0.027
0.021
0.029
0.026
0.026
0.028
0.028
0.026

Y/L
1970
2546
871
1485
3397
2807
1511
12280
2653
1997
5247
1676
2949
3649
1056
3109
1144
2946
3723
2239

Y/L
2000
1772
1631
2033
2912
2000
3144
4367
1823
1479
5924
1786
3389
1910
938
2149
1835
2141
5127
2359

DY/L
I/Y
K/L
1970-2000 1970-2000 1970
-0.012
0.028
896
0.020
0.138
1337
0.010
0.075
1812
-0.005
0.067
761
-0.011
0.027
615
0.024
0.135
824
-0.033
0.117
10451
-0.012
0.073
2052
-0.010
0.089
781
0.004
0.124
6473
0.002
0.039
325
0.004
0.072
2758
-0.021
0.033
645
-0.004
0.243
2356
-0.012
0.078
1129
0.015
0.023
161
-0.010
0.169
8255
0.010
0.199
9226
0.002
0.095
2142

LOW-MID (from YPOP 3,001 to YPOP 6,000 in year 2000)
Algeria
0.026
13369
14527
Cape Verde
0.016
4061
10078
Colombia
0.020
7651
11477
Costa Rica
0.025
13639
14827
Dominican Republic
0.021
7488
16173
Ecuador
0.024
7069
9023
Egypt
0.021
5603
10970
El Salvador
0.018
12578
10368
Equatorial Guinea
0.015
8094
8641
Fiji
0.014
11620
13580
Guatemala
0.025
8673
10611
Guyana
0.002
8628
8243
Iran
0.026
18304
19560
Jamaica
0.011
10177
7310
Jordan
0.038
8120
13087
Morocco
0.020
6815
9301
Namibia
0.025
13955
14689
Pakistan
0.027
2729
5360
Paraguay
0.027
6183
10439
Peru
0.021
11927
10095
Philippines
0.023
6548
8374
Sri Lanka
0.014
3745
7646
AVERAGE
0.024
7374
9984

0.003
0.029
0.013
0.003
0.025
0.008
0.022
-0.006
0.002
0.005
0.007
-0.001
0.002
-0.011
0.015
0.010
0.002
0.022
0.017
-0.005
0.008
0.023
0.010

0.190
0.171
0.116
0.151
0.138
0.189
0.076
0.072
0.130
0.147
0.081
0.163
0.197
0.173
0.146
0.139
0.182
0.117
0.121
0.170
0.152
0.119
0.143

K/L
2000
741
1722
1896
2892
875
5028
9274
1501
2383
9592
971
2977
1468
2405
2784
537
4457
10738
2843

DK/L
Y/POP
1970-2000 1970
-0.006
1274
0.008
455
0.001
784
0.043
1881
0.011
1571
0.058
816
-0.004
3980
-0.010
1519
0.036
1113
0.013
2862
0.035
887
0.002
1627
0.026
1496
0.001
565
0.029
1397
0.039
608
-0.020
1335
0.005
2155
0.009
1176

Y/POP DY/POP
2000 1970-2000
836
-0.014
784
0.018
969
0.007
1447
-0.008
1037
-0.013
1459
0.019
1767
-0.026
875
-0.018
707
-0.015
2866
0.000
895
0.000
1622
0.000
695
-0.025
482
-0.005
870
-0.015
941
0.014
892
-0.013
2486
0.005
1138
-0.001

16093
4652
7860
13398
6156
16442
2553
7532
3091
19314
6972
23071
17202
24743
6841
5460
26608
4024
3930
26080
8197
2090
8417

29706
15448
16847
26203
20717
22049
7379
10390
15860
24384
10314
18465
38541
21030
21156
14654
28559
6412
15810
25698
15312
10726
15835

0.020
0.039
0.025
0.022
0.039
0.009
0.034
0.010
0.053
0.008
0.013
-0.007
0.026
-0.005
0.036
0.032
0.002
0.015
0.045
0.000
0.020
0.053
0.021

3433
1387
3159
4181
2018
2292
1970
4141
3758
3433
2991
2432
5225
3867
2228
2261
4770
943
2874
4686
2396
1557
2560

4896
4027
5383
5870
5270
3468
4184
4435
3604
4971
3914
3532
5995
3693
3895
3717
4529
2008
4684
4589
3425
3300
3846

0.011
0.034
0.017
0.011
0.031
0.013
0.024
0.002
-0.001
0.012
0.009
0.012
0.004
-0.001
0.018
0.016
-0.002
0.024
0.016
-0.001
0.012
0.024
0.013

UPPER-MID (from YPOP 6,001 and above in year 2000, excluding OECD + Israel)
Argentina
0.014
19967
25670
0.008
0.173
37276
Barbados
0.004
15935
32961
0.023
0.148
31065
Botswana
0.029
3126
23926
0.066
0.188
2896
Brazil
0.019
11006
19220
0.018
0.207
18028
Chile
0.015
15345
25084
0.016
0.151
25676
Gabon
0.029
11293
17645
0.014
0.140
8597
Mauritius
0.012
13162
32241
0.029
0.126
13700
Mexico
0.022
17965
21111
0.005
0.182
27956

58223
41302
32356
43954
49286
23958
39386
46815

0.014
0.009
0.078
0.029
0.021
0.033
0.034
0.017

9265
6040
1193
3620
4794
6857
4005
5522

11006
16415
8241
7190
9926
8402
13932
8762

0.006
0.032
0.062
0.022
0.023
0.007
0.040
0.015

40

UPPER-MID
Panama
Seychelles
South Africa
Syria
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela
AVERAGE

DPOP
1970-2000
0.021
0.013
0.021
0.031
0.009
0.020
0.020
0.006
0.026
0.020

Y/L
1970
11357
8470
18415
26235
19842
8573
8017
13579
35399
14566

Y/L
2000
14382
23552
18488
28817
25188
17124
14125
21150
15705
19492

DY/L
I/Y
K/L
1970-2000 1970-2000 1970
0.008
0.207
17391
0.033
0.149
4934
0.000
0.120
23582
0.003
0.190
34728
0.008
0.106
13058
0.022
0.160
20720
0.018
0.162
8040
0.014
0.121
19073
-0.026
0.168
44808
0.009
0.159
22076

K/L
2000
37650
44543
25070
14163
33090
26610
29528
34882
36511
40132

DK/L
Y/POP
1970-2000 1970
0.025
3824
0.071
4091
0.002
6878
-0.029
7542
0.030
6582
0.008
2568
0.042
3619
0.019
6131
-0.007
10528
0.019
5184

Y/POP DY/POP
2000 1970-2000
6066
0.015
10241
0.030
7541
0.003
9193
0.006
11175
0.017
6776
0.031
6832
0.021
9622
0.015
6420
-0.016
7924
0.014

OLD TIGERS
Hong Kong, SAR of
China
Korea, Republic of
Singapore
Taiwan, P. of China
AVERAGE

0.018
0.012
0.021
0.013
0.013

15587
7676
15085
7282
8513

51469
31239
50809
42402
36922

0.039
0.045
0.039
0.057
0.048

0.249
0.311
0.454
0.194
0.302

28329
9584
32892
6392
11132

138086
98424
187383
78537
102174

0.051
0.075
0.056
0.081
0.074

6506
2716
5279
2790
3120

26699
15876
28869
19034
18312

0.046
0.057
0.055
0.062
0.059

NEW TIGERS
China
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
AVERAGE

0.014
0.020
0.019
0.025
0.017
0.017

1583
2454
2865
8377
3758
2036

6175
5587
7677
23994
11308
6355

0.044
0.027
0.032
0.034
0.036
0.037

0.178
0.118
0.146
0.223
0.309
0.195

1564
2470
1635
10090
7486
2052

10624
6729
13772
54710
36890
10587

0.062
0.032
0.069
0.055
0.051
0.054

815
1073
1087
2884
1822
966

3747
2479
3642
9919
6857
3367

0.049
0.027
0.039
0.040
0.043
0.041

Note: The averages have been computed based on the meta-country averages. For example, output per worker in
2000 has been obtained by first summing income and workers separately for a given meta country, thereafter
dividing total income with total workers and then dividing this ratio by the number of countries. An alternative way,
leading to a slightly different result, is to first compute income per worker for each country, sum the country results
and then divide this total by the number of countries.
DPOP = Average annual growth rate (AAGR) of population; Y/L = GDP per worker; DY/L = AAGR of GDP per
worker; I/Y = Investment share in GDP; K/L = capital-labor ratio; DK/L = AAGR of capital-labor ratio (i.e. capital
deepening); Y/POP = GDP per capita; and DY/POP = AAGR of GDP per capita.

41

Capital stocks
We use a perpetual inventory method (PIM) to estimate the stock of capital from the investment
data (the capital stock is denoted K05+S in Figure A.1.). Under the PIM, the stock of capital at
the end of year t that is available for production in the following year, Kt+1, is equal to the
depreciated amount of capital left over from the preceding year, (1-δ)Kt, plus the amount of new
capital added through investment during the year, It:

K t +1 = (1 − δ ) K t + I t ,

(A.1)

The δ denotes the depreciation rate here, as in the text. By substituting backward in time to some
initial period, equation A.1 can be expressed in terms of the depreciated stream of investment
plus the initial capital stock, K0 :
t

t
t −i
K t = (1−δ ) K 0 + ∑ (1−δ ) I i .

(A.2)

i =1

This method of estimating the stock of capital requires time-series data on real investment, which
we obtain from the Penn World Tables 6.1 (Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002), in purchasing
power parity 1996 US dollars. We have no information as to country-specific depreciation rates,
so we assume a common 5 percent rate for each country.
To obtain a starting value for the capital stock of each country, we assume the country is
at its steady state capital-output ratio. The steady-state benchmark value is obtained from the
equation:
k = i /( g + δ ),

(A.3)

where k = K/Y (i.e. capital-output ratio), g = the growth rate of real Y (i.e. growth of GDP), and i
= I/Y (i.e. investment rate). The steady-state growth of GDP (g) and the investment rate (i),
respectively, are calculated as the annual average over 10 years (1960-1969). Inserting these into
(A.3) gives k and the benchmark is obtained by multiplying k by initial GDP. Thereafter, we add
10 years of investment to the benchmark and this marks the initial capital stock, K0.
We have also investigated the robustness of this procedure against two other
computational methods. The first alternative is to use the steady-state approach discussed above
to compute the initial capital stock, K1970, and thereafter apply the perpetual inventory method to
the remaining years (KS). Our second procedure is to use the perpetual inventory method, but
this time without the steady-state approach to obtaining a benchmark, i.e. the benchmark is zero
in 1960. The accumulation of 10 years of investment is then taken to represent the initial capital
stock in 1970 (K05).
Figure A.1 shows how the three capital stocks actually tend to converge over time and
this leads us to have faith in our choice of calculating capital stock, implying a reasonably high
degree of robustness to our method of estimating the initial level of capital.

42

Figure A.1. Capital Stocks Under Three Assumptions.
25000000

20000000

Capital

15000000

10000000

5000000

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

19
70

0

Year
K05+S

KS

K05

Table A.2. Comparison of Capital Stocks Based on PPP ($) and National Prices ($).

Meta-countries

PPP, $
AAGR

Meta-countries

National prices, $
AAGR

Low
0.61
Low
0.85
Low-Mid
1.94
Low-Mid
1.90
Upper-Mid
1.70
Upper-Mid
1.47
Old Tigers
7.12
Old Tigers
6.84
New Tigers
5.44
New Tigers
5.16
High
3.30
High
2.53
AAGR = Average annual growth rates in percent for the period 1970-2000.
Note: The difference between the two columns, when multiplied by .33, gives the change in TFP
growth rates in Table 1a that would occur if national prices were substituted for PPP prices.

43

Labor shares
It is standard in cross-country analysis to assume common labor shares across countries, with a
two-thirds share commonly assigned to labor (Gollin (2002)). However, the labor shares are
calculated from published data reveal very large differences across countries.16 Figure A.2
reveals just how large the differences are, and how far short of the two-thirds share the actual
estimates are. In general, labor shares increase with income level of the meta country, although
they remain fairly constant within meta countries.

Figure A.2. Labor’s Income Share for 6 Meta-Countries
0.8

0.7

0.6

Labor's share

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

19
70
19
71
19
72
19
73
19
74
19
75
19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00

0

Year
HIGH-INC

16

LOW

LOW-MID

UPP-MID

OLD TIGERS

NEW TIGERS

STANDARD

Data on labor shares are not available for all countries. The average labor shares are therefore based on meta
countries excluding the following countries: HIGH Cyprus; LOW Bangladesh, Comoros, D.R. Congo, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea and Nepal; LOW-MID Cape Verde, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Pakistan and
Syria; NEW TIGERS Indonesia.
44

