                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TRADE SHOCKS AND LABOR ADJUSTMENT:
                         A STRUCTURAL EMPIRICAL APPROACH

                                          Erhan Artuc
                                       Shubham Chaudhuri
                                         John McLaren

                                       Working Paper 13465
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13465


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2007




We are grateful to seminar participants at the University of Virginia, Syracuse University, Wilfred
Laurier University, and the North American Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society in June
2007. This work has been supported by National Science Foundation grant 0080731. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Erhan Artuc, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach
Erhan Artuc, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren
NBER Working Paper No. 13465
October 2007
JEL No. F16,J60

                                                  ABSTRACT

The welfare effects of trade shocks depend crucially on the nature and magnitude of the costs workers
face in moving between sectors. The existing trade literature does not directly address this, assuming
perfect mobility or complete immobility, or adopting reduced-form approaches to estimation. We present
a model of dynamic labor adjustment that does, and which is, moreover, consistent with a key empirical
fact: that intersectoral gross flows greatly exceed net flows. Using an Euler-type equilibrium condition,
we estimate the mean and the variance of workers' switching costs from the U.S. March Current Population
Surveys. We estimate high values of both parameters, implying both slow adjustment of the economy,
and sharp movements in wages, in response to a trade shock. Simulations of a trade liberalization indicate
that despite the high estimated adjustment cost, in terms of lifetime welfare, the liberalization is Pareto-improving.
The explanation for this surprising finding -- which would be missed by a reduced-form approach
-- is that the high variance to costs ensures high rates of gross flow; this helps spread the liberalization's
benefits around.

Erhan Artuc                                               John McLaren
Koc University, Department of Economics                   Department of Economics
Rumelifeneri Yolu                                         University of Virginia
Sariyer 34450, Istanbul                                   P.O. Box 400182
eartuc@ku.edu.tr                                          Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
                                                          and NBER
Shubham Chaudhuri                                         jmclaren@virginia.edu
East Asia and Pacific Poverty Reduction
and Economic Management Unit
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
schaudhuri@worldbank.org
1     Introduction.
Perhaps the most urgent question facing trade economists is the effect of liberalization
and other trade shocks on the welfare of workers. This question has generated a large
body of research, but a feature shared by most of the extant trade literature on this
is a reliance on static models, in which workers are assumed to be either instantly
costlessly mobile, or perfectly immobile (we will discuss important exceptions below).
This prevents the trade literature from even addressing, let alone answering, some
central questions: What are the costs faced by workers who wish to move to a new
industry in response to import competition? How long will the labor market take
to adjust, and find its new steady state? Will that steady state feature a lasting
differential impact on workers in the import-affllicted sector, or will arbitrage equalize
worker returns in the long run? What are the lifetime welfare effects on workers in
different industries, taking into account moving costs and transitional dynamics?
    This paper offers an approach to answering these questions. Within the context
of a standard trade model, we specify a dynamic equilibrium model of costly labor
adjustment, a model fully studied in Cameron, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2007). We
then show how the structural moving-cost parameters of this model can be estimated,
using Euler-equation-type techniques borrowed from macroeconomics. Estimating
these parameters on data from the US Current Population Surveys (CPS), we then use
these parameters to simulate stylized trade shocks and show their dynamic equilibrium
impact.
    A large number of studies in the trade economics field have attempted to mea-
sure the effects of trade shocks on wages. Some test labor-market predictions of the
Heckscher-Ohlin model, as Lawrence and Slaughter (1993). Others regress changes
in wages sector-by-sector on changes in import prices (as Revenga (1992)), trade pol-
icy (as Pavcnik, Goldberg and Attanasio (2004)) or import penetration (as Kletzer
(2002)). Slaughter (1998) provides an overview.
    Much has been learned from this literature, but it suffers from three weaknesses
that this study addresses directly. First, these all suffer from the Lucas critique; for
example, the change in wages observed when a tariff falls may be different depending
on whether or not it was anticipated, or whether or not it is expected to be part
of a continuing reduction. Reduced-form regressions cannot accommodate such dis-


                                            2
tinctions. Second, in a dynamic environment, wage changes at a given moment are
insufficient for identifying the lifetime effect on a workers’ utility, which is what really
matters for welfare analysis. Third, perhaps most importantly, these reduced-form
studies take no account of the constant inter-industry gross flows of workers observed
in the data. In the data, such gross flows are large, and have a large effect on welfare
calculations. Indeed, we will see that the conclusions one would draw from standard
reduced-form regression results can be reversed when gross flows are accounted for.
   A small number of studies in the trade literature do study the empirics of dy-
namic labor market adjustment, but focus on employer-side adjustment. Utar (2007)
estimates a dynamic model of firm adjustment to trade shocks with heterogeneous
firms. Robertson and Dutkowsky (2002) use an Euler equation approach to estimate
employers’ labor adjustment costs in Mexico with a focus on international policy but
employs a model that rules out gross flows in excess of net flows, thus ruling out an
important feature of the data that is central to our approach.
   On the other hand, a number of labor economists have developed highly sophis-
ticated structural empirical models that allow them to estimate the impact of policy
changes on labor adjustment in a manner similar in some respects to what we are
doing here. Examples include Lee (2005) and Keane and Wolpin (1997), who focus
on occupational choices of workers rather than inter-industry reallocation, and Ken-
nan and Walker (2003), who study movement of workers across US regions. There
are four key differences between those studies and our approach. First, with our
emphasis on intersectoral reallocation we are tailoring our model to the analysis of
trade policy, which cannot be addressed by those other studies. Second, with our
Euler-equation approach, which appears not to have been used before in the analysis
of workers’ mobility choices, we do not need to make any strong assumptions about
what workers know about the future (in particular, they do not need to know the fu-
ture course of aggregate events with certainty, which is assumed in Keane and Wolpin
(1997) and Lee (2005), for example). We assume that workers have rational expec-
tations about the future, but we need to make no assumption regarding how much
information they have about the future. Third, our estimation method is simple and
computationally cheap, allowing its application potentially to a very wide range of
data sets. The most closely related paper to ours is Artuç (2006), which does esti-


                                             3
mate a general-equilibrium structural model of worker response to trade shocks, but
focuses on intergenerational distributional issues and does not use an Euler-equation
approach.1
       In our approach, we present a dynamic rational-expectations model2 in which each
worker can choose to move from her current industry to another one in each period,
but must pay a cost to do so. The cost has a common component, which does not
vary across time or workers; and a time-varying idiosyncratic component, which can
be negative, reflecting non-pecuniary motives that workers often have for changing
jobs (such as tedium, a need to relocate for family reasons, and the like). We derive
an equilibrium condition, which is a kind of Euler equation, estimate its parameters
using the Current Population Survey (CPS), and simulate a trade liberalization to
illustrate their implications.
       The element of idiosyncratic shocks is crucial to a realistic treatment of worker
mobility, for two reasons. First, gross flows are an order of magnitude larger than
net flows, implying large numbers of workers moving in opposite directions at the
same time. Second, Bowlus and Newmann (2006) show that a significant fraction of
workers who change jobs voluntarily move to jobs which pay less than the job the
worker left behind. Approximately 40% of voluntary job changes have this feature,
not very different from the 50% that would be expected if wage differences had no
effect on mobility decisions. Both of these observations suggest a central role for
idiosyncratic shocks in worker mobility. We quantify this in our estimates, and show
that it is very important for evaluating the welfare effects of trade policy. In particular,
the presence of these shocks imply that option value is an important element of each
worker’s utility calculation, which, although it can have a decisive effect on the welfare
   1
       Another related paper, Kambourov (2006), calibrates a model of labor reallocation, which is
costly because of sector-specific human capital and firing costs, and applies it to trade reform. It
turns out that firing costs have a large negative effect on the gains from trade reform. Unlike our
paper, Kambourov’s model does not provide workers with idiosyncratic shocks, so it cannot generate
gross flows in excess of net flows. Given the importance of gross flows in the data, this is a significant
feature of our approach.
   2
     The model we use is presented in full in Cameron, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2007). It is a
full-employment model with moving costs for workers. An alternative approach would be to focus
on search frictions, as in Hosios (1990), Davidson, Martin and Matusz (1999) and Davidson and
Matusz (2001).


                                                    4
effects of trade reform, to our knowledge has never before been introduced into the
literature on trade and labor.
       The estimates we obtain show very high average moving costs, and a very high
standard deviation of moving costs, both estimated to be several times average an-
nual wages for moving from one broadly aggregated sector of the economy to another.
These surprisingly high estimated costs are actually in line with related findings by
other authors using different techniques; for example, Kennan and Walker’s (2003)
estimates of costs of moving between US regions, and Artuç’s (2006) estimates of
intersectoral moving costs.3 In addition, as we will see, simulations based on these
patterns produce realistic aggregate behavior. The message conveyed by these find-
ings is that US workers change industry a great deal, but those movements do not
respond much to movements in intersectoral wage differentials. Thus, non-pecuniary
motives such as are captured by our idiosyncratic shocks must be driving a large
portion of our workers’ movements. This is important for the analysis of trade lib-
eralization, as our simulations reveal. First, it suggests sluggish adjustment of the
labor market to a trade shock, with the economy requiring several years to approach
the new steady state. Second, as a corollary, it implies a large drop in wages in the
import-competing sector that is hit by the liberalization; indeed, the wages in that
sector never fully recover. Third, surprisingly, because of the high levels of mobil-
ity due to idiosyncratic shocks, workers in the import-competing sector benefit from
the liberalization. Their welfare rises because the high volatility of their idiosyncratic
shocks combined with rising real wages in other sectors implies that their option value
is enhanced by the liberalization, and this effect overwhelms the direct loss from the
lower wages in their own sector.4 This shows the utility of a dynamic structural
approach; a reduced-form wage equation would have, in this case, produced exactly
   3
       It should be noted that this is so even though Artuç (2006) uses a different data set, namely the
NLSY; this paper uses the CPS.
  4
    This is closely related to the empirical findings of Magee, Davisdon and Matusz (2005). They
find, for low-turnover industries, that political action committees are much more likely to donate
to pro-trade politicians if they represent an export sector than an import-competing sector; but
for high-turnover sectors the difference between export and import-competing industries essentially
disappears. They rationalize this using a search model of labor adjustment as in Hosios (1990) and
Davidson, Martin and Matusz (1999), but the underlying reason is similar: With a high degree of
labor flows, workers do not identify closely with the industry in which they are currently located.


                                                     5
the wrong welfare conclusion by showing wage losses for the import-competing sector
without identifying the countervailing option-value effect. Indeed, in our simulation
section we will show how some of our findings are superficially similar to results from
the static, reduced-form regressions of Revenga (1992), but with the opposite welfare
implications.
        In the following sections we present the model, deriving its estimating equation
and explaining the identification strategy intuitively; then examine the data and its
measurement issues; then present our estimates and interpret them. The next section
deals with a number of measurement and specification issues, and a final section
studies simulations based on our estimated parameters.


2         The model.
Consider an economy in which production may occur in any of N industries. We con-
struct a dynamic rational expectations model of labor mobility across these industries,
in which our goal is to derive an equilibrium condition that will allow estimation of
moving cost parameters.5


2.1         Basic setup
Assume that in each industry i there are a large number of competitive employers,
and that the value of their aggregate output in any period t is given by xit = X i (Lit , st ),
where Lit denotes the labor used in industry i in period t, and st is a state variable
that could capture the effects of policy (such as trade protection, which might raise
the price of the output), technology shocks, and the like. Assume that X i is strictly
increasing, continuously differentiable and concave in its first argument. Its first
derivative with respect to labor is then a continuous, decreasing function of labor,
holding st constant; this is, then, the demand curve for labor in the industry. Assume
    5
        In principle, the model can accommodate geographic as well as inter-industry mobility. Instead
of N industries, we could have N industry-region cells, for example; all of the logic below would carry
through without amendment. In practice, we have limited the discussion to inter-industry mobility
because we have not found enough inter-regional mobility in the data to identify the parameters of
interest.



                                                    6
that s follows a first-order Markov process on some state space S.
       The economy’s workers form a continuum of measure L. Each worker at any
moment is located in one of the N industries. Denote the number of workers in
industry i at the beginning of period t by Lit . If a worker, say, l ∈ [0, L], is in industry
i at the beginning of t, she will produce in that industry, collect the market wage wti
for that industry, and then may move to any other industry. In order for the labor
                                              ∂X i (Lit ,st )
market to clear, we must have wti =              ∂Lit
                                                                at all times.
       If worker l moves from industry i to industry j, she incurs a cost C ij ≥ 0, which is
the same for all workers and all periods, and is publicly known. In addition, if she is
in industry i at the end of period t, she collects an idiosyncratic benefit εil,t from being
in that industry. These benefits are independently and identically distributed across
individuals, industries, and dates, with density function f : < 7−→ <+ and cumulative
distribution function F : < 7−→ [0, 1]. Thus, the full cost for worker l of moving from
i to j can be thought of as εil,t − εjl,t + C ij . The worker knows the values of the εil,t
for all i before making the period-t moving decision.6 We adopt the convention that
C ii = 0 for all i.
       Note that the mean cost of moving from i to j is given by C ij , but its variance and
other moments are determined by f . It should be emphasized that these higher mo-
ments are important both for estimation and for policy analysis, as will be discussed
below.
       All agents have rational expectations and a common constant discount factor
β < 1, and are risk neutral.
       An equilibrium then takes the form of a decision rule by which, in each period,
each worker will decide whether to stay in her industry or move to another, based on
the current allocation vector L of labor across industries, the current aggregate state
s, and that worker’s own vector ε of shocks. In the aggregate, this decision rule will
generate a law of motion for the evolution of the labor allocation, and hence (by the
labor market clearing condition just mentioned) for the wage in each industry. Given
this behaviour for wages, the decision rule must be optimal for each worker, in the
sense of maximizing her expected present discounted value of wages plus idiosyncratic
   6
       It is useful to think of the timeline as follows: The worker observes st at the beginning of the
period, produces output and receives the wage, then learns the vector εl,t and decides whether or
not to move. At the end of the period, she enjoys εjl,t in whichever sector j she has landed.


                                                       7
benefits, net of moving costs.


2.2       The key equilibrium condition.
Suppose that we have somehow computed the maximized value to each worker of
being in industry i when the labor allocation is L and the state is s. Let U i (L, s, ε)
denote this value, which, of course, depends on the worker’s realized idiosyncratic
shocks. Denote by V i (L, s) the average of U i (L, s, ε) across all workers, or in other
words, the expectation of U i (L, s, ε) with respect to the vector ε. Thus, V i (L, s) can
also be interpreted as the expected value of being in industry i, conditional on L and
s, but before the worker learns her value of ε.
      Assuming optimizing behavior, i.e., that a worker in industry i will choose to
remain at or move to the industry j that offers her the greatest expected benefits,
net of moving costs, we can write:7

                U i (Lt , st , εt ) = wti + max{εjt − C ij + βEt [V j (Lt+1 , st+1 )]}      (1)
                                                j

                                   = wti + βEt [V i (Lt+1 , st+1 )] + max{εjt + εij
                                                                                 t }
                                                                             j

where:
                        εij        j                  i
                         t ≡ βEt [V (Lt+1 , st+1 ) − V (Lt+1 , st+1 )] − C
                                                                           ij
                                                                                            (2)
Note that Lt+1 is the next-period allocation of labor, derived from Lt and the decision
rule, and st+1 is the next-period value of the state, which is a random variable whose
distribution is determined by st . The expectations in (1) and (2) are taken with
respect to st+1 , conditional on all information available at time t.
      Taking the expectation of (1) with respect to the ε vector then yields:


                         V i (Lt , st ) = wti + βEt [V i (Lt+1 , st+1 )] + Ω(εit ),         (3)
where εit = (εi1         iN
              t , ..., εt ) and:
                            N Z
                            X         ∞                      Y
                       i
                 Ω(εt ) =                 (εj + εij     j
                                                 t )f (ε )          F (εj + εij   ik   j
                                                                             t − εt )dε .   (4)
                             j=1    −∞                       k6=j

The average value to being in industry i can therefore be decomposed into three terms:
(1) the wage, wti , that a industry-i worker receives; (2) the base value of staying on in
  7
      From here on, we drop the worker-specific subscript, l.

                                                     8
industry i, i.e., βEt [V i (Lt+1 , st+1 )]; and (3) the additional value, Ω(εit ), derived from
having the option to move to another industry should prospects there look better
(and which is simply equal to the expectation of maxj {εj + εij
                                                             t } with respect to the

ε vector). We will call this the ‘option value’ associated with being in that industry
at that time.
    Using (3), we can rewrite (2) as:

        C ij + εij
                t  = βEt [V j (Lt+1 , st+1 ) − V i (Lt+1 , st+1 )]
                            j      i
                    = βEt [wt+1 − wt+1 + βEt+1 [V j (Lt+2 , st+2 ) − V i (Lt+2 , st+2 )]
                        +Ω(εjt+1 ) − Ω(εit+1 )], or

               C ij + εij        j      i      ij  ij       j          i
                       t = βEt [wt+1 − wt+1 + C + εt+1 + Ω(εt+1 ) − Ω(εt+1 )]              (5)

Note that εij                 i  j
           t is the value of ε −ε at which a worker in industry i is indifferent between

moving to industry j and staying in i. Condition (5) thus has the simple, common-
sense interpretation that for the marginal mover from i to j, the cost (including the
idiosyncratic component) of moving is equal to the expected future benefit of being
in j instead of i at time t + 1. This expected future benefit has three components.
The first is the wage differential. The second is the revealed expected value to being
in industry j instead of i at time t + 2, as revealed by the cost borne by the marginal
mover from i to j at time t + 1, or C ij + εij
                                            t+1 . The last component is the difference in
option values associated with being in each industry. Thus, if I contemplate being in
j instead of i next period, I take into account the expected difference in wages; then
the difference in the expected values of continuing in each industry afterward; and
finally, the differences in the values of the option to leave each industry if conditions
call for it.
    Put differently, condition (5) is an Euler equation. Given appropriate choice of
functional forms, this can be implemented to estimate the moving-cost parameters.
We turn to that task next.


2.3     The estimating equation.
Let mij
     t be the fraction of the labor force in industry i at time t that chooses to move

to industry j, i.e., the gross flow from i to j. With the assumption of a continuum of


                                                9
workers and i.i.d idiosyncratic components to moving costs, this gross flow is simply
the probability that industry j is the best for a randomly selected i-worker. Now,
make the following functional form assumption. Assume that the idiosyncratic shocks
follow an extreme-value distribution with parameters (−γν, ν):

                                  e−ε/ν−γ
                                          exp −e−ε/ν−γ
                                             
                          f (ε) =
                                     ν
                          F (ε) = exp −e−ε/ν−γ ,



   implying:



                                    E(ε) = 0, and
                                            π2ν 2
                                  V ar(ε) =       .
                                             6
(For further properties of the extreme-value distribution, see Patel, Kapadia, and
Owen (1976).)
   Note that while we make the natural assumption that the ε’s be mean-zero, we
do not impose any restrictions on the variance. The variance is proportional to the
square of ν, which is a free parameter to be estimated, and crucial for all of the policy
and welfare analysis.
   By assuming that the εit are generated from an extreme-value distribution we are
able to obtain a particularly simple expression for the conditional moment restriction,
which we then plan to estimate using aggregate data. Specifically, it is shown in the
Appendix that, with this assumption:


                   εij         j      i       ij       ij      ii
                    t ≡ βEt [Vt+1 − Vt+1 ] − C = ν[ln mt − ln mt ]                   (6)

and:
                                    Ω(εit ) = −ν ln miit                             (7)

   Both these expressions make intuitive sense. The first says that the greater the
expected net (of moving costs) benefits of moving to j, the larger should be the
observed ratio of movers (from i to j) to stayers. Moreover, holding constant the


                                            10
(average) expected net benefits of moving, the higher the variance of the idiosyncratic
cost shocks, the lower the compensating migratory flows.
         The second expression says that the greater the probability of remaining in indus-
try i, the lower the value of having the option to move from industry i.8 Moreover,
as the variance of the idiosyncratic component of moving costs increases, so too does
the value of having the option to move. This also makes good sense.
         Substituting from (6) and (7) into (5) and rearranging, we get the following con-
ditional moment condition:
                                                                        
       β j      i           ij        jj      (1 − β) ij      ij      ii
  Et    (w − wt+1 ) + β(ln mt+1 − ln mt+1 ) −        C − (ln mt − ln mt ) = 0.
       ν t+1                                     ν
                                                                            (8)
This condition can be interpreted as a linear regression:

                             (1 − β) ij β j
    (ln mij      ii
         t − ln mt ) = −
                                                 i
                                    C + (wt+1 − wt+1 ) + β(ln mij        jj
                                                               t+1 − ln mt+1 ) + µt+1 , (9)
                                ν       ν
where µt+1 is news revealed at time t + 1, so that Et µt+1 ≡ 0. In other words, the
parameters of interest, C ij , β and ν, can then be estimated by regressing current flows
(as measured by (ln mij     ii                                        ij       jj
                     t −ln mt )) on future flows (as measured by (ln mt+1 −ln mt+1 ))

and the future wage differential with an intercept. Of course, the disturbance term,
µt+1 , will in general be correlated with the regressors, requiring instrumental variables.
The theory implies that past values of the flows and wages will be valid instruments,
and the optimal weighting scheme can be derived as in the Generalized Method of
Moment (GMM) (Hansen (1982)). Note that while our choice of f obviously deter-
mined the form of the estimating equation, under the GMM estimation procedure,
we do not need to make any additional assumptions about the process governing the
state variables, st .


2.4          Identification
.
         It may be helpful to review how the model provides a strategy for identifying the
parameters of interest to us. Roughly, the logic of the model tells us that the level
of gross flows in the data helps us pin down the ratio of average moving costs to the
     8                               i
         Note that 0 < mii                        ii
                        t < 1, so Ω(εt ) = −ν ln mt > 0.



                                                   11
variance of moving costs (that is, the ratios of the C ij ’s to ν), and the responsiveness
of labor flows to anticipated wage differentials pins down the level of ν. Essentially,
both the overall level of gross flows and their responsiveness to wages together pin
down the values of the parameters. To see how, first note that worker flows are given
by the following:



                                            exp(εij /ν)
                                  mij =   Pn         ik
                                           k=1 exp(ε /ν)



   This is derived from the properties of the extreme-value distribution, and is es-
sentially the same as the outcome of the familiar extreme-value multinomial choice
problem (a detailed deriviation is presented in the appendix). Now consider a sim-
plified version of the model in which labor demand in each industry is identical and
non-stochastic, and C ij ≡ C∀i 6= j. In the steady state of such a model, Li = Lj and
V i = V j ∀i, j. Therefore, εij = −C∀i 6= j, and:



                                          exp(−C/ν)
                              mij =   1+(n−1) exp (−C/ν)
                                               1
                                                                                     (10)
                                     = exp (C/ν)+(n−1)

∀i 6= j.
   Thus, the level of steady-state gross flows is a decreasing function of C/ν. This
is easy to understand, as a rise in C raises costs of changing industries, discouraging
mobility, and a rise in ν fattens the tails of the idiosyncratic shocks, increasing the
probability that a given worker has an idiosyncratic moving cost below the thresh-
old required to move. (Or, viewed differently, a rise in ν raises the importance of
non-pecuniary factors in mobility decisions, making workers more likely to change
industries for non-pecuniary reasons.)
   Thus, in this simplified model, observing what fraction of workers change their
industry per period allows us to pin down the ratio C/ν. Note that in our estimation
equation (9) this ratio is proportional to the intercept, so that a general increase in
gross flows in the data (for given β) will result in lower values for the C ij /ν ratios.
This can be illustrated with Figure 1. A high value of observed flows would imply


                                            12
a ray in C, ν space with a low slope, such as OA, while a lower value of gross flows
would imply a point on a ray with a higher slope, such as OB. Now, what identifies
the point upon that ray that the true parameter values must occupy?
   Note from (9) that the coefficient multiplying the next-period wage differential
is β/ν. A straightforward interpretation of this is that the coefficient β/ν measures
the degree to which the future wage differential predicts the current rate of gross
flow, (ln mij      ii
           t − ln mt ). Thus, holding β constant, if future wage differentials are a

good predictor for current labor flows, then we will obtain a low estimate for ν. This
can be understood in two ways. First, realize that a high value of ν means that
idiosyncratic and non-pecuniary factors are dominant in workers’ mobility decisions,
so that workers do not pay much attention to wages when making those decisions.
Thus, a high value of ν implies that wages will be relatively irrelevant as a determinant
of labor flows. A second interpretation is in terms of elasticities of labor supply: If we
think of a labor supply model in which workers have individual disutilities to work and
will join the labor force only if the wage exceeds the disutility, then a high variance of
that disutility in the population of potential workers implies a vertical labor-supply
curve and a low elasticity of supply, so that the wage has a small effect on the amount
of aggregate labor supplied. This is analogous to the effect observed in our model,
but in a setting of dynamic, intersectoral labor supply: A high idiosyncratic variance
implies a low elasticity of response to wages.
   Thus, roughly, the overall level of gross flows pins down the C/ν ratio, and the
level of responsiveness of labor flows to future wage differentials pins down the level
of C and ν. For a given level of flows, if wages do not matter much for explaining
variation in flows over time, a high value of both C and ν will be implied.
   A note on measurement error may be appropriate here, as well. If systematic errors
in coding of workers’ industry are present so that spurious industry mobility occurs in
the data, that will both put the parameters on a lower ray (by putting excess mobility
into the data) and put them on a higher point along that ray (by making wages appear
less relevant to mobility, since coding errors are likely uncorrelated with anticipated
wages). Thus, coding errors can in principal result in over- or underestimates of C,
but will definitely provide an overestimate of ν and an underestimate of the ratio
C/ν.


                                           13
3     Data.
Our estimation strategy hinges on observing aggregate gross flows across industries.
Since there are no published data on gross flows, we construct gross flow measures
from individual-level data. For this purpose, we use the US Census Bureau’s March
Current Population Surveys (CPS). Each year, the March CPS provides information
on the individual’s industry, occupation, and employment status at the time of the
March interview, as well as the industry, occupation, and employment status in which
the individual spent the most time during the previous calendar year (i.e., January to
December). We use this information to construct rates of flow, mij
                                                                t−1 for each date t.
We also obtain industry wages wti as the average wage reported in the CPS samples for
industry i at date t. These are deflated by the CPI, and normalized so that over the
whole sample the average annualized wage is equal to unity. We restrict the sample
to males aged 25 to 64 currently working full time who worked at least 26 weeks in
the previous year and whose most recent weekly income was between $50 and $5,000.

                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: Gross Flows, 1975-2000.

                  Agric/Min     Const     Manuf     Trans/Util     Trade    Service
    Agric/Min       0.9292      0.0126     0.0142     0.0075      0.0160    0.0206
                   (0.0146)    (0.0040) (0.0046)      (0.0032)   (0.0063) (0.0057)
    Const           0.0056      0.9432     0.0139     0.0063      0.0119    0.0191
                   (0.0028)    (0.0108) (0.0029)      (0.0023)   (0.0027) (0.0040)
    Manuf           0.0020      0.0041     0.9708     0.0031      0.0080    0.0120
                   (0.0008)    (0.0008) (0.0035)      (0.0010)   (0.0012) (0.0021)
    Trans/Util      0.0025      0.0044     0.0068     0.9643      0.0081    0.0138
                   (0.0011)    (0.0018) (0.0016)      (0.0050)   (0.0023) (0.0033)
    Trade           0.0030      0.0061     0.0135     0.0055      0.9469    0.0250
                   (0.0011)    (0.0015) (0.0033)      (0.0017)   (0.0073) (0.0036)
    Service         0.0018      0.0043     0.0079     0.0037      0.0103    0.9720
                   (0.0008)    (0.0011) (0.0013)      (0.0008)   (0.0014) (0.0033)

(Origin sector is listed by row, destination sector by column. Each cell of table
contains mean flow rate followed by standard deviation in parentheses.)

                                           14
   If we have n industries, then there are n2 rates of gross flow to keep track of
each period (or n(n − 1) if one excludes the fraction of workers in each industry who
do not move). Thus, the number of directions for gross flows proliferates rapidly as
the number of industries increases, leading in finite samples to zero observations and
observations with very small numbers of individuals. As a result, we need to aggregate
industries, and we aggregate to the following six: 1. Agriculture and Mining; 2.
Construction; 3. Manufacturing; 4. Transportation, Communication, and Utilities;
5. Trade; and 6. All Other Services including government. As a result of this
aggregation, the sample size for each regression is 720, since we have 26 years minus
2 to allow for lags, and 6 times 5 directions of flows.

                  Table 2: Descriptive Statistics: Wages, 1975-2000.


                Mean Wage      Standard         Mean wage,   Standard       Sample size
                (in 2000$)     deviation        normalized   deviation of
                               of wage (in                   wage (nor-
                               2000$)                        malized)
 Agric/Min      34,739         24,978           0.8374       0.6021         20,952
 Const          38,432         21,623           0.9265       0.5213         44,943
 Manuf          42,655         21,706           1.0283       0.5233         140,339
 Trans/Util     43,608         20,552           1.0512       0.4954         55,699
 Trade          37,024         23,288           0.8925       0.5614         83,833
 Service        43,617         26,810           1.0514       0.6463         173,012



   An additional issue with the CPS is imputed data. In the CPS interviews, if an
answer to a particular question is not received or is inconsistent with other answers,
a variety of complex procedures are followed to impute the missing or inconsistent
information (see Current Population Survey (2002), chapter 9, for a lengthy sum-
mary). As Kambourov and Manovskii (2004) point out, the imputation procedures
changed in 1976 and 1989, and at those dates, rates of gross flow across industries
and occupations in the publicly released CPS data changed dramatically. In par-
ticular, apparent rates of gross flow dropped dramatically with the 1976 change in

                                           15
imputation procedures, and they increased dramatically with the 1989 change. Rates
of gross flow are central to our estimation strategy, so we need to obtain the most
reliable measures for such flows possible, and if imputation procedures introduce spu-
rious flows we need to find a way to cleanse the data of these effects. From 1989 on,
an indicator variable is recorded in the data to indicate if a portion of a given data
record has been imputed. We follow Moscarini and Vella (2003), and perform the
following two steps to minimize the imputation problem: (i) We drop data prior to
1976 (for which Moscarini and Vella argue that the imputation procedures were very
crude and introduced a great deal of spurious gross flows, and no indicator exists in
the data to identify which records are affected by imputation); and (ii) We drop any
individual subsequent to 1988 whose data are partially imputed. In principle, this
could create a selection bias, but since the sample means for the individuals who have
been dropped are very similar to those for the rest of the sample (except for gross
flow rates, which are much higher for the dropped workers), it does not appear to be
a problem in this case.
   Descriptive statistics for the resulting data are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Sample
sizes added up across years range from 20,952 for Agriculture/Mining to 140,339 for
Manufacturing and 173,012 for Service. Table 1 summarizes gross flows. Each cell of
the table shows the average fraction of workers in the row sector who moved to the
column sector in any given period; for example, on average, 0.56% of Construction
workers in any year moved to Agriculture/Mining. The main diagonal shows the
average fraction who did not change sector of employment (that is, miit ), so one
minus this value is a simple measure of the rate of gross flow. The value on the
diagonal varies from 0.9292 for Agriculture/Mining to 0.9720 for Services, implying
a rate of gross flow that varies across sectors from 2.8% to 7.1%. Table 2 shows
descriptive statistics for wages. Normalized wages (that is, normalized to have a unit
mean) averaged across time range from 0.8374 for Agriculture/Mining to 1.0514 for
Services.




                                         16
4     Results.
Before showing estimations, we should point out that we do not attempt to estimate
β. This model is not designed to estimate rates of time preference, and although it
could be done in principle, in practice it turns out that that one parameter is very
poorly identified. Since it is not a parameter of interest for us, and since it is the one
parameter for which we have strong information a priori, we simply impose β = 0.97
in all that follows.
    Table 3 shows the results from the basic regression. For the simplest implemen-
tation of the model, we impose C ij ≡ C∀i 6= j, so that the mean moving cost for any
transition from one industry to any other is the same. We will explore specifications
that allow the C ij ’s to vary shortly. Throughout the table, the data are from 1976 to
2001, and the t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
    Panel I shows the results for the full sample with no instruments, which (recalling
(8))amounts to regressing current flows ln mij     ii                    ij       ii
                                            t −ln mt on future flows ln mt+1 −ln mt+1
                                  j      i
and the future wage differential wt+1 − wt+1 by OLS. Of course, this is likely to be
biassed, as the residual contains the shock revealed at time t + 1, which is likely to
be correlated with date-t + 1 wages. For this reason, we use as instrumental variables
the values of the gross flows and wages lagged twice, which must be uncorrelated with
any new information revealed at time t + 1. The estimates using the instrumental
values are reported in Panel II. Henceforth, unless otherwise stated, all estimates use
this instrumental-variables approach.
    For the basic specification, estimation with and without instrumental variables
produces extremely high estimates of both C and ν, with both parameters highly
significant. The instrumental-variables estimate of C in Panel II amounts to ap-
proximately thirteen times average annual wage earnings (given our normalization of
average wages to unity). The value of ν of 2.897 implies a variance of the idiosyncratic
shock equal to 13.8, or a standard deviation of 3.7; of course, the standard deviation
of the idiosyncratic moving cost is twice that (since it is the difference between two
idiosyncratic shocks). In other words, the mean moving cost between two industries
is thirteen times the average wage, but its standard deviation is about seven times
the average wage. We will argue in the following section that these estimates are
likely to be biassed upward and we will present lower estimates following corrections


                                           17
                          Table 3: The Basic Regression.

                       I. Full sample: OLS
                               ν                      C
                        4.466** (1.829)        22.065 (1.780)**
                       II. Full sample with instruments.
                               ν                      C
                       2.897*** (2.667) 13.210*** (2.558)
                       III. Younger workers.
                               ν                      C
                       2.385*** (2.346)        10.312** (2.228)
                       IV. Older workers.
                               ν                      C
                         4.220 (1.153)          21.508 (1.149)
                       V. No college education.
                               ν                      C
                         5.665 (0.946)          25.658 (0.922)
                       VI. Some college education.
                               ν                      C
                        3.339** (2.000)        15.539** (1.785)

(T-statistics are in parentheses. One-sided significance: 1-percent***, 5-percent**,
10-percent*.)




                                          18
for the bias, but these strikingly high figures do convey an important message that is
robust to all corrections: Labor movements in response to a differential in wages are
very sluggish. The labor market acts as if it is very costly to change sectors, but at
the same time a significant number of workers does so anyway, not in response to dif-
ferences in wages, but because of unobserved and possibly non-pecuniary factors that
are at least as important as wages in workers’ decisions. Later, in the simulations, we
will see that the aggregate labor market behavior implied by our estimates is quite
realistic, and fits well with some reduced-form regression results in the literature.
        Panels III and IV show the results when the estimation is restricted to workers
under the age of 45 and workers 45 years old or older, respectively. Once again,
the coefficients are highly significant. The difference in results is that the mean and
variance of moving costs are substantially higher for older workers (the value of C
is about twice as high for the older workers), although it must be noted that the
parameters are very imprecisely estimated for the older workers.9 This does not
reflect a substantially reduced mobility per se for older workers (the ratio C/ν is
about 5.1 for older workers and 4.3 for younger workers), but rather a much lower
responsiveness of mobility to wage differentials.
        Panels V and VI show the results when the estimation is restricted to workers
with no college education and those with at least one year of college, respectively.10
Again, the coefficients are significant, although with a much lower level for those with
no college. Again, the level of mobility per se is not very different between the two
groups (the C/ν ratio is about 4.5 for both groups), but estimated mobility barriers
are very much higher for those with no college.


5         Possible sources of bias.
There are two notable reasons the very high estimates we have obtained for C and
ν may be the result of bias: Sampling error in industry wages and possible misinter-
    9
        This may well reflect sample sizes, leading to more noise in the measured wages and gross flows
for older workers. There are 518,778 worker-year observations in the sample, of whom 326,918 are
young (63% of the total) and 191,860 are older (37% of the total).
  10
     Workers with some college education comprise 149,329 worker years, or 29% of the total. Workers
with no college comprise 369,449 worker years, or 71% of the total.


                                                    19
pretation of mobility rates in the CPS data due to timing issues. There is also the
possibility that constraining all C ij values to the the same is a mispecification that
generates its own bias. We discuss these in turn.


5.1    Sampling error in wages.
We measure the industry wages wti as the average wage in the industry in the CPS
sample. If the sampling error is significant, the industry wage will be measured with
noise, resulting in a classical errors-in-variables bias. Given the estimating equation
(9), this will lower the estimated value βν , thus raising the estimated value of ν and
thus C. We investigate this possibility in two ways.
   First, we re-do the estimation using time-averaged values of the variables. To
the extent that the high estimates are driven by serially uncorrelated noise in the
measured variables, this should reduce their level. We break the sample into consec-
utive, non-overlapping five-year segments. For each industry i, we average wti over
each segment, and for each i and j we average mij
                                               t over the segment. The results are

reported in Table 4.
   Note that although the estimated moving costs are much smaller now, nonetheless
C is estimated at eight and a half times average wages and the standard deviation
of moving costs equal to eight times annual wages in the benchmark specification of
panel II. (They are also much more precisely estimated, with significance at the 1%
level for all parameters.) This specification is not useful for policy analysis, since
the implied five-year period for each worker reallocation is unrealistically long, but it
does make the point that only a portion of the explanation for the high moving costs
could plausibly be due to sampling error in wages.
   Second, we re-do the regression using wage data from the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics’ Current Employment Surveys (CES) in place of the wage data we have con-
structed from the CPS. Since the CES is a broad employer-based survey with a large
sample size, it is likely to have less of a problem with sampling error in the wages. The
industry classifications for the two data sets are not exactly the same, but the nearest




                                           20
                  Table 4: The Regression with Time-Averaging.

                        I. Full sample: OLS
                               ν                       C
                        3.587*** (5.924) 10.298*** (4.621)
                        II. Full sample with instruments.
                               ν                       C
                        3.338*** (7.932)        8.477*** (6.035)
                        III. Younger workers.
                               ν                       C
                        3.172*** (6.211)        7.513*** (4.668)
                        IV. Older workers.
                               ν                       C
                        3.680*** (4.156) 12.715*** (4.114)
                        V. No college education.
                               ν                       C
                        5.160*** (2.763) 12.733*** (2.626)
                        VI. Some college education.
                               ν                       C
                        3.177*** (4.948)        8.367*** (3.926)

(T-statistics are in parentheses. One-tailed significance: 1-percent***, 5-percent**,
10-percent*.)




                                           21
match produces quite similar wage series,11 and very similar regression results.12
       We thus conclude that the high estimates of C and ν are not likely to be artifacts
of sampling error in wages.


5.2        Timing and the misinterpretation of flow rates.
Kambourov and Manovskii (2004) point out a difficulty in interpreting flow rates
that come out of the March CPS retrospective questions. Respondents are asked their
industry and occupation in their longest-held job of the previous year. If the duration
of jobs is distributed randomly and respondents remember correctly, on average they
will be reporting their employment status as of the middle of the previous year, and
thus mobility at a nine-month window (June to March) rather than a twelve-month
window. However, if a respondent has had more than one job during that year and
recalls the details of the later job more clearly, the later one might incorrectly be
reported as the longest job. In this case, the respondent might be reporting details of
his or her employment in October, for example, implying that what is being measured
is mobility at a six-month window.
       Therefore, although it appears superficially to be annual, the mobility measured
by the March CPS is something less than annual. Kambourov and Manovskii (2004)
point out that, consistent with this, occupational gross flow rates as measured by the
March CPS tend to be smaller than those measured from other sources.
       We can attempt to correct for this in the following way. Suppose that the gross
flow rate we observe is the flow rate over some interval that is K months long, and
denote the matrix of gross flow rates thus observed by m.
                                                       e We first convert this into
a matrix of monthly gross flows, m̂, by solving the equation m̂K = m̃, where m̂K
denotes the matrix m̂ multiplied by itself K times.13 Without loss of clarity, we can
  11
       The correlation between the two wage series is 63% for Agriculture/mining; 91% for Construc-
tion; 44% for Manufacturing; 56% for Transportation/Utilities; 61% for Trade; and 55% for Gov-
ernment and other services.
  12
     For example, for the OLS regression in Table 3, the point estimate and t-statistic for ν are 4.466
(1.829) for the CPS wage data and 4.237 (2.031) for the CES data respectively. The estimates for
C are 22.065 (1.780) for the CPS wage data and 20.921 (2.021) for the CES data respectively.
  13
     For example, in the two-industry case, if K = 2, the fraction of workers in industry 1 at the
beginning of the two-month interval who are in industry 2 at the end of the two-month interval is



                                                  22
denote this matrix as m̃1/K = m̂. Suppose that within a year, the monthly flow rate
matrix m̂ is constant. Then the year-by-year matrix of flow rates will be given by
                          12
mAN N ≡ m̂12 = m̃ K , or the m̂ matrix multiplied by itself 12 times. We have data on
gross flow rates from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), which we
can denote mij,N
            t
                 LSY
                     and which do not suffer from the timing problems just described
for the March CPS. We choose K to minimize the following loss function:14
                          X      12/K
                             ((m̃t )ij − mij,N
                                           t
                                               LSY 2
                                                   )                                             (11)
                                        i,j,t

for the portion of our sample restricted to younger workers. This results in a value
of K = 5, implying that the March CPS measures mobility at a five-month horizon.
                                         e with the annualized gross flows mAN N =
We then replace our measured gross flows m
e 12/K throughout, and perform the estimation again.
m
       As expected, the annualized rates show higher gross flows overall. Table 5 provides
                                                              e ii for i = 1, . . . 6) with
a comparison of the original rates of gross flow (meaning 1 − m
the annualized rates of gross flow (meaning 1 − (mAN N )ii for i = 1, . . . 6).

                      Table 5: Rates of gross flow, original and annualized.

                                                Raw data.    Annualized data.
                               Agric/Min          0.071            0.161
                                  Const           0.057            0.130
                                 Manuf            0.029            0.068
                                Trans/Util        0.036            0.083
                                  Trade           0.053            0.122
                                 Service          0.028            0.065


       The regression results are as shown in Table 6. The first two columns show results
from annualized data as just described, and comparing them with the results in Table
3 shows that, as expected, the values for C and ν are lower for each version of the re-
gression and for each subsample. The only exception is version IV, the regression with
equal to m̂12 m̂22 + m̂11 m̂12 , which is the product of the first row and the second column of the m̂
matrix.
  14                  12/K ij                                              12/K
       To clarify, (m̃t   )     is the ij element of the matrix mAN
                                                                 t
                                                                    N
                                                                      = m̃t       .

                                                      23
only older workers; that sample shows a slight increase for the annualized regression,
but for neither the raw nor the annualized data are the coefficients significant. For
the other cases, the drop in the estimates of C and ν is substantial; for example, the
results from the benchmark regression (regression II) imply a mean moving cost of
about six and a half times average annual wages (compared with thirteen in Table 3)
and a standard deviation of moving costs of five times annual wages (compared with
seven times for Table 3). The final two columns of Table 6 show the results of the
regression when we apply time-averaging as in the previous subsection to the annu-
alized data. Note the sharp reduction in estimates of C and ν, with the benchmark
regression showing average moving costs at just below three times average annual
wages. Note also that the coefficients for older workers are now significant, and that
throughout Table 6, the patterns of the basic regression are preserved: Instrumental
variables lower the estimated moving cost parameters, and moving costs are lower
for younger workers and workers with some college (the exception being the last two
rows of the last column).
   Overall, we find strong indications that the timing problem due to the nature
of CPS questions does bias our estimates for C and ν upward substantially, but
correcting for this still leaves large values for moving costs, with C never falling
substantially below three times average annual wages.


5.3    Mispecification of moving costs.
A last possible source of bias comes from the fact that we have imposed uniform
moving costs for all sectors, so that C ij = C∀i, j. Degrees-of-freedom concerns prevent
us from estimating the full set of C ij parameters without restriction, but we have also
estimated the model with a slightly richer specification allowing for sector-specific
“entry costs.” In this approach, C ij = cj for i = 1, . . . , 6. Table 7 shows the results
of this regression with annualized data.
   Compared with the benchmark regression (II) from Table 6, we find that most
sectors exhibit lower entry costs (mostly between 4 and 5, compared to 6.6 for Table
6), but Sector 4, Transport, Communications and Utility exhibits substantially higher
entry costs — more than eight times average annual wages. This reflects the fact
that Sector 4’s wages are relatively high but few workers wind up in this sector. For


                                           24
                Table 6: The Regression with Annualized Flow Rates.

     Annualized flows.                      Annualized with time-averaging.
     I. Full sample: OLS
            ν                   C                      ν                  C
     2.178*** (3.755) 8.799*** (3.264)          1.857*** (9.982)   3.452*** (4.740)
     II. Full sample with instruments.
            ν                   C                      ν                  C
     1.884*** (3.846) 6.565*** (3.381) 1.899*** (11.614) 2.837*** (4.300)
     III. Younger workers.
            ν                   C                      ν                  C
     1.516*** (3.808) 4.988*** (3.011)          1.756*** (9.358)   2.296*** (3.313)
     IV. Older workers.
            ν                   C                      ν                  C
       4.605 (0.504)      22.962 (0.502)        2.285*** (6.812)   5.640*** (4.893)
     V. No college education.
            ν                   C                      ν                  C
      2.926* (1.405)       9.382 (1.261)        2.856*** (4.006)   4.037*** (2.351)
     VI. Some college education.
            ν                   C                      ν                  C
     1.848** (1.938)      7.689* (1.499)        1.890*** (7.447)   2.969*** (2.984)

(T-statistics are in parentheses. One-tailed significance: 1-percent***, 5-percent**,
10-percent*.)




                                           25
                          Table 7: Sector-specific entry costs.

                                                            Estimate.    t-statistic.
     ν                                                      1.512***      (3.622)
     C 1 (Agriculture/Mining)                               4.124         (1.053)
     C 2 (Construction)                                     4.899**       (1.735)
         3
     C (Manufacturing)                                      4.994***      (3.165)
     C 4 (Transportation, Communication and Utilities)      8.311***      (3.044)
     C 5 (Trade)                                            3.703*        (1.437)
     C 6 (Government and Other Services)                    5.589***      (3.791)

(Full sample, with instruments. Gross flows are annualized as in Table 6. One-tail
significance: 1-percent***, 5-percent**, 10-percent*.))

example, from Table 2, note that wages for both Services and Sector 4 are about
five percent above the whole-sample average, but Sector 4 has fewer than a third as
many workers. Alternatively, note from a comparison of the fourth and sixth colums
of Table 1 that the rate of flow from each other sector into sector 4 is in each case
around one third the rate of flow into sector 6, despite that fact that on average the
wages in these two sectors are about identical. This indicates some implicit obstacle
(or disutility) to entering sector 4 compared to other sectors, thus implying a high
value of C 4 .
    We can conclude that a portion of the reason for the high values estimated for
C in the earlier regressions is the need to account for the unusually low flows into
Transport, Communications and Utilities. However, even when this effect is separated
out, most of the other sectoral moving costs are still high — at least four times average
annual wages.


6     Simulation: A Sudden Trade Liberalization.
Now, we use the estimates to study the effect of a hypothetical trade shock through
simulations. We assume that each of the six sectors has a Constant Elasticity of
Substitution production function, with labor and unmodelled sector-specific capital


                                           26
as inputs. Thus, for our purposes, the production function for sector i is given by:
                                                         1
                         i   i   i   i ρi        i   i ρ i ρi
                       yt = ψ α (Lt ) + (1 − α )(K )          ,                   (12)

where yti is the output for sector i in period t, K i is sector-i’s capital stock, and
αi > 0, ρi < 1, and ψ i > 0 are parameters. Given the number of free parameters and
our treatment of capital as fixed,15 we can without loss of generality set K i = 1∀i.
This implies that the wages are given by:

                                                     i
                                                                              i
                                                                                              1−ρi i
                                   pit αi ψ i (Lit )ρ −1
                                                                                                ρ
                         wti   =                               α   i
                                                                       (Lit )ρ     + (1 − α )i
                                                                                                      ,   (13)

where pit is the domestic price of the output of sector i. We set the values αi , ρi , and ψ i
to minimize a loss function given our assumptions on prices (see below). Specifically,
for any set of parameter values, we can compute the predicted wage for each sector
and that sector’s predicted share of GDP using (13) and (12) together with empirical
employment levels for each sector and our assumptions about prices as described
below. The loss function is then the sum across sectors of the square of each sector’s
predicted wage minus mean wage in the data, plus the square of the sector’s predicted
minus its actual share of GDP. In addition, we assume that all workers have identical
Cobb-Douglas preferences, using consumption shares from the BLS consumer price
index calculations for the consumption weights. The parameter values that result
from this procedure are summarized in Table 8.
       The moving-cost parameters used are found in our preferred specification, the
annualized-flow-rate approach of the first two columns of Table 6, using the full
sample with instruments.
       Then, to provide a simple trade shock, we assume the following: (i) Units are
chosen so that the domestic price of each good at date t = −1 is unity. (Given
our available free parameters, this is without loss of generality.) (ii) There are no
tariffs on any sector aside from manufacturing, at any date. (iii) The world price of
manufacturing output is 0.7 at each date. The world price of all other tradeable goods
  15
       We assume that capital is fixed in order to focus on the workers’ problem and to keep the model
manageable. Of course, capital should also be expected to adjust to trade liberalization, and that
should also be expected to affect wages. We have experimented with simple simulations with perfect
capital mobility, obtaining similar welfare results but sharper movements in wages. We defer a full
treatment of this issue to future work.

                                                               27
                         Table 8: Parameters for Simulation.


                 αi       ρi       ψi     Consumer expenditure      Pre-liberalization      World
                                                   share.             domestic price.       price.
 Agric/Min     0.691    0.6828 0.6733               0.07                      1                 1
   Const       0.6544 0.4924 0.7653                  0.3                      1                1∗
   Manuf       0.3224 0.3553 1.6965                  0.3                      1               0.7
 Trans/Util    0.5721 0.5664 1.0393                 0.08                      1                1∗
   Trade       0.5714   0.445    0.9125              0                        1                1∗
   Service     0.3418 0.5576 2.2135                 0.25                      1                 1

(Note:∗ Under the second simulation specification, the sectors marked with an asterisk
are non-traded, so they have no world price.)

is equal to unity at each date. (iv) There is initially a specific tariff on manufactures
at the level 0.3 per unit, so that the domestic price of manufactures is equal to unity.
(v) Initially, this tariff is expected to be permanent, and the economy is in the steady
state with that expectation. (vi) At date t = −1, however, after that period’s moving
decisions have been made, the government announces that the tariff will be removed
beginning period t = 0 (so that the domestic price of manufactures will fall from
unity to 0.7 at that date), and that this liberalization will be permanent.
   Thus, we simulate a sudden liberalization of the manufacturing sector. We com-
pute the perfect-foresight path of adjustment following the liberalization announce-
ment, until the economy has effectively reached the new steady state. This requires
that each worker, taking the time path of wages in all sectors as given, optimally de-
cides at each date whether or not to switch sectors, taking into account that worker’s
own idiosyncratic shocks. This induces a time-path for the allocation of workers, and
therefore the time-path of wages, since the wage in each sector at each date is de-
termined by market clearing from (13) given the number of workers currently in the
sector. Of course, the time path of wages so generated must be the same as the time-
path each worker expects. It is shown in Cameron, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2007)




                                           28
that the equilibrium exists and is unique.16 The computation method is described at
length in Artuç, Chaudhuri and McLaren (forthcoming).
       We present two versions of the simulation. In the first, all goods are assumed
to be traded, so all output prices are exogenous. In the second, some sectors are
non-traded, and so their prices are determined as part of the equilibrium.


6.1        Specification I: All output is tradeable.
The results from the simulation with all goods tradeble can be seen in Figure 2, which
plots the fraction of the labor force in each of the six sectors at each date, and Figure
3, which plots the time-path of wages. Figure 4 shows the average payoff Vti to being
a worker in sector i at time t.
       It is clear from Figure 2 that the employment share of manufacturing drops sharply
as a result of the liberalization, from an old steady state value of 25% to a new
steady state value of 16%, with corresponding modest gains to all other sectors.
This transition is substantially complete within 8 years. The loss of manufacturing’s
share is of course not surprising given that manufacturing has lost its protection. It
is also clear from Figure 3 that real wages in manufacturing fall as a result of the
liberalization, from an old steady-state value of 1.06 to a new steady-state value of
1.03, and with corresponding modest gains to all other sectors due to the drop in
consumer prices. It should be emphasized that in neither steady state are the wages
equalized across sectors. This is a basic feature of the gross-flows model, absent
in net-flows models (see Cameron, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2007) for an extended
discussion).
       Figure 3 shows, in addition, that each sector sees a non-monotonic path for real
wages. The real wage in manufacturing overshoots its long-run value, with an initial
drop of 22% and a new steady state just 2.45% below the original steady state.
This overshooting occurs because after the sudden shock of the drop in domestic
manufacturing prices, workers begin to move out of the sector, moving up and to
the left along the sector’s demand-for-labor curve and gradually bringing wages up.17
  16
       Strictly speaking, the proof there applies to the case with all goods traded, but it can be extended
mechanically to the case with non-traded goods under free trade.
 17
    In principle, it is possible that this process could continue so that real wages in the liberalizing



                                                     29
Similar overshooting occurs in each of the other sectors, in the opposite direction, for
parallel reasons.
    Note that at each date following the liberalization announcement, the real wage
in manufacturing is below what it was in the old steady state. It would be tempting
to conclude that for this reason manufacturing workers must be worse off because
of the liberalization. However, that is not true. As can be seen in Figure 4, which
plots V i (Lt , st ) from equation (3), all workers see a rise in their expected discounted
lifetime utilities at the time of the announcement, including manufacturing workers.18
The reason is the presence of gross flows. Each manufacturing worker understands
that, because of the liberalization, manufacturing wages are permanently lower but
real wages in all other sectors are permanently higher. Further, there is in each
period a positive probability that the manufacturing worker will choose to move to
one of those other sectors and enjoy those higher wages. Taking into account these
probabilities, the manufacturing worker considers himself/herself lucky to be hit with
the liberalization.
    Put differently, the liberalization lowers the wages in the manufacturing sector but
raises the option value to workers in the sector by more than enough to compensate.
Thus, in this case, despite the estimation of extremely high moving costs, the model
predicts that even workers in import-competing sectors will welcome liberalization.
This underlines the crucial importance of gross flows in welfare analysis.19
    Finally, we can compute trade flows from the simulation. At each date with free
trade, GDP can be computed from the labor allocation and production functions;
from the utility function, we can compute consumption of each sector’s output, and
subtract the quantity produced to derive net imports. In the initial steady state with
the tariff, calculation is slightly more complicated, as we need to add tariff revenue
to income and compute consumption with domestic prices instead of world prices.
sector could rise past their original value, and wind up higher in the new steady-state than in the
old, but that does not happen in this case. See Artuç, Chaudhuri and McLaren (forthcoming) for
examples.
  18
     The rise in lifetime utility is between 4.5% and 5% in non-manufacturing sectors and 1.7% in
manufacturing.
 19
    We also have simulated exactly the same policy experiment with the estimates from the sector-
specific “entry-cost” specification of Table 7. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively very
similar, with rather higher wages overall for Transporation, Communications and Utilities.


                                                 30
Figure 5 shows the result for manufacturing output. At the date of liberalization,
manufacturing consumption jumps up because of the abrupt drop in the domestic
price of manufactures. Thereafter, it trends upward slightly because of increases
in GDP as the economy reallocates its labor. Throughout, domestic production of
manufactures falls, as workers leave the sector. Note that this implies that following
the liberalization, manufactures imports continue to rise for several years, even as
manufacturing wages rise. Thus, if one regressed manufacturing wages on import
penetration and the date t = −1 was not part of the data, one would find a positive
coefficient, while including the date t = −1 would change the sign to negative. This
suggests that regressions that relate current manufacturing wages to current import
penetration measures, such as are explored in Freeman and Katz (1991) and Kletzer
(2002), need to be interpreted with great care.
   Another point can be seen regarding the interpretation of reduced-form regres-
sions. Revenga (1992), in her simplest specification, regresses changes in log industry
wages and employment for the years 1981-5 on changes in log industry import prices
for the same period, and finds an elasticity of 1.74 for employment and 0.40 for wages.
An analogous wage ‘elasticity’ can be computed from our simulation, as
                         !                    !                           !
       w3manuf − w−1
                   manuf
                                  pmanuf
                                   −1               1   w manuf
                                                          3     − w manuf
                                                                    −1
              manuf            manuf    manuf
                                                =−             manuf
                                                                            ,
            w−1              p3      − p−1         0.3       w−1

where wtmanuf and pmanuf
                   t     denote the period-t manufacturing wage and domestic out-
put price, respectively. The employment ‘elasticity’ is analogous. The employment
‘elasticity’ from our simulation is 0.88, and the wage ‘elasticity’ is 0.38. Thus, the
orders of magnitude are similar to the Revenga elasticities and the signs match up
– despite the tremendous differences in method. However, as pointed out above, the
welfare implications of our dynamic model with gross flows are the opposite of the
implications of Revenga’s static model without gross flows. In her interpretation,
workers in a sector whose import price falls are hurt, while in our simulation they are
not. The option value effects that are key to our analysis have no possible role in the
static approach.
   Thus, although our model generates aggregate behavior broadly similar to what is
found in some reduced-form regression results, the welfare implications are extremely
different.

                                          31
6.2        Specification II: Non-traded sectors.
In our second simulation specification, Construction, Transportation/Utilities and
Trade are taken to be non-traded.20 Thus, their prices are endogenous, and adjust so
that the quantity produced in each of those sectors at each date (as determined from
the production function and the number of workers in the sector at that date) is equal
to the quantity demanded, given GDP and tradeable-goods prices. The endogenous
domestic prices are shown in Figure 11, which can be contrasted with the exogenous
prices of Figure 6. Figure 7 shows the reallocation of labor. Compared with Figure 2,
the pattern is similar, but the non-traded sectors expand less while the traded sectors
expand more. This is because the suddenly less expensive manufactured goods cause
consumer expenditure to switch toward manufacturing and away from non-traded
goods, effectively shifting the demand curve for non-traded goods sharply downward
at the date of the liberalization. This is reflected in the sudden drop in non-traded
prices exhibited in the time-plot of domestic prices shown in Figure 11. As a result,
the movement in wages in non-traded sectors is much less sharp in Figure 8 than in
Figure 3. Figure 10 shows that, once again, liberalization increases the imports of
manufactures, with an initial jump and gradual adjustment over the following several
years.
       The main point is unchanged. Real wages in manufacturing fall sharply and
never recover, as shown in Figure 8, but workers in manufacturing benefit from the
liberalization along with workers in all of the other sectors, as shown in Figure 9.
Once again, the explanation is enhanced option value for workers in the liberalized
sector.


7        Conclusion.
We have presented a dynamic, rational expectations model of labor adjustment to
trade shocks, which is, through Euler-equation techniques, easy to estimate econo-
  20
       This division is, of course, to some degree arbitrary. It is difficult to argue that Services should
be classified as non-traded, since services trade has occupied much attention and created much
controversy at the WTO. On the other hand, the ‘Trade’ sector is, of course, mainly domestic
wholesale and retail trade, and thus not internationally traded, which is the meaning of ‘non-traded’
here.

                                                     32
metrically, yielding structural parameters. It is then easy to simulate to study policy.
Among our findings are the following.
    (i) Since gross flows of workers across industries are substantial but do not respond
much to intersectoral wage differences, both the mean and the standard deviation of
workers’ moving costs implied by the model are large – several times an average
workers’ annual earnings, in fact.
    (ii) Because of this, the model predicts somewhat sluggish reallocation of workers
following a trade liberalization. In our simulation of the elimination of a 30% tariff
on manufacturing, 95% of the reallocation is completed in 8 years.
    (iii) This implies sharp movement of wages in response to the liberalization, with
the short-run response overshooting the long-run response by a wide margin.
    (iv) Option value, not previously part of the discussion in analysis of trade policy,
matters a great deal in evaluating the welfare effects of trade liberalization. In our
simulation, the manufacturing wage falls both in the short run and in the long run,
but manufacturing workers are better off than before the liberalization because of
their enhanced option value. This echoes some findings by Magee, Davidson and
Matusz (2005) on patterns in political contributions.
    (v) Although our model generates aggregate behavior broadly similar to what is
found in some reduced-form regression results, the welfare implications are extremely
different.


A      Appendix: Derivation of Equilibrium Condi-
       tions with the Extreme Value Distribution.

A.1     Overview of the Derivation.
The cumulative distribution function for the extreme value distribution with zero
mean is given by:
                            F (ε) = exp(− exp(−ε/ν − γ)),

where γ ∼
        = 0.5772 is Euler’s constant. The associated density function is:

                    f (ε) = (1/ν) exp(−ε/ν − γ − exp(−ε/ν − γ)).


                                           33
   In the following subsection we will derive equation (6), which relates gross flow
rates to the value function. In the subsection after that we will derive the form for
the option-value function reported in (7).


A.2     The mij function.
The gross flow of workers from i to j at date t, mij
                                                  t , is equal to the probability that

a given i-worker will switch to j at date t, or the probability that, for an i-worker,
utility wti + εjt + βEt [V j (Lt+1 , st+1 )] − C ij will be higher for a move to j than for any
of the other n − 1 options. In other words, from (2),


                       mij
                                    ij   j    ik   k
                                                                          
                        t = P robεt εt + εt ≥ εt + εt for k = 1, . . . , n .

   Suppressing the time subscript, this can be written:

                                   Z   ∞             Y
                              ij
                            m =            f (εj )          F (εj + εij − εik )dεj .
                                    −∞               k6=j
                                                                                                  Pn
                                                                                                       exp(z k /ν)
   Define, for convenience: x ≡ εj /ν+γ, z j ≡ εij , εik = z k , and λ ≡ log(                       k=1
                                                                                                    exp(z k /ν)
                                                                                                                   ).
Then the expression for gross flows can be rewritten:


           1
               R
 mij =             exp(−εj /ν − γ − exp(−εj /ν − γ))                        exp(− exp(−[εj + εij − εik ]/ν − γ))dεj
                                                                 Q
           ν                                                         k6=j


           1
               R
                   exp(−εj /ν − γ − exp(−εj /ν − γ)) exp(−                            exp(−[εj + εij − εik ]/ν − γ))dεj
                                                                            P
       =   ν                                                                   k6=j


           1
               R                             Pn
       =   ν
                   exp(−εj /ν − γ) exp(−        k=1     exp(−[εj + εij − εik ]/ν − γ))dεj

           1
                   exp (−εj /ν − γ) − nk=1 exp(−[εj + εij − εik ]/ν − γ) dεj
               R                    P                                  
       =   ν


           1
                   exp (−εj /ν − γ) − exp((−εj /ν − γ)) nk=1 exp(−[z j − z k ]/ν) dεj
               R                                      P                         
       =   ν


           1
               R                                       Pn                             j
       =   ν
                   exp (−εj /ν − γ) − exp((−εj /ν − γ))  k=1 exp(z k
                                                                     /ν)  / exp(z j
                                                                                    /ν) dε

           R
       =       exp(−x − exp(−(x − λ)))dx.

                                                        34
     This again can be rewritten:
                                       Z
                        ij
                      m = exp(−λ)            exp(−(x − λ) − exp(−(x − λ)))dx.

     Now set y = x − λ. Noting that the antiderivative of


                                           exp(−y − exp(−y))

is
                                             exp(− exp(−y)),

we can derive:


                                          R
                             mij = exp(−λ) exp(−y − exp(−y))dy


                                  = exp(−λ)

                                             j
                                  =   Pnexp(z /ν)k /ν)
                                       k=1 exp(z


                                        exp(εij /ν)
                                  =   Pn         ik  .
                                       k=1 exp(ε /ν)




Given that εii ≡ 0, this yields (6).


A.3        The Option-Value Function.
Define:

            R∞
 Ψij ≡          (εj − C ij )f (εj )              F (εj + εij − εik )dεj
                                      Q
             −∞                           j6=k


            1
                R
                    (εj − C ij ) exp(−εj /ν − γ − exp(−εj /ν − γ))                   exp(− exp(−[εj + εij − εik ]/ν − γ))dεj
                                                                          Q
       =    ν                                                                 k6=j




     Going through the steps of Subsection (A.2), we find:



                                                        35
           R
  Ψij =        (ν(x − γ) − C ij ) exp(−x − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                                         R
       = (−C ij − νγ) exp(−λ) + ν            x exp(−x − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                                         R
       = (−C ij − νγ) exp(−λ) + ν exp(−λ) x exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

   We know that exp(−λ) = mij from the previous derivation. Substituting this in:

                                    R
Ψij = (−C ij − νγ)mij + νmij            x exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                                    R
     = (−C ij − νγ)mij + νmij           x exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                  R
          +νmij       λ exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                  R
          −νmij       λ exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                             R
     = (−C ij − νγ)mij + νmij (x − λ) exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                  R
          +νmij       λ exp(−x + λ − exp(−(x − λ)))dx

                                    R                                   R
     = (−C ij − νγ)mij + νmij           y exp(−y − exp(−y))dy + νλmij       exp(−y − exp(−y))dy

                                    R
     = (−C ij − νγ)mij + νmij           y exp(−y − exp(−y))dy + νλmij .

                 R
   Noting that       y exp(−y − exp(−y))dy = γ (Euler’s constant) (Patel, Kapadia and
Owen (1976, p. 35)), we can simplify:

                        Ψij = (−C ij − νγ)mij + νλmij + νγmij


                             = −C ij mij − ν log(mij )mij


                             = mij (−C ij − ν log(mij )) .

                                              36
   Adding this up across possible destinations j, note that the utility of a worker in
i is equal to:
                                   n
                                   X
         i               i
                                         Ψij    ij j
                                                                     
       Vt+1      =      wt+1   +          t + βmt Vt+1
                                   j=1

                                   n
                                   X  ij
                    i
                                      mt (−ν log(mij     ij    j
                                                                   
                 = wt+1 +                         t ) − C + βVt+1 )
                                   j=1

                                 n
                                 X  ij
                         i
                                    mt (−ν log(mij     ij     j      i         i
                                                                         
                 =      wt+1   +                t ) − C + β(Vt+1 − Vt+1 ) + βVt+1
                                   j=1

                                 n
                                 X  ij ij
                         i
                                    mt (εt − ν log(mij       i
                                                       
                 =      wt+1   +                    t ) + βVt+1 .
                                   j=1



                                                                                                         Pn
   Now, recall from Subsection (A.2) above that log(mij ) = εij
                                                                                                                               
                                                             t /ν−log                                         k=1   exp(εik /ν) .
This yields:
                                             n
                                                   "                     n
                                                                                               !#
                                             X                           X
                   i
                 Vt+1    =      i
                               wt+1      +             mij
                                                        t (ν   log                    ik
                                                                               exp(ε /ν)                 i
                                                                                                    + βVt+1
                                             j=1                         k=1
                                                        n
                                                                                !
                                                        X
                            i
                         = wt+1 + ν log                        exp(εik /ν)               i
                                                                                    + βVt+1 .
                                                        k=1

   This implies that the option value Ω(εi ) can be written as:
                                          n
                                                        !
                                        X
                             i                     ik
                          Ω(ε ) = ν log       exp(ε /ν) .
                                                                k=1

   Alternatively, recalling that εii = 0, we have:
                                                                         n
                                                                                           !
                                                                         X
                               log(mii ) = 0 − log                             exp(εik /ν)
                                                                         k=1
                                                                    n
                                                                                           !
                                                                    X
                                               = − log                     exp(εik /ν) ,
                                                                     k=1

so in equilibrium
                                              Ω(εi ) = −ν log mii .
                                                                 

This, then, is (7).

                                                               37
References
 [1] Artuç, Erhan (2006). “Intergenerational Effects of Trade Liberalization.” Mimeo:
    Koç University.

 [2] Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren (forthcoming). “Delay
    and Dynamics in Labor Market Adjustment: Simulation Results.” Forthcoming,
    Journal of International Economics.

 [3] Bowlus, Audra J., and George R. Neumann,(2006). “The Job Ladder” In H.
    Bunzel, B.J. Christensen, G. Neumann, and J-M Robin (eds.), Structural Models
    on Wage and Employment Dynamics. NewYork, NY: Elsevier, pp. 217-235.

 [4] Cameron, Stephen, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren (2007). “Trade
    Shocks and Labor Adjustment: Theory.” NBER Working Paper #13463 (Oc-
    tober).

 [5] Current Population Survey (2000). Technical Paper 63: Design and Methodology.
    Washington, D.C.

 [6] Davidson, Carl and Steven J. Matusz (2001). “On Adjustment Costs.” Michigan
    State University Working Paper.

 [7] Davidson, Carl, Lawrence Martin and Steven J. Matusz (1999). “Trade and
    Search Generated Unemployment.” Journal of International Economics 48:2
    (August), pp. 271-99.

 [8] Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger (1999). “Sectoral Job Creation and De-
    struction Responses to Oil Price Changes.” NBER Working Paper 7095 (April).

 [9] Freeman, Richard B., and Lawrence F. Katz (1991). “Industrial Wage and Em-
    ployment Determination in an Open Economy,” in John M. Abowd and Richard
    Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market (Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press, 1991), pp. 235-59.

[10] Hanson, Gordon H. and Matthew J. Slaughter (1999). “The Rybczynski Theo-
    rem, Factor-Price Equalization, and Immigration: Evidence from U.S. States.”
    NBER Working Paper 7074 (April).

                                           38
[11] Hosios, Arthur J. (1990). “Factor Market Search and the Structure of Simple
    General Equilibrium Models,” The Journal of Political Economy, 98:2 (April),
    pp. 325-355.

[12] Kambourov, Gueorgui (2006). “Labor Market Regulations and the Sectoral Re-
    allocation of Workers: The Case of Trade Reforms.”

[13] Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii (2004). “A Cautionary Note on Us-
    ing (March) CPS Data to Study Worker Mobility.” Working paper, University
    of Toronto.

[14] Keane, Michael P., and Wolpin, Kenneth I. (1997). The Career Decisions of
    Young Men, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105:3.

[15] Kennan, John and James R. Walker (2003). “The Effect of Expected Income on
    Individual Migration Decisions.” NBER Working Paper No. 9585.

[16] Kletzer, Lori G. (2002). Imports, Exports and Jobs: What Does Trade Mean for
    Employment and Job Loss?” Kalamazoo,Michigan: W. E. Upjohn Institute for
    Employment Research.

[17] Lawrence, Robert Z. and Matthew J. Slaughter (1993). International Trade and
    American Wages in the 1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup? Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity (Microeconomics 1993).

[18] Lee, Donghoon (2005). An Estimable Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of
    Work, Schooling and Occupational Choice. International Economic Review, 46
    (February), pp. 1-34.

[19] Magee, Christopher S.P., Carl Davidson, and Steven J. Matusz (2005). “Trade,
    turnover, and tithing,” Journal of International Economics 66, pp. 157 176

[20] Moscarini, Giuseppe and Kaj Thomsson (2006). “Occupational and Job Mobility
    in the US.” Working paper, Yale.

[21] Moscarini, Giuseppe and Francis Vella (2003). “Aggregate Worker Reallocation
    and Occupational Mobility in the United States: 1976-2000.” Mimeo, Yale Uni-
    versity.

                                       39
[22] Patel, Jagdish, C. H. Kapadia, and D. B. Owen (1976). Handbook of Statistical
    Distributions, New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.

[23] Pavcnik, Nina, Orazio Attanasio and Pinelopi Goldberg (2004). “Trade Reforms
    and Income Inequality in Colombia.” Journal of Development Economics, 74
    (August), pp. 331-366.

[24] Revenga, Ana L. (1992). “Exporting Jobs?: The Impact of Import Competition
    on Employment and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing,” The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 107:1. (February), pp. 255-284.

[25] Robertson, Raymond and Donald H. Dutkowsky (2002). “Labor adjustment costs
    in a destination country: the case of Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics
    67:1 (February), pp. 29-54.

[26] Slaughter, Matthew J. (1998). “International Trade and Labor-Market Out-
    comes,” Economic Journal, 108:450 (September), pp. 1452-1462.

[27] Utar, Hâle (2007). “Import Competition and Employment Dynamics.” Working
    paper, University of Colorado at Boulder.

[28] United States Bureau of the Census, (1992) “Geographic Mobility: March 1987
    to March 1991.” U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.




                                        40
