                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  AN ASSET-PRICING VIEW OF EXTERNAL ADJUSTMENT

                                             Anna Pavlova
                                            Roberto Rigobon

                                          Working Paper 13468
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13468


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2007




Correspondence to: Roberto Rigobon, Sloan School of Management, MIT, 50 Memorial Drive, E52-442,
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347, rigobon@mit.edu. We thank Helene Rey and seminar participants at
Banque de France and London Business School for stimulating discussions and Fondation Banque
de France for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Anna Pavlova and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
An Asset-Pricing View of External Adjustment
Anna Pavlova and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 13468
October 2007
JEL No. F31,F36,G12,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent evidence on the importance of cross-border equity flows calls for a rethinking of the standard
theory of external adjustment. We introduce equity holdings and portfolio choice into an otherwise
conventional open-economy dynamic equilibrium model. Our model is simple and admits a closed-form
solution regardless of whether financial markets are complete or incomplete. We find that the excessive
emphasis put in the literature on solving models with incomplete markets for the sole purpose of obtaining
nontrivial implications for the current account is misplaced. We revisit the current debate on the relative
importance of the standard vs. the capital-gains-based (or "valuation'') channels of the external adjustment
and establish that in our framework they are congruent. Our model's implications are consistent with
a number of intriguing stylized facts documented in the recent empirical literature.

Anna Pavlova
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UK
apavlova@london.edu

Roberto Rigobon
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-442
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu
1.     Introduction

An unprecedented rise in cross-border equity holdings over the past two decades generated a source
of income previously disregarded in the national accounts: capital gains on equity holdings. The
current practice incorporates capital gains only after they are redeemed, and this lack of marking to
market may result in a potentially dangerous misrepresentation of the extent of external imbalances
worldwide—especially in the US, most of Europe, and Japan. This is because if one were to use
the standard measure of external sustainability, based on the oﬃcial ﬁgures, one could predict a
global economic disaster. Summarizing the view expressed by many inﬂuential economists, Martin
Wolf (2004) proclaims that “The US is now on the comfortable path to ruin.”

     Burgeoning empirical literature has emphasized that capital gains on the industrialized coun-
tries’ net foreign asset (NFA) positions—or “valuation changes”—have become sizable.1 These
exciting new empirical developments call for a modiﬁcation of the standard external adjustment
theory that includes valuation changes. This task is not an easy one. A formal study of the dy-
namic properties of the NFA position requires not only the analysis of how exchange rates and
asset prices change in the presence of a multitude of shocks, but also the knowledge of countries’
portfolio decisions and their interaction with the real side of the economy. Furthermore, this has
to be studied in an economic environment where the current account implications are not trivial.

     Recent literature oﬀers several ambitious attempts to incorporate portfolio choice and asset pric-
ing in models of international macroeconomics. The complexity of the proposed models, however,
rules out analytical solutions and hence the literature has concentrated on developing sophisticated
approximate or numerical methods to be able to analyze the dynamic properties of such economies.2
Moreover, it has been suggested that to get nontrivial implications for the current account dynam-
ics, the literature needs to move away from the complete markets paradigm, which complicated the
matters further.

     In this paper, we intend to take a step back and simplify the economic setting so that it
   1
     Prominent examples of papers belonging to this strand of literature include Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), Gour-
inchas and Rey (2007b), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), Tille (2003), and Tille
(2005).
   2
     See, e.g., Ghironi, Lee, and Rebucci (2006) and Kollmann (2006) for the ﬁrst-generation analyses that employ
standard ﬁrst-order approximation techniques. The second-generation methodologies were developed by Devereux
and Sutherland (2006), Evans and Hnatkovska (2007), and Tille and van Wincoop (2007) who solve stochastic
portfolio models with incomplete markets using more complex higher-order approximations. Cavallo and Tille (2006)
propose a shortcut solution method in which optimal portfolios are speciﬁed to be an (exogenous) fraction of trade
ﬂows.



                                                        1
becomes analytically tractable and allows us to disentangle the diﬀerent channels through which
capital markets and external adjustment are interrelated. In particular, we develop a two-country
pure-exchange economy with multiple risky assets and incomplete markets in which equilibrium can
be characterized in closed form. To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst fully-ﬂedged dynamic general
equilibrium model of this kind that admits an analytical solution.

    An advantage of our approach is that it provides a theoretical framework in which we can exam-
ine (and clarify) some of the conjectures that have been made in the literature. First, we reassess
the role that incomplete markets play in generating nontrivial current account dynamics. We ar-
gue that to produce ﬂuctuations in the (conventional) current account it is neither necessary nor
suﬃcient that markets are incomplete, and provide two simple examples to support this argument.
Instead, the necessary and suﬃcient condition for generating current account imbalances is that
the countries’ optimal portfolios include holdings of bonds—which depends on hedging demands of
agents and not on market incompleteness per se.

    Second, we revisit the traditional intertemporal approach to the current account that says
that, for the budget constraint to be satisﬁed, a country’s current negative NFA position must
be compensated by future trade surpluses (Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995)). A new view that has
recently emerged in the literature criticizes the traditional approach for neglecting the possibility
that changes in asset returns may lead to changes in the discount factor that could raise the present
value of future trade surpluses without the need to actually adjust the trade balance.3 Surprisingly,
we ﬁnd that in our model, once the endogenous responses of asset prices to underlying shocks are
taken into account, the NFA position ends up being tightly linked to the current trade balance—thus
making the traditional and the new views of the external adjustment congruent.

    Third, we ﬁnd that our theoretical implications are consistent with many stylized facts obtained
in the literature. We adjust the traditional measure of the current account for capital gains,
and analyze separately the two elements that are missing from that measure: the expected and
the unexpected capital gains. We show that the former have a stabilizing property, oﬀsetting the
ﬂuctuations in the trade balance and the traditional current account. Gourinchas and Rey document
   3
     As pointed out by Gourinchas and Rey (2007b). See also Hausmann and Sturzenegger (2006) and Tille (2003)
for related arguments. This new view sheds a fresh light on the question of the sustainability of the US external
imbalances, suggesting that the widening current account deﬁcit in the US could be part of the normal adjustment
process and does not necessarily spell any economic disaster. This conclusion is contested by the proponents of the
traditional view who believe that a signiﬁcant adjustment of the trade balance and in particular a large US dollar
depreciation needs to take place (see e.g., Edwards (2005), Frankel (2006), Obstfeld (2004), Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ
(2007), Roubini and Setser (2004)).


                                                        2
a similar eﬀect occurring in their dataset. It is the unexpected part of the capital gains, however,
that is key to the dramatically diﬀerent dynamic properties of the traditional and the capital-gains
adjusted current account in our model. The traditional current account follows a persistent process,
while the capital-gains adjusted current account is highly volatile and serially uncorrelated. This
is consistent with the evidence presented in Kollmann (2006) and Lane and Shambaugh (2007).
In other words, the capital-gains adjusted current account behaves much like asset returns, whose
short-term dynamics are also dominated by unexpected capital gains.

   Finally, because we are able to fully characterize the equilibrium in our economy, we describe the
adjustment process, and what role portfolio reallocations, changes in expected returns, unexpected
capital gains, and the trade balance play. We study the behavior of these and other variables in
response to supply and demand shocks and explain the economic mechanisms behind the patterns
that we ﬁnd.

   We have already cited the papers that are conceptually related to this work. Methodologically,
the most closely related works are He and Pearson (1991), Cuoco and He (1994), and Basak and
Cuoco (1998). At a partial equilibrium level, He and Pearson derive a solution to a consumption-
portfolio problem under incomplete markets. Cuoco and He develop a method for solving for
equilibrium under incomplete markets via a “planner” with stochastic weights. Basak and Cuoco
were the ﬁrst to apply this method to study ﬁnancial markets with frictions (restricted partici-
pation, in their case). None of these papers, however, oﬀers a model with multiple risky assets
and incomplete markets that can be analyzed analytically. The model that we develop builds on
Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Helpman and Razin (1978), Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), and Zapatero
(1995). All these are tractable multi-asset multi-good models like ours, but in contrast to our work,
in each of these papers markets are complete or eﬀectively complete.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the model and characterize
its equilibrium. In Section 3, we derive a number of implications of our model for the current
account and its dynamics. In Section 4, we present several special cases of our economy in which
the dynamics of portfolios and the current account simplify signiﬁcantly, and in Section 5, simulate
the model in order to analyze its properties in the general case. Section 6 discusses several caveats
and desirable extensions, and Section 7 concludes.




                                                  3
2.      The Model

2.1.    The Economic Setting

We consider a continuous-time pure-exchange world economy with a ﬁnite horizon, [0, T ] along
the lines of Pavlova and Rigobon (2007). Uncertainty is represented by a ﬁltered probability
space (Ω, F, {Ft }, P ), on which is deﬁned a standard four-dimensional Brownian motion w(t)
                                                                                            =
(w(t), w∗ (t), wα , wβ ) , t ∈ [0, T ]. All stochastic processes are assumed adapted to {Ft ; t ∈ [0, T ]},
the augmented ﬁltration generated by w.
                                      All stated (in)equalities involving random variables hold
P -almost surely. In what follows, given our focus, we assume all processes introduced to be well-
deﬁned, without explicitly stating regularity conditions ensuring this.

     There are two countries in the world economy: Home and Foreign. The Home country represents
a large industrialized country, while Foreign stands for the rest of the world. Each country is
endowed with a Lucas tree producing a strictly positive amount of a country-speciﬁc perishable
good:

                    dY (t) = µY (t) Y (t) dt + σY (t) Y (t) dw(t)              (Home),                  (1)

                   dY ∗ (t) = µY ∗ (t) Y ∗ (t) dt + σY ∗ (t) Y ∗ (t) dw∗ (t)    (Foreign),              (2)

where µY , µ∗Y , σY > 0, and σY∗ > 0 are arbitrary adapted processes. The claims to the trees, Home
and Foreign stocks S and S ∗ , respectively, are available for trade by all investors and are in ﬁxed
supply of one share each. The prices of the Home and Foreign goods are denoted by p and p∗ ,
respectively. We ﬁx the world numeraire basket to contain a ∈ (0, 1) units of the Home good and
(1-a) units of the Foreign good, and normalize the price of this basket to be equal to unity. The
terms of trade, q, are deﬁned as the price of the Home good relative to that of the Foreign good:
q ≡ p/p∗ .

     In addition to the stocks S and S ∗ , there is also the “world” bond B available for investment,
which is a money market account locally riskless in units of the numeraire. The bond is in zero net
supply. Since there are four independent Brownian motions driving the economy and only three
investment opportunities in place, ﬁnancial markets are incomplete. To ﬁx notation, the posited




                                                       4
dynamics of the investment opportunity set of the agents is given by

                                           dB(t) = B(t)r(t)dt,                                        (3)

                            dS(t) + p(t)Y (t)dt = S(t)[µS (t)dt + σS (t)dw(t)],
                                                                                                     (4)

                         dS ∗ (t) + p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t)dt = S ∗ (t)[µS ∗ (t)dt + σS ∗ (t)dw(t)],
                                                                                                     (5)

where the interest rate r, the stocks expected returns µS and µS ∗ and their volatilities σS and σS ∗
are to be determined in equilibrium. The volatility matrix of the stock returns is then deﬁned as
          
       σ
σ = σ S∗ .
        S


   The initial shareholdings of a representative consumer-investor of each country consist of no
shares of the bond and a total supply of the stock market of his country. Thus, the initial wealth
of the Home resident is WH (0) = S(0) and that of the Foreign resident is WF (0) = S ∗ (0). Each
consumer i, i ∈ {H, F }, chooses nonnegative consumption of each good (Ci (t), Ci∗ (t)) and a port-
folio of the available securities xi (t) ≡ (xSi (t), xSi (t)), where xji denotes the fraction of wealth of
                                                         ∗



consumer i invested in asset j. The dynamic budget constraint of each consumer has the standard
form
                                                                    ∗
                                                                                                
   dWi (t) =         Wi (t) r(t) + xSi (t)Wi (t)(µS (t) − r(t)) + xSi (t)Wi (t)(µS ∗ (t) − r(t)) dt
                                            ∗
                                                                                            
                                                                 − p(t)Ci (t) + p∗ (t)Ci∗ (t) dt ,
                 + xSi (t)Wi (t)σS (t) + xSi (t)Wi (t)σS ∗ (t) dw(t)                                  (6)

where Wi (T ) ≥ 0, i ∈ {H, F }. Preferences of consumer i, are represented by a time-additive utility
function deﬁned over consumption of both goods:
                       T                             
                    E      e−ρt ui (Ci (t), Ci∗ (t)) dt ,          ρ > 0,    i ∈ {H, F },             (7)
                              0

where

                         uH (CH (t), CH∗ (t)) = αH (t) log CH (t) + βH (t) log CH∗ (t),

                         uF (CF (t), CF∗ (t)) = βF log CF (t) + αF log CF∗ (t).

In our speciﬁcation of the countries’ utilities, we allow for the possibility of preference shifts to-
wards the home or the foreign good (or “demand shocks”), modeled along the lines of Dornbusch,
Fischer, and Samuelson (1977). The role of this assumption is twofold. First, in the absence of
the demand shocks, free trade in goods makes stock prices perfectly correlated and ﬁnancial mar-
kets irrelevant (Helpman and Razin (1978), Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Zapatero (1995)). Second,

                                                         5
empirical evidence indicates that demand shocks are important drivers of the real-world dynamics.
For example, Stockman and Tesar (1995) calibrate preference shocks to be roughly 85% of the size
of supply shocks, while of Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) estimate a similar model and conclude that
they have about the same volatility as supply shocks. Formally, we assume that αH and βH are
positive adapted stochastic processes, martingales, and have dynamics

                              dαH (t) = σαH (t)dw(t),
                                                                dβH (t) = σβH (t)dw(t).
                                                                                   

In the analysis that follows, we consider primarily two types of demand shocks: (i) demand shocks
that are completely independent of the supply (output) shocks w and w∗ and (ii) demand shocks
that are allowed to be correlated with the supply shocks. For simplicity, we assume that there are
no demand shocks at Foreign, but our model can be easily extended to accommodate these.4


2.2.      Countries’ Portfolio Choice

The ﬁrst step in our solution procedure is to derive the countries’ optimal portfolios at a partial
equilibrium level. To do so, we are going to employ techniques developed in the portfolio choice
literature. However, relative to that literature, there are two non-standard ingredients in the
optimization problem that the countries are facing: multiple consumption goods and incomplete
markets. We address them in turn.

       For concreteness, we focus our exposition on the Home consumer. The portfolio of the Foreign
consumer is derived analogously. Following the early literature in ﬁnance (Breeden (1979), Adler
and Dumas (1983)), we decompose the problem of maximizing his utility (7) subject to the budget
constraint (6) into two parts. First, at each t, we derive the consumer’s demands for the Home
and the Foreign goods, keeping the overall consumption expenditure ﬁxed. Second, we derive his
optimal consumption expenditure process and the optimal portfolio.

       The ﬁrst step is the standard static consumer problem under certainty:

                                         max  ∗ (t)}
                                                       αH (t) log CH (t) + βH (t) log CH∗ (t)
                                    {CH (t), CH

                           s.t.     p(t)CH (t) + p∗ (t)CH∗ (t) ≤ CH (t),

where CH (t) denotes overall consumption expenditure at time t. Solving this problem, we obtain
   4
    At this point, for generality, we are not requiring that each country has a stronger preference for the home
good (αi > βi , i ∈ {H, F }). However, a realistic calibration of a model like ours would typically incorporate such a
preference bias. We delay calibrating our model until Section 5.


                                                             6
the following demands for the individual goods as fractions of the overall expenditure:
                                             αH (t)     CH (t)     βH (t)     CH (t)            ∗
                        C H (t) =                              ,                     .            (8)
                                                                                            C H (t) =
                                         αH (t) + βH (t) p(t) αH (t) + βH (t) p∗ (t)
                                                                                      
                                                                                    ∗
The indirect utility function deﬁned as UH (CH (t); p(t), p∗ (t)) ≡ uH C H (t), C H (t) is then given
by
             UH (CH (t); p(t), p∗ (t)) = (αH (t) + βH (t)) log CH (t) + F (αH (t), βH (t), p(t), p∗ (t)),

where F (·) is a function the form of which does not aﬀect our analysis. This function F depends
only on the variables that are exogenous from the viewpoint of the consumer and therefore, because
of the separability of the indirect utility, it drops out of his portfolio choice.

     The second step is to reformulate the portfolio choice problem of the consumer in terms of his
indirect utility:
                                           T                                                          
                                                 −ρt
                   max
                     ∗
                                E                e        (αH (t) + βH (t)) log CH (t) dt                                    (9)
                xS
                 H , x H , CH
                       S                 0
                                                                         ∗
                                                                                                     
      s.t.      dWH (t) = WH (t) r(t) + xSH (t)WH (t)(µS (t) − r(t)) + xSH (t)WH (t)(µS ∗ (t) − r(t)) dt
                                          ∗
                                                             
                                                                − CH (t)dt .
                + xSH (t)WH (t)σS (t) + xSH (t)WH (t)σS ∗ (t) dw(t)                                                         (10)

The optimization problem is thus formally equivalent to a familiar single-good consumption-investment
problem, with consumption expenditure CH replacing consumption. Consumption of individual
goods can then be recovered from (8). It is important to note that the prices of the individual
goods, p and p∗ , and hence the terms of trade have dropped out of the optimization problem. This
implies that ﬂuctuations in the terms of trade do not pose a risk that the consumer desires to
hedge. In contrast, one would generally expect him to hedge against the preference shifts αH and
βH , which enter as state variables in his optimization problem.

     The next issue we need to address is market incompleteness. A technique for solving such
problems in a single-good framework via martingale methods has been developed in a seminal
contribution of He and Pearson (1991). These authors show that, just like for the case of com-
plete markets, one can replace the dynamic optimization problem (9)–(10) by the following static
variational problem:
                                                                          T                                           
                                                                                −ρt
                                                 max E                          e     (αH (t) + βH (t)) log CH (t) dt       (11)
                                                     CH                 0
                                                             T                            
                                s.t.             E                 ξν (t)CH (t)dt ≤ WH (0),                                 (12)
                                                           0


                                                                                        7
where ξν denotes an appropriate state price density—i.e., an Arrow-Debreu state price per unit of
probability P . The diﬃculty arises from the fact that in incomplete markets, there is an inﬁnite
number of such state price densities consistent with no arbitrage and hence potentially an inﬁnite
number of static budget constraints (12). However, this set of budget constraints is known to
possess some special structure. Let m denote the market price of risk process

                                    m(t) ≡ σ(t) (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 (µ(t) − r(t)1),                            (13)

where µ ≡ (µS , µS ∗ ) and 1 is a two-dimensional vector of ones. Then the set of state price densities
can be represented as (He and Pearson, Proposition 1):

                               dξν (t) = −r(t)ξν (t)dt − (m(t) + ν(t)) ξν (t)dw(t),
                                                                                                          (14)

                                                                  T
with ν(t) ∈ R4 satisfying σ(t)ν(t) = 0, ∀t ∈ [0, T ] and          0    ||ν(t)||2 dt < ∞.5 It is easy to see that
if the volatility matrix sigma is a nondegenerate square matrix, the condition σ(t)ν(t) = 0 can be
satisﬁed only for ν(t) = 0, where 0 is a four-dimensional vector of zeros. This is precisely the case
when markets are complete: the state price density is unique and ν(t) = 0 at all t. If, however,
the volatility matrix has has fewer rows than there are Brownian motions (and hence columns),
many possible ν(t)’s can satisfy the restriction σ(t)ν(t) = 0. This is the case when markets are
intrinsically incomplete.

      He and Pearson go on to prove that there exists a unique individual-speciﬁc ν, which we denote
by νH , that minimizes the maximum expected utility in (11). We derive the expression for it in the
proposition below. The only relevant budget constraint in (12) is then the one corresponding to νH .
Establishing the portfolio that solves the optimization problem (11)–(12) is then straightforward.
We report this portfolio, as well as the portfolio of Foreign, in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. (i) The fractions of wealth xH and xF invested in the risky stocks by the Home
and the Foreign country, respectively, are given by

                                                                                σαH (t) + σβH (t)
               xH (t) =      (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t) m(t) + (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t)                                (15)
                                                                                  αH (t) + βH (t)
                            mean-variance portfolio
                                                                       hedging portfolio

               xF (t) = (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t) m(t).                                                          (16)

The fractions of wealth invested in the bond by Home and Foreign are given by 1 − 1 xH (t) and
1 − 1 xF (t), respectively.
  5
      The notation ||z||2 stands for the dot product z · z.


                                                              8
    (ii) The processes νH and νF , entering the specification of the personalized state price densities
of Home and Foreign, respectively, are given by

                          σαH (t) + σβH (t)
            νH (t) = −                     (I4×4 − σ(t) (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t))   and   νF (t) = 0,   (17)
                           αH (t) + βH (t)

where I4×4 is a 4 × 4 identity matrix.


   Consider ﬁrst the portfolio of the Home consumer. It consists of two parts: the mean-variance
eﬃcient portfolio and the hedging portfolio. This decomposition is standard in the portfolio choice
literature. The optimal mean-variance portfolio was ﬁrst derived by Markowitz (1952) in a one-
period setting and later generalized by Merton (1971) to a continuous-time stochastic environment.
Furthermore, Merton shows that in addition to the mean-variance portfolio an investor optimally
selects a hedging portfolio whose role is to oﬀset ﬂuctuations in the state variables in his optimization
problem. As is well-known, investors with logarithmic preferences do not wish to hedge against
changes in their investment opportunity set (stock and bond price dynamics)—in that sense they
behave myopically. However, they do wish to hedge against ﬂuctuations in the state variables
entering their preferences, namely the preference shifts. When markets are complete (or eﬀectively
complete), the gains made by the hedging portfolio are perfectly positively correlated with the
ﬂuctuations in state variable Home desires to hedge: αH + βH . (This is the state variable entering
Home’s objective function (9)). When markets are incomplete, not every payoﬀ can be replicated
and so it is typically not possible to construct a portfolio whose gains are perfectly correlated with
a state variable. In that case, the Home investor chooses the portfolio most highly correlated with
αH + βH .

   In contrast, the Foreign investor demands no hedging portfolio. This is because the term
αF + βF entering his objective function is non-stochastic. Consequently, the inability to hedge
perfectly under incomplete markets does not hurt the Foreign investor: in contrast to that of the
Home investor, his personalized νF remains the same as it would be under complete markets.

   As we elaborate later, (heterogeneous) hedging demands are key vehicles for generating trade
between consumers in equilibrium. For example, in the absence of preference shifts, agents have no
hedging demands and hence they have no reason to trade assets.




                                                      9
2.3.    Characterization of Equilibrium

An equilibrium in our economy is deﬁned in a standard way: it is a collection of goods and
                                                                                                               ∗
asset prices (p, p∗ , S, S ∗ , B) and consumption-investment policies (Ci (t), Ci∗ (t), xSi (t), xSi (t)),
i ∈ {H, F } such that (i) each consumer-investor maximizes his utility (7) subject to the budget
constraint (6) and (ii) goods, stock, and bond markets clear.

    In the economy with incomplete markets the equilibrium allocation would not be Pareto optimal.
Hence, the usual construction of a representative agent’s (planner’s) utility as a weighted sum, with
constant weights, of individual utility functions is not possible. Instead, we are going to employ a
ﬁctitious representative agent with stochastic weights (introduced in an important contribution by
Cuoco and He (1994)), with these stochastic weights reﬂecting the eﬀects of market incompleteness.6
This ﬁctitious representative agent maximizes his utility subject to the resource constraints:
                                 T                                                           
                                      −ρt                ∗                           ∗
                max
                 ∗     ∗
                              E      e    (uH (CH (t), CH  (t)) + λ(t) uF (CF (t), CF  (t)))dt
            {CH , CH , CF , CF }           0



                         s. t.        CH (t) + CF (t) = Y (t) ,

                                      CH∗ (t) + CF∗ (t) = Y ∗ (t) ,

where we have normalized the weight on the Home consumer to be equal to one and assigned the
weight λ to the Foreign consumer. The possibly stochastic weighting process λ will be linked to
the wealth distribution in the economy and will be determined as part of the equilibrium. In the
event that in an equilibrium λ ends up being a constant (we encounter this situation in some of
the special cases we consider later), the allocation is Pareto optimal. This situation corresponds to
the case of complete or so-called eﬀectively complete ﬁnancial markets.

    Solving the representative agent’s optimization problem, we obtain the sharing rules

                                      αH (t)                                 βH (t)
                  CH (t) =                       Y (t),     CH∗ (t) =                   Y ∗ (t),                   (18)
                                 αH (t) + λ(t)βF                        βH (t) + λ(t)αF

                                     λ(t)βF                                  λ(t)αF
                   CF (t) =                      Y (t) ,     CF∗ (t)=                   Y ∗ (t) .                  (19)
                                 αH (t) + λ(t)βF                        βH (t) + λ(t)αF
    6
      Alternatively, we could have solved for equilibrium directly from the system of equilibrium equations. We prefer
the method we are presenting because of the clarity of the ensuing intuitions. The construction of a representative
agent with stochastic weights has been employed extensively in dynamic asset pricing models with ﬁnancial market
frictions. See, for example, Basak and Croitoru (2000), Basak and Cuoco (1998), and Detemple and Serrat (2003). A
related approach is the extra-state-variable methodology of Kehoe and Perri (2002). For the original solution method
utilizing weights in the representative agent, see Negishi (1960).


                                                             10
   We can now derive the terms of trade that prevail in a competitive equilibrium. They are
identiﬁed with the ratio of either country’s marginal utilities of the Home and Foreign goods:

                                              αH (t) + λ(t)βF Y ∗ (t)
                                     q(t) =                           .                          (20)
                                              βH (t) + λ(t)αF Y (t)

We next use the no-arbitrage valuation principle to obtain stock prices and equilibrium wealth of
the countries.

Lemma 1. Equilibrium stock prices in our economy are given by

                                         1 − e−ρ(T −t)      q(t)
                             S(t) =                                  Y (t) ,                     (21)
                                              ρ        aq(t) + 1 − a

                                         1 − e−ρ(T −t)       1
                            S ∗ (t) =                                Y ∗ (t)                     (22)
                                              ρ        aq(t) + 1 − a

and the wealth of the countries by

                             αH (t) + βH (t)                         λ(t)(αF + βF ) ∗
                 WH (t) =                    S(t) ,       WF (t) =                   S (t) .     (23)
                             αH (t) + λ(t)βF                         βH (t) + λ(t)αF

Lemma 1 yields a simple interpretation of the weight λ. One can see that

                                              WF (t)(αH (t) + βH (t))
                                     λ(t) =                           .                          (24)
                                                WH (t)(αF + βF )

That is, incomplete markets enrich the dynamics of the economy with an additional state variable
λ, which is related to the wealth distribution, but not given exactly by the wealth distribution
unless αH (t) + βH (t) is constant. We have already encountered the expression αH (t) + βH (t) earlier
in our analysis: it was the state variable giving rise to the hedging portfolio held by Home.

   Lemma 1 allows us to characterize the dynamics of stock returns and the market price of risk
in equilibrium, which are tedious but straightforward to compute. Equation (24) lets us pin down
the weight λ. We relegate the details of the necessary calculations to the Appendix, and report the
resulting dynamics of λ below.

Proposition 2. (i) In an equilibrium, the weight of the Foreign country in the fictitious represen-
tative agent follows

                        dλ(t) = −λ(t) νH (t) dw(t),
                                                         with λ(0) = βH (0)/βF .

(ii) When such equilibrium exists, the volatility matrix σ and the market price of risk m can be
computed as functions of exogenous state variables. They are reported in the Appendix.



                                                     11
     Note that our characterizations the terms of trade, consumption, and stock prices presented in
this section all involve the exogenous state variables of the model and one endogenous quantity:
the weight λ. With this weight λ now characterized in Proposition 2, we can then pin down these
equilibrium quantities and their dynamics. Moreover, the countries’ portfolios held in equilibrium
are also fully determined now, with the volatility matrix of stock returns and the market price
of risk characterized fully in terms of exogenous state variables (see the Appendix). Admittedly,
the equilibrium characterizations of the portfolios are not particularly transparent. To develop
intuitions, in Section 4 we are going to consider several special cases in which the expressions for
the portfolios are simple. The analysis of these special cases relies in part on the result of the
following lemma.

Lemma 2. The countries hold no bond in their portfolios if and only if the value of the hedging
portfolio demanded by Home is equal to zero.


Proof.     Suppose that bondholdings of the countries are zero. This is equivalent to saying that the
fraction of wealth each country invests in the stocks is equal to one:
                                                                                       
                                                                       σα (t) + σβH (t)
        1 xH (t) = 1 (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t) m(t) + (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t) H                   =1
                                                                        αH (t) + βH (t)

         1 xF (t) = 1 (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t) m(t) = 1,

where we have substituted the formulas for the portfolios derived in Proposition 1. This can happen
                                 σαH (t)+σβH (t)
only if 1 (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t)    αH (t)+βH (t)    = 0—i.e., the fraction of wealth invested in the hedging
portfolio is zero.

     Conversely, if the value of the hedging portfolio is zero, then 1 xH (t) = 1 xF (t)
= 1 (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t) m(t). Bond market clearing then implies that 1 (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t)m(t) = 1.



3.     The Current Account

Before we turn to investigating equilibrium behavior in the general case of our model and make a
link between portfolio rebalancing and external adjustment mechanisms, we explore our model’s
implications for the current account and its dynamics. We ﬁrst start with the textbook deﬁnition
of the current account and then consider the deﬁnition based on changes in a country’s net foreign
asset position.

                                                         12
   In principle, the two deﬁnitions should yield similar measures. However, once expected and
realized capital gains are accounted for, the diﬀerences between the two measures, and especially
their dynamic properties, can be striking, as we demonstrate below.


3.1.   The Textbook Current Account

Let us concentrate on the Home country. The traditional measure of the current account, commonly
employed in international ﬁnance textbooks, is

            CA = Trade Balance + Net Dividend Payments + Net Interest Payments.

In our model, the trade balance is given by

                            T BH (t) = p(t)(Y (t) − CH (t)) − p∗ (t)CH∗ (t),

and the current account is
                                                                                   
                                  S∗    ∗    ∗
            CAH (t) = T BH (t) + sH (t)p (t)Y (t) − sF (t)p(t)Y (t) + sH (t)B(t)r(t) dt,
                                                     S                 B
                                                                                             (25)


where sji denotes the number of shares of asset j held by country i. The second and the third
terms in (25) are dividend receipts from foreign assets minus dividend payments to Foreign, and
the last term is net interest payments. Recall that each of the above quantities in our model is
deﬁned as a rate (e.g., the export rate, the dividend rate, etc.) and hence need to be scaled by a
time increment. This is the reason behind the term “dt” appearing in (25).

   An often cited shortcoming of pure-exchange models with log-linear preferences is that they
are unable to generate a nontrivial current account. Having a current account equal to zero at all
times would clearly hinder any quantitative analysis of current account deﬁcits that we intend to
undertake in this paper. It is therefore worth highlighting the situations under which the current
account is zero in our model.

Lemma 3. The current account of the Home country can be represented as follows:
                                                                
                                                       ρ
                      CAH (t) = sH (t)B(t) r(t) −
                                  B
                                                                  dt.                        (26)
                                                  1 − e−ρ(T −t)




                                                  13
Proof.     Note that

                                            ∗    ∗
        H (t)B(t) = WH (t) − sH (t)S(t) − sH (t)S (t)
       sB                     S            S



                    αH (t) + βH (t)                               ∗
                 =                  S(t) − (1 − sSF (t))S(t) − sSH (t)S ∗ (t)
                   αH (t) + λ(t) βF
                                                                                                 
                   1 − e−ρ(T −t)             βH (t) − λ(t) βF     S∗    ∗     ∗
                 =                 p(t)Y (t)                  − sH (t)p (t)Y (t) + sF (t)p(t)Y (t) ,
                                                                                    S

                         ρ                   αH (t) + λ(t) βF

where the second equality follows from Lemma 1 and stock market clearing (sSH (t) = 1 − sSF (t)),
and the last one, again, from Lemma 1. On the other hand, by substituting (18) into (25) and
simplifying, one can show that
                                                                                              
                         βH (t) − λ(t) βF     S∗   ∗    ∗
   CAH (t) = −p(t)Y (t)                   + sH (t)p (t)Y (t) − sF (t)p(t)Y (t) + sH (t)B(t)r(t) dt
                                                                S                 B

                         αH (t) + λ(t) βF
                                                
                                 ρ
            = sH (t)B(t) −
               B
                                          + r(t) dt.
                           1 − e−ρ(T −t)

This proves the statement in (26). 

   This lemma reveals that the ﬁrst suﬃcient condition for the current account to be equal to
zero is that the Home country (and hence the Foreign) holds no bonds. This is indeed a common
implication of models with log-linear preferences (e.g., Pavlova and Rigobon (2005), Pavlova and
Rigobon (2007)), however, nothing in our model prevents the bond holdings from being diﬀerent
from zero. That is, preference shifts may potentially introduce enough heterogeneity among the
countries so that they are willing to trade in all available ﬁnancial assets for risk-sharing purposes.
The second condition under which the current account is zero is when the interest rate r(t) is equal
to ρ/(1 − e−ρ(T −t) ). The latter quantity is deterministic, while the interest rate is a stochastic
process. Hence, it is true only on the measure zero set of parameter values.


3.2.     The Capital-Gains Adjusted Current Account

Deﬁning the current account as the change in the net foreign asset position of a country, we have
                                                                         
                                      S∗     ∗
                     CGCAH (t) = d sH (t)S (t) − sF (t)S(t) + sH (t)B(t) ,
                                                    S            B
                                                                                              (27)

where the ﬁrst two terms in the square brackets are Home’s investment in the Foreign stock minus
Foreign’ investment in the Home stock, and the last term is Home’s balance on the bond account.
The label “CGCA” stands for “capital-gains adjusted current account,” the rationale for which will


                                                   14
become clear shortly. Note that, by market clearing, sSF (t) = 1 − sSH (t) and that, by deﬁnition,
                                                                                              ∗
Home’s ﬁnancial wealth equals its portfolio value, WH (t) = sSH (t)S(t) + sSH (t)S ∗ (t) + sB
                                                                                            H (t)B(t).

Hence, we can rewrite (27) as

                                         CGCAH (t) = dWH (t) − dS(t)                              (28)

Note further that the budget constraint of Home (6) can be equivalently represented as
                                                                                      
                                                                 S∗      ∗
     dWH (t) =         sB
                        H (t) B(t) r(t) + s S
                                            H (t)S(t)µ S (t) + s H  (t)S   (t)µ S ∗ (t)  dt
                                           ∗
                                                                                       
                   + sSH (t)S(t)σS (t) + sSH (t)S ∗ (t)σS ∗ (t) dw(t)
                                                                  + T BH (t) − p(t)Y (t) dt .

Substituting it into (28) and then using (4) and the stock market clearing, we arrive at the following
proposition.

Proposition 3. The capital-gains adjusted current account is given by
                                                                                 
                                   S∗     ∗
      CGCAH (t) = T BH (t) + sH (t)S (t)µS (t) − sF (t)S(t)µS (t) + sH (t)B(t)r(t) dt
                                                ∗
                                                       S              B



                                                                     
                                 S∗    ∗
                              + sH (t)S (t)σS ∗ (t) − sF (t)S(t)σS (t) dw(t),
                                                       S
                                                                                                 (29)

where σS and σS ∗ are derived in Proposition 2 and r, µS , and µS ∗ are reported in the Appendix.


   The ﬁrst diﬀerence between the traditional and the capital-gains adjusted current account re-
vealed by Proposition 3 is the presence of the diﬀusion (dw)
                                                           component in (29) and its absence in
(25). This component is the unexpected part of the realized capital gains on Home’s net foreign
assets. A shock dw
                  typically has a diﬀerential impact on the stock portfolios of Home and Foreign.
The capital-gains adjusted current account of Home improves if its return on foreign asset holdings
exceeds the return the Foreign country makes on its holdings of Home’s assets. Equation (29)
assumes, however, that all capital gains are marked to market. This aspect makes CGCA diﬀerent
from book-value based measures of current account such as the one in (25), commonly employed
in practice.

   It is important to note that the two measures of the current account have fundamentally dif-
ferent dynamic properties. The traditional current account is a persistent process, in line with the
results in the existing literature. In contrast, the capital-gains adjusted current account features
additionally an increment of a random walk (dw)
                                              process, and therefore it bears a closer resem-
blance to the dynamics of a stock market rather than a persistent macroeconomic series such as

                                                          15
dividends or the traditional current account. It is amply documented by the proponents of the
eﬃcient markets hypothesis in ﬁnance that stocks’ capital gains are large, volatile, and serially
uncorrelated. And so should be the ﬂuctuations in a NFA position of a country, captured here by
CGCA!

   The second diﬀerence between the two measures of the current account stems from the diﬀer-
ences in the expected (dt) component. Comparing equations (25) and (29), we ﬁnd two elements
that are common to the traditional and the capital-gains adjusted current account measures: the
trade balance and net interest payments on the (locally) riskless bond. The remaining terms, due
to holdings of the risky stocks, are diﬀerent. To better highlight the diﬀerences, note from (4)–(5)
that

                                                                                   
       S(t) µS (t)dt = Et dS(t) + p(t)Y (t)dt     and S ∗ (t) µS ∗ (t)dt = Et dS ∗ (t) + p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t)dt,

where Et [ · ] is a shortcut for E[ · |Ft ]. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of these expressions is the
expected capital gains and the second one is the dividends per share. Denoting the expected capital
gains on holding a share of stocks S and S ∗ by ECGS and ECGS ∗ , respectively, we can express the
diﬀerence between the expected capital-gains adjusted current account and the traditional one as

                                                                ∗
                  Et CGCAH (t) − CAH (t) = −sSF (t) ECGS (t) + sSH (t) ECGS ∗ (t).                      (30)

This simple formula describes what Hausmann and Sturzenegger (2006) label “the missing dark
matter” in the measurement the current account. This “dark matter” accumulates due to the
fact that the countries hold risky assets which are issued at home as well as abroad, and these
risky assets have diﬀerent expected capital gains. The expected capital gain on an asset, of course,
reﬂects its risk and return tradeoﬀ. If domestic assets are safer and have lower expected returns
than foreign, a country earns a higher expected return on its assets than it owes on its liabilities. In
this scenario, the diﬀerence between the capital-gains adjusted and the traditional current account
is expected to be positive. We expect such pattern to be occurring in the US whose gains on
domestic assets have been lower than gains on assets abroad (Gourinchas and Rey (2007b)).

   The sum of net expected capital gains and net unexpected capital gains is what has been
typically labeled as “valuation eﬀects” in the current account adjustment literature. Empirically,
it is very hard to disentangle the two individual components. However, as we will point out below,
their stochastic properties are very distinct.


                                                     16
   One may wonder why the terms of trade were mentioned nowhere in this discussion. After all,
the original arguments highlighting valuation eﬀects stress primarily the fact that the values of a
country’s asset and liabilities change in response to ﬂuctuations in the exchange rate (or the terms
of trade), and these ﬂuctuations need to be taken into account when evaluating the NFA position
of a country. This argument deﬁnitely applies in our model—in fact, as will become clear below,
the terms of trade play a key role in our intuitions. The terms of trade are embedded in the prices
of stocks and their dynamics.

   It is worth mentioning that in our derivations of the capital-gains adjusted current account and
the relationship between CA and CGCA we did not need to specialize consumer preferences to
be log-linear. The expressions for both the current account in equation (25) and the capital-gains
adjusted current account in equation (29) are valid for a general utility function. The log-linear
form of the preferences is needed only for obtaining a closed-form characterization of the inputs
into the formulas, namely the stock prices and the countries’ portfolios.


3.3.   Congruence between NFA and Trade Balance

To conclude this section, we derive the expression for NFA in our model and draw a connection
between the NFA position and the trade balance. Note that

N F AH (t) = WH (t) − S(t)
                         T                                                  T                      
               1                                   ∗     ∗           1
           =         Et      ξνH (s) (p(s) C(s) + p (s) C (s))ds −         Et      ξνH (s) p(s) Y (s) ds .
             ξνH (t)      t                                        ξνH (t)      t

Hence, by deﬁnition of a trade balance,
                                                            T
                                                                                    
                                          1
                         N F AH (t) = −         Et                ξνH (s) T BH (t) ds .          (31)
                                        ξνH (t)           t

Equation (31) is nothing else but the familiar statement that the NFA position is given by the
present value of the future trade deﬁcits. The traditional intertemporal approach to the external
adjustment—that ignores changes in the state price density (or the stochastic discount factor)
ξνH —says that, for example, for a country with a negative NFA position, adjustment must come
through future trade surpluses. Recent literature challenges this conclusion and draws attention
to the “valuation channel” of the external adjustment that operates precisely through changes in
the stochastic discount factor. It is argued that such changes are large and volatile, and hence
the valuation channel should have a substantial contribution to the NFA dynamics. Surprisingly, it

                                                 17
turns out that in our model, after the endogenous responses of asset prices and hence the stochastic
discount factor to underlying shocks are taken into account, the NFA adjustment takes place
instantaneously and entirely through the trade balance. In that sense, the traditional and the
new views are not at all inconsistent: much can be learned about the NFA adjustment by simply
looking at the most conventional measure of external imbalances—the trade balance.7

Lemma 4 (Congruence between N F A and trade balance). The relationship between the net
foreign assets and the trade balance is given by

                                                     1 − e−ρ(T −t)
                                    N F AH (t) = −                 T BH (t).                                 (32)
                                                          ρ
The net foreign asset position of Home is
                                                    βH (t) − λ(t) βF
                                     N F AH (t) =                    S(t) .                                  (33)
                                                    αH (t) + λ(t) βF

     We remark that the perfect negative correlation between the current trade balance and the NFA
position is due primarily to our assumption that the agents have log-linear preferences that rule
out intertemporal hedging motives. It is important to evaluate the robustness of this result under
alternative preferences that give rise to intertemporal hedging.


4.     Equilibrium Portfolios in Several Special Cases

To better understand the composition of the equilibrium portfolios, we consider several special
cases of our model before turning to the general case (analyzed in Section 5).


4.1.    Example 1: The Irrelevance Result

The ﬁrst example we study is one in which the ﬁnancial markets’ structure is irrelevant, there are no
net portfolio ﬂows, and therefore, capital gains on ﬁnancial assets play no role in the international
adjustment process. This is the case considered in Helpman and Razin (1978), Cole and Obstfeld
(1991), and Zapatero (1995). The three examples that follow relax some of the assumptions we
make here in order to clarify the role that capital gains play.

     In our model, we obtain our irrelevance result by specializing the Home consumer’s preferences
so that αH and βH are constant (σαH (t) = σβH (t) = 0). As is well-known, under this speciﬁcation
   7
     It is important to note that the “connection” is between the NFA and the trade balance of goods and services,
and not between NFA and the conventional current account.


                                                       18
the returns on the two stocks are perfectly correlated in equilibrium. Hence, portfolio allocations
into these stocks are indeterminate. Only positions in the composite stock market, S(t) + S ∗ (t),
can be uniquely determined. Using an argument analogous to that we employed in Section 2.2, we
can derive the investors’ optimal fractions of wealth invested in the composite stock market. One
can easily see that the portfolios demanded by the two agents are going to be identical: in the
absence of preference shifts, they both demand the mean-variance but no hedging portfolios.

      It is also well-known that ﬁnancial markets are eﬀectively complete in this special case. This
is equivalent to saying that νH (t) = νF (t) = 0 at all times and hence, from Proposition 2, the
weight λ is constant. Thus, Pareto optimality obtains despite market incompleteness—or, in other
words, markets are eﬀectively complete. Investors are not adversely aﬀected by market incom-
pleteness because they do not make use of ﬁnancial markets to construct portfolios hedging against
ﬂuctuations in any state variables: there is no state variable either agent desires to hold a hedge
against. The intuition for why the ﬁnancial markets are not needed in this case comes from the
fact that movements in the terms of trade exactly oﬀset output shocks and hence the values of the
dividends on the Home and the Foreign stock markets, p(t)Y (t) and p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t), respectively, are
always the same (up to a multiplicative constant). Fluctuations in the terms of trade therefore fully
oﬀset the supply shocks; i.e., with no demand uncertainty the capital gains on the two stocks are
always perfectly correlated. This feature of our model is due to the way we speciﬁed preferences
(log-linear) and endowments (shares of trees), and represents a simple benchmark for comparison.

      Finally, unlike holdings of individual stocks, the bond holdings of the countries are uniquely
determined: there are equal to zero at all times.8 This is because, the two countries demand the
same portfolio and in particular, wish to invest the same fraction of wealth in the bond. For the
bond market to clear, this fraction has to be zero. Consequently, CA(t) = 0 at all times. Moreover,
the capital-gains adjusted current account CGCA is also zero. Each country is holding the same
portfolio and stock markets are perfectly correlated. Therefore, the net dividend payments and the
net capital gains account have to be zero as well.


4.2.      Example 2: No Asset Cross-Holdings

The purpose of this example is to illustrate the role of international asset cross-holdings and portfolio
rebalancing. We consider a version of our model in which portfolio holdings are unique (as opposed
  8
      This result is not new. See Cass and Pavlova (2004).



                                                         19
to indeterminate as in the previous case), but portfolio holdings are ﬁxed (hence there is never
a rebalancing after any of the shocks). We show that in this case the current account and the
capital-gains current account are zero at all times. Hence, movements in asset prices are unrelated
to the external adjustment.

   To highlight these dynamics, consider the special case of the model in which βH remains constant
(σβH (t) = 0), and αH is stochastic. In the presence of preference shifts—even one possible shift, as
we specify here—the two stocks are no longer perfectly correlated, the volatility matrix is invertible,
and hence the expressions in Propositions 1 and 2 readily apply. It turns out that the equity
portfolios of the countries, expressed as numbers of shares, take a particularly simple form
                                                                                
                               βH − λ(t)βF                        λ(t)(αF + βF )
                  sH (t) = 1,                 and sF (t) = 0,                      ,
                               λ(t)αF + βH                         λ(t)αF + βH
                  ∗
where si ≡ (sSi , sSi ) are obtained from xi using Lemma 1.

   The hedging portfolio held by Home, in numbers of shares, is
                                                            
                                            αH (t) + λ(t)βF
                                h(t) = 1, −                   .
                                             λ(t)αF + βH
The (instantaneous) gain on this hedging portfolio is given by
                                                        WH (t)
                              d h(t) = [. . .] dt +              σα (t) dw(t),
                                                                         
                                                      αH (t) + βH H
where the drift term need not concern us here. Note that the gain on the hedging portfolio
is perfectly instantaneously correlated with ﬂuctuations in the preference shifts αH . (Recall that
d αH (t) = σαH (t) dw(t).)
                          Therefore, despite market incompleteness, the Home investor is able to
construct a portfolio perfectly correlated with its preference shock. It is of no surprise then that
it turns out that νH (t) = 0: the investor is able to achieve the same eﬃciency of hedging as under
complete markets. Consequently (Proposition 2), again, the weight λ is constant and markets are
eﬀectively complete. In contrast to the no preference shifts case, however, one can see that eﬀective
market completeness does not lead to the indeterminacy of equilibrium portfolios.

   Having established that λ is a constant, we can further simplify the expressions for the countries’
portfolios. From Proposition 2, λ = λ(0) = βH /βF , and hence the portfolios of the countries, in
numbers of shares, are simply sH (t) = (1, 0) and sF (t) = (0, 1). Note that Home ends up holding
the entire supply of the Home stock, and Foreign holds the entire supply of its stock as well.

   Note that in this example we have an extreme portfolio home bias (an apparent home bias,
because in this case the optimal portfolio is to hold all of the home stock and none of the foreign).

                                                        20
It is important to point out that the home bias is coming because the demand shock is aﬀecting
home demand for home goods (this is equivalent to explicitly modeling shocks to the non-tradable
demand which has been already highlighted in the literature). It is equally important to highlight
that the home bias in consumption has nothing to do with the home bias in portfolios in this case.
The home bias in consumption in country i occurs when αi is larger than βi . However, for this
result αi can be larger or smaller than βi in either country, and the home bias in portfolios will
remain as long as the demand shocks aﬀect the preference for the home good (i.e., αH is stochastic)
as opposed to that for the foreign good.

   Regarding bond holdings, just like in the previous special case, the countries invest nothing
in the bond. To see this, we compute the value of the hedging portfolio h and conclude (from
Lemma 1) that it is equal to zero at all times. The result then follows from Lemma 2. Intuitively,
the hedging portfolio held by Home is a costless long-short portfolio of the two available stocks.
If it were not costless, the investor would need to borrow or lend on his bond account in order to
ﬁnance it.

   Finally, note that
                            CAi (t) = CGCAi (t) = 0,       i ∈ {H, F }.

The textbook current account is zero because none of the countries invests in the bond (Lemma 3).
The capital-gains adjusted current account is also zero simply because the countries’ end up owning
no foreign assets and no bonds. Hence, by deﬁnition (equation (27)), both the net foreign asset
positions of the countries and their capital-gains adjusted current accounts are zero. In this case,
the net capital gains and net expected return accounts are zero because the countries exhibit a 100
percent home bias, and not because the stock markets are perfectly correlated (as they were in the
previous case).


4.3.   Example 3: Valuation Eﬀects

We now consider a more general case of our model in which the current account is still identically
equal to zero but the capital-gains adjusted current account is now diﬀerent from zero. The diﬀer-
ence between the two deﬁnitions is, of course, due to the expected and unexpected capital gains on
NFA. The external adjustment process in this example is therefore driven entirely by the valuation
eﬀects and has nothing to do with traditional channels.

   We consider a special case of the model in which the preference shifter αH is driven only by

                                                21
the Brownian motion wα and βH by the Brownian motion wβ . Formally, σαH (t) = (0, 0, σα1 (t), 0)
and σβH (t) = (0, 0, 0, σβ2 (t)), with σα1 > 0 and σβ2 > 0. The stockholdings of Home and Foreign,
respectively, are as follows:
                                                                                                         
            1 βH                 αH                                      βH                 αH
     sH =           (λαF + βH ) + 2 (αH − λ αF ),                             (βH − λ βF ) + 2 (αH + λβF ) ,        (34)
           G σβ22                σα1                                     σβ22               σα1
                                            
             λ(αF + βF )        αH βH
        sF =                         ,            ,                                                                 (35)
                 G              σα2 1 σβ22

               βH                     αH
where G ≡      σβ2
                     (λαF + βH ) +     2 (αH
                                      σα              + λ βF ). In the expressions above and for the remainder of
                 2                      1

this section, we suppress the argument t. It already becomes clear at this point that depending on
parameter values, our model can produce large gross portfolios.9

       The hedging portfolio, h, held by Home, in numbers of shares, is
                                       βH             αH
                                       σβ2
                                                 −     2
                                                      σα1
                                  h=         2
                                                            (λαF + βH ,        −(αH + λβF )) .                      (36)
                                                 G

Consider again the gain on the hedging portfolio:
                                                                               
                                                               βH        αH
                                                  WH βH        σβ2
                                                                     −    2
                                                                         σα
                                                                 2         1
                         dh = [. . .] dt +                                          (0, 0, σα1 , σβ2 ) dw,
                                                                                                         
                                                                 βH2         α2H
                                                 (αH + βH )      σβ2
                                                                         +    2
                                                                             σα
                                                                     2         1


and compare it to the ﬂuctuations in the state variable, αH + βH , that Home desires to hedge
against:
                                       d(αH + βH ) = (0, 0, σα1 , σβ2 ) dw.
                                                                         

(Recall that αH + βH is the state variable entering Home’s objective function (9).) Unlike in the
previous special case, the hedge is no longer perfect. If βH /σβ22 > αH /σα2 1 , the hedging portfolio
gains in response to a positive shock in αH (an innovation to wα ). But it loses value if the economy
is hit by a positive βH shock. The opposite is true for βH /σβ22 < αH /σα2 1 . In any event, Home
is able to perfectly hedge against an αH or a βH shock but not both. The condition determining
which shock to focus on reﬂects the relative importance of a shock. Ceteris paribus, if the volatility
   9
    The shareholdings simplify considerably in the case of full symmetry (αH = αF = α, βH = βF = β, λ = 1, and
σα1 = σβ2 = σ).
                                                   1                            1
                                       sH =           (β, α) ,         sF =        (α, β) ,
                                                  α+β                          α+β
In this case, the portfolio holdings of the two countries are mirror images of each other and the extent of the portfolio
home bias is directly related to the degree of consumption home bias.


                                                                  22
of, say, the αH shock, σα1 , is high, Home holds a hedging portfolio that is positively correlated with
αH ; otherwise, it prefers instead a portfolio positively correlated with the βH shock. Note that the
holdings of the two stocks in the hedging portfolio have the opposite sign, and this sign depends
on the sign of βH /σβ22 − αH /σα2 1 . This implies that, depending on the relative importance of the
two demand shocks, our model can produce a home bias or a reverse home bias in portfolios. Note
that the condition determining the direction of the bias is not same one as that for the home bias
in consumption (αH > βH ), as is often thought.

   The inability to hedge perfectly is indicative of the fact that market incompleteness matters.
Indeed, in equilibrium,
                                                                                         
                                           αH σα1 σβ22                 βH σα2 1 σβ2
                       νH =   0, 0, −                          , −                            ,   (37)
                                        βH2 σα2 1   + α2H σβ22     βH2 σα2 1 + α2H σβ22

and hence the weight λ follows a stochastic process. The zeros in the ﬁrst two positions of νH are
not accidental. Since the preference shifts that the Home country faces are uncorrelated with the
output shocks, it demands a hedge correlated with the Brownian motions wα and wβ but not w
and w∗ . Constructing such a hedging portfolio is possible: one can easily show that any zero-cost
portfolio of the two stocks is going to be uncorrelated with the output shocks. The hedging portfolio
h must then have a value of zero, and one can easily verify from (36) and Lemma 1 that this is
indeed the case. As a corollary, none of the countries holds any bond (Lemma 2) and hence their
current accounts are zero (Lemma 3).

   Now let us examine the capital-gains adjusted current account of, say, Home. Recall from
                          βH −λ βF
Lemma 4 that N F AH =     αH +λ βF   S. Unlike in the two previous special cases, where it turned out
that βH − λ βF = 0, Home’s net foreign asset position is no longer zero at all times. We ﬁnd that in
our model, the sign of the responses of the capital-gains adjusted current account to the underlying
innovations depends on whether the country is a net debtor or a net creditor. We thus need the
following condition:

   Condition A1: Home is Net Creditor. βH − λβF > 0.

   We can then sign (or characterize) the direction the valuation eﬀects. Table 1 presents the
eﬀects.

   For the signs of the unexpected gain/loss on the Home’s net foreign asset position in response
to the output shocks, Condition A1 is necessary and suﬃcient. This observation is similar to the
one made in Kraay and Ventura (2000). However, the condition is only a suﬃcient one for the signs

                                                       23
                                                      dw    dw∗    dwα   dwβ
                        Unexpected change in S         +     +      +     −
                        Unexpected change in S ∗       +     +      −     +
                        CGCAH                         +A1   +A1    −A1   +A1

Table 1: The valuation eﬀects: Unexpected gains on stocks and Home’s the net foreign assets
(CGCAH ) in response to the underlying shocks. The superscript A1 indicates that a sign is valid
under Condition A1.

of the responses to the demand shocks, which give rise to more complex dynamics.

   Table 1 reveals that on impact, both stocks yield unexpected capital gains in response to a
positive output shock in either country (dw or dw∗ ). This is because a positive output shock in say,
Home, raises the dividend on the Home tree. At the same time, it causes a deterioration of Home’s
terms of trade because the Home good becomes less scarce. This in turn improves Foreign’s terms
of trade and hence raises the value of the output of the Foreign tree. Hence, both stock markets
go up. The remaining signs of the unexpected gains on the stocks are summarized in the last two
columns. The reaction of stock prices to preference shifts has a distinctly diﬀerent pattern: the
preference shifts make the stock prices always move in opposite directions. As Home shifts its
preference towards the Home good, there is an excess demand for the Home good in the world.
This pushes the price of the Home good up, or equivalently, causes an appreciation of the terms of
trade, q. This raises the value of the Home output relative to Foreign. Consequently, the price of
the Home stock increases, while that of the Foreign stock falls.

   To understand the intuition behind the impact of the valuation eﬀects on the current account,
note that Foreign always holds a positive position in Home stock and, under Condition A1, Home
has a positive position in the Foreign stock (see equations (34)–(35)). It is then immediate from
(29) that the unexpected component term has to be negative for the dwα and positive for the dwβ
shock. In the case of a preference shift towards the Home good, a positive dwα , Home loses on its
investment in the Foreign stock while Foreign gains on its investment in the Home stock—hence
the fall in the current account surplus of Home. The opposite is true for a preference shift towards
the Foreign good, a positive dwβ .

   Finally, it turns out that in this example the directions of the agents’ portfolio reallocations in
response to the underlying shocks are unambiguous. In particular, portfolios respond to demand
shocks, but not to the supply shocks, as reported in Table 2.



                                                 24
                     Variable/ Eﬀects of            dw(t)   dw∗ (t)   dwα (t)   dwβ (t)
                     dsSH                             0       0         −         +
                         ∗
                     dsSH                             0       0         +         −

        Table 2: Impact responses of Home’s portfolio holdings to the underlying shocks.

4.4.   Example 4: Bondholdings and the Current Account

This ﬁnal example illustrates what is required for the current account to have a nontrivial dynamics.
As we can anticipate from the previous examples, the key implication that produces such dynamics
is that the countries have nontrivial bondholdings.

   To induce the countries to trade in bonds, we now allow for the correlation between the pref-
erence shifts and the output shocks. To keep the model tractable, however, we reduce the number
of Brownian motions driving the economy from four to two. In particular, we shut down Brownian
motions wα and wβ and require that all processes are adapted to the ﬁltration generated by the
output shocks w and w∗ . Under this modiﬁcation, all four-dimensional vectors in our analysis in
Section 2 and the Appendix become two-dimensional. This implies further that the volatility ma-
trix of stock returns σ is a 2× 2 square matrix. If this matrix is nondegenerate—which is always the
case in the presence of stochastic preference shifts—ﬁnancial markets are complete. Equilibrium
allocation is then Pareto optimal and the weight λ is constant.

   In the interest of space, we do not report the countries’ portfolios in this case. It suﬃces to say
that now portfolios depend on all of the parameters of the model except for the drifts of outputs.
As to be expected, the gain on the hedging portfolio in this case is perfectly correlated with the
ﬂuctuations in αH + βH :

                                                     WH
                              d h = [. . .] dt +           (σαH + σβH ) dw.
                                                                         
                                                   αH + βH

In contrast to all the special cases we have considered so far however, the value of the hedging
portfolio is not equal to zero. Lemma 2 then implies that now the countries engage in borrowing
and lending. Furthermore, for some special cases of this economy, the bondholdings always have a
unique sign. For example, if we set σαH = (σα1 , 0) and σβH = (0, σβ2 ), with σα1 > 0 and σβ2 > 0,
the value of the bondholdings of the Home country becomes
                             
                1 − e−ρ(T −t)                  Y Y ∗ λ (αF + βF ) σα1 σβ2
             −                                                                            .
                     ρ          (1 − a)Y (λαF + βH )2 σY ∗ σα1 + aY ∗ (αH + λβF )2 σY σβ2
Home borrows from Foreign to ﬁnance its hedging portfolio, whose value is always greater than

                                                      25
zero in this case. This example demonstrates that in our model it is possible to have a negative
bond position forever. This does not in any way contradict sustainability of a country’s external
position: if an equilibrium exists, the budget constraints of both countries are always satisﬁed, and
so a negative position in the bond account is oﬀset by positive positions in the stocks.

     It follows from Lemma 3 that the countries current accounts are nozero. This is the ﬁrst
time we encounter a nonzero current account in this section. As the case we are considering here
demonstrates, enough heterogeneity in hedging demands that is suﬃcient to give rise to trade in
bonds for risk sharing purposes guarantees that the current account deviates from zero.

     The analysis of the capital-gains adjusted current account is less transparent when the preference
shifts depend on the output shocks. This is because the capital gains on the stocks in response to
all shocks no longer have unique signs. Recall from our earlier discussions (Section 4.3) that the
Home stock responds positively to an output shock in either country, positively to the preference
shift towards the Home good (dαH > 0), but negatively to the preference shift towards the Foreign
good. The demand and supply eﬀect reinforce each other for the case of the Home output shock
(because αH loads positively on dw), but they go in the opposite direction for the case of the Foreign
output shock (because βH loads positively on the Foreign output shock). The analogous argument
holds for the Foreign stock.


5.     Simulations

Section 4 studies particular examples that highlight the diﬀerent channels through which asset
prices aﬀect the adjustment process. In those examples we have either incomplete markets with
independent demand shocks or complete markets with correlated demand and supply shocks. In
this section, we study a general case of our economy. Although our characterizations are in closed
form, it is easier to present the results in terms of tables and plots.

     The parameter values chosen are not meant to represent any particular country—they are
just for expositional purposes—and so should not be viewed as a formal calibration of the model.
Nevertheless, we chose them to be such that countries have positive cross-holdings, the portfolios
exhibit a home bias, and one of the countries is running a current account deﬁcit (conventionally
deﬁned). Table 3 lists the parameter values employed in this section.




                                                  26
                   Parameter        Value     Parameter       Value      Parameter       Value
                   Y (0)            1         αH (0)          0.6        σY              0.01
                   Y ∗ (0)          1         αF              0.6        σY ∗            0.01
                   µY               0.02      βH (0)          0.4        σαH             (z1 , 0, z2 , 0)
                   µY ∗             0.02      βF              0.4        σβ H            (0, z1 , 0, y2 )
                   ρ                0.05      a               0.5

                                            Table 3: Parameter choices.

where z1 ∈ [0, 0.006], z2 ∈ [0.002, 0.014].10 According to this parametrization, the countries’ output
processes are geometric Brownian motions (since both the drift and diﬀusion are constant). This
is a speciﬁcation most commonly assumed in the literature. The literature provides little guidance
for the form of preference shifts, and so we simply assume that the parameters σαH and σβH
are constant. This creates a potential problem that αH (t) and βH (t) may become negative, but we
guard against this possibility in our simulations. The results are qualitatively the same if αH (t) and
βH (t) follow geometric Brownian motions with no drift. Furthermore, motivated by the estimated
dynamics of demand shocks in Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), we posit that αH loads positively on
the Home output shock w and βH loads positively on the Foreign output shock w∗ . We vary the
relative sizes of the demand and supply shocks by varying the volatility of the demand shocks and
keeping that of the supply shocks ﬁxed.

    We deﬁne the steady state as the path in which all shocks are equal to zero at all times.
Figure 2 reports the steady-state values of the key variables in our model. Unless stated otherwise,
all variables are for the Home country. We plot the number of shares of the Home stock held by the
Home residents (panel (a)), the number of shares of the Foreign stock held by Home residents (panel
(b)), the value of their bondholdings (panel (c)), the annualized trade balance and (conventional)
current account measured as fractions of GDP (panels (d) and (e)), the capital-gains adjusted
current account as a fraction of GDP (panel (f)), the interest rate (panel (g)), and the expected
returns on Home and Foreign stocks (panels (h) and (i)). In all ﬁgures, the x-axis measures the
instantaneous correlation between the demand and supply shocks (we vary it from 0 to 45 percent),
and the y-axis the relative size of the demand and supply shocks, as captured by the ratio of their
volatilities (we vary it from 0.05 to 1.85).11 The points where the correlation is zero—z1 = 0—
  10
     The ranges of σαH and σβH are determined by choosing the relative variance of the supply and demand shocks
to vary from 0.05 to 1.85, and the correlation between
                                                     p supply and demand shocks from 0 to 45 percent.        p
  11
     The former is formally deﬁned as σY i1 σαH /(σY ||σαH ||2 ), where i1 = (1, 0, 0, 0), and the latter as ||σαH ||2 /σY .
That is, the supply shock is represented by the Home output shock and the demand shock by a preference shift towards
the Home good. We could have deﬁned these quantities using the output shock at Foreign and the demand shift
towards the Foreign good—the results below would be essentially the same.



                                                             27
correspond to our Example 3 (Section 4). Finally, the value of the relative variance of 0.05 implies
that demand shocks are almost negligible and the model approaches Example 1 (although we cannot
simulate Example 1 directly because portfolio holdings become indeterminate).

       Our choice of parameters implies a home bias in portfolios, whereby Home holds more than
70 percent of the supply of Home shares, and between 25 to 50 percent of that of Foreign shares.
When the correlations between demand and supply shocks are zero and their relative variance is
small, this ratio is close to 70/30.12 As in our Example 3, when demand shocks are uncorrelated,
bond holdings are exactly zero. When the correlation increases, Home’s bondholdings become
negative.13 Home demands more of both the Home and Foreign stock, ending up owning more
shares of the Foreign stock than foreigners own abroad, and ﬁnances these stock purchases not by
selling domestic shares (rebalancing), but by borrowing. The selling of the bond by Home implies
a current account deﬁcit, as shown in panel (e) and implied by Lemma 3. The current account
deﬁcit varies from zero up to 12 percent of GDP, while the trade balance and CGCA are exactly
zero in steady state (panels (d) and (f)).14 Finally, the last row of Figure 2 plots the interest rate
and the expected return on Home and Foreign stocks. The interest rate and the expected returns
are increasing with the degree of correlation and the size of the demand shocks. The equity premia
on both stocks are positive but small.15 Finally, note that our parametrization implies that the
expected return on the Foreign stock is larger than the expected return on the Home stock.


5.1.      Unconditional responses

In the simulation we generate 500 histories, each of 95 periods (we set the shocks to be zero in the
ﬁrst ﬁve periods), by randomly drawing all four shocks. Each period corresponds to one hundredth
of a year.

       We start by examining the serial correlation of the textbook current account and the serial
correlation of the capital-gains adjusted current account. To provide an illustration, Figure 1 depicts
  12
     A home bias in portfolios is achieved by selecting appropriate variances of the demand shocks.
  13
     It is important to highlight that whether bondholdings are positive or negative depends on the sign of the
correlation between the demand shocks and the supply shocks. In our case, home supply shocks are positively
correlated with the agents’ demand for the Home good, and therefore, the Home stock is a good hedge against that
correlation.
  14
     The trade balance and the CGCA are zero because of the symmetry of the agents’ preferences and their identically
valued endowments.
  15
     This should have been expected, given our assumptions on the agents’ preferences. The purpose of this paper is
not to match the equity premium, and we make a number of simplifying assumptions in order to achieve tractability.
We discuss extensions of our model that incorporate alternative preferences in Section 6.



                                                         28
a variety of sample paths of the current accounts emerging from the Monte-Carlo simulations.


  -0.032                                                                       0.4
           1   9   17   25   33   41   49   57   65   73   81   89   97


 -0.0325                                                                       0.3



  -0.033                                                                       0.2



 -0.0335                                                                       0.1



  -0.034                                                                         0
                                                                                      1   9   17   25   33   41   49   57   65   73   81   89   97


 -0.0345                                                                       -0.1



  -0.035                                                                       -0.2



 -0.0355                                                                       -0.3



  -0.036                                                                       -0.4




               (a) Textbook current account                                           (b) Capital-gains adjusted current account

Figure 1: Simulated sample paths of the textbook current account (CAH ) and the capital-gains
adjusted current account (CGCAH ) (in fractions of GDP). Each sample path corresponds to one
simulated history.


    The diﬀerence in the dynamic behavior of the two series is striking. The textbook current
account is clearly highly serially correlated, while the capital-gains adjusted current account is
not. The main reason why the latter does not exhibit signiﬁcant serial correlation is the fact that
much of its variation is explained by the unexpected capital gains, which are not serially correlated.
The series in panel (b) looks much like a return on a ﬁnancial asset: very volatile and largely
unpredictable. Table 4 validates these observations and reports the serial correlations of each of
the two variables. We estimate a simple AR(1) and average the coeﬃcients across all simulations,
for the entire parameter space.

                                                                Serial Correlation                      Standard
                                                           Average     Max       Min                    Deviation
                                       CAH                  95.91% 97.09% 94.96%                        0.53%
                                       CGCAH               -0.95% -0.55% -1.25%                         0.19%

Table 4: The variability and the serial correlation of the textbook current account (CAH ) and the
capital-gains adjusted current account (CGCAH ) (in fractions of GDP). The Average is computed
as the simple average of the estimates across our parameter space. The variation of the estimates
across the diﬀerent parameters is measured as the standard deviation in column 4, and as the
maximum and minimum in the second and third columns. All of the point estimates for the serial
correlation of CAH are signiﬁcant at the 1% level, while all those of CGCAH are not signiﬁcant
even at the 10% level (the average t-statistics is 0.01).

    One can see that irrespectively of the parameters chosen for a simulation, the current account
is highly serially correlated, while the CGCA is not. In terms of their volatilities, the CGCA has

                                                                          29
a standard deviation of 1.16% while the current account of only 0.27% (these standard deviations
have been annualized).16 Finally, the average current account deﬁcit is around 3% of GDP, while
that of the capital-gains adjusted current account is about zero.

    Recent empirical literature has produced an intriguing stylized fact: valuation changes (capital
gains) have a stabilizing eﬀect on the current account (Gourinchas and Rey (2007a)). We investigate
whether our model generates similar implications. We have already noted that the unexpected
capital gains drastically increase the variability of the current account, and so our focus here is
primarily on the expected current account and the eﬀects of net expected capital gains.

    Recall our decomposition of the current account:
                                  ∗
                                                                                                    
           CAH (t) = T BH (t) + sSH (t)p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t) − sSF (t)p(t)Y (t) +      sB
                                                                                H (t)B(t)r(t)           dt
                                           Net Dividend Payments            Net Interest Payments

and
                      ∗
                                                             ∗                                          
CGCAH (t) = CAH (t)+sSH (t) ECGS ∗ (t) − sSF (t) ECGS (t) dt+ sSH (t)S ∗ (t)σS ∗ (t) − sSF (t) S(t) σS (t) dw(t)
                                                                                                            
                                 Net Expected Capital Gains                    Net Unexpected Capital Gains

In the current simulation we computed a variance decomposition of both measures of the current
account by looking at the net contribution of their components. This is not a standard variance
decomposition because we are not studying the contribution of independent shocks (as is typical of
VAR variance decompositions). Instead, we are interested in highlighting the negative correlation
of the variables comprising the current account. Therefore, we ﬁrst compare the variance of the
trade balance with the variance of the traditional the current account (CAH ). If the net dividend
and interest payments play a stabilizing role, then the variance of the current account should be
smaller than the variance of the trade balance. We compute the ratio of the standard deviations
to capture the extent of this stabilizing role. We then contrast the traditional and the expected
capital-gains adjusted current account and examine the variance reduction that the net expected
capital gains produce. Finally, we add unexpected capital gains. Table 5 presents the results of the
variance decomposition.

    Table 5 reveals that there is a sizeable stabilizing eﬀect that the net dividend and interest
payments and the expected capital gains provide. Together, they generate a reduction of 60 percent
of the standard deviation of the trade balance. Especially notable is the contribution of the net
  16
     The orders of magnitude and their relative importance are consistent with the evidence presented in Kollmann
(2006) and Lane and Shambaugh (2007).


                                                       30
             Variable                                             Std. Dev.                    Ratio
                                                           Average Max            Min         Average
             T BH                                           0.41%    0.54%       0.37%           1
             CAH                                            0.27%    0.42%       0.07%         0.69
             CAH + Net Expected Capital Gains               0.16%    0.21%       0.15%         0.40
             CGCAH                                          1.16%    1.55%       1.04%         2.83

                                     Table 5: A variance decomposition.


expected capital gains, suggesting that there is a negative correlation between the traditional current
account and the net expected capital gains. However, the unexpected capital gains, although
slightly negatively correlated with the trade balance in our simulations (about -14%), increase the
overall variance. This is because the unexpected capital gains themselves are extremely volatile.


5.2.      Impulse responses

We now turn to investigating impulse responses of the economy to supply and demand shocks.
More speciﬁcally, we examine the following shocks: a permanent shift in preferences toward the
home good (a demand shock) and a permanent increase in productivity at Home (a supply shock).
In our model we can also investigate the eﬀects of a preference shift towards the Foreign good and
a productivity shock at Foreign, but for brevity we omit that discussion. We emphasize that the
shocks that we study are permanent.17

       For each shock we present a sequence of ﬁgures that capture the impact responses of the real
side of the economy, of the ﬁnancial side of the economy and then highlight the resulting response
of the current account of the Home country. To compute the impact responses, we simulate the
model without shocks (dw(t)
                           = 0, all t)—the steady state—and then introduce one shock occurring
at an arbitrarily chosen time t = 5 . Then, for each pertinent variable, we subtract the steady-state
series for this variable from the one with the shock, and report the resulting change at the time of
the shock.

       Figure 3 presents impact responses to a shock dwα . By construction, such a shock has no
eﬀect on the Home or Foreign output, and the only change in the the primitives of our model
that takes place in response to the stock is a preference shift at Home towards the domestic good
  17
     Some of the existing literature has focused on the eﬀects of transitory shocks. Our focus on permanent shocks is
motivated largely by the limitations of the model: while productivity shocks can be modeled as transitory, preference
shifts have to be permanent (recall that, for tractability, we have assumed that αH and βH are martingales). The
analysis of transitory shocks is thus beyond the scope of this paper, and we leave it for future research.




                                                         31
(αH increases). As we have discussed in Section 4, the resulting excess demand for the Home
good pushes its price up and therefore improves Home’s terms of trade. This is why panel (a)
of Figure 3 reports an increase in q for all parameter values. Output in both countries stays the
same, but because of the movement in the terms of trade, the value of the output increases at
Home and decreases at Foreign. Hence the increase in the stock market values at Home (panel
(b)) and the decrease at Foreign (panel (c)). It is now easy to understand why the Home country
suﬀers an net unexpected capital loss (panel (d)). Remember that our parameters imply positive
steady state holdings of both stocks by both countries. The increase in the stock price at Home
thus implies a capital gain for foreigners, while the decline in foreign stock prices implies a loss
for Home agents. Both eﬀects act in the same direction, against the Home residents. Notice that
this is exactly the same intuition as we have gained from Example 3 (Section 4), except here it
generalizes to the case where the supply and demand shocks are correlated and the countries trade
in the bond market. The capital loss at Home induces the “planner” to reassign weights to the
countries in its objective function—in favor of Foreign (panel (e)). This could be thought of as
a wealth transfer from Home to Foreign, but this is not entirely accurate, as can be seen from
                          WF (t)       αH (t)+βH (t)
equation (24): λ(t) =     WH (t)   ×     αF +βF      .   Indeed, a part of a change in the relative weight λ
coincides with a change in the wealth distribution (a pure wealth transfer), but the remaining part
is due to imperfect demand risk sharing: under complete markets, λ does not move in response to
any shock, but it does respond to shocks under incomplete markets because the shocks cannot be
perfectly hedged. For our parametrization, the wealth transfer eﬀect dominates, but this need not
be the case in general.

   As shown in panel (f), the trade balance improves for all parameter values. This improvement
of the trade balance is simply the ﬂip side of the deterioration of the NFA position due to the
unexpected net capital loss (Lemma 4). The current NFA position is no longer suﬃcient to ﬁnance
the existing trade imbalance, and so Home has to cut it down. For all parameters, except the ones
that give rise to our Example 3 (i.e., no correlation between the demand and supply shocks), Home
purchases the bond. The purchases decrease the deﬁcit in the current account (Lemma 3)—an
improvement in the current account is evident in panel (h). Finally, note that the movements in
the net unexpected capital gains dominate the dynamics of the NFA position. The response of the
capital-gains adjusted current account mimics that of the net unexpected capital gains—CGCA
is negative for all parameter values (panel (i)). Note that the direction of the response of the
conventional current account is the opposite (panel (h)).

                                                           32
   In Figure 4 we provide the impulse responses to a shock to the Home output dw. Remember
that the case in which the instantaneous correlation between the demand and supply shocks is
zero corresponds to our Example 3. However, when this correlation is positive, as we assume
through our choice of parameters here, a positive Home output shock also causes an increase in
αH . As mentioned earlier, a positive shock to the Home output YH increases the value of its stock
market (panel (b)) but at the same time deteriorates its terms of trade because the Home good
becomes less scarce (panel (b)). The resulting improvement in Foreign’s terms of trade beneﬁts
its stock market (panel (c)). These responses are somewhat mitigated by the increase in αH that
occurs contemporaneously. As we have seen in the previous ﬁgure, a positive shock to αH improves
Home’s terms of trade, boosts the stock market at Home, while decreasing the stock market abroad.
We can see that this confounding eﬀect becomes more pronounced when the demand shocks have
a high loading on the supply shock dw—i.e., when both the correlation between the demand and
supply shocks and the relative variance of the demand and supply shocks is high.

   Furthermore, we ﬁnd that Home enjoys a net unexpected capital gain in response to the supply
shock (panel (d)). The intuition of this result is complicated because it depends on how prices and
portfolio choices interact. A “partial” intuition is as follows. When the correlation between the
demand and supply shocks is zero (as in Example 3) the net unexpected capital gain have to be
zero as well. The main reason for this result is that for our parameter values βH (t) = λ(t)βF in the
steady state, and hence our condition A1 holds with equality. The net unexpected capital gains
then have to be zero for all remaining parameter values, as becomes evident from Table 1. When we
move away from the case of zero correlation, home agents demand more of both Home and Foreign
stocks and purchase them from the foreigners (see Figure 2). For the exact same movement in the
stock prices, this implies a net unexpected capital gain. A capital gain at Home causes a wealth
transfer from Foreign to Home, or, more accurately, the weight λ of Foreign in the “planner’s”
problem falls, increasing the allocation to the Home country (panel (e)). Since the NFA position
of Home has improved, it can aﬀord to deteriorate its trade balance, which is what we see in panel
(f). Part of the ﬁnancing of the increased purchases of the two stocks comes from selling the bond
(panel (g)), which according to our Lemma 3 deteriorates the conventional current account (panel
(h)). The capital-gains adjusted current account, however, moves in the opposite direction—the
same direction as the net unexpected capital gains, which are positive here (panel (i)).




                                                 33
6.       Discussion

Some of the recent literature has drawn attention to the relevance of the quality of international
assets for the discussion of global imbalances (see Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2006), Dooley,
Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2004), and Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa (2005) for the link to global
imbalances, and Kouri (1982) for an earlier discussion). Because in our model the entire output
of each country is capitalizable and there are no restrictions on capital ﬂows, ﬁnancial assets do
not vary in their quality. But we believe that diﬀerences in asset quality is an important feature
of international capital markets, and therefore it would be interesting to extend our framework to
include this element into the analysis.

       Extending the framework beyond log-linear preferences may also prove fruitful. This would
introduce some of the intertemporal hedging motives that have been shut down in our model.
Moving away from the log-linear speciﬁcation, however, has the drawback that the model loses its
tractability. For instance, for the case of CES preferences, it is not possible to obtain closed-form
characterizations for portfolios and asset prices.18 There are three ways in which one can tackle
such a model. First, one can attempt to solve the model numerically. To our knowledge, this
has been done only for the complete-markets case (Gourinchas and Rey (2006))—an extension to
the incomplete-markets case is a daunting task. Second, one can follow, for example, Devereux
and Sutherland (2006) and Tille and van Wincoop (2007) and approximate around a deterministic
steady state. Finally, one can recognize that log-linear preferences are a special case of CES
preferences and build on our model to ﬁnd an approximate solution for the CES case. To do so,
one can perturb the equilibrium in our economy by expanding around the unitary elasticity of
substitution, for which the solutions are analytical.19 The advantage of this approach is that the
approximation is done around a stochastic equilibrium as opposed to a deterministic steady state.


7.       Conclusion

In his Harms Lecture at the Kiel Institute, Obstfeld (2004) stresses that “recent changes in the
functioning of international capital markets require a new view of external adjustment” and more-
over, that any notion of “external balance adjustment cannot be deﬁned without reference to the
  18
    The analysis of the NFA position is analytically tractable only for the case of complete markets (see ).
  19
    This idea is closely related to the works of Judd (1998) and Kogan and Uppal (2003) who develop applications
of perturbation methods to solving problems in economics and ﬁnance.



                                                      34
structure of national portfolios.” In this paper, we take a step in that direction. We develop an
open economy model with endogenous portfolio decisions, in which we investigate the interaction
between capital markets and the external adjustment process.

   From the methodological point of view, our contribution is to construct a framework that is
rich enough to include multiple risky assets, incomplete markets, and supply- and demand-side
uncertainty, while at the same time simple enough to allow for closed-form characterizations of
asset prices, net foreign asset positions, and equity portfolios. It is within this framework that we
are able to establish the interconnections between the real side of the economy represented by the
trade balance, current account, and consumption allocations and the ﬁnancial side such as portfolio
holdings, stock prices, and valuation changes.

   From the policy point of view, one surprising result in our paper is that even though valuation
eﬀects play an important role in the adjustment process, there is a tight link between the trade
balance of good and services—the traditional and the preferred policy target—and the new measure
of external sustainability based on the market value of net foreign assets—that is extremely diﬃcult
to measure and target. On the other hand, this relationship does not exist between the current
account and the valuation-eﬀects adjusted measures. Hence, the discussion regarding the disconnect
between the new measures of sustainability and the classical ones is far from over.

   Of course, the implications that we highlight have been derived in the context of our model,
and as any model, it is a highly simpliﬁed depiction of reality. Future research must go beyond our
stylized framework and establish tighter links with the data.




                                                 35
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. In this proof, we closely follow He and Pearson (1991). Their analysis
is presented in the context of a single-good economy, but this does not present a diﬃculty for us
because (in the main text) we have reduced our problem to a representation that is equivalent
to a familiar single-good one. In particular, the ﬁrst-order conditions for the consumer problem
(11)–(12) have the familiar form

                                  αi (t) + βi (t)
                           e−ρt                   = yi ξνi (t) ,      i ∈ {H, F },              (A.1)
                                       Ci (t)

where the Lagrange multiplier yi is such that the budget constraint evaluated at the optimal
consumption expenditure, C, is satisﬁed with equality:
                          T                
                       E       ξν (t)CH (t)dt = WH (0) , i ∈ {H, F }.
                              0

It follows that, by no-arbitrage, the time-t wealth of a consumer is given by
                                     T                        
                                            1
                     Wi (t) = Et                 ξνi (s)Ci (s)ds , i ∈ {H, F },
                                       t ξνi (t)

and hence, making use of (A.1) and the assumption that αi and βi are martingales, we have

                                   αi (t) + βi (t) e−ρt − e−ρT
                        Wi (t) =                               ,         i ∈ {H, F }.           (A.2)
                                      yi ξνi (t)        ρ

Of course, for the case of the Foreign country, the arguments αF and βF are constant over time.
   To ﬁnd optimal portfolios, we apply Itô’s lemma to (A.2) and match the corresponding diﬀusion
term to that in the dynamic budget constraint (10). This operation yields

                                           σαi (t) + σβi (t)
                          x
                           i (t)σ(t) =                       + (m(t) + νi (t)) ,               (A.3)
                                            αi (t) + βi (t)

where we have used equation (14). Recall that in incomplete markets the matrix σ is not a square
matrix, and hence the above system of equations contains 4 equations (dimensionality of the vector
of Brownian motions) in 2 unknowns (the number of stocks). It has a solution if and only if its
right-hand side lies in Span(σ). This entails a restriction

                                                            σαi (t) + σβi (t)
                  (I4×4 − σ(t) (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t))                            + νi (t) = 0,   (A.4)
                                                              αi (t) + βi (t)

where we have applied the projection operator I4×4 − σ(t) (σ(t)σ(t) )−1 σ(t). Equation (17) then
follows immediately. Note that, for the case of Foreign, equation (A.4) simpliﬁes to yield νF (t) = 0
because σαF (t) and σβF (t) are both equal to zero.
   The optimal portfolios are obtained from (A.3) via simple algebraic manipulations that, in
particular, make use of the property that σ(t)νi (t) = 0. 



                                                       36
Proof of Lemma 1. We use the construct of the representative agent to value stocks in the
economy. The representative agent’s utility evaluated at the aggregate output is given by

        u(Y (t), Y ∗ (t); λ(t)) =            max                  uH (CH (t), CH∗ (t)) + λ(t)uF (CF (t), CF∗ (t)).
                                    CH (t) + CF (t) = Y (t),
                                     ∗        ∗
                                    CH (t) + CF (t) = Y ∗ (t)


It follows from this deﬁnition that the marginal utilities of the representative agent and the indi-
vidual agents, evaluated at the optimum, are related as
                                                                          ∗                                    ∗
              ∇u(Y (t), Y ∗ (t); λ(t)) = ∇uH (C H (t), C H (t)) = λ(t)∇uF (C F (t), C F (t)),

where the symbol ∇ is used to denote the gradient. From the ﬁrst-order conditions of the Home
consumer,                                                                   
                                    ∗
                    ∇uH (C H (t), C H (t)) = yH p(t)ξνH (t), yH p∗ (t)ξνH (t) .
                                                                      ∗                                            ∗
To derive this we used the fact that ∇uH (C H (t), C H (t)) = (αH (t)/C H (t), βH (t)/C H (t)) combined
with (8) and (A.1). Substituting the sharing rules of the representative agent (18), we can then de-
rive the personalized state price density of the Home consumer and hence that of the representative
agent:
                                   p(0) C H (0)        p(0)Y (0) αH (t) + λ(t)βF
                    ξνH (t) = e−ρt              = e−ρt                             .              (A.5)
                                   p(t) C H (t)        p(t)Y (t) αH (0) + λ(0) βF
This state price density can be used to price assets by no-arbitrage:
                       T                                            T                       
              1                                     ∗        1                      ∗     ∗
   S(t) =          Et      ξνH (s) p(s) Y (s) ds , S (t) =         Et      ξνH (s) p (s) Y (s) ds .
           ξνH (t)      t                                  ξνH (t)      t

Hence, the price of the Home stock is
                                                                                            
                       eρt p(t) Y (t)                  T
                                                           −ρs
          S(t) =                      Et                   e     (αH (s) + λ(s)βF )ds
                      αH (t) + λ(t)βF              t
                                                                                                                     
                      1 − e−ρ(T −t)             eρt βF p(t) Y (t)                         T
                                                                                                  −ρs
                 =                  p(t)Y (t) +                   Et                          e         (λ(s) − λ(t))ds ,   (A.6)
                           ρ                    αH (t) + λ(t)βF                       t

where we used the fact that αH is a martingale (i.e., Et [αH (s)] = αH (t)). Analogously, using the
fact that βH is a martingale, we ﬁnd the price of the Foreign stock to be
                                           T                              
         ∗          eρt p∗ (t) Y ∗ (t)          −ρs
       S (t) =                         Et      e (βH (s) + λ(s)αF )ds
                   βH (t) + λ(t)αF          t
                                                                            T                  
                   1 − e−ρ(T −t) ∗         ∗      eρt αF p∗ (t) Y ∗ (t)          −ρs
               =                    p (t) Y (t) +                       Et      e (λ(s) − λ(t))ds . (A.7)
                          ρ                        βH (t) + λ(t)αF            t

There are two ways to proceed in evaluating the above conditional expectations. The ﬁrst is to
assume that λ is a martingale (and hence Et [λ(s) − λ(t)] = 0) and then verify that it is indeed the
case in equilibrium. From Proposition 2, however, we can only conclude that λ is a local martingale.
In all special cases that we consider in Section 4, it is easy to verify that λ is also a true martingale




                                                                 37
under some additional mild regularity conditions imposed on the preference shifts.20 However, for
the general case it is not immediate how to show it.
    An alternative approach is to use the following, less direct, argument based on market clearing.
In particular, from (A.1)–(A.2), we have

                                         1 − e−ρ(T −t)              1 − e−ρ(T −t)                  1 − e−ρ(T −t)
WH (t) + WF (t) = (CH (t) + CF (t))                    = p(t) Y (t)               + p∗ (t) Y ∗ (t)               ,
                                              ρ                          ρ                              ρ
where in the last equality we used the fact that the total consumption expenditure at time t equals
p(t)Y (t) + p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t). On the other hand, from stock market clearing, we have

                                        WH (t) + WF (t) = S(t) + S ∗ (t).

Combining the resulting restriction that

                                                   1 − e−ρ(T −t)                  1 − e−ρ(T −t)
                     S(t) + S ∗ (t) = p(t) Y (t)                 + p∗ (t) Y ∗ (t)
                                                        ρ                              ρ

with (A.6)–(A.7), we conclude that

                                     1 − e−ρ(T −t)                                    1 − e−ρ(T −t)
                 S(t) = p(t) Y (t)                     and S ∗ (t) = p∗ (t) Y ∗ (t)                 .
                                          ρ                                                ρ

This establishes (21)–(22).
    To derive (23), we combine (A.1)–(A.2) with (18)–(19) and use the representation of the stock
prices S and S ∗ derived in this lemma. 


Proof of Lemma 4. Equation (33) follows from N F AH (t) = WH (t) − S(t) and Lemma 1. To
derive (32), we use the deﬁnition of the trade balance, T BH (t) = p(t)(Y (t) − CH (t)) − p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t),
substitute the equilibrium expressions for consumption and the terms of trade, (18) and (20), and
simplify. 


  Before we proceed to the rest of the proofs, we need to deﬁne several auxiliary vectors to be used
throughout the remainder of this appendix. Let

              i1 ≡ (1, 0, 0, 0),        i2 ≡ (0, 1, 0, 0), and                                                  (A.8)
                       σαH (t) − βF λ(t) ν(t) σβH (t) − αF λ(t)ν(t)
           A(t) ≡                             −                       − σY (t) i1 + σY ∗ (t) i2 .               (A.9)
                          αH (t) + λ(t) βF        βH (t) + λ(t) αF
  20
    The only special case that requires these additional assumptions is that presented in Section
                                                                                             h 1 R T3.3. 
                                                                                                         In particular,
                                                                                                               i
one needs to bound the preference shifts in such a way that the expression in (37) satisﬁes E e 2 0 ν(t) ν(t)dt < ∞.
This condition is known as the Novikov condition.




                                                          38
Proof of Proposition 2.       By substituting (A.2) into (24) we derive

                                                   yH ξνH (t)
                                          λ(t) =              .
                                                   yF ξνF (t)

Applying Itô’s lemma and using the representation of the countries’ state price densities from (14),
we have
                          dλ(t) = −λ(t)m(t) νH (t)dt − λ(t)νH (t)dw(t),
                                                                                             (A.10)

where we have substituted the ﬁnding that νF (t) = 0 established in Proposition 1. To show that
the drift term in (A.10) is equal to zero, we use the deﬁnition of m from (13) and the restriction
that σ(t)νH (t) = 0.
   To determine λ(0), note from Lemma 1 that the initial ﬁnancial wealth of, say, the Home
country is given by (23) evaluated at t = 0. On the other hand, WH (0) = S(0) because the initial
portfolio of Home consists of one share of the Home stock. This allows us to pin down λ(0). It is
easy to show that λ(0) = βH (0)/βF .
   We now report the volatility matrix of stock returns.
                                 ⎡                               ⎤
                                        1−a
                                               A(t) + σ   (t) i1
                         σ(t) = ⎣ a q(t)+1−a                     ⎦,
                                                        Y

                                        a q(t)
                                   − a q(t)+1−a A(t) + σY (t) i2
                                                          ∗



where A(t), i1 , and i2 are deﬁned in (A.8)–(A.9). This volatility matrix is obtained by applying
Itô’s lemma to the closed-form expressions for the stock prices (21)–(22).
    The market price of risk process m can be derived from the dynamics of ξH in (14). Using the
identity ξH (t) = ap(t)ξH (t) + (1 − a)p∗ (t)ξH (t) and equations (20) and (A.5), we derive
                                                                                           
             −ρt     αH (t) + λ(t) βF Y (0)                 −ρt     βH (t) + λ(t) αF  Y (0)
  ξH (t) = ae p(0)                                + (1 − a)e p(0)                             . (A.11)
                    αH (0) + λ(0) βF Y (t)                         αH (0) + λ(0) βF Y ∗ (t)

Applying Itô’s lemma and identifying the diﬀusion term with that in the representation of ξH in
(14), we obtain

                p(0)e−ρt       Y (0)        σ (t) − β λ(t) ν (t)          αH (t) + βF λ(t)
                                                α
    m(t) = −                                                           −a
                                                          F      H
                                            a H                                              σY (t)i1
                  ξH (t) αH (0) + λ(0) βF              Y (t)                       Y (t)
                        σβ (t) − αF λ(t) νH (t)           βH (t) + αF λ(t)            
               +(1 − a) H                       − (1 − a)                  σ   ∗ (t)i2 − νH (t).
                                Y ∗ (t)                        Y ∗ (t)
                                                                             Y



This completes the proof of the proposition. 




                                                   39
Proof of Proposition 3. We ﬁrst report the interest rate r and the stocks’ expected returns µS
and µS ∗ and then explain how we derived these expressions.
                                                                                            
                       aq(t)                       2   σY (t)i1 (σαH (t) − λ(t) ν(t) βF )
    r(t) = ρ +                     µY (t) − σY (t) +
                 aq(t) + 1 − a                                   αH (t) + λβF (t)
                                                                                               
                       1−a                           2   σY ∗ (t)i2 (σβH (t) − λ(t) ν(t) αF )
               +                    µY (t) − σY (t) +
                                       ∗         ∗                                                   (A.12)
                 aq(t) + 1 − a                                        βH (t) + λαF
                                                                                               
                                1−a                       aq(t)               2              
   µS (t) = ρ + µY (t) +                    µq (t) −                  ||A(t)|| + σY (t)A(t)i1 ,      (A.13)
                           aq(t) + 1 − a              aq(t) + 1 − a
                                                                                                   
                                 aq(t)                       aq(t)               2               
  µS ∗ (t) = ρ + µY ∗ (t) +                  −µq (t) +                   ||A(t)|| − σY ∗ (t)A(t)i2 , (A.14)
                             aq(t) + 1 − a              aq(t) + 1 − a

where µq is the expected improvement in the terms of trade, given by

                                 1            1 ||σαH (t) − λ(t) ν(t) βF ||2
     µq (t) = µY ∗ (t) − µY (t) + ||A(t)||2 −
                                 2            2     (αH (t) + λβF (t))2
                                           1 ||σβH (t) − λ(t) ν(t) αF ||2 1         1
                                       +                            2
                                                                          + σY (t)2 − σY ∗ (t)2 ,
                                           2     (βH (t) + λ αF (t))       2         2

and where A(t), i1 , and i2 are deﬁned in (A.8)–(A.9).
     The interest rate r in (A.12) is equal to the drift term from the Itô expansion of the equilibrium
state price density reported in (A.11). The formulas in (A.13)–(A.14) are obtained by applying
Itô’s lemma to the closed-form expressions for the stock prices (21)–(22) and the terms of trade
(20), and then using the deﬁnitions of µS and µS ∗ from (4)–(5). 


Derivations for Section 4. All derivations for the special cases examined in Section 4 are
tedious but straightforward. Perhaps the easiest way to obtain the formulas and signs reported in
that section is to use Mathematica to simplify the expressions in Propositions 1–3 and manipulate
them in Mathematica to verify the desired properties. Our programs are available upon request.




                                                     40
References
Adler, M., and B. Dumas (1983): “International Portfolio Choice and Corporation Finance: a
 Synthesis,” Journal of Finance, 38, 925–984.
Basak, S., and B. Croitoru (2000): “Equilibrium Mispricing in a Capital Market with Portfolio
 Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 715–748.
Basak, S., and D. Cuoco (1998): “An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock Market Partic-
 ipation,” Review of Financial Studies, 11(2), 309–341.
Blanchard, O., F. Giavazzi, and F. Sa (2005): “International Investors, the U.S. Current
  Account, and the Dollar,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1–65.
Breeden, D. T. (1979): “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption
 and Investment Opportunities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7(1), 265–296.
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2006): “An Equilibrium Model of “Global
 Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” NBER working paper 11996.
Cass, D., and A. Pavlova (2004): “On Trees and Logs,” Journal of Economic Theory, 116,
 41–83.
Cavallo, M., and C. Tille (2006): “ Could Capital Gains Smooth a Current Account Rebal-
  ancing?,” working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Cole, H. L., and M. Obstfeld (1991): “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 28, 3–24.
Cuoco, D., and H. He (1994): “Dynamic Equilibrium in Inﬁnite-Dimensional Economies with
 Incomplete Financial Markets,” working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Detemple, J. B., and A. Serrat (2003): “Dynamic Equilibrium with Liquidity Constraints,”
 Review of Financial Studies, 16, 597–629.
Devereux, M. B., and A. Sutherland (2006): “Solving for Country Portfolios in Open Econ-
 omy Macro Models,” working paper, University of British Columbia.
Dooley, M. P., D. Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber (2004): “The Revised Bretton Woods
 System,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, 9(4), 307–313.
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977): “Comparative Advantage, Trade,
 and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review,
 67, 823–839.
Edwards, S. (2005): “Is the U.S. Current Account Deﬁcit Sustainabe? And If Not, How Costly
  is Adjustment Likely To Be?,” NBER working paper 11541.
Evans, M., and V. Hnatkovska (2007): “Solving General Equilibrium Models with Incomplete
  Markets and Many Financial Assets,” working paper, Georgetown University.
Frankel, J. A. (2006): “Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates: An Equilibrium Model vs.
  a Disequilibrium Reality,” working paper, Harvard University.
Ghironi, F., J. Lee, and A. Rebucci (2006): “The Valuation Channel of External Adjustment,”
 working paper, Boston University.
Gourinchas, P.-O., and H. Rey (2006): “Intertemporal Approach to the Financial Account,”
 work in progress, University of California, Berkeley.
       (2007a): “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: The US External Adjustment
  and The Exorbitant Privilege,” forthcoming in “G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
  and Adjustment,” R. Clarida, ed., The University of Chicago Press.


                                             41
         (2007b): “International Financial Adjustment,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcom-
  ing.
Hausmann, R., and F. Sturzenegger (2006): “The Implications of Dark Matter for Assessing
 the US External Imbalance,” working paper, Harvard University.
He, H., and N. D. Pearson (1991): “Consumption and Portfolio Policies with Incomplete Mar-
 kets and Short-Sale Constraints: The Inﬁnite Dimensional Case,” Journal of Economic Theory,
 54, 259–304.
Helpman, E., and A. Razin (1978): A Theory of International Trade under Uncertainty. Aca-
 demic Press, San Diego.
Judd, K. L. (1998): Numerical Methods in Economics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kehoe, P. J., and F. Perri (2002): “International Business Cycles with Endogenous Incomplete
 Markets,” Econometrica, 70, 907–928.
Kogan, L., and R. Uppal (2003): “Risk Aversion and Optimal Portfolio Policies in Partial and
 General Equilibrium Economies,” CEPR Discussion Paper 3306.
Kollmann, R. (2006): “International Portfolio Equilibrium and the Current Account,” working
 paper, ECARES, Free University of Brussls.
Kouri, P. (1982): “Balance of Payment and the Foreign Exchange Market: A Dynamic Partial
 Equilibrium Model,” in Jagdeep Bhandari and Bluford Putnam, eds., Economic Interdependance
 and Flexible Exchange Rates, (MIT Press), 116-156.
Kraay, A., and J. Ventura (2000): “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor Countries,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 1137–1166.
Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2001): “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of
  Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of International
  Economics, 55, 263–294.
         (2007): “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of
  Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Lane, P. R., and J. C. Shambaugh (2007): “Financial Exchange Rates and International Cur-
  rency Exposures,” work in progress, Dartmouth College.
Markowitz, H. (1952): “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, 7, 77–91.
Merton, R. C. (1971): “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time
 Model,” Journal of Economic Theory, 3, 373–413.
Negishi, T. (1960): “Welfare Economics and Existence of an Equilibrium for Competitive Econ-
 omy,” Metronomica, 12, 92–97.
Obstfeld, M. (2004): “External Adjustment,” Review of World Economics, 140, 541–568.
Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogoff (1995): “The Intertemporal Approach to the Current Ac-
 count,” in G. Grossman and K. Rogoﬀ, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. III, El-
 sevier Science B.V., 1731–1799.
        (2007): “The Unsustainable US Current Account Position Revisited,” forthcoming in “G7
  Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment,” R. Clarida, ed., The University
  of Chicago Press.
Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon (2005): “Wealth Transfers, Contagion, and Portfolio Constraints,”
  NBER working paper 11440.

                                                42
        (2007): “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1139–1181.
Roubini, N., and B. Setser (2004): “The US as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of the US
 External Imbalances,” working paper, New York University.
Stockman, A. C., and L. L. Tesar (1995): “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of
  the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic Review, 85,
  168–185.
Tille, C. (2003): “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign Debt,” Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9.
         (2005): “Financial Integration and the Wealth Eﬀect of Exchange Rate Fluctuations,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report 226.
Tille, C., and E. van Wincoop (2007): “International Capital Flows,” NBER Working Paper
  12856.
Wolf, M. (2004): “America on the Comfortable Path to Ruin,” Financial Times, August 17.
Zapatero, F. (1995): “Equilibrium Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 19, 787–811.




                                             43
  1                                                                                      0.5                                                                                    1

 0.9                                                                                     0.45                                                                                   0

 0.8                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                -1

 0.7                                                                                     0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                -2
 0.6                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                -3
 0.5                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                -4
  0.4                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                -5
  0.3                                                                                     0.15

                                                                                           0.1                                                                                   -6
  0.2
                                                                        1.65                                                                                   1.65                                                                                            1.65
  0.1                                                                                     0.05                                                                                   -7
                                                                      1.25                                                                                  1.25                                                                                           1.25

       0                                                           0.85 Relative size           0                                                         0.85 Relative size        -8                                                                 0.85 Relative size

           0                                                    0.45                                0 0.05                                             0.45                                  0                                                      0.45
               0.05 0.1                                                                                    0.1 0.15                                                                               0.05 0.1
                        0.15 0.2                                                                                     0.2 0.25                                                                              0.15 0.2
                                  0.25 0.3                    0.05                                                            0.3 0.35               0.05                                                            0.25 0.3                    0.05
                                           0.35 0.4                                                                                    0.4 0.45                                                                               0.35 0.4
                      Correlation                   0.45                                                     Correlation                                                                                 Correlation                   0.45




   (a) Home’s holdings of Home                                                             (b) Home’s holdings of Foreign                                                            (c) Home’s bondholdings (value)
            stock sH
                   H
                                                                                                     stock sFH                                                                                    sB
                                                                                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                     B



  0.1                                                                                    0.02                                                                                    0.1

 0.08                                                                                       0                                                                                   0.08

 0.06                                                                                                                                                                           0.06
                                                                                         -0.02
 0.04                                                                                                                                                                           0.04
                                                                                         -0.04
 0.02                                                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                                                                         -0.06
       0                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                         -0.08
 -0.02                                                                                                                                                                          -0.02
                                                                                           -0.1
 -0.04                                                                                                                                                                          -0.04
                                                                                          -0.12
 -0.06                                                                                                                                                                          -0.06
                                                                        1.65                                                                                   1.65                                                                                            1.65
 -0.08                                                                                    -0.14                                                                                 -0.08
                                                                     1.25                                                                                   1.25                                                                                           1.25
   -0.1                                                            0.85 Relative size     -0.16                                                           0.85 Relative size         -0.1                                                              0.85 Relative size

            0 0.05                                              0.45                                 0 0.05                                            0.45                                      0 0.05                                             0.45
                   0.1 0.15                                                                                 0.1 0.15                                                                                    0.1 0.15
                             0.2 0.25                         0.05                                                    0.2 0.25                       0.05                                                         0.2 0.25                       0.05
                                      0.3 0.35                                                                                 0.3 0.35                                                                                    0.3 0.35
                    Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                      Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                         Correlation                0.4 0.45




               (d) Trade balance T BH                                                               (e) Current account CAH                                                                       (f ) Capital-gains adjusted
                                                                                                                                                                                                   current account CGCAH



 0.06995                                                                                 0.06996                                                                                      0.07

 0.06994                                                                                                                                                                        0.06999
                                                                                         0.06995

 0.06993                                                                                                                                                                        0.06998
                                                                                         0.06994
 0.06992                                                                                                                                                                        0.06997

  0.06991                                                                                0.06993                                                                                0.06996

   0.0699                                                                                                                                                                       0.06995
                                                                                          0.06992
  0.06989                                                                                                                                                                        0.06994

                                                                       1.65               0.06991                                                             1.65                                                                                           1.65
  0.06988                                                                                                                                                                        0.06993
                                                                     1.25                                                                                   1.25                                                                                           1.25
  0.06987                                                           0.85 Relative size      0.0699                                                         0.85 Relative size       0.06992                                                             0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Relative size
                0 0.05                                           0.45                                  0 0.05                                           0.45                                       0 0.05                                           0.45
                       0.1 0.15                                                                               0.1 0.15                                                                                    0.1 0.15
                                 0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                      0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                           0.2 0.25                     0.05
                                          0.3 0.35                                                                               0.3 0.35                                                                                    0.3 0.35
                        Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                    Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                         Correlation                0.4 0.45




                    (g) Interest rate r                                                             (h) Expected return on the                                                                   (i) Expected return on the
                                                                                                         Home stock µS                                                                                Home stock µS∗



Figure 2: Steady state values. All underlying shocks, dw, dw∗ , dwα , dwβ , are set to be zero at
all times. The horizontal axes
                             measure the instantaneous correlation between the demand and
                     
supply shocks σY i1 σαH /(σY ||σαH ||2 ), where i1 = (1, 0, 0, 0), and the ratio of the volatilities of the
                            
demand and supply shocks ||σαH ||2 /σY .

                                                                                                                                44
 0.012                                                                                     0.12                                                                                          0



  0.01                                                                                      0.1                                                                                    -0.02



 0.008                                                                                     0.08                                                                                    -0.04



  0.006                                                                                    0.06                                                                                    -0.06



  0.004                                                                                     0.04                                                                                    -0.08


     0.002                                                                1.65              0.02                                                                  1.65                  -0.1                                                                1.65
                                                                        1.25                                                                                    1.25                                                                                      1.25
              0                                                       0.85 Relative size          0                                                           0.85 Relative size       -0.12                                                            0.85 Relative size

                  0 0.05                                           0.45                                   0 0.05                                           0.45                                    0 0.05                                            0.45
                         0.1 0.15                                                                                0.1 0.15                                                                                 0.1 0.15
                                  0.2 0.25                      0.05                                                       0.2 0.25                      0.05                                                       0.2 0.25                      0.05
                                           0.3 0.35                                                                                 0.3 0.35                                                                                 0.3 0.35
                          Correlation               0.4 0.45                                                       Correlation               0.4 0.45                                                      Correlation                0.4 0.45




                     (a) Terms of trade q                                                                         (b) Home stock S                                                                        (c) Foreign stock S ∗



 0                                                                                         0.009                                                                                   0.0035

                                                                                           0.008
 -1                                                                                                                                                                                 0.003
                                                                                           0.007
 -2                                                                                                                                                                                0.0025
                                                                                           0.006

 -3                                                                                        0.005                                                                                        0.002


 -4                                                                                         0.004                                                                                   0.0015

                                                                                            0.003
  -5                                                                                                                                                                                    0.001
                                                                                            0.002
  -6                                                                      1.65                                                                                    1.65                 0.0005                                                               1.65
                                                                                            0.001
                                                                        1.25                                                                                    1.25                                                                                      1.25
     -7                                                               0.85 Relative size           0                                                          0.85 Relative size               0                                                        0.85 Relative size

              0                                                    0.45                                   0 0.05                                           0.45                                     0 0.05                                           0.45
                   0.05 0.1                                                                                      0.1 0.15                                                                                  0.1 0.15
                            0.15 0.2                                                                                      0.2 0.25                                                                                   0.2 0.25
                                      0.25 0.3                  0.05                                                               0.3 0.35              0.05                                                                 0.3 0.35            0.05
                                               0.35 0.4                                                                                     0.4 0.45                                                                                   0.4 0.45
                          Correlation                   0.45                                                      Correlation                                                                               Correlation




          (d) Net unexpected capital                                                                        (e) Weight of Foreign λ                                                                    (f ) Trade balance T BH
                gains of Home



 0.06                                                                                      0.0012                                                                                  0


 0.05                                                                                       0.001                                                                                  -1


 0.04                                                                                      0.0008                                                                                  -2


 0.03                                                                                      0.0006                                                                                  -3


  0.02                                                                                      0.0004                                                                                 -4


  0.01                                                                                      0.0002                                                                                  -5


          0                                                               1.65                        0                                                           1.65              -6                                                                      1.65
                                                                        1.25                                                                                    1.25                                                                                      1.25
  -0.01                                                               0.85 Relative size    -0.0002                                                           0.85 Relative size       -7                                                               0.85 Relative size

                  0 0.05                                           0.45                                    0 0.05                                          0.45                                0                                                     0.45
                         0.1 0.15                                                                                 0.1 0.15                                                                         0.05 0.1
                                   0.2 0.25                                                                                 0.2 0.25                                                                        0.15 0.2
                                            0.3 0.35            0.05                                                                 0.3 0.35            0.05                                                         0.25 0.3                    0.05
                                                     0.4 0.45                                                                                 0.4 0.45                                                                         0.35 0.4
                          Correlation                                                                              Correlation                                                                            Correlation                   0.45




(g) Home’s bondholdings (value)                                                                           (h) Current account CAH                                                                   (i) Capital-gains adjusted
             sB
              HB                                                                                                                                                                                    current account CGCAH



Figure 3: Impact responses to a shock dwα (a shock to the preference-shifter αH ). The
horizontal axes
               measure the instantaneous correlation between the demand and supply shocks
       
σY i1 σαH /(σY ||σαH ||2 ), where i1 = (1, 0, 0, 0), and the ratio of the volatilities of the demand and
               
supply shocks ||σαH ||2 /σY .


                                                                                                                                     45
        0                                                                            0.18                                                                                       0.12

 -0.001                                                                              0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
 -0.002
                                                                                     0.14
 -0.003
                                                                                     0.12                                                                                       0.08
 -0.004
                                                                                       0.1
 -0.005                                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                      0.08
 -0.006
                                                                                      0.06                                                                                       0.04
  -0.007
                                                                                      0.04
  -0.008
                                                                    1.65                                                                                       1.65              0.02                                                                     1.65
  -0.009                                                                              0.02
                                                                  1.25                                                                                       1.25                                                                                       1.25
   -0.01                                                        0.85 Relative size          0                                                             0.85 Relative size           0                                                              0.85 Relative size

             0 0.05                                          0.45                                   0 0.05                                             0.45                                    0 0.05                                              0.45
                    0.1 0.15                                                                               0.1 0.15                                                                                   0.1 0.15
                             0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                       0.2 0.25                        0.05                                                       0.2 0.25                        0.05
                                      0.3 0.35                                                                                0.3 0.35                                                                                   0.3 0.35
                     Correlation               0.4 0.45                                                      Correlation               0.4 0.45                                                         Correlation               0.4 0.45




                (a) Terms of trade q                                                                         (b) Home stock S                                                                          (c) Foreign stock S ∗



 0.4                                                                                            0                                                                                          0

 0.35                                                                                -0.00005                                                                                   -0.00002

                                                                                      -0.0001                                                                                   -0.00004
  0.3
                                                                                     -0.00015                                                                                   -0.00006
 0.25
                                                                                      -0.0002                                                                                   -0.00008
  0.2
                                                                                     -0.00025                                                                                    -0.0001
 0.15
                                                                                       -0.0003                                                                                  -0.00012
   0.1
                                                                                      -0.00035                                                                                   -0.00014
  0.05                                                                                 -0.0004                                                                                   -0.00016
                                                                    1.65                                                                                      1.65                                                                                       1.65
        0                                                                             -0.00045                                                              1.25                 -0.00018                                                              1.25
                                                                 1.25
  -0.05                                                        0.85 Relative size      -0.0005                                                             0.85 Relative size     -0.0002                                                             0.85 Relative size

            0 0.05                                          0.45                                       0 0.05                                           0.45                                      0 0.05                                           0.45
                   0.1 0.15                                                                                   0.1 0.15                                                                                   0.1 0.15
                             0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                          0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                          0.2 0.25                     0.05
                                      0.3 0.35                                                                                   0.3 0.35                                                                                   0.3 0.35
                    Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                        Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                        Correlation                0.4 0.45




        (d) Net unexpected capital                                                                    (e) Weight of Foreign λ                                                                      (f ) Trade balance T BH
              gains of Home



 0.002                                                                               0.00005                                                                                    0.4

        0                                                                                                                                                                       0.35
                                                                                                0
 -0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                     -0.00005
 -0.004
                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                      -0.0001
 -0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
 -0.008                                                                              -0.00015
                                                                                                                                                                                0.15
  -0.01                                                                               -0.0002
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
 -0.012
                                                                                     -0.00025
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
  -0.014
                                                                    1.65                                                                                      1.65                                                                                        1.65
                                                                                       -0.0003                                                                                         0
  -0.016                                                          1.25                                                                                      1.25                                                                                       1.25
  -0.018                                                        0.85 Relative size    -0.00035                                                             0.85 Relative size    -0.05                                                               0.85 Relative size

             0 0.05                                          0.45                                      0 0.05                                           0.45                                   0 0.05                                             0.45
                    0.1 0.15                                                                                  0.1 0.15                                                                                0.1 0.15
                             0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                          0.2 0.25                     0.05                                                       0.2 0.25                        0.05
                                      0.3 0.35                                                                                   0.3 0.35                                                                                0.3 0.35
                     Correlation               0.4 0.45                                                        Correlation                0.4 0.45                                                     Correlation                0.4 0.45




(g) Home’s bondholdings (value)                                                                     (h) Current account CAH                                                                     (i) Capital-gains adjusted
             sB
              HB                                                                                                                                                                                current account CGCAH



Figure 4: Impact responses to an output shock at Home dw. The horizontal           axes measure the
instantaneous correlation between the demand and supply shocks σY i1 σαH /(σY ||σαH ||2 ), where
                                                                                     
i1 = (1, 0, 0, 0), and the ratio of the volatilities of the demand and supply shocks ||σαH ||2 /σY .



                                                                                                                                46
