NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING, CREDIT MARKETS AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 13471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13471

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Housing, Credit Markets and the Business Cycle
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13471
October 2007
JEL No. E3,E4
ABSTRACT
The housing sector is now (September 2007) at the root of three distinct but related problems: (1)
a sharp decline in house prices and the related fall in home building; (2) a subprime mortgage problem
that has triggered a substantial widening of all credit spreads and the freezing of much of the credit
markets; and (3) a decline in home equity loans and mortgage refinancing that could cause greater
declines in consumer spending. Each of these could by itself be powerful enough to cause an economic
downturn. The combination could cause a very serious recession unless there are other offsetting forces.
In this paper, I discuss each of these and then comment on the implications for monetary policy.
Martin S. Feldstein
President and Chief Executive Officer
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Housing, Credit Markets and the Business Cycle
Martin Feldstein*
The housing sector is now (September 2007) at the root of three distinct but related
problems: (1) a sharp decline in house prices and the related fall in home building ; (2) a
subprime mortgage problem that has triggered a substantial widening of all credit spreads and
the freezing of much of the credit markets; and (3) a decline in home equity loans and mortgage
refinancing that could cause greater declines in consumer spending. Each of these could by itself
be powerful enough to cause an economic downturn. The combination could cause a very
serious recession unless there are other offsetting forces. In this paper, I discuss each of these
and then comment on the implications for monetary policy .

Falling House Prices
Robert Shiller (2007) presents evidence of a sharp surge in house prices after the year
2000. More specifically, national indexes of real house prices., real rents and real construction
costs moved together for 25 years until the year 2000. After that, while construction costs and
rents continued to move in parallel, real house prices then rose rapidly so that by 2006 they were
70 percent higher than equivalent rents., driven in part by a widespread popular belief that
houses were an irresistible investment opportunity. How else could an average American family
buy an asset appreciating at 9 percent a year , with 80 percent of that investment financed by a
mortgage with a tax deductible interest rate of 6 percent, implying an annual rate of return on the
initial equity of more than 25 percent?

*

Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This text is based on remarks that were presented as a final summary and
personal commentary at the Jackson Hole conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City on Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, September 1, 2007. All 2007
references in this paper are to the papers in the conference volume that is available on the web
site of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-1-

But at a certain point home owners recognized that house prices – really the price of land
– wouldn’t keep rising so rapidly and may decline. That fall has now begun, with a 3.4 percent
decline in housing prices over the past 12 months and an estimated 9 percent annual rate of
decline in the most recent month for which data are available (a Goldman-Sachs estimate for
June 2007.) The decline in house prices accelerates offers to sell and slows home buying,
causing a rise in the inventory of unsold homes and a decision by home builders to slow the rate
of construction. Home building has now collapsed, down 20 percent from a year ago, to the
lowest level in a decade.
Edward Leamer (2007) explained that such declines in housing construction were a
precursor to 8 of the past 10 recessions. Moreover, major falls in home building were followed
by a recession in every case except when the Korean and Vietnam wars provided an offsetting
stimulus to demand..
Why did home prices surge in the past 5 years? While a frenzy of irrational house price
expectations may have contributed, there were also fundamental reasons. Credit became both
cheap and relatively easy to obtain. When the Fed worried about deflation it cut the Fed funds
rate to one percent in 2003 and promised that it would rise only very slowly. That caused
medium term rates to fall, inducing a drop in mortgage rates and a widespread promotion of
mortgages with very low temporary “teaser” rates.
Mortgage money also became more abundant as a result of various institutional changes
as Ben Bernanke (2007), Ned Gramlich (2007) , and Richard Green and Susan Wachter (2007)
explained. Subprime mortgages were the result of legislative changes (especially the
Community Reinvestment Act) and of the widespread use of statistical risk assessment models
by lenders,. In addition, securitization induced a lowering of standards by lenders who did not
hold the mortgages they created. Mortgage brokers came to replace banks and thrifts as the
primary mortgage originators. All of this had been developing since the 1990s but these
developments contributed to the current mortgage problems when rates fell after 2000.
If house prices now decline enough to reestablish the traditional price-rent relation1 ,

1

Shiller(2007) commented that a 50 percent decline in real house prices is “entirely
possible”. A Goldman-Sachs US Economic Research Report (August 29, 2007 concluded that
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-2-

there will be serious losses of household wealth and resulting declines in consumer spending.
Since housing wealth is now about $21 trillion, even a 20 percent nominal decline would cut
wealth by some $4 trillion and might cut consumer spending by $200 billion or about 1.5 percent
of GDP. The multiplier consequences of this could easily push the economy into recession.
A 20 percent national decline would mean smaller declines in some places and larger
declines in others. A homeowner with a loan to value ratio today of 80 percent could eventually
find himself with a loan that exceeds the value of his house by 20 percent or more. Since
mortgages are effectively non-recourse loans, borrowers can walk away with no burden on future
incomes. While experience shows that most homeowners continue to service their mortgages
even when the loan balances slightly exceed the value of their homes, it is not clear how they
would behave if the difference is substantially greater. The decision to default would be more
likely if house prices are expected to fall further. .
Once defaults became widespread, the process could snowball, putting more homes on
the market and driving prices down further. Some banks and other holders of mortgages could
see their highly leveraged portfolios greatly impaired. Problems of illiquidity of financial
institutions could become problems of insolvency.

Widening Credit Spreads
I turn now to the second way in which the housing sector is affecting our economy: the
impact of subprime mortgages on credit spreads and credit availability.
For several years now, informed observers have concluded that risk was underpriced in
the sense that the differences in interest rates between U.S. Treasury bonds and riskier assets
(i.e., the credit spreads) were very much smaller than they had been historically.
Some market participants rationalized these low credit spreads by saying that financial
markets had become less risky. Better monetary policies around the world have reduced
inflation and contributed to smaller real volatility. Securitization and the use of credit derivatives
were thought to disperse risk in ways that reduced overall risk levels. Most emerging market
governments now avoid overvalued exchange rates and protect themselves with large foreign

“nominal house prices will likely need to fall by 15-30% ... over the next several years.”
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-3-

exchange reserves. There was also the hope based on experience that the Federal Reserve would
respond to any financial market problems by an easing of monetary policy.
Many of us were nevertheless skeptical that risk had really been reduced to the extent
implied by existing credit spreads. It looked instead like the very low interest rates on high grade
bonds were incenting investors to buy riskier assets in the pursuit of yield. Many portfolio
managers were enhancing the return on their portfolios by selling credit insurance – i.e., by using
credit derivatives to assume more risk – and by using credit to leverage their investment
portfolios on the false assumption that the basic portfolio had relatively small risk. Investors
took comfort from the apparent risk transfer in structured products. And less sophisticated
investors were buying such structured products without actually recognizing the extent of the
risk.
Most of the institutional investors who thought that risk was mispriced were nevertheless
reluctant to invest based on that view because of the cost of carrying that trade. Since virtually
all such institutional investors are agents and not principals, they could not afford to take a
position that involved a series of short term losses. They would appear to be better investment
managers by focusing on the short term gains that could be achieved by going with the herd to
enhance yield by assuming increased credit risk.
But these investors also shared a widespread feeling that the day would come when it
would be appropriate to switch sides, selling high risk bonds and reversing their credit derivative
positions to become sellers of risk. No one knew just what would signal the time to change.
It was the crisis in the subprime mortgage market that provided the shock that started the
wider shift in credit spreads and credit availability.
Subprime mortgages are mortgage loans to high risk borrowers with low or uncertain
incomes, high ratios of debt to income, and poor credit histories. These are generally floating
rate mortgages, frequently with high loan-to-value ratios and very low initial “teaser” rates. A
realistic assessment would imply that the borrowers would have trouble meeting the monthly
payments once the initial teaser rate period ended and the interest rate rose to a significant
premium over the rates charged to prime (i.e., low risk) borrowers.
Borrowers with subprime credit ratings nevertheless took these adjustable rate loans with
low teaser rates because they wanted to get in on the house price boom that was sweeping the
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-4-

country. Some of them hoped on the basis of recent experience that market prices would rise
enough by the time that they had to face higher interest rates that they could refinance with a
lower loan to value ration and therefore a lower interest rate. Many of those who originated the
loans were mortgage brokers who sold them almost immediately at a profit to the financial
market and therefore did not care about the ability of the borrowers to service their debt..
The sophisticated buyers of the subprime loans could then bundle them into large pools
of mortgages and sell participation in that pool. Often the pool was “tranched” to offer different
degrees of risk to different buyers. In a simple case, the highest risk tranche might represent the
first 10 percent of the mortgages to default and would carry a correspondingly high interest rate.
Buyers of the next tranche would incur losses only if more than 10 percent of the mortgages
defaulted. The highest quality tranche, which would incur losses only after 90 percent of the
mortgages had defaulted, was regarded as so safe that the rating agencies would give it a better
than AAA rating even though all of the underlying assets were subprime mortgages.
In retrospect, the riskiness of individual tranches was often underestimated by the rating
agencies and by those who bought the participation in the risk pool.2 These were nevertheless
combined with other more traditional bonds and commercial paper in structured notes and even
in money market mutual funds that had high ratings and attractive yields.
This was clearly an accident waiting to happen. The subprime problem unfolded quickly
with very high default rates on subprime loans.
Because subprime mortgages are a relatively small fraction of the total mortgage market
and therefore an even smaller fraction of the total global credit market, many experts and
government officials initially claimed that the subprime problem would have only a very limited
effect on capital markets and the economy.

But the subprime defaults and the dramatic widening of credit spreads in that market
triggered a widespread flight from risk, widening credit spreads more generally and causing
price declines for all risky assets. When those risky assets were held in leveraged accounts or

2

This reflected in part the use of data on borrower experience in recent years in which
house prices were rising and interest rates declining.
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-5-

when investors had sold risk insurance through credit derivatives, losses were substantial.
As credit spreads widened, investors and lenders became concerned that they did not
know how to value complex risky assets. Credit ratings came under suspicion when failures
exceeded levels associated with those official credit ratings. A result was a drying up of credit
for risky investments, including private equity acquisitions.
Loans to support private equity deals that were already in the pipeline could not be
syndicated, forcing the commercial banks and investment banks to hold those loans on their own
books. Banks are also being forced to honor credit guarantees to previously off-balance-sheet
conduits and other back-up credit lines. These developments are reducing the capital available
to support credit of all types. One result has been that hedge funds have been forced to sell
stocks (or buy back short positions) because they could not obtain credit to maintain their
portfolios.
It will of course be a good thing to have credit spreads that correctly reflect the actual
risks of different assets. But the process of transition may be very costly to the overall economy.

Declining Mortgage Credit for Consumer Spending
This brings me to the third way in which the housing sector now contributes to the
adverse outlook of the American economy: the potential for a substantial decline in consumption
in response to lower home equity withdrawals through home equity loans and mortgage
refinancing. This channel is in addition to the effect of reduced wealth caused by a fall in house
prices.
An important feature of the US mortgage system is that most borrowers can repay at any
time without penalty. When interest rates fall, the borrower can replace the existing mortgage
with a new one at a lower interest rate. If the value of the property has increased since the
existing mortgage was obtained, refinancing also provides an opportunity to withdraw cash –
the so-called mortgage equity withdrawal (or MEW).
Starting in 2001, the combination of lower mortgage rates and the rapid rise in house
prices led to widespread refinancing with equity withdrawals, a practice heavily promoted by
banks and mortgage brokers. Someone who obtained a mortgage at 7.7 percent in 1997 could
refinance at a 5.8 percent rate in 2003 and extract substantial cash at the same time.
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-6-

A massive amount of such refinancing and equity withdrawal occurred. In 2005, 40
percent of existing mortgages were refinanced. The Flow of Funds data imply that mortgage
equity withdrawals between 1997 and 2006 totaled more than $9 trillion, an amount equal to
more than 90 percent of disposable personal income in 2006.
This new borrowing was used to pay down other non-mortgage debts, to invest in
financial assets, and importantly to finance additional consumer spending.
There is a vigorous professional debate about the extent to which MEWs did lead to
additional consumer spending, (Frederick Mishkin (2007) , John Muellbauer (2007)). Alan
Greenspan and James Kennedy (2004) , in Federal Reserve Bank research paper, concluded
from an analysis of survey data that substantial fractions of the MEW funds were used to finance
home improvements or general consumption. It is significant in this context that home
improvements would generally be treated in the national income accounts as a form of consumer
spending rather than investment.
Mishkin and others are skeptical about the effect of mortgage equity withdrawals on
consumer expenditures, pointing out that individuals may choose to undertake mortgage
refinancing simply because they want to increase their spending or undertake home
improvements. While that may be true in some cases, I believe that the combination of rapidly
rising home prices that more than doubled the value of owner occupied housing between 1999
and 2006 – an increase of more than $10 trillion dollars – and the substantial fall in interest rates
were the primary drivers of the large rise in mortgage equity withdrawals. I believe that it was
the availability and low cost of mortgage equity withdrawals that caused the increased consumer
outlays.
Muellbauer notes that the relatively long time series evidence on the relation between
mortgage equity withdrawals and consumer spending is inconclusive, with some studies pointing
to substantial effects of mortgage equity withdrawal and others the opposite. I am quite skeptical
about the relevance of this evidence because variations in national home values only became
substantial after the year 2000.
Some economists argue on theoretical grounds that MEW should not change consumer
spending, since consumption should be a function only of income (including expected future
income), wealth, and the rate of interest. If so, the transformation of housing wealth into cash
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-7-

should not affect consumption but should be used only to reduce debt or invest in financial
assets. I’m not convinced for two reasons. First, as Mullbauer notes, individuals who are
liquidity constrained will consume more in response to an increased opportunity to borrow.
Second, consumers can regard the increased spending on home improvements and major
consumer durables as a form of investment that will provide services for years to come even
though the national income accounts classify these outlays as consumer spending.
The recently revised national income accounts show that personal saving fell sharply
from 2.1 percent of disposable income in 2003 and 2004 to less than 0.5 percent in 2005 and
2006, a decline equal to about a $160 billion annual rate. I believe that a substantial part of that
decline and the relative increase in consumer spending was due to the concurrent rise in MEW
that resulted from low mortgage interest rates and increasing home prices.
The potential implication of this for the future is clear. A decline in house prices and a
rise in mortgage interest rates should shrink MEW and cause the household saving rate to rise to
a more normal level. This is clearly good in the long term, permitting increased investment in
plant and equipment and reducing our dependence on capital from abroad. But in the short run a
rapid rise in the saving rate and a decline in consumer spending would mean less aggregate
demand. Whether this would be big enough to push the economy into recession depends on the
magnitude and speed of the adjustment in mortgage equity withdrawals, on the impact of the
MEWs on consumer spending, and on the state of aggregate demand as this occurs.
The volume of mortgage refinancing has recently begun to decline and the level of
revolving home equity loans has been declining since the beginning of the year. The household
saving rate has also started to rise. We will have to wait to see the impact of the sharp reduction
in available mortgage credit that occurred in recent weeks.

Possible Implications for Economic Policy
The three housing sector problems that I have discussed point to a potentially serious
decline in aggregate demand and economic activity. What are the possible implications for
current Federal Reserve policy?
It is widely agreed that neither the Federal Reserve nor the government should bail out
individual borrowers or lenders whose past mistakes have created losses. Doing so would
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-8-

simply encourage more reckless behavior in the future. But it is also widely agreed that it would
be a mistake to permit a serious economic downturn just in order to punish those market
participants.
But what should be done about the frozen credit markets and the possible insolvencies
that could result from mortgage defaults? The Fed and other central banks have stressed their
roles as lenders of last resort, providing liquidity to member banks against good collateral
(although not collateral of the highest quality) at rates that exceed the federal funds rate. There
are of course many important financial institutions – including the investment banks and large
hedge funds – that do not have access to the Fed’s discount window. The Fed has encouraged
the commercial banks to lend to them against suitable collateral with the ability to rediscount
that collateral at the Federal Reserve.
It is not clear whether this will succeed, since much of the credit market problem reflects
more than a lack of liquidity: a lack of trust , an inability to value securities, and a concern about
counterparty risks. The inability of credit markets to function adequately will weaken the overall
economy over the coming months. And even when the credit market crisis has passed, the wider
credit spreads and increased risk aversion will be a damper on future economic activity.
Even with the best of policies to increase liquidity, future aggregate demand is likely to
be depressed by weak housing construction, depressed consumer spending, and the impaired
credit markets. Although lower interest rates cannot solve the specific problems facing credit
markets, lower interest rates now would help by stimulating the demand for housing, autos and
other consumer durables, by encouraging a more competitive dollar to stimulate increased net
exports, by raising share prices that increased both business investment and consumer spending,
and by freeing up spendable cash for homeowners with adjustable rate mortgages.

But the Fed also has a responsibility to focus on inflation. There now remains a
significant risk of rising inflation because of slowing productivity growth (unit labor costs are up
4.5 percent from the second quarter of 2006 to the second quarter of 2007), the falling dollar,
and higher food prices that have pushed market based consumer prices up at a 4.6 percent rate in
the most recent quarter.} How should the Fed now balance these two goals?
We know that there is no long-run trade-off between price stability and achieving full
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-9-

employment and growth. But how should policy makers deal with the short run relation between
price stability and employment?
One view is that monetary policy should focus exclusively on achieving price stability
because that is the best way to achieve full employment and maximum sustainable growth as
rapidly as possible. If that view is correct, there is no reason to change current monetary policy.
The existing 5.25 percent nominal federal funds rate is relatively tight in comparison to the
historic average real fed funds rate of about two percent. The housing and credit market
problems that I have discussed will simply reinforce this tight monetary policy and speed the
decline in inflation.
But there is an alternative and more widely held view that the Federal Reserve should
give explicit weight to unemployment or unused capacity in the short run as well as to inflation.
That is the view that underlies all variants of the Taylor rule. If that view is accepted, there are
two reasons for a major reduction now in the federal funds rate – possibly by as much as 100
basis points.
First, experience suggests that the dramatic decline in residential construction provides
an early warning of a coming recession. The likelihood of a recession is increased by what is
happening in credit markets and in mortgage borrowing. Most of these forces are inadequately
captured by the formal macroeconomic models used by the Federal Reserve and other macro
forecasters.
Second, even if all of the evidence does not add up to a high probability of an
unacceptable decline in economic activity, the Fed could adopt the risk-based “decision theory”
approach in responding to the current economic environment. If the triple threat from the
housing sector materializes with full force, the economy could suffer a very serious downturn. A
sharp reduction in the interest rate – in addition to a vigorous lender of last resort policy – would
attenuate that very bad outcome.
But what if the outcome in the absence of a substantial rate cut would be more benign
and yet the Fed nevertheless cuts the federal funds rate? The result would be a stronger
economy with higher inflation than the Fed desires, an unwelcome outcome but one that might
be judged to be the lesser of two evils. If that happens, the Fed would have to engineer a longer
period of slower growth to bring the inflation rate back to its desired level. How well it would
Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-10-

succeed in doing this would depend on its ability to persuade the market that a risk-based
approach in the current context is not an abrogation of its fundamental pursuit of price stability.

Cambridge, MA
September 2007

Housing, Credit Markets & the Business Cycle.092307

-11-

