                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE LIFETIME COSTS AND BENEFITS OF MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY

                                            David M. Cutler

                                         Working Paper 13478
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13478


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




This paper was prepared for the conference in honor of Joe Newhouse's 25 years of editing the Journal
of Health Economics. I am grateful to Doug Norton for superb research assistance, and to Henry Aaron,
Jonathan Skinner, the editors, three anonymous referees, and conference participants for helpful comments,
and to the National Institutes on Aging for research support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by David M. Cutler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Lifetime Costs and Benefits of Medical Technology
David M. Cutler
NBER Working Paper No. 13478
October 2007
JEL No. I11

                                               ABSTRACT

Measuring the lifetime costs and benefits of medical technologies is essential in evaluating technological
change and determining the productivity of medical care. Using data on Medicare beneficiaries with
a heart attack in the late 1980s and 17 years of follow up data, I evaluate the long-term costs and benefits
of revascularization after a heart attack. I account for non-random selection into treatment with instrumental
variables; following McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse, the instrument is the differential distance
to a hospital capable of providing revascularization. The results show that revascularization is associated
with over 1 year of additional life expectancy, at a cost of about $40,000. Revascularization, or other
treatments correlated with it, appears to be highly cost-effective.

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
         Technological change is the predominant reason for medical cost increases in the

past half century. Studies of aggregate medical spending and of particular medical

conditions show that at least half of all cost growth is a result of increased use of

technology (Newhouse, 1992; Cutler and McClellan 2001).

         But evaluating the short run cost of technology is not the only policy need. There

are two other issues that also need to be considered. The first is the health benefits that

result from technology. Medical technology may be expensive, but it might still be a

good deal, if it extends the length or quality of life or otherwise results in positive social

returns. Understanding cost-effectiveness is more important than understanding costs

alone.

         Even in the cost realm, short run costs are only a partial story. Medical advances

applied in one year can lead to higher or lower spending in subsequent years. Costs

subsequently may increase if people survive to spend more, or may fall if people live

healthier lives and thus use less care. These downstream impacts of new technology need

to be evaluated in addition to the up front costs. Indeed, it is possible for new technology

to lower future spending, if the improved health that results from it offsets the increase in

spending over the longer number of years.

         In this paper, I consider the lifetime costs and benefits of medical technology. I

first show theoretically how to measure the impact of medical technology on lifetime

medical spending, and the long-run cost effectiveness of new technology. I then turn to a

specific medical technology: therapeutic surgical care after a heart attack. In the

aftermath of a heart attack, many people will receive bypass surgery or angioplasty
(collectively termed revascularization) to restore blood flow to the heart. Each is

expensive, and the value of each has been debated (Skinner, Staiger, and Fisher, 2007). I

focus on the marginal value of receiving these intensive treatments.

        The central empirical issue in evaluating the impact of any technology is the non-

random selection of who receives the care. The sickest patients may not be strong

enough to withstand revascularization, and the healthiest patients may not need it. Thus,

the set of people receiving revascularization is not a random set of people with a heart

attack. McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994) account for this by instrumenting for

receipt of the technology, using the differential distance from the patient’s zip code of

residence to a hospital capable of providing the technology as the instrument.1 I follow

the same strategy in this paper.

        The advantage that I bring to these previous efforts is the ability to analyze

outcomes over longer-periods of time. McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994) used

only four years of follow-up data on MI patients. I take advantage of the greater elapsed

time since their study was completed and use 17 years of data on MI cohorts. This gives

me a more complete lifetime spending and survival history for Medicare beneficiaries

who had an MI in the late 1980s.

        Like McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994), I show that people who receive a

revascularization procedure have lower mortality in the first day after the MI than those

not receiving revascularization. This may not be a result of revascularization; most

revascularizations are not performed that rapidly. Rather, it probably reflects selection or

other correlated treatments. However, this initial mortality benefit disappears by one year


1
 Chandra and Staiger (2007) follow this strategy as well. They use data fro the mid-1990s but have only
one year of mortality follow-up.


                                                    2
after the MI; mortality is higher for the revascularization group at that point. In

subsequent years, revascularization is associated with reduced mortality, with an increase

in their survival rate of 5 percentage points after 3 years and 12 percentage points after a

decade. Even 17 years after the MI, the survival benefit is 5 percentage points.

        While revascularization extends survival, it does not save money. Receiving

revascularization is associated with increased spending of about $40,000 after a decade,

of which 60 percent comes in the immediate aftermath of the MI. Still, the costs are

small relative to the benefits. I estimate that the cost of revascularization is about

$33,000 per year of extra life.

        In contrast to these results for revascularization, I find very small survival benefits

of being admitted to a high volume hospital, and significantly greater spending. Survival

rates in high volume hospitals are 2 percentage points higher in the period just after the

MI, and half a percent higher after that. The overall survival benefit is .07 years, at a

cumulative cost of nearly $10,000 higher. The cost-effectiveness is thus $144,000 per

year.

        There are two possible interpretations of these results. If one believes the

instrumental variables, they suggest that intensive medical care in the aftermath of an MI

is highly cost effective, even if it doesn’t save money. It is possible, however, that the

instrument is picking up other aspects of being admitted to a hospital with

revascularization capability. Revascularization hospitals may be better than hospitals

without revascularization capability because they provide better medical management

during the admission, because they are better at post-admission follow-up, or because

people come to them for treatment of other conditions in subsequent years, and receive




                                              3
better care at that point. Adopting this formulation, the estimates suggest lower absolute

mortality benefit, but about the same cost-effectiveness – $17,000 per year of additional

life.

        The paper is structured as follows. The first section considers the theoretical

impact of medical technology on lifetime costs. The second section describes the case

study I consider. The third section presents the data. The fourth and fifth sections

present the results, and the last section discusses the implications.



I.      The Lifetime Impact of Medical Technology

        Imagine that a new medical technology is developed to treat people with a

particular condition. A natural desire is to estimate the costs and benefits of the new

technology. Short-run costs and health impacts are relatively easy to measure, if one has

the right data. One looks at how spending and health for people with the treatment

compare to similar people without the treatment. The major issue in this comparison is

econometric: how to separate out the effect of the treatment from the factors that make

someone more or less likely to receive the treatment or from other treatments correlated

with the one under study. I return to this below.

        But short-run costs and benefits are not the only concern. A treatment provided in

one year may have impacts on health and medical care received down the road, and this

may increase or decrease the cost-effectiveness of the therapy. Consider a technology s

with upfront costs in year t of m*t. I denote Is as an indicator for whether the technology

is provided. The technology affects health in the future, so Ht+k=Ht+k(Is), where Ht+k is

health in year t+k. Since future spending is related to future health status, this will have




                                              4
impacts on future costs: mt+k=mt+k(Ht+k). Substituting the recursive equations, the present

value of lifetime medical spending is given by:

                                     ∞
          Spending = mt ( I s ) +   ∑ (1 + r )
                                    k =1
                                                 −k
                                                      mt + k ( H t + k ( I s ))           (1)


where r is the discount rate. The first term in equation (1) is the direct cost of the

technology. The second term is the indirect cost, operating through subsequent health

status.

          One can imagine situations where the second term is positive or negative. A life

saving intervention increases future costs. Without the intervention, the person dies and

future spending is zero. With the intervention, the person survives. Regardless of the

health state of the survivor, there will be some medical spending. Interventions that

reduce disability, in contrast, could lower lifetime spending. If the intervention results in

fewer lifetime years spent disabled, or if death occurs at a later age and is thus cheaper,

the total costs of caring for the person may decline. This latter point is particularly

important given the very high spending at the end of life. Over one-quarter of Medicare

spending is in the last year of life, so that interventions that make death cheaper could

come with significant savings.

          Table 1 show the magnitude of this possible effect, using data from Hoover et al.

(2002) on deaths in the mid-1990s. Average spending in the last year of life is over

$37,000, compared to $7,000 for people who do not die. Total end of life costs are

relatively constant by age.2 Medicare costs, however, decline with age at death. A

Medicare beneficiary dying at age 85 or older spends nearly $10,000 less in the last year

2
 One qualification to this finding is that people who die at older ages are more likely to have been in
nursing homes, and at least some of the nursing home cost is for residential services. Thus, the medical
component of total end of life costs is probably falling with age.


                                                          5
of life than a beneficiary dying between 65 and 74. Partly, this is because older people

die of different diseases than younger people (pneumonia versus cancer, for example). In

addition, physicians are generally less aggressive in treating older people than treating

younger people. Since a good part of non-Medicare spending is paid for by the

individual (out-of-pocket payments for nursing homes, for example), it is likely that total

public spending declines with age at death.

           To see what this implies, consider an intervention that has a 10 percent chance of

extending the life of an 80 year old by ten years. The additional ten year survival lowers

Medicare end of life costs by perhaps $8,000, or $800 for the population as a whole.

Thus, the cost of the intervention could be as high as $800 without raising lifetime

spending.3 This is not a huge amount, but it is not trivial either.

           The counterpart to spending is health benefits. Consider a particular

normalization of Ht+k, scaled between 0 (death) and 1 (perfect health). Quality adjusted

life expectancy is given by:

                        ∞
            QALE =     ∑ (1 + r )
                       k =0
                                    −k
                                         H t +k (I s )                                                      (2)


Equation (2) shows the same discount rate for quality as for costs, but this needn’t be the

case (Gold et al., 1996).

           The cost-effectiveness of the technology can be found by taking the ratio of

changes in equations (1) and (2):4
                                                         ∞
                                                                              ⎛ dmt + k         ⎞ ΔH
                                            m *t +       ∑ (1 + r )      −k
                                                                              ⎜
                                                                              ⎝         dH      ⎟
                                                                                           t +k ⎠
                                                                                                     t +k
            Cost − Effectiveness =                       k =1
                                                                 ∞
                                                                                                            (3)
                                                                ∑ (1 + r )
                                                                k =0
                                                                               −k
                                                                                    ΔH t + k

3
    For simplicity, I ignore discounting in this example.
4
    See Meltzer (1997) for a similar derivation.


                                                                     6
The numerator of equation (3) is the impact of the technology on medical spending, the

sum of current and (discounted) future costs. The denominator is the change in quality-

adjusted life expectancy.

        An important issue in the analysis of lifetime costs and benefits is the treatment of

downstream interventions. Consider a specific example. Suppose that bypass surgery

keeps people alive and that some of those kept alive develop cancer. The cancer may be

more common in bypass surgery survivors (for example, smokers are differentially

saved) or independent. How does the treatment of cancer affect the cost-effectiveness of

bypass surgery?

        Much of the literature argues for omitting the future costs of unrelated diseases,

arguing that this is irrelevant for considering the particular therapy under question (Gold

et al., 1996). Garber and Phelps (1997) justify this in a model without savings, though

Meltzer argues that these costs need to be included if consumption is decided in an

intertemporal framework. Lee (forthcoming) suggests a distinction between future

medical costs, which ought to be included, and future non-medical costs, which ought not

to be included. In my analysis, I consider the present value of future medical spending,

but not non-medical spending.

        Even when future costs are included, the importance of future diseases makes the

evaluation of equation (3) complex. Consider again the example of bypass surgery and

downstream cancer. Equation (3) might show a high cost effectiveness ratio (that is,

large costs relative to the benefits) either because bypass surgery care is not very

effective relative to its cost, or because cancer care is wasteful. If the latter is the case,




                                                7
one could make the wrong decision and decide not to provide bypass surgery, when the

right decision is to provide bypass surgery but constrain cancer care.

       There are some circumstances in which downstream costs will not be important.

If cancer is equally likely to affect people who have bypass surgery and not, and the

impact of cancer treatment is the same for people who have and have not received bypass

surgery, then cancer costs and benefits will be the same for the bypass surgery group and

the non-bypass surgery group, and the evaluation of bypass surgery will not be affected

by subsequent cancer care. Neither of these assumptions is likely to be true, however.

Any intervention that affects mortality will almost certainly affect the probability of

contracting other diseases. Further, by affecting the subsequent path of health, bypass

surgery may make future cancer care more or less likely to be successful.

       In the absence of these assumptions, equation (3) can be interpreted as a weighted

average of the costs and benefits of bypass surgery and all the subsequent conditions that

are correlated with receiving bypass surgery. As a result, one cannot necessarily attribute

the estimate cost-effectiveness ratio as a causal statement about bypass surgery. But even

in this setting, it answers an important factual question: is it worth it to provide bypass

surgery, given how people are treated on average as they age? I discuss the interpretation

of the findings in more depth below.



II.    The AMI Example

       Most cost-effectiveness evaluations simulate the life course with and without the

disease and use those simulations to estimate lifetime costs and benefits. In some cases,




                                              8
however, these data can be estimated directly, using longitudinal records on people with a

particular condition. I follow this latter path with the example of heart attacks.

       Understanding a little medicine is helpful for following the analysis. A heart

attack occurs when the arteries supplying blood to the heart become occluded. Restoring

blood flow to the heart is the primary therapeutic goal for someone presenting with an

MI. This can be accomplished with medications, or through invasive surgical

procedures. Such procedures begin with a cardiac catheterization, a diagnostic procedure

to measure blood flow to the heart. Depending on the results, the cardiologist may decide

to treat the patient medically, to perform coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), or to

use angioplasty (PCI), now done almost exclusively with stents. Bypass surgery and

angioplasty together are referred to as revascularization. I consider the lifetime costs and

benefits of revascularization.

       Because of its intensity, Medicare pays more for invasive care than for medical

management. Average costs in the 90 days after the MI are about $10,000 for patients

who receive medical management, $15,000 for patients who are catheterized with no

further procedure, $40,000 for patients who go on to receive CABG, and $20,000 for

patients who receive an angioplasty. These high dollar amounts make understanding the

lifetime costs and benefits of revascularization particularly important.

       There is significant debate about the value of these procedures in the literature.

Clinical studies generally show that bypass surgery and primary angioplasty (angioplasty

done within the first hours of the MI) are associated with improvements in survival

(Yusuf et al., 1994; Keeley et al., 2003), though non-primary angioplasty (done after the

first few hours) is not (Hochman et al., 2006). Clinical trials may not be relevant to real




                                              9
world application, however, particularly for complex surgical interventions such as

cardiac interventions.

       Existing literature analyzing data from actual practice has reached conflicting

conclusions. Studies of large changes in procedure use generally show significant health

benefits. Cutler and McClellan (2001) argue from aggregate data that advances in

intensive treatments from 1984 to 1998 increased one-year survival by about 10

percentage points and increased life expectancy by nearly one year, at a cost of only

$10,000 – through Skinner, Stagier, and Fisher (2007) show that this progress stopped

after 1998. McClellan and Newhouse (1995) show that hospitals that open cardiac

catheterization labs have 9 percentage points lower one year mortality rates; the cost per

one year survivor is $70,000. Similarly, Stukel et al. (2005) showed that areas that

provided cardiac catheterization to more patients had 10 percent lower morality than

areas with lower cardiac catheterization rates (roughly 4 percentage points with a 40

percent one year mortality rate), though the difference narrowed in areas providing good

medical management.

       There is more controversy about the benefits accruing to the marginal patient

receiving intensive therapy. Using data from 1987, McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse

(1994) estimate that people receiving cardiac catheterization because they lived closer to

a facility providing it experienced 5 percentage points lower mortality a year after the MI,

but most of this gain occurred during the first day, when catheterization would not be

expected to provide significant benefit. Chandra and Staiger (2007) repeat the analysis

using data from the mid-1990s and estimate a 14 percentage point mortality advantage to

cardiac catheterization. The reconciliation between these studies is not entirely clear.




                                             10
         Beyond analysis of specific therapies, evidence shows clearly that not all care is

worth it. Skinner, Staiger, and Fisher (2007) document that areas with greater increases

in spending on heart attacks did not experience greater outcomes – though spending

increases are not very highly correlated with increased use of intensive procedures. All

of these considerations make an analysis of longer term outcomes important.



III.     Data

         The data I employ come from Medicare records. I mirror as much as possible the

work of McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (hereafter MMN). MMN use data on all

Medicare beneficiaries admitted to a hospital with a heart attack in 1987. I do not have

access to the complete set of MI patients, but I construct a similar sample using a 20

percent sample of all Medicare beneficiaries. Specifically, I sample all beneficiaries who

were admitted to a hospital with a heart attack in 1986, 1987, or 1988 and use the same

omission criteria as MMN to narrow down to non-repeat MIs.5 The final sample size is

124,950 patients.

         The advantage of my data is the additional years that have passed since the MMN

analysis. Where they are constrained to 4 year outcomes, I have complete histories

through 2005. I thus construct 17 year survival and cost experiences for people with an

AMI in 1986-88. By 17 years after the MI, nearly every Medicare beneficiary with a

heart attack will have died.



5
  I exclude people with an MI in the prior 365 days, people who were in the hospital for fewer than three
days, other than those who died or were transferred, and people living more than 100 miles from the
hospital of initial admission. For the cost analysis, I exclude people who joined an HMO at any time after
their MI, since spending data in HMOs are not reliably reported. Given the sickness of these patients, this
is not a large share of cases.


                                                    11
       Data on procedure use are available in the Medicare claims. In my primary

results, I follow the bulk of the literature and examine receipt of revascularization

procedure within 90 days of the MI. This captures time for the initial survival therapy to

be applied, and for others to receive procedures after a few weeks. I show sensitivity

results with a shorter window of time until the revascularization – 7 days and 30 days.

       In the late 1980s, about two-thirds of revascularization was bypass surgery; today,

angioplasty is more common. In my sample, about 30 percent of angioplasties were

performed in the first day of the heart attack, and 70 percent were after that. Since many

of the first day angioplasties probably occurred many hours after the MI, the best way to

view the sample is as predominantly non-primary angioplasty.

       Spending data are also from Medicare claims records. Part A records are

available for the entire 20 percent sample of Medicare beneficiaries. Part B data are only

available for 5 percent of beneficiaries, however. To make spending as complete as

possible, I use the smaller number of observations in the spending regressions

(N=29,988). The results using Part A data only for this simple are generally similar to

those from the larger sample; this is not surprising given the large sample sizes.

       More troubling for the spending data is that they reflect only Medicare covered

services; the Federal government does not match Medicare beneficiaries to non-Medicare

spending. Without any obvious source of non-Medicare data, I examine only Medicare

spending. All dollar amounts are adjusted to 2006 dollars using the GDP deflator.

       Revascularization is one factor that may affect health outcomes, but there are

others as well. Medical management of heart attacks involves a variety of medications

(aspirin, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and others) along with specialized facilities such




                                             12
as coronary care units. The Medicare data do not contain information on use of

medications, so I cannot examine how they influence survival and costs. One proxy for

the general quality of heart attack care is the number of heart attack patients the hospital

treated. Providers with more experience have better outcomes than those with less

experience (Huckman and Pisano, 2006). Following MMN, I define a hospital as high

volume if it admits at least 75 Medicare patients with heart attacks in the relevant year.6

         The Medicare data have information on mortality but not quality of life. I thus

measure health only by whether the person survived. Given the high mortality rate for

people over 65 with an MI – 40 percent will die within one year – survival is an

important measure of overall health.

         I relate survival and cumulative medical spending over k years to three sets of

factors: demographic and health controls (X), a dummy variable for whether the patient

received a revascularization procedure (REVASC), and a dummy variable for whether

the patient was admitted to a high volume hospital (HIGH VOLUME). The equations are

of the form:

         Spendingi(k) = Xiαk + α1k * REVASCi + α2k * HIGH VOLUMEi + ηi                             (4)

         Mortalityi(k) = Xiβk + β1k * REVASCi + β2k * HIGH VOLUMEi + εi                            (5)

By estimating these equations over different intervals, k, we can trace out the impact of

revascularization and admission to a high volume hospital on lifetime health and medical

spending.

         The control variables (X) in equations (4) and (5) are in several categories. Basic

demographics include age by sex dummy variables (65-69, 70-74, 75-79, 80-84, 85+) and

6
  Since I have a 20 percent sample of patients, I count hospitals as high volume if they have 15 admissions
in the year.


                                                    13
dummies for black and other race. I also include dummies for the year of the MI: 1986,

1987, or 1988. To capture the time from the MI until entering the medical system, I

include distance to the nearest hospital and a dummy for rural residence. Finally, to

control for underlying health status, I include dummies for 24 comorbid conditions noted

as secondary diagnoses on the MI admission or on a hospital admission in the prior year7

as well as total Medicare spending in the year prior to the MI.

         Several econometric issues arise in considering equations (4) and (5). Equation

(4) relates spending linearly to receipt of revascularization or admission to a high volume

hospital. Since entry into the sample is conditional on hospitalization, there is no need

for a two-part model.8 But there is an issue about whether spending is significantly right-

skewed, and if so whether a log transformation should be used. In practice, results from

logarithmic specifications gave very similar results.9 For simplicity, I report the results

for the level of spending.

         In the survival equation (5), an alternative to the cumulative survival function is to

estimate a hazard model for death in any year. By allowing for separate coefficients by

year, I am effectively estimating a survival function with an unconstrained baseline. I

present the cumulative survival function and variations in that function based on receipt

of revascularization and admission to a high volume institution.

         The major issue in estimating equations (4) and (5) is the endogeneity of

revascularization and high volume hospital admission. Conditional on having a heart

7
  The list includes the categories from Elixhauser et al. (1998): congestive heart failure, valvular disease,
pulmonary circulation disorders, peripheral vascular disorders, paralysis, other neurological disorders,
chronic pulmonary disease, uncomplicated diabetes, complicated diabetes, renal failure, liver disease,
peptic ulcer disease, HIV-AIDS, lymphoma, metastatic cancer, solid tumor without metastasis, rheumatoid
arthritis, coagulopathy, weight loss, fluid and electrolyte disorders, blood loss anemia, deficiency anemia,
alcohol abuse, and psychoses.
8
  Effectively, the first part of the model – use of any medical care – is the same for everyone.
9
  I have also experimented with trimming large outliers in spending, again with similar impacts.


                                                     14
attack, very sick and very healthy patients are each less likely to receive intensive

therapies. The natural solution is instrumental variables. I return to this below, after

presenting OLS results.



IV.    The Lifetime Consequences of AMI Treatment

       I begin with OLS estimates of the return to revascularization and being admitted

to a high volume hospital. These serve as a benchmark for the more appropriate

instrumental variables. Figure 1 shows OLS estimates of cumulative mortality for

various years after the heart attack. The scale for the revascularization coefficients is on

the left hand side of the graph, and the scale for the high volume hospital coefficients is

on the right hand side. In each case the estimates are negative for all time periods –

revascularization and admission to a high volume hospital always lower mortality. But

the revascularization coefficients in particular seem too large to be plausible. The results

suggest that revascularization reduces mortality by over 18 percent in the first 90 days

and 20 percent after one year. Clinical trials rarely show an impact of surgery that is this

large or that immediate. It seems clear that patient selection into treatment is non-

random.

       The solution to the endogeneity issue in MMN, which I follow, is to use

instrumental variables. MMN argue that the “differential distance” to a hospital capable

of performing the indicated procedure – the distance to the nearest revascularization

hospital minus the distance to the nearest hospital of any type – is a good instrument for

actual receipt of the procedure. This is true because patients are generally taken to the




                                             15
nearest hospital after an MI, and where one is admitted affects what is done – even

several months later.

           There are two important criteria for differential distance to be a good instrument.

First, it needs to be the case that patients who are more likely to benefit from invasive

treatments do not select their residential location based on distance to high-tech medical

care. There is no way to test this directly, though like MMN I show that most covariates

are balanced above and below the median differential distance.

           The second criterion is that differential distance not be correlated with other

treatments affecting outcomes. For example, if hospitals that provide revascularization

are also better at providing aspirin at admission, at managing post-acute follow-up, or at

treating subsequent illnesses years later, the instrumental variables estimates will

overstate the importance of revascularization. This too is difficult to test, and worrisome

because of the importance of a variety of other important therapies for AMI survival. I

return to the interpretation of the instrumental variable estimates below.

           The first stage equations are given by:

     REVASCi = Xiγ + γ1*REVASC DIFFERENTIAL-DISTANCEi + νi                                     (6)

     HIGH VOLUMEi = Xiδ + δ1*HIGH VOLUME DIFFERENTIAL-DISTANCEi + μi (7)

           To form differential distance, I need to code hospitals as capable of providing

revascularization or not. Survey data on technological capabilities often have some error.

To judge true revascularization capability, I see if the hospital performed at least 2

procedures on Medicare beneficiaries in the indicated year.10 This variable is allowed to

change in the three year panel, though change is not rapid.11

10
     Requiring two procedures reduces the importance of solitary coding errors.
11
     About 2 percent of hospitals acquire revascularization capability over the time period.


                                                       16
       Receipt of a revascularization procedure is a binary variable, as is mortality. In

the absence of instrumental variables, the appropriate estimation of the mortality

regression would be non-linear, for example a probit or logit specification. In IV models,

however, non-linear equations are problematic (Newey, 1990). I thus estimate all of the

models using linear probability equations.

       Table 2 reports summary information on the differential distance measures. In the

1986-88 period, the average differential distance to a hospital with revascularization

capability is 8 miles, and the average differential distance to a high volume hospital is 2

miles. There is a good deal of heterogeneity in the differential distance measures. The

25th percentile differential distance is 1 mile for revascularization and 0 miles for a high

volume hospital. The 75th percentile is 30 miles for revascularization and 20 miles for

high volume.

       While not everyone who is revascularized is admitted to a high volume hospital,

high volume hospitals are far more likely to have revascularization capability. The

correlation between differential distance for revascularization and high volume hospital is

.640. I estimate the model with both variables included. In specification tests, I included

each variable separately. The impact of revascularization or admission to a high volume

hospital is similar with and without the other variable included.

       As noted above, one criterion for a valid instrument is that patients do not choose

which hospital to live near on the basis of health status. We can partially test this by

looking at how observable risk factors are related to differential distance. Table 3 shows

differences in demographic characteristics of the population by differential distance to a

hospital with revascularization capability, and a high volume of admissions. In each




                                             17
case, I cut the data about at the median. The first rows report differences in

demographics. Because of the sample size, equality of the means for people who live

closer and farther from the indicated hospitals is frequently rejected. In most cases,

however, the substantive differences are not large. The major exception is urban or rural

residence. Many of those with high differential distance to a revascularization or high

volume hospital live in rural areas. To account for this, I include controls for distance to

nearest hospital and rural residence in the regression.

       The next rows show that differential distance is associated with hospital of

admission. People living below the median distance to a revascularization hospital are 38

percentage points more likely to be initially admitted to a hospital capable of providing

revascularization than are people who live farther away. The difference in high volume

admission based on above and below median distance to a high volume facility is 51

percentage points.

       These differences in where people are admitted translate into differences in how

they are treated. People who live closer to a revascularization hospital are 3 percentage

points more likely to receive a revascularization procedure than are people who live

farther away. Interestingly, living closer to a high volume hospital is not associated with

increased likelihood of being revascularized.

       The next rows report cumulative mortality rates at different intervals after the MI:

one day, 180 days, 1 year, 5 years, 10 years, and 17 years (the longest time period with

complete data in the sample). As in MMN, there is a large difference in mortality in

favor of those living closer to a revascularization hospital. However, the pattern is non-

linear. In the first day after the MI admission, mortality rates are 1.1 percentage points




                                             18
lower for people living closer to a revascularization hospital. Given the infrequency of

primary angioplasty in this time period, it is unlikely that this reflects the impact of

revascularization. Rather, it likely reflects unmeasured differences in patient

characteristics, or other forms of therapy provided by hospitals that are capable of

providing revascularization, such as greater use of aspirin or thrombolytic drugs.

       Beyond one day, the gap in mortality narrows so that by one year after the MI,

there is no improvement in survival associated with living near a revascularization

hospital. Even the percentage difference (0.4 percentage points) is smaller. After the

one year interval, however, the gap in mortality again increases. By 10 years after the

MI, people living closer to a revascularization hospital are 0.5 percent more likely to

survive than those living farther away. This is true even with an 80 percent cumulative

mortality rate. The difference is relatively constant through 17 years. It is more plausible

that this reflects receipt of a revascularization procedure, although the case is not proven.

       If one believes that the difference in mortality ten years after the MI reflects the

receipt of the revascularization, one can use Table 3 to estimate the marginal impact of

that therapy. The Wald estimate of the impact of revascularization on ten year survival is

the mortality difference scaled by the difference in procedure receipt, or 17 percent

(0.5/3.0). This is a large impact.

       The impact of living near a high volume hospital follows a similar pattern. There

is a large mortality benefit of living near such an institution (1.3 percent) one day after

the MI. This might reflect better care provided by such institutions, or possibly selection

of cases. That gap remains roughly constant for the first year after the MI, and then

narrows considerably. By 10 years after the MI, the difference in mortality is 0.3 percent,




                                              19
and is only significant at the 10 percent level. Further, the Wald estimate of the impact of

being admitted to a high volume hospital is much smaller – only 0.6 percent (0.3/51).

         The final set of rows shows the impact of differential distance on cumulative

spending after the MI. Spending is total expenditures up to that year; people who die are

included in the sample, with their costs up to death included. Spending is consistently

higher for those living near a revascularization or high volume facility. The difference in

costs is about $3,000 in the 30 days after the MI, and increases to $9,000 by a decade

later. These differences in costs are sizeable. The cost differences reflect two factors:

more care provided to patients who live closer to hospitals with revascularization

capability, and increased prices that Medicare pays for such hospitals (assuming these are

teaching hospitals or hospitals that care for a disproportionate share of the poor).

Typically, studies of variation in medical spending attribute a greater share to what is

done than the prices paid. But the vast number of outpatient claims makes an exact

division difficult to determine.

         Of course, there is power in explaining service use beyond just the single cut of

above or below median differential distance. In the first stage of the IV estimation, I

break the differential distance into 15 buckets (as in MMN): 0, <1 mile, 1-2 miles, 2-4

miles, 4-6 miles, 6-8 miles, 8-10 miles, 10-12 miles, 12-15 miles, 15-18 miles, 18-21

miles, 21-25 miles, 25-30 miles, 30-40 miles, and 40+ miles. Table 4 shows the first

stage equations predicting receipt of revascularization or admission to a high volume

hospital.12 The coefficients are generally as expected. In virtually all cases, increases in



12
  In practice, both differential distance measures are used to predict each outcome. Controlling for
differential distance to a revascularization facility, differential distance to a high volume hospital does not
affect receipt of revascularization therapy. Similarly, differential distance to a revascularization hospital


                                                       20
differential distance are associated with a reduced probability of receiving that type of

care. In the case of revascularization, for example, a person living 15 or more miles

away from a revascularization facility is 5 percentage points less likely to receive a

revascularization than is a person whose nearest hospital is capable of providing

revascularization. In the case of a high volume hospital, the differential distance impact

is 74 percentage points at 15 miles.

         Table 5 shows the second stage estimation results. For readability, the

coefficients are graphed in Figure 2 (the impact on survival) and Figure 3 (the impact on

costs). The non-distance covariates (not shown) are as expected. Older people, men, and

people with more prior conditions are more likely to die than their opposites.

         The impact of revascularization is broadly similar to the Wald estimates derived

from Table 3. The marginal person receiving a revascularization is about 4 percentage

points more likely to survive the first day after the MI than if the person did not receive a

revascularization (although not statistically significantly). This gap narrows over time

and even reverses by 1 year. At that time interval, people who received revascularization

are 6 percentage points more likely to have died than people not receiving

revascularization.

         After one year, a new gap in survival develops, in favor of those receiving

revascularization. By two years post-MI, people who receive a revascularization

procedure are 3 percentage points more likely to be alive. After 7 years, the impact is 12

percentage points and is statistically significant. The gap remains about 12 percentage

points through 12 years after the MI. As overall mortality increases, the gap narrows a


has little impact on admission to a high volume hospital when controlling for differential distance to a high
volume hospital.


                                                     21
bit. By 17 years after the MI, the mortality benefit for those receiving revascularization

is 5 percentage points and is not statistically significant.

        It is difficult to know what accounts for this survival pattern. It could be a real

trend of treatment. Some patients will be saved by primary PTCA. Other patients might

die during the revascularization procedure, or as a result of complications from it.13

Mortality could then decline as one-year survivors are at lower risk of recurrent episodes.

        But selection of patients or correlated treatments is also a concern. MMN argue

that the reduction in one-day mortality was likely due to treatments other than intensive

surgical care that hospitals capable of providing that care also provide. McClellan and

Newhouse (1987) argue that this is true about hospitals opening catheterization labs as

well, suggesting the treatments are cardiac ones. If one believes that these other factors

are important but are fully accounted for by the one-day survival difference, the

subsequent 8 percentage point reduction in mortality after the first day (or 14 percent

reduction from one year) truly reflects the impact of revascularization.

        Correlated treatments might be a concern after the MI as well. It may be that

hospitals that provide revascularization are also better at post-acute follow-up – greater

attention to diet and exercise, or an increased use of medications to prevent recurrent

MIs. The Medicare data do not have evidence on this; these treatments are generally

pharmaceuticals, and outpatient pharmaceuticals were not covered by Medicare at that

time. Other evidence suggests that revascularization hospitals are unlikely to be superior

in providing this care, however. Chandra and Staiger (2007) show that areas with higher

cardiac catheterization rates in the mid-1990s were less likely to provide valuable


13
  Restenosis, or re-occlusion of the coronary arteries, was a relatively common outcome of angioplasty
during this time period.


                                                   22
medications to heart attack patients when they were inpatients. The evidence would have

to be the opposite at the hospital level to explain the results here.

       Alternatively, the correlated therapy might be provided years later. People who

go to a hospital for an MI are likely to go there for other problems as well. Thus, cancers,

broken hips, and pneumonias are more likely to be treated in these intensive hospitals. If

quality is correlated across diseases, these hospitals might be better at other treatments as

well. The possibility that care for conditions other than the heart attack explains the

longer-term survival improvements could be tested with enough information on

subsequent conditions and treatments received. This analysis would require a complex

model of the range of medical conditions, however. Such a model does not now exist.

As a crude proxy, the regressions presented above control for pre-existing conditions as

of the MI. Exploring this possible correlation is a valuable subject for future research.

       Figure 3 shows the impact of revascularization and admission to a high volume

hospital on Medicare spending. Medicare spending is significantly higher for the

revascularization group than the group not receiving revascularization. In the 90 days

after the MI, the revascularization group spends $28,308 more. This matches closely the

mean reimbursement differential for revascularization therapy noted above, suggesting

the estimate is plausible. Incremental spending rises to $30,149 by one year after the MI

and remains at that level for the next six years. It is possible that this relative constancy

reflects the higher end of life costs for the non-revascularization patients. Those patients

die sooner, and thus incur the higher costs of end of life care. After 7 years, the cost gap

increases, to a level of about $40,000 by year 10.




                                              23
        The impact of being admitted to a high volume hospital is significantly smaller

than the impact of receiving revascularization. The mortality impact is nearly 2

percentage points in the first day (statistically significant), but then declines to 0.5

percentage points by two years (not statistically significant). It remains close to that level

through the rest of the sample. Being admitted to a high volume hospital is associated

with increased spending, with an amount that is increasing over time. The initial

difference is about $2,000, and rises to $10,000 by year 13.



V.      Alternative Specifications

        I have estimated a variety of alternative models to test the robustness of the basic

IV results. I present some of these specification tests for the revascularization

coefficients, since that therapy has the larger impact on survival and costs.

        The first issue is the time frame in which revascularization is measured. While

considering 90 day procedure rates is standard in the literature, extending the time frame

reduces the discriminatory power of differential distance – since consultation with

providers in the community will result in additional procedures being performed for those

initially admitted to non-revascularization hospitals. A sharper test thus looks at care

provided closer to the time of initial admission. To consider this, I estimate models for

the impact of revascularization within 7 days and 30 days of the MI. The results are

shown in the second and third rows of Table 6 (the first row repeats the results in Table 5,

for convenience).

        Narrowing the window for the revascularization has little quantitative impact on

the findings. There is still a one day survival improvement for people receiving a




                                              24
catheterization, ranging between 3 and 4 percentage points. By one year after the MI,

mortality is higher for the revascularization group, by 6 to 10 percentage points. Over the

next few years, patients receiving revascularization fare better, with a mortality benefit of

11 to 12 percentage points after a decade and declining after that.

        The costs associated with revascularization are somewhat smaller for

revascularizations that occur closer in time to the MI. Relative to the $30,000 additional

cost in the first year for the baseline specification, the first year cost is $17,000 for the

group receiving revascularization in the first week after the MI, and $26,000 for the

group receiving revascularization within a month. This may reflect that patients who

wait longer for revascularization are on average sicker.

        The next rows separate the revascularization impact by urban and rural residence.

Revascularization may have a different impact in urban and rural areas. Time to the

hospital varies with urban/rural location, influencing how sick patients are when first

treated. In addition, surgeons may have more experience with revascularization in urban

areas, and thus better outcomes. As table 6 shows, survival benefits are significantly

greater in urban areas than in rural ones. The increase in mortality in the first year is

greater in rural areas than in urban ones. Further, the 10 year survival benefit is 16

percent in urban areas, while there is no survival benefit in rural areas.

        The final specification I examine reformulates the problem to consider the issue

of correlated treatments. As long as patients do not choose where to live on the basis of

their potential benefits from intensive care, the regressions will accurately capture the

impact of having been initially admitted to a hospital capable of performing

revascularization. By instrumenting for initial admission to a revascularization hospital




                                               25
rather than just receiving a revascularization, I can estimate the impact of the full range of

therapies associated with early adopters of revascularization technology.

       These results are shown in the last row of Table 6. The pattern of coefficients is

generally similar to the estimates for revascularization, but the magnitudes are lower.

Mortality for those initially admitted to a revascularization-capable hospital is higher

after one year, but then declines in subsequent years. The gap is one percentage point

after 6 years and remains there for most of the next decade. The similar qualitative

pattern is encouraging. The lower quantitative magnitude is a natural product of the

analysis, and can be seen most clearly in the revascularization columns of table 3. The

regression for receiving a revascularization attributes the half-percent or so better

mortality profile for people living near revascularization hospitals to the 3 percentage

point higher revascularization rates for those living closer to such facilities. In the

regression for being admitted to a revascularization hospital, in contrast, the same

mortality difference is instead attributed to the 38 percentage point difference in where

people are admitted. The impact of admission is obviously smaller.

       Corresponding to this smaller mortality impact is a lower cost associated with

admission. Table 6 shows that cumulative spending is about $1,400 higher for those

admitted to a hospital capable of performing revascularization.



VI.    Implications

       There are two ways to interpret the results in the previous section. The first is that

they largely reflect the true impact of revascularization. Using the values presented, we

can estimate the incremental lifetime cost-effectiveness of revascularization therapy.




                                              26
Standard lifetable methods indicate that the greater survival for the marginal patients

receiving revascularization translates into 1.1 years of additional life expectancy.14 The

cost of this gain is about $38,000. Thus, the cost per year of life is $33,246. Admission

to a high volume hospital is substantially less cost effective. The increase in life

expectancy is only 0.06 years, and the incremental cost is nearly $10,000. The cost per

year of life is thus $175,719.

        The value of a year of life is generally taken to be about $100,000 (Cutler, 2004).

That value typically assumes good quality of life; the quality here may not be as high.

However, these calculations ignore any improvements in quality of life that may result

from revascularization. For non-primary angioplasty in particular, that is a big part of the

potential benefits. Thus, it is not clear whether accounting for quality would lead to more

or less favorable cost-effectiveness ratios. Overall, it is virtually certain that

revascularization after an MI is highly cost-effective.

        The unresolved issue in this first interpretation is whether the benefits of

revascularization flow from that therapy, or from receipt of other services that are

correlated with admission to a hospital with revascularization capabilities. If it is the

latter, the results reflect the current and future implications of an initial admission to a

high-tech hospital, but not necessarily receipt of those procedures. In this case, the

mortality benefit is smaller, but so are costs. The estimates in the last row of Table 6

translate into a benefit of .08 years at a cost of $1,389, or $17,022 per year of additional

life. Care is clearly worth it, but which care is an open question.




14
  This assumes that people who survive 17 years all die in the next year. The 1.1 year survival
improvement is not particularly sensitive to this assumption.


                                                    27
       The obvious issue is how these estimates compare to others in the literature.

MMN do not estimate the cost of catheterization, but other studies do. As noted above,

McClellan and Newhouse (1987) estimate that costs are about $70,000 per patient

surviving an additional year. Since the average heart attack survivor lives 5 years in our

data, this is about $14,000 per lifeyear. Cutler and McClellan (2001) use time series data

to estimate a cost of about $10,000 per additional year of life. The estimates are very

close to what I present.

       The biggest empirical puzzle raised by these results is the extent to which the

improved outcomes reflect intensive treatment of the heart attack versus less intensive

treatment, or treatment of other conditions. Without better treatment data and a detailed

analysis of the full range of subsequent conditions, I cannot answer the question

definitively. Separating out the impact of high tech care from other care is a topic worthy

of future research.




                                            28
                                       References

       Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O. Staiger, “Productivity Spillovers in Health
Care: Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks”, Journal of Political Economy,
2007, 115(1), 103-140.

      Elixhauser, Anne, Claudia Steiner, D. Robert Harris, et al., “Comorbidity
measures for use with administrative data,” Medical Care, 1998, 36(1), 8-27.

        Garber, Alan M., and Charles E. Phelps, “Economic Foundations of Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis”, Journal of Health Economics, 16, 1997, 1-33.

       Gold, Marthe R., Joanna E. Siegel, Louise B. Russell, and Milton C. Weinstein,
Cost Effectiveness in Health and Medicine, New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

      Hochman, Judith S., et al., “Coronary Intervention for Persistent Occlusion After
Myocardial Infarction,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2006, 255:2395-2407.

       Hoover, Donald R., Crystal, Stephen, Kumar, Rizie, Usha Sambamoorthi, Joel C.
Cantoret, “Medical Expenditures During the Last Year of Life: Findings From the 1992-
1996 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey.” Health Services Research 2002, 37(6),
1625-1642.

       Huckman, Robert S., and Gary P. Pisano. "The Firm Specificity of Individual
Performance: Evidence from Cardiac Surgery." Management Science 2006, 52(4), 473-
488.

       Keeley Ellen C., Judith A. Boura, Cindy L. Grines, “Primary angioplasty versus
intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction: a quantitative review of
23 randomised trials,” Lancet 2003 Jan 4;361(9351):13-20.

       Lee, Robert S., “Cost Effectiveness Analysis and Future Costs”, Journal of
Health Economics, forthcoming.

        McClellan, Mark B., Barbara McNeil, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “Does More
Intensive Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality?”
Journal of the American Medical Association. 1994;272(11):859–66

       Meltzer, David, “Accounting for Future Costs in Medical Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis,” Journal of Health Economics, 16, 1997, 33-64.

      Newey, Whitney, “Efficient Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear
Models,” Econometrica, 1990, 58(4), 809-837.

       Newhouse, Joseph P., “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?" Journal
of Economic Perspectives 1992, 6(3): 3-21.



                                           29
        Skinner, Jonathan S., Douglas O. Staiger, and Elliott S. Fisher, “Is Technological
Change in Medicine Always Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial Infarction”, Health
Affairs, 2006, 25, w34-w47.

      Stuckel, Therese A., F. Lee Lucas, and David E. Wennberg, “Long-Term
Outcomes of Regional Variations in Intensity of Invasive vs. Medical Management of
Medicare Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction”, JAMA, 2005, 293:1329-1337.

       Yusuf, Salim et al., "Effect of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery on Survival:
Overview of Ten-Year Results from Randomised Trials by the Coronary Artery Bypass
Graft Trialists Collaboration," Lancet 344, no. 8922 (1994): 563–570




                                           30
 Table 1: Average Medical Spending by Time Until
                     Death
                            Time until death
Payer and Age        <12 months      >12 months
All Payers
   Total               $37,561          $7,456
   65-74                37,043           5,719
   75-84                38,529           7,832
   85+                  36,985          13,895

Medicare
  Total                  $26,049           $3,786
  65-74                   27,832           3,247
  75-84                   26,078           4,153
  85+                     18,226            5,052

Non-Medicare
   Total                   $11,512          $3,670
   65-74                     9,211           2,472
   75-84                    12,451           3,679
   85+                      18,689           8,843
Note: Data are from Hoover et al. (2002). The
average is adjusted to the age distribution of the
entire elderly population.
        Table 2: Differential Distance Measures
                      Revascularization High volume
Measure                     hospital         hospital
 Mean                         18.7             12.8
   th
 10 %ile                       0.0              0.0
   th
 25 %ile                       1.1              0.0
 50th %ile                      7.8                1.9
 75th %ile                      29.9               19.7
 90th %ile                      51.3               44.4

Correlations
 Revasc hospital               1.000                ---
 High volume hospital           .640               1.000
Note: Hospitals are counted as having the capacity to
perform revascularization if they do at least 2 procedures in
the year in question. A high volume hospital is one with at
least 15 admissions for MI in the year.
    Table 3: Differences in Patient Characteristics by Differential Distance Measures
                              Revascularization                    High Volume
Characteristic          < 8 miles > 8 miles p-value < 2 miles > 2 miles p-value
Demographics
 Average age               76.2      76.1        .072       76.2         76.1      .349
 Percent male              49%       52%        <.001       49%          51%      <.001
 Percent black              7%        4%        <.001        6%           5%      <.001
 Percent other race /     1.2%       0.8%       <.001       0.9%        1.1%       .026
  unknown
 Percent rural              4%       59%        <.001       11%          52%      <.001
 Prior year spending     $3,124 $2,442          <.001      $3,035      $2,530     <.001

Hospital of initial admission
 Revasc hospital            47%      9%       <.001       35%         21%       <.001
 High volume hospital 65%           36%       <.001       80%         29%       <.001

Procedure receipt
 Cath Within 90           26%       21%       <.001       24%         24%        .354
 CABG within 90            9%        7%       <.001        8%          8%        .252
 PTCA within 90            6%        4%       <.001        5%          5%        .057
 Revasc within 90         14%       11%       <.001       13%         13%        .957

Cumulative Mortality
  1 day                   7.8%      8.9%      <.001      7.7%        9.0%       <.001
  180 Days               34.6%     35.3%      0.007      34.2%       35.8%      <.001
  1 year                 39.9%     40.3%      0.214      39.6%       40.7%      <.001
  5 years                62.5%     62.9%      0.244      62.5%       62.9%       .094
  10 years               79.8%     80.3%      0.041      79.9%       80.2%       .090
  17 years               93.4%     93.7%      0.008      93.4%       93.7%       .006

Cumulative Costs
  30 Days               $16,045    $12,820    <.001     $15,532     $13,290     <.001
  180 Days              $19,354    $15,386    <.001     $21,531     $17,826     <.001
  Year 1                $26,441    $20,615    <.001     $25,912     $21,059     <.001
  Year 5                $45,497    $36,043    <.001     $44,909     $36,490     <.001
  Year 10               $60,986    $48,977    <.001     $59,927     $49,861     <.001
  Year 17               $73,051    $59,800    <.001     $72,029     $60,628     <.001

N, Costs                14,864 15,124            -     15,099       14,889        -
N, All Other            62,983 61,967            -     63,327       61,623        -
Note: Cost sample excludes those enrolled in an HMO at any point after the MI
           Table 4: First Stage Instrumental Variable Results
                                          Outcome
                              Received            Admitted to High
Variable                  Revascularization       Volume Hospital
Differential Distance
    0 mile                    Reference               Reference
    <1 mile                    -0.0112                 -0.1482
                                (-2.28)                (-28.58)
    1-2 miles                  -0.0306                 -0.2684
                                (-6.90)                (-53.05)
    2-4 miles                  -0.0294                 -0.3853
                                (-7.73)                (-84.96)
    4-6 miles                  -0.0348                 -0.5187
                                (-8.12)                (-86.87)
    6-8 miles                  -0.0403                 -0.6159
                                (-7.83)               (-88.78 )
    8-10 miles                 -0.0482                 -0.6543
                                (-8.16)                (-81.43)
    10-12 miles                -0.0629                 -0.6999
                                (-9.71)                (-83.21)
    12-15 miles                -0.0439                 -0.7449
                                (-8.06)               (-101.12)
    15-18 miles                -0.0509                 -0.7423
                                (-8.78)                (-96.15)
    18-21 miles                -0.0592                 -0.7654
                               (-10.03)               (-100.53)
    21-25 miles                -0.0589                 -0.7855
                               (-10.88)               (-114.94)
    25-30 miles                -0.0584                 -0.7929
                               (-11.37)               (-118.07)
    30-40 miles                -0.0726                 -0.8079
                               (-16.06)               (-141.27)
    40+ miles                  -0.0799                 -0.8514
                               (-19.25)               (-180.61)
Demographics, health
                                  Yes                     Yes
status controls
N                              124,950                 124,950
  2
R                                0.077                   0.434
Note: The coefficients report the impact of differential distance to the
relevant outcome on the probability of receiving that outcome (e.g.,
the impact of differential distance to a revascularization facility on
receipt of revascularization). t-statistics are in parentheses. Each
regression also includes differential distance to hospitals of the other
type. Those coefficients are not reported.
               Table 5: Impact of Medical Care on Survival After an MI
                              Revascularization               High Volume Hospital
Time After MI            Survival        Spending          Survival          Spending
                          -0.042                           -0.0192
1 day                                         -                                  -
                          (-1.08)                           (-6.84)
                          -0.020                           -0.0224
7 days                                        -                                  -
                          (-0.38)                           (-5.80)
                          -0.029          $24,544          -0.0195            $1,688
30 days
                          (-0.47)          (4.84)           (-4.46)           (4.53)
                          -0.004          $28,308          -0.0185            $2,301
90 Days
                          (-0.06)          (4.57)           (-4.02)           (5.07)
                           0.053          $28,593          -0.0152            $3,152
180 days
                           (0.81)          (4.14)           (-3.20)           (6.22)
                           0.061          $30,149          -0.0097            $4,065
1 year
                           (0.91)          (3.28)           (-2.02)           (6.04)
                          -0.029          $27,339          -0.0055            $5,300
2 years
                          (-0.44)          (2.52)           (-1.13)           (6.65)
                          -0.067          $25,919          -0.0049            $5,993
3 years
                          (-1.02)          (2.16)           (-1.04)           (6.81)
                          -0.043          $26,820          -0.0014            $6,560
4 years
                          (-0.66)          (2.07)           (-0.30)           (6.90)
                          -0.106          $27,517          -0.0053            $7,296
5 years
                          (-1.68)          (1.99)           (-1.16)           (7.18)
                          -0.118          $29,662          -0.0050            $7,659
6 years
                          (-1.94)          (2.03)           (-1.13)           (7.15)
                          -0.119          $31,090          -0.0048            $7,953
7 years
                          (-2.02)          (2.03)           (-1.12)           (7.07)
                          -0.108          $32,919          -0.0042            $7,982
8 years
                          (-1.89)          (2.05)           (-1.02)           (6.79)
                          -0.111          $36,961          -0.0058            $8,087
9 years
                          (-2.03)          (2.21)           (-1.47)           (6.59)
                          -0.119          $38,028          -0.0073            $8,314
10 years
                          (-2.28)          (2.16)           (-1.95)           (6.45)
                          -0.113          $38,191          -0.0061            $8,532
11 years
                          (-2.27)          (2.08)           (-1.70)           (6.33)
                          -0.120          $40,804          -0.0088            $9,002
12 years
                          (-2.55)          (2.13)           (-2.59)           (6.40)
                          -0.074          $38,079          -0.0060            $9,161
13 years
                          (-1.68)          (1.91)           (-1.88)           (6.26)
                          -0.064          $38,708          -0.0061            $9,671
14 years
                          (-1.55)          (1.89)           (-2.03)            6.44)
                          -0.047          $36,758          -0.0053            $9,524
15 years
                          (-1.21)          (1.75)           (-1.90)           (6.19)
                          -0.041          $37,200          -0.0060            $9,599
16 years
                          (-1.15)          (1.75)           (-2.31)           (6.14)
                          -0.051          $37,990          -0.0068            $9,770
17 years
                          (-1.52)          (1.76)           (-2.83)           (6.17)
 Note: Each cell is a separate regression of either cumulative mortality or spending.
All regressions include controls for age/sex, race, distance to the nearest hospital, prior
year spending, and 24 conditions. t-statistics are in parentheses.
              Table 6: Alternative Specifications of Impact of Revascularization on Mortality and Costs
                                        Mortality                                             Costs
Specification         1 day    90 days 1 year 10 years 17 years            90 days    1 year     10 years       17 years
Baseline             -0.042     -0.004     0.061     -0.119    -0.051      $28,308 $30,149 $38,028              $37,990
                     (-1.08)    (-0.06) (0.91) (-2.28)         (-1.52)      (4.57)    (3.28)       (2.16)        (1.76)

Timing of Revascularization
 7 day revasc        -0.027       0.019    0.095     -0.110     -0.031       $19,382     $16,844    $19,443     $16,872
                    (-0.63)       (0.28)   (1.31)    (-1.92)    (-0.84)       (2.64)      (1.61)     (0.98)      (0.69)
 30 day revasc       -0.036       0.000    0.061     -0.113     -0.042       $25,346     $25,961    $31,517     $33,264
                    (-0.97)      (-0.01)   (0.95)    (-2.22)    (-1.31)       (3.84)      (2.69)     (1.72)      (1.48)
Urban-Rural Residence
 Urban             -0.033        -0.029    0.036      -0.164    -0.065       $23,159     $21,268    $28,205     $32,379
                   (-0.81)       (0.42)    (0.72)    (-2.93)    (0.036)       (3.11)      (1.91)     (1.38)      (1.31)
 Rural             -0.071         0.036    0.088      0.004     -0.002       $23,691     $24,343    $48,950     $55,828
                   (-0.78)       (0.25)    (0.58)    (0.035)    (-0.02)       (3.83)      (2.89)     (2.23)      (2.10)

Instrument for Initial Admission to High-Tech Hospital
 High tech            -0.0003 0.0027 0.0077 -0.0096 -0.0020                    $1,408     $1,150      $1,287     $1,389
   hospital admit      (-0.09)     (0.46)    (1.27) (-2.00)     (-0.64)        (2.23)     (1.28)      (0.76)     (0.67)
Note: Each cell reports the coefficient from a regression of mortality or costs on revascularization. Other controls are
the same as in Table 5. t-statistics are in parentheses.
                      Figure 1: OLS Estimates of the Impact of Revascularization and
                         High Volume Hospital Admission on Cumulative Mortality
                     0%                                                                                                                 0.0%

                                                                                                                                        -0.2%
                    -5%
                                                                                                                                        -0.4%
Revascularization




                    -10%
                                                                                                                                        -0.6%




                                                                                                                                                High Volume
                    -15%                                                                                                                -0.8%

                                                                                                                                        -1.0%
                    -20%
                                                                                                                                        -1.2%
                    -25%
                                                                                                                                        -1.4%

                    -30%                                                                                                                -1.6%
                           1      7 30 90 180 1             2         4         6          8        10         12        14        16
                               ------- Days ------- --------------------------------- Years ------------------------------------


                                                        Revascularization                      High Volume
                       Figure 2: IV Estimates of the Impact of Revascularization and
                         High Volume Hospital Admission on Cumulative Mortality
                     8%                                                                                                             1.5%

                     6%
                                                                                                                                    1.0%
                     4%
                                                                                                                                    0.5%
                     2%
Revascularization




                     0%                                                                                                             0.0%




                                                                                                                                            High Volume
                    -2%
                                                                                                                                    -0.5%
                    -4%

                    -6%                                                                                                             -1.0%

                    -8%
                                                                                                                                    -1.5%
                    -10%
                                                                                                                                    -2.0%
                    -12%

                    -14%                                                                                                            -2.5%
                           1    7 30 90 180 1            2          4         6         8        10        12        14        16
                           ------- Days ------- --------------------------------- Years ------------------------------------


                                                     Revascularization                      High Volume
                       Figure 3: IV Estimates of the Impact of Revascularization and
                        High Volume Hospital Admission on Cumulative Spending
                    $45,000                                                                                                   $12,500



                                                                                                                              $10,000
Revascularization




                    $30,000




                                                                                                                                        High Volume
                                                                                                                              $7,500



                                                                                                                              $5,000
                    $15,000


                                                                                                                              $2,500



                        $0                                                                                                    $0
                              30 90 180 1         2         4         6         8        10        12        14          16
                              --- Days --- -------------------------------- Years ------------------------------------


                                                   Revascularization                     High Volume
