                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LOCAL SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL PROBLEMS:
                   POLICY CHOICE AND REGULATORY JURISDICTION

                                         James Bushnell
                                         Carla Peterman
                                        Catherine Wolfram

                                       Working Paper 13472
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13472


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2007




We are grateful to Max Auffhammer, Dallas Burtraw, Alex Farrell, Larry Goulder and Dan Skopec
for helpful discussions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by James Bushnell, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Local Solutions to Global Problems: Policy Choice and Regulatory Jurisdiction
James Bushnell, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 13472
October 2007
JEL No. Q48,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the efficiency of various types of environmental regulations when they are applied
locally to pollutants whose damages extend outside the jurisdiction of the local regulator. We draw
on examples from state- and city-level efforts to address climate change by enacting policies to reduce
greenhouse gases. While previous work has noted the possibility for leakage, whereby the polluting
sources move outside the jurisdiction of the regulation in order to escape it, we note an additional problem
when policies are targeted downstream at consumers of goods whose production creates pollution.
Specifically, we show how consumer-based policies can be circumvented by a simple reshuffling of
who is buying from whom. We argue that the leakage and reshuffling problems are most pronounced
with more flexible or market-based regulations. We conclude that localities may have the most effect
on global pollutants when they enact efficiency standards or targeted subsidies.

James Bushnell                                       Catherine Wolfram
University of California Energy Institute            Haas School of Business
2547 Channing Way                                    University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720                                   Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER                                             and NBER
bushnell@haas.berkeley.edu                           wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu

Carla Peterman
UC, Berkeley
2547 Channing Way
Berkeley, CA 94720
cpeterman@berkeley.edu
1.0 Introduction

    In this paper, we explore the intersection of two emerging trends in the

environmental arena that are coming into increasing conflict with each other. On the one

hand, there has been a movement toward more market-based regulations, which

economists have long argued for on theoretical grounds. Market-based regulations such

as cap-and-trade mechanisms can provide more flexibility for compliance, and thereby
achieve environmental targets with greater efficiency and lower cost. They can also

create stronger incentives for compliance and for innovation.

    On the other hand, the trend toward liberalized regulatory tools has coincided with

increased environmental activism on a local scale. This is particularly the case with

climate change. Within the United States, a handful of states, impatient with what is

perceived as inadequate Federal action, have adopted various forms of local controls

designed to address climate change. Notably, states are acting alone even though the

impacts, and sources, of the problem extend far beyond any local jurisdiction.

    Local environmental action on climate change has not been limited to the state level.

Many U.S. cities have adopted climate change policies (for example over 700 mayors

have signed on to the U.S. Conference of Mayors Climate Protection Agreement). Indeed,

the growing market for voluntary carbon offsets, purchased by individuals, can be viewed

as the ultimate local action. Further, in the case of climate change, the global nature of

the problem means that actions taken by individual countries can be subject to the same

local problems as cities or states.

    In this paper, we argue that the emergence of these two trends has become

problematic where they overlap. While market-based environmental regulations hold
great promise relative to more traditional regulatory tools, limiting their application to

local jurisdictions can undermine their effectiveness. The very flexibility that makes




                                                                                             1
market based regulations attractive can make them liable to circumvention if only applied

locally.

    Much of the problem stems from the ability of firms to source their production

outside of the reach of the local regulation. In many cases this may involve the physical

relocation of the economic activity. In other circumstances, it may involve simply a

paper reshuffling of the matching between specific products and the consumers receiving

those products. For example, we demonstrate how a market-based cap-and-trade policy
for greenhouse gases, such as one proposed for California, could have very little effect on

carbon emissions from the electricity sector if applied only to that state.

    This raises the question of what small jurisdictions like California, Cambridge, MA

or Berkeley, CA are trying to achieve with their greenhouse gas policies: Is the goal to

truly reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and not just cause the sources to change location?

Or is the goal to produce a regulatory policy that could be scaled up to a national level,

and provide a framework for economically efficient reductions if the policy were more

widely adopted? Just as states like California must consider both the direct and indirect

impacts of its regulations, as well as its ability to influence its neighbors and Federal

policy, individual nations must address the same issues on the international stage.

    These issues are sometimes framed as a debate between the merits of a “narrow but

deep” vs. “shallow but broad” sets of emissions reduction goals (see, e.g., Aldy, Barrett

and Stavins, 2003). Some policies focus on an ambitious (e.g. deep) set of reductions

applied to a small (e.g. narrow) set of jurisdictions. The Kyoto Protocol has been

characterized as narrow but deep, and state- and city-level goals, which call for deeper

reductions in much smaller jurisdictions, must be considered even more so.

    The main criticism of narrow but deep strategies has been the potential for leakage,
as industries migrate to locations outside of the regulatory regime. The proponents of the

shallow but broad strategy argue that without widespread participation, the leakage issues




                                                                                             2
will overwhelm the best efforts of the participating countries and eventually undermine

efforts everywhere.

    This paper highlights another way in which narrow but deep policies can be

circumvented through a contractual reshuffling of who buys from whom. The problem is

similar to an ineffective consumer boycott. Leakage is most relevant when the regulatory

policies apply to the producer, while reshuffling is a concern when buyers are subject to

regulations (i.e. downstream regulation). The difference between leakage and reshuffling
is that the former involves a physical change in the location of the economic activity,

while reshuffling simply changes the matching between specific sources and consumers.

Therefore, while leakage can be costly for firms who have to relocate their production,

with reshuffling, production does not change, and neither do costs.

    Ironically, the tools that offer the best prospect for local regulators to make real

progress toward an environmental goal may be those that are among the least attractive

from an economic efficiency perspective for regulation on a large scale. In particular,

targeted subsidies for “clean technologies,” although vulnerable to political favoritism

and limited in flexibility, can create a measurable impact on pollution. Therefore,

although local subsidies for energy-efficiency, renewable electricity, and transportation

bio-fuels constitute attempts to pick technology winners, they may be the only

mechanisms that local jurisdictions, acting alone, have to impact climate change.

    The remainder of this paper proceeds by stepping through three broad categories of

regulatory tools: standards, subsidies for “clean” technologies and market-based policies.

We describe the issues that arise in trying to apply these tools on a local scale. We draw

on examples from state efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, focusing particularly

on the electricity industry. The electricity industry not only accounts for the most CO2

emissions of any single sector in the US economy, but it has also been the target of many

of the early policy proposals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Although we

categorize these policies, as for example, a “standard” or a “subsidy,” in many cases


                                                                                             3
policies can share attributes of more than one type of regulatory approach. The

distinctions between these regulatory approaches are best thought of as falling along a

continuum than a bright line.



2.0 Environmental Regulatory Tools

2.1 Regulatory Standards


       The first class of regulatory tools we discuss is the regulatory standard.

Regulatory standards, or command-and-control regulations, have at times been criticized

by economists as an inflexible and inefficient approach to dealing with environmental

problems. Under such an approach, a regulatory body determines a standard - such as a

maximum limit on the emission of a pollutant or on the energy usage of an appliance –

and requires all sources (power plants, appliances, etc.) to individually comply with that

standard. The standard could require adoption of a specific technology, such as selective

catalytic reduction for NOx control in electricity plants, or specific gasoline formulations.

       If a standard is enforced broadly, this approach is usually very effective at

achieving the environmental goal. The main criticism has been that this environmental

success can be much more costly to achieve than necessary, both in terms of the costs to

the firms and also in terms of foregone consumer welfare of people who would otherwise

consume a product that is banned by the regulatory standard. This is because all firms

are required to meet the same standard. If there is heterogeneity across firms, for

instance in the production processes they are using or in the vintage of their capital, it

may be relatively inexpensive for some to achieve substantial emissions reductions, while

for other firms any reduction in emissions will be cost prohibitive. In short, source
specific standards do not recognize the potential differences in compliance costs across

the regulated sources, and therefore cannot take advantage of these differences. The

severity of this problem is obviously closely related to how significant those potential


                                                                                             4
cost differences really are. Unfortunately, it is often difficult to know exactly how much

costs may vary before the regulations are put into place.

       It is important to recognize that, in addition to spurring the proliferation of

mitigation technology, the application of environmental standards also influences

industrial activity. The decision by firms to comply with an environmental standard is

taken in the context of more general decisions about how much and where their product

should be produced. A stronger standard will, at least weakly, reduce overall production
and can spur production to relocate to regions where the standard does not apply or is not

enforced.

       For example, the enforcement of the U.S. Clean Air Act has stratified the country

into areas of “attainment” and “non-attainment” of clean-air targets. In non-attainment

areas, more stringent and costly emission standards apply. Research has demonstrated

that industrial activity declines in non-attainment areas and is at least partially displaced

by growth in attainment areas where regulation is less costly (see Greenstone 2002, and

Becker and Henderson 2000).

       When considering the migration of polluting sources away from areas of stringent

regulation, it is critical to recognize the varying impacts of local pollution. Many of the

CAA criteria pollutants cause damage close to where they are emitted, the classic

example being ground-level ozone, which contributes to smog. Therefore the out

migration of polluting sources is not necessarily a bad thing. Indeed it no doubt has

contributed to the improvement in air quality in many areas of the United States. To the

extent that the “growth” regions are less vulnerable to damage, or simply much less

populated, this can be a net social gain (see Becker and Henderson 2000).

       However, in some cases the out migration of polluting sources may not improve
the local environment. This can be the case if the plants move “up-wind” of the region

they are leaving, or if the region applying the standard is very small relative to the

geographic scope of the environmental problem. Climate change represents the most


                                                                                                5
extreme and challenging case. To a first order, the location of GHG emissions does not

influence their impact on the climate. In effect, when it comes to climate change,

everywhere is upwind.

       The global public good aspect of the climate is therefore, one of the great

challenges to formulating climate change policy (see Nordhaus 2007). To the extent that

local regulations cause out-migration or “leakage” of regulated facilities, rather than a

true reduction from local sources, the local environment does not improve. In addition to
leakage, some regulatory standards may be achieved simply by reshuffling contractual

relationships.



Standards Designed to Reduce Growth in GHG Emissions



       Recent utility regulations in California provide a discouraging example of the

reshuffling problem. California senate bill 1368 establishes a standard for purchases by

“load-serving entities” (LSEs), the firms responsible for buying electricity for end-users

in California, from “baseload” power plants. The law requires that new energy purchases

and investments by California LSEs come exclusively from low-carbon power plants.1

       In Bushnell, Peterman and Wolfram (2007) (hereafter BPW (2007)), we

demonstrate that ample resources outside of California that are compliant with the

standard already exist. California utilities can comply with the standard by buying from

the existing low carbon sources, leaving the “dirty” sources to meet demand from other

states (see BPW 2007). The California electricity context therefore demonstrates how a

standard can be met on paper without any real impact on pollution. This is another




1
  Specifically, the law requires that power plants from whom these LSEs buy power
under long-term contracts, invest in, or build themselves, must meet a standard that limits
their emissions to be no greater than a current combined-cycle natural gas plant.


                                                                                             6
important shortcoming to source-specific standards beyond the classic criticism that they

ignore diversity in compliance costs.

         In addition to limits on the carbon emission rate of electricity generation, a

related “low carbon fuel standard” (LCFS) has been developed for transportation fuels.

California’s LCFS will require fuel providers to reduce carbon and other greenhouse gas

emissions of transportation fuels by at least 10 percent by 2020. The expected flexibility

of the LCFS allows fuel providers to exercise a myriad of options to reduce greenhouse

gases including the blending of lower carbon fuels and purchasing credits.

       Although California’s LCFS proposal is the most advanced, similar standards

have been proposed in the U.S. Congress, United Kingdom, British Columbia,

Washington, Oregon, Arizona, New Mexico, Minnesota, Illinois, and the European

Union. In practice, a LCFS is effectively a subsidy to bio-fuels, so we discuss it in more

detail in the following section. One particular aspect of the LCFS is relevant to the

current discussion. Specifically, by taking a lifecycle approach, the proposed standards

attempt to differentiate between low and high-carbon bio-fuels, by tracking bio-fuel

production up the supply chain. Ethanol produced from lower-carbon crops and farming

methods would earn more credit under the California proposal. However, applying these

standards locally raises similar problems to that of buying electricity from low-carbon

power plants. If California requires its firms to buy clean ethanol, then firms in other

states will buy the dirty ethanol forsaken by Californians. There would only be a net

change in clean ethanol production if the amount of clean production everywhere is less

than the requirements of California customers.

       Local standards aimed at the carbon-content of energy sources are vulnerable to

regional reallocation of those sources. By contrast, standards that have focused on a

reduction of energy consumption promise to have more impact at the local level. Energy

efficiency standards are another type of regulatory command-and-control that has been

adopted to control GHG emissions. Efficiency standards can have more of a meaningful


                                                                                             7
local effect if they apply to consumption choices that are inherently local – such as

residential and commercial building and lighting standards – for which leakage is not a

serious issue.

       The impact of standards on more fungible consumer goods, such as appliances or

vehicles, is more complex. If a jurisdiction is large enough, a local standard can force an

industry past a tipping point beyond which it is easier to produce all goods, even those

sold outside the regulated region, to comply with that local standard. The local standard,
far from being bypassed, actually gets leveraged onto other regions. With other goods,

the economics of production and customer demand may result in a mix of compliant and

non-compliant products. To the extent this mix existed prior to the application of the

local standard, the adoption of that standard could simply draw in the compliant products

from other regions who substitute to non-compliant products.



2.2 Promoting “Clean” Energy Sources



       In the policy arena, a popular alternative to limiting the use of “dirty”

technologies through regulatory standards is the promotion of alternative, “clean”

technologies. The promotion of such technologies can be accomplished through direct

subsidies for the manufacture or installation of the technologies, through tax incentives,

or through mandates that certain institutions buy a certain percentage of their

consumption from clean sources. The political appeal of such an approach is obvious:

instead of appearing to raise the cost of conventional energy sources, these tools appear

to lower the cost of the alternatives.

       Proposals for a low-carbon fuel standard (LCFS) for transportation fuels illustrate
this point. As discussed above, a LCFS would require a reduction in the average carbon-

content of transportation fuels. The focus is on the mix of transportation fuels sold, rather

than a reduction in the consumption of transportation fuels. In this way, it is largely a


                                                                                             8
subsidy for ethanol and other bio-fuels.2 Although encouraging a transition from

petroleum based fuels to bio-fuels can reduce the GHG impact of each mile traveled, the

production of bio-fuels themselves still create greenhouse gasses. Thus subsidizing a

source that is less bad than the alternative is still promoting over-consumption of the bad.

       Proponents of these policies often point to a variant of the “infant industries”

argument. This hypothesis, often applied in the context of international trade, argues that

certain technologies or industries can be very competitive with incumbent technologies if

they could capture the necessary economies of scale or learning. The subsidies

promoting these technologies thus speed up the development, moving the industry along

the learning curve faster, or allowing it to grow to a minimum efficient scale more

quickly. Once these technologies reap the benefits of such efficiencies, no further

intervention is necessary. These new alternatives will, in theory, be preferred even if the

environmental costs of the old technologies are not borne by the producers.

       It is important to note that even the presence of a strong potential for learning or

scale economies does not necessarily create a market failure. The key issue is whether

those economies can be appropriated, through patents or a dominant position in the

market, or whether there are significant knowledge “spillovers.” If a firm can profit from

developing a new technology, there is a market incentive to innovate. If the innovations

are easily copied by competitors, investment in research and development becomes a

public good, thereby justifying public support.

       There are several criticisms of such policies. First, although it is perhaps

politically appealing to make clean technologies look cheaper, rather than make dirty

sources seem more expensive, such an approach sends the wrong message to consumers.

There are no additional costs associated with continued consumption from dirty sources.

The opportunity for encouraging conservation in the obvious way, by making the

2
 See Holland, Knittel and Hughes (2007) for a detailed examination of California’s
proposed LCFS policy.


                                                                                              9
production more expensive, is therefore lost. In practice, the cost of the subsidies are

often borne by other customers, so at least indirectly dirty consumption can be made

more expensive.

       A second, related criticism of “green” subsidies is that by drawing demand away

from traditional sources, they will indirectly reduce the prices of the dirty product. From

a consumer perspective this can sound appealing, but from the perspective of an

environmental regulator, lower prices for dirty products are counter-productive. Even if
consumption from the targeted product is discouraged within the region where the

subsidies are applied, lower prices will encourage consumption elsewhere.3

       Therefore, even the subsidies of alternative energy sources, when applied locally,

are not immune to spillovers in other regions. In fact, the impact of a local regulation

will come down to the relative price impacts of those subsidies on the “clean” and “dirty”

technologies, and the elasticity of demand for those technologies in other regions. When

adopted by small jurisdictions, these price impacts are likely to be small.

       The choice of regulatory options, for a local regulator, therefore comes down in

part to whether the price impacts of subsidies produce less damaging spillovers than the

leakage and reshuffling effects of standards or market-based regulations. In most of the

markets we discuss here, particularly electricity, the leakage and reshuffling problems are

almost certainly more pronounced than any price impacts on coal or natural gas.

       Perhaps the most poignant criticism of targeted subsidies is that they rely upon a

very judicious regulatory process for them to be implemented efficiently. Even with very

intelligent and dedicated regulators, the information requirements to pick the “right”

technologies are daunting. The risk of large subsidies going to technologies that would

not prove competitive under ideal regulations is very high. Politicians and regulators are

3
  This argument has been noted in the context of the adoption of bio-fuels to combat US
oil dependence, but it is worth noting that the lowering of natural gas prices has also been
cited as a benefit of aggressive adoption of renewables (see Wiser, Bolinger and St. Clair
2005).


                                                                                           10
in effect placing large bets that the promised economies of scale and learning will in fact

materialize. If these benefits do not appear, there are often calls for continued subsidies.

There are many cases of “infant” industries that have never grown up.

       There is no question that politics also plays an important role in the subsidies

game. Many argue that the U.S. focus on corn-based ethanol is heavily influenced by the

politics of the Midwestern farm-belt. Federal tax incentives provided for the purchase of

hybrid-fuel cars were deliberately designed to favor producers who sell hybrids in smaller
volumes. These producers also happened to be the U.S. auto manufacturers. Of course,

this criticism could be leveled at just about any regulation or public policy. Because they

often involve direct transfers of money to some parties, however, subsidies appear to be

even more vulnerable to these pressures than other regulations. Further, once subsidy

programs are set in place and are conferring direct benefits to specific groups, it can be

politically difficult to take them away.

       Despite all the potential faults of direct, targeted subsidies, they do feature one

distinct advantage over the other policies discussed here: they are less vulnerable to

leakage or other means of bypassing emissions regulations. They can therefore be more

appealing to smaller jurisdictions, such as US cities or states, than other regulatory tools

that can be more easily bypassed. While such policies may not be an appealing choice on

a national or international scale, they may be the only means to meaningfully impact

emissions on a more local level.



Alternative Energy Policies for the Electricity Industry



       Regulators have adopted a wide variety of initiatives to encourage specific
alternative energy technologies for producing electricity. For illustrative purposes, we

will focus our discussion on two prominent programs that represent different

implementation philosophies: state-level renewable portfolio standards and the California


                                                                                             11
Solar Initiative. The two policies are very different in their approaches, but share the

general feature that they focus on the inputs into the production of electricity, rather than

the output of greenhouse gasses.

       As of this writing, twenty-seven states and the District of Columbia have adopted

renewable portfolio standards (see figure 1). While the details of the implementation

vary, these share the common characteristic that they impose a requirement that electric

utilities within the states meet a certain percentage of their demand with energy from
renewable sources. Conceptually an RPS does not target a specific technology, but rather

a class of technologies, for preferential treatment.4 The advantage over a more targeted

subsidy is that these various renewable technologies compete against each other. In

theory, the “best” (or lowest cost) choices amongst renewable options will come to

dominate the portfolios of firms. Thus, for example, if solar photovoltaics (PVs)

continue to be one of the most expensive renewable options, electric utilities are free to

invest in other more economic choices. In this way, the RPS shares features of more

market-based approaches to regulation.

       The RPS policies also have their limitations. Because of their focus on the fuel

inputs, rather than carbon output, firms do not have an incentive to develop alternative

solutions to the emissions challenge, such as energy-efficiency, carbon sequestration, or

nuclear power. Many believe that significant investment in some or all of these non-

renewable alternatives will be necessary to achieve long-term GHG reduction goals.

Further, although there are aspects of inter-resource competition in the RPS, the playing

field may not be completely level. For example, when accounting for the costs of various

renewable technologies, it is not clear how the costs of new transmission, which will

likely reach many billions of dollars, will be treated. Last, some renewable sources such

as biomass, may have questionable GHG benefits.

4
 RPS policies in fourteen states do require some portion of the RPS to be met with a
specific technology, but these amounts are small relative to the total RPS requirement.


                                                                                             12
       The RPS has been and will continue to be a strongly binding regulation that is

dramatically changing the procurement practices of electric utilities. This is because the

amount of renewable capacity necessary to meet states’ RPS obligations does not yet

exist. Because little renewable capacity exists outside of California and Texas (see table

1), the option to comply by exporting dirty power and importing the renewable energy

from other states is limited.
       In contrast to the RPS, several States and cities have adopted policies to promote

specific alternative energy sources. Perhaps the most ambitious of these in the U.S. is the

California Solar Initiative (CSI). The initiative is a set of direct subsidies for property

owners who install solar photovoltaic systems on their buildings.5 Over the next ten

years, the program allocates up to $2.8 billion, drawn from general electric rates, for

these subsidies. The program represents a classic example of a targeted subsidy. Its

proponents claim that an expansion of solar PVs in California will spur new efficiencies

their design, production, and installation and will spur local economic investment in the

industry. However, these benefits are far from guaranteed.

    As critics of the program have pointed out, an injection of even several hundred

million dollars per year into the worldwide solar PV market, estimated at over $5 billion,

while significant, would hardly constitute the dramatic, transformational, change in

demand necessary to capture needed efficiencies. A program of this scale would likely

ramp up production capacity of the existing technology, rather than spur needed

innovation in new technologies. At current costs, current generation solar PV represents

a curious technology to place a bet on. Even generous estimates indicate that solar PV

installations cost about 30 cents/kWh, many multiples of the current costs of coal,


5
 The original form was adopted by the California Public Utilities Commission, and 2006
Senate Bill 1 extended the program to most municipal utilities. Interestingly the largest
California municipal utility, LADWP is in effect exempted from these policies.


                                                                                              13
natural-gas, or even wind-powered electricity generation.6 If the hoped for efficiency

benefits of these subsidies do not materialize, the energy procured under this program

could be four to five times more costly than other alternatives.



2.3 Market-Based Environmental Regulations



    We next consider market-based regulatory approaches, which could include taxes on

carbon emissions or programs through which the government limits carbon emissions by

issuing permits that can be traded among polluters (so-called “cap-and-trade” policies).

Rather than dictating the specific technology or fuel choice to be used in reducing

emissions, these programs use price signals to provide incentives to firms to reduce

emissions in the most cost-effective way possible.

    Because of their inherent flexibility, these policies are attractive in circumstances in

which they can be practically applied. They do not require a perfectly-informed regulator

to come up with the optimal carbon-reducing strategy. Individual firms will in theory

arrive at their least-cost method for reducing emissions because, under most

circumstances, they have an incentive to do so.7 Regulators still play a central role in a
market-based system – the parameters of the regulatory instruments will drive firms’

decisions – but their role is more limited than under other regulatory approaches.



6
  See Borenstein (2007). At the residential level, these costs are further subsidized by the
practice of “net-metering.” Generation from residential power sources can be used to
offset not just the cost of utility electricity generation, but also the sunk costs of the
network infrastructure such as transmission wires and other utility operations. This
practice has been workable on a small scale, but may become unwieldy if extended to a
large number of residences. The problem is that the other, non-solar residences have to
pay relatively more for these infrastructure costs since they are spread over a smaller
number of customers, in addition to funding the direct subsidies for the solar installation.
7
  There are cases where a firm’s incentives may not be aligned strictly with minimizing
its compliance costs. For example, a regulated firm may prefer options that can be added
to its rate base (see Fowlie 2006).


                                                                                             14
    An emissions tax places an explicit charge on each unit of pollution produced by a

firm, or individual.8 If a firm has options for reducing its emissions that are less

expensive than the tax itself, it should adopt those options and reduce its emissions.

Importantly, one of the options likely to be considered is simply consuming less of the

input that is producing the pollution (e.g. fuel, fertilizer, chemicals). Thus taxes, in a

relatively straightforward fashion can directly, and appropriately, impact both production

and consumption choices in a market. The tax revenues can be applied to efforts to

further reduce emissions or used to offset other taxes. In practice it is often the case that

taxes are not directly applied to the pollutant, but rather indirectly at sources contributing

to pollution, such as gasoline. These taxes may not have been imposed for the sake of

environmental regulation, but do impact the behavior of firms and individuals, and

therefore the environment, nonetheless.

    There are two facets of emissions taxes that contribute to their perception as the

intellectual playthings of ivory-tower economists, rather than practical tools for

policymakers. First, they are viewed as extremely unpopular and therefore politically

infeasible. Taxes in general are a hard sell, although “sin” taxes (applied to socially

unappealing activities such as smoking and consuming alcohol) have often been the first

recourse for policymakers that have been forced to raise revenue. It is important to stress

also that these taxes need not even increase government revenues, but could be used to

offset other taxes. However, critics point out that such a revenue neutral approach to new

taxes would be rather novel in the history of government.

    The second important concern with emissions taxes is that they do not guarantee that

emissions will in fact be reduced. If consumers and firms decide that paying the tax is

less costly, or more convenient, than reducing pollution, then the tax will raise revenues

without actually changing behavior. More realistically, taxes may change behavior

8
 Nordhaus (2007) goes through many of the advantages of taxing carbon rather than
setting quantity limits through something like a cap-and-trade policy.


                                                                                             15
somewhat, but figuring out exactly how much is a complicated forecasting exercise.

Environmental regulations are usually developed with a target in mind (e.g., ambient

concentrations, source specific emission rates). Once that target is developed, regulators

usually feel more comfortable implementing measures that they are confident will reach

that target.9

    Fortunately, even the regulation of emissions quantities can be achieved in a market-

based fashion. The cap-and-trade approach to emissions regulation is an example of a

market-based regulation of quantities. A cap-and-trade system applies an overall regional

limit to total emissions (the cap) and allows for flexibility as to which sources within that

region actually emit. Emissions credits, totaling no more than the regional cap, are

created and allocated to the regulated firms. In theory, firms that can cheaply reduce

their emissions will sell credits to firms that find it very expensive to reduce (the trade).

The net result is that the emissions target is achieved in a way that minimizes overall

costs.

    The concept of emissions credit trading has had a colorful history in the United States.

Originally the concept was derided as the moral equivalent to selling “indulgences” for

sins. The application of a cap-and-trade system for SO2, developed under the 1990

amendments to the Clean Air Act, has been widely viewed as successful (see, e.g.,

Stavins 1998 and Ellerman 2000). Since that time, emissions trading systems have

become increasingly appealing to policymakers. One important practical advantage to

these systems is that the regulatory burden can be smoothed through the allocation of the


9
  There is a rich literature in environmental economics, dating back to Weitzman (1974)
on the proper use of “price” tools such as emissions taxes vs. “quantity” tools such as
command and control regulations or emissions caps. The general idea is that taxes help
to limit uncertainty over the costs of compliance while quantity regulations help to limit
the uncertainty over how much pollution results. The choice is rarely strictly between
one or the other. For example, an emissions limit is usually accompanied by a penalty for
violating that limit. This penalty could be thought of as a tax on emissions above those
imposed by the regulatory limit.


                                                                                            16
credits. These allocations can be used to mitigate, or even co-opt, the opposition of firms

who might be the most vulnerable to regulations of any kind.

     It is important to recognize that cap and trade systems are not universally appropriate,

or immune to criticism in practice. While the SO2 program has been viewed as a success,

programs to trade certain smog-producing pollutants (NOx) in southern California and

the eastern United States have run into a variety of problems.

     For many pollutants, a key problem is coming up with a workable definition of the
region over which the cap is to be applied. It is important to try to match the region being

regulated to the region being impacted by the emissions. One shortcoming of most cap-

and-trade systems is that they focus solely on how much pollution is being created and

ignore the importance of where the pollution is coming from. For a more localized

pollution problem, such as smog, this means that the capped region would ideally be

relatively small. If the capped region is defined too broadly, there is a risk that emissions

reductions will occur in regions where the pollution does little harm, and not where such

reductions would have the most benefit. Thus the RECLAIM emissions credit program

in southern California covered the LA basin but not the San Francisco Bay Area.

Reductions in NOx in the Bay Area would have no benefit on smog conditions in LA.

     Indeed, even the SO2 program has been criticized for ignoring the geographic

importance of emissions.10 Regulators took the opposite of the RECLAIM approach to

NOx trading in the eastern US, where NOx credits can be swapped amongst firms in

nineteen states. Recent research has demonstrated that the bulk of the reductions in NOx

emissions have been concentrated in southern states, even though most of health

problems arise from emissions in the Midwest and Northeast (see Fowlie 2006).




10
 States in the northeast have complained that under the SO2 trading program, there has
been relatively little reduction in SO2 emissions in states upwind of the eastern seaboard,
which has borne the greatest impact of SO2 emissions.


                                                                                          17
Although the nature of the pollutant may argue for a small trading region, small regions

can lead to other problems. A small region will feature fewer firms that are subject to the

regulation, and therefore less liquidity in emissions trades. Further a small region is more

likely to be dominated by one or two large polluters who may enjoy market power either

in the product they produce or in the pollution credits themselves. It appears that the

RECLAIM program was plagued by both of these problems (see, e.g., Kolstad and

Wolak, 2003).
       A related problem arises when the definition of a region is too small to capture all

of the relevant sources of pollution. This is the problem of leakage, where firms

“reduce” their pollution in the regulated region simply by moving their facilities to an

unregulated region. In the case of a localized pollutant such as NOx, this may not be a

problem. It is likely efficient for smog-producing facilities to leave the LA basin for

other areas where smog is a distant concern. In the case of GHG emissions, leakage is a

major difficulty (see, e.g., Fowlie 2007). From a climate change perspective, California

is equally vulnerable to GHG emissions in Nevada (or China) as it is to GHG emissions

within its own borders.

       One policy that could combat leakage is to focus regulation on a “consumption”

standard rather than a “producer” standard. This means that, for purposes of tracking

emissions, a firm is responsible for the emissions created by the plants it takes delivery of

products from, no matter where those plants may be located. For example, an electricity

firm in California that takes delivery of power generated by a plant in Utah will still be

treated as “producing” the carbon from that plant in Utah. Similarly, firms burning

ethanol in California would be responsible for the GHG emissions used in producing that

ethanol, even if it was produced in Iowa. Such an approach requires potentially much
more sophisticated monitoring of emissions activities, as the regulator is trying to track

emissions all the way up the supply chain and far beyond its normal regulatory

jurisdiction. There are also questions about the legality of such an approach for


                                                                                             18
individual states.11 Assuming such tracking can be achieved, and the legal obstacles

overcome, this approach can go a long way to preventing the perverse effects of leakage

under the right circumstances.

       Under some circumstances, however, a consumption-based application of cap-

and-trade can fall victim to a comparable problem, the reshuffling of production. This is

a problem, like leakage, that can arise when the area being regulated is much smaller than

the area from which troublesome pollution can be produced. Although the regulator can

force its local firms to buy “clean” products, it can’t keep firms in other states from

buying the “dirty” products that the firms in the regulated states used to buy. If there is

already substantial clean production capacity in neighboring regions, the regulation can

result in the local firms simply swapping suppliers with their brethren in other states. For

example, there is both clean (low-carbon) and dirty (high-carbon) ethanol produced in the

U.S. today.

       The problem is similar to the conditions that limit the effectiveness of consumer

boycotts. Although a percentage of motivated customers stop buying from the boycotted

source (e.g. diamonds thought to support “blood” regimes), there will be no net impact on

sales or prices if there are enough other price-sensitive customers who are indifferent to

the cause of the boycott and willing to shift over to the boycotted producers. As soon as

prices from the boycotted sources fall because of the boycott, other customers shift over

and prices rise again.

       As we describe below, the leakage and reshuffling problems are of more than

academic concern when it comes to local GHG policies. If States act unilaterally,

without the participation of others in their regions, these problems could overwhelm any

meaningful impact of the regulations.


11
  For example, some states have claimed that California’s attempt to regulate the
purchases of firms within its borders of products produced outside its borders violates the
commerce clause of the constitution (see, e.g., Potts, 2006).


                                                                                              19
State-level cap-and-trade proposals in electricity



       There are two possible approaches to measuring the amount of emissions from the

electricity industry: a consumption- or load-based measure and a production- or source-

based measure. A source-based measure would regulate GHG gasses emitted only from

plants physically located within the regulating region.
       Such an approach though can be problematic for states located in large regional

electricity markets. For example, a substantial fraction of California’s electricity and a

majority of the GHG emissions, come from plants outside of California.12 There is a

significant risk that a source-based standard could be circumvented by simply increasing

net imports from outside of the regulating states. Absent additional limitations, these

imports would count as perfectly “clean” under a source-based standard.

       The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), an effort of ten northeastern and

mid-Atlantic states, employs such a source-based standard. It will be the first U.S.

mandatory cap-and-trade program to control carbon dioxide emissions. Unlike California,

the RGGI program will only regulate the electric sector. The initiative will stabilize

carbon dioxide emissions at participating power plants to current levels through 2014 and

then reduce emissions by 10 percent in 2019.

       Concern over emissions leakage has been raised with RGGI’s source-based

system since some of the states participate in markets with generators outside of the cap-

and-trade program. Debate persists regarding the extent to which such emissions leakage

will occur, particularly since the magnitude will be affected by location-specific factors


12
   The accounting of production is complicated somewhat by the fact that there is coal
capacity owned by (or contracted to) California LSEs that is located outside of California
but connected in such a way that, electrically, it is treated as within California. The CEC
attributes over twenty-eight TWh of electricity generation to plants that fall in this
category.


                                                                                             20
and allowance prices. Modeling projections however estimate potential emissions

leakage of eighteen to 27 percent through 2015.13

       The California policies most relevant to the discussion of market-based

regulations are those that could emanate from the process initiated by California

Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32). The bill itself does not establish specific policies, but rather

articulates an overall goal of reducing California’s GHG emissions to 1990 levels by

2020 with a scope that extends well beyond the electricity industry to include most major

sources of GHG emissions. The exact methods for achieving the goals articulated in the

bill are to be determined by a process that is currently ongoing. Market-based regulatory

tools, such as a cap-and-trade program, have been widely discussed but are also

somewhat controversial.

       Although several industries may be included within the California cap-and-trade

regime, the electricity industry has received the most initial focus. Currently the leading

options for a cap-and-trade system in California are the consumer (or load-based)

approach and a first-seller approach. The first seller is a hybrid approach that is

effectively source-based for plants within California and load-based for imported

power.14 Although these two approaches treat sources inside of California differently,
their treatment of imports from outside of California is very similar. The motivation for

both options is a desire to reduce emissions from plants that are physically located

outside of California, but sell to California consumers. Thus both systems regulate the

downstream “importer” of power in an attempt to indirectly influence the outside sources.


13
   RGGI Emissions Leakage Multi-State Staff Working Group (March 2007).
Potential Emissions Leakage and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI):
Evaluating Market Dynamics, Monitoring Options, and Possible Mitigation Mechanisms.
p.9.
14
   The Market Advisory Committee (MAC) an expert panel formed by the California
EPA to study the implementation of AB 32 via cap-and-trade has recommended the first-
seller approach (see MAC, 2007). See Bushnell (2007) for a more detailed discussion of
the differences between first-seller and load-based approaches.


                                                                                            21
While this approach may seem more likely to constrain imports than a pure source-based

approach, it is vulnerable to a reshuffling of transactions. Consumers inside California

can reduce their purchases from dirty plants and increase their purchases from existing

clean ones, and firms outside of California could do the reverse.

       To assess the plausibility of such an outcome, we examine the mix of generation

available in the western electricity market. Table 2 shows the amount of energy

produced in 2004 from each major fuel source in each sub-region of the western market.
As is evident from this table, the amount of energy from zero-carbon sources, hydro and

nuclear, is substantial. Also note that California has a relatively clean fuel mix (at least

with regards to CO2), with large amounts of nuclear and hydro production and

comparatively little coal production. To examine whether there is enough low-carbon

capacity to meet California’s AB 32 goals for electricity, we use a projection of

California’s 2020 electricity demand of about 341 TWh.15 The CO2 emissions created to

serve California demand in 1990 was approximately eighty-two million metric tons

(MMT).

       Figure 2 plots the cumulative CO2 emissions from power plants in the west in

2004 against the cumulative TWh of electricity produced by these plants, where the TWh

are assumed to come from the lowest carbon sources first. For example, the function is

equal to zero for the first 264 TWh of output because zero carbon sources produced 264

TWh of output in 2004. The horizontal line in figure 2 is drawn at the emissions level

that California would need to achieve to meet the AB 32 standard (the 1990 level of 82.0

MMT) and the vertical line is drawn at the projected 2020 demand (341 TWh). The

function crosses the vertical line before it crosses the horizontal line, suggesting that

California could procure power in the western markets from existing sources without

exceeding 1990 carbon emissions levels. This implies that even a load-based standard for

15
  This number is comparable to the CEC’s forecast of 340 TWh. For details see BPW
(2007).


                                                                                               22
California is at serious risk of circumvention through a swapping of energy sources

amongst the western states.

       This analysis reflects many important underlying assumptions about the

willingness and ability of western electricity firms to trade their electricity. It is intended

as an illustrative calculation to indicate the potential severity of the problem, rather than a

forecast of what is likely to happen. That said, BPW (2007) consider several of the most

likely impediments to a complete reshuffling of energy sources in a relatively
straightforward way, and they do not change the overall conclusion that California is not

a large enough player in the western electricity market to cause substantive change with a

cap-and-trade policy.

       The reshuffling in the electricity sector could impact the effectiveness of AB 32 in

other sectors. If the cap-and-trade system allows trading across sectors, than electric

companies could sell any excess allowances they create by reshuffling. Firms in other

sectors could purchase the allowances created by reshuffling instead of actually reducing

the carbon emissions from their production processes. This would limit the ability of a

cap-and-trade system to reduce emissions in other sectors of the economy.



Beyond Local Regulation



       The designers of both RGGI’s and California’s cap-and-trade policies recognize

the challenges of implementing regulations on a less-than national scale. Various

administrative rules relating to the accounting of emissions from “outside” the regulated

region could reduce, or even eliminate, the incentives to reshuffle purchases. Most

solutions involve fixing a default emissions value for imported power that can only be
changed if the importer switches to a new facility, rather than an existing one.16 These

16
  For example, power purchases could be tied to a historic reference year, rather than
actual current purchases. Thus a firm that bought power from a coal plant in 2000, for


                                                                                             23
rules dilute the incentives of firms located outside the region to actually reduce emissions.

They also blunt the accuracy of emissions measurement and could also draw legal

challenges.

        A far better outcome for the fate of a cap-and-trade program would be the

expansion of its jurisdiction. At the end of February 2007, California Governor

Schwarzenegger together with the Governors from Arizona, New Mexico, Oregon and

Washington, announced a plan to do just that. The Governors outlined plans to establish
a regional cap within six months and to set up a regional cap-and-trade system within

eighteen months (see Eilperin, 2007).17 In view of this announcement, BPW (2007)

examined a policy that would include the five states party to the agreement.

        We find that a source-based standard would likely help to induce (or reinforce) a

decision to retire a few coal plants by 2020. The key question though, is what kind of

capacity would replace the production of those plants, and also generate the additional

energy required to meet load growth in this region? The problem again with a source-

based standard is that this additional production could be met from new facilities located

outside of the five-state block. If the new plants are coal-fired, little overall benefit to the

GHG problem is achieved.

        Under a load-based standard, the imports would, in theory, be judged based upon

the carbon content of their sources. We must now consider two further relevant facts in

this analysis: the addition of sixty-five to seventy-five new TWh of renewable energy


example, would be responsible for the future emissions from that same plant, whether or
not it continues to buy power from it. For more discussion, see Bushnell (2007).
17
   Carbon growth between 1990 and 2004 varied considerably state to state. States in the
Pacific Northwest showed the highest proportional increases as a high fraction of their
capacity installed by 1990 was hydro or nuclear plants, which are zero carbon sources. In
terms of raw tonnage of carbon emissions, however, Arizona stands out as the state with
the largest increase since 1990 (and therefore the farthest away from a target of reducing
to 1990 levels). Arizona generation accounts for roughly half of the forty-two MMT
increase in the five states since 1990.



                                                                                             24
under the various RPS in these five states, and the presence of roughly seventy TWh of

hydro energy in neighboring regions of the WECC, including Canada. The combined

135-145 TWh of zero-carbon energy sources would be nearly sufficient to meet the

emissions standard at the lower end of our load-growth projections, and the standard

could be met if there is sufficient new zero-carbon generation added outside the five

states. There are several reasons to believe that not all of this additional hydro energy

would be available for reshuffling. A more realistic scenario is to assume that load
growth is met with combined-cycle natural gas plants, which have CO2 emissions much

lower than coal plants, but significantly above the zero-carbon nuclear, hydro, and

renewable energy sources.

        Following this alternative assumption, BPW find that these five states would have

to abandon all the coal plants from which they currently consume energy, and instead buy

power from new combined-cycle gas plants to meet 1990 CO2 targets if demand growth

were at the low end of estimates. This is a significant investment in new gas plants, but

hardly transformational, considering that a similar amount of combined-cycle gas

capacity came online in the western US between 1999 and 2005. 18

     In sum, as with a California-only policy, the BPW analysis suggests that even if

carbon limitations are expanded to cover Arizona, New Mexico, Oregon and Washington,

the biggest single driver towards less carbon-intensive electricity generation is likely to

be the renewable portfolio standards. This is an example of an important issue in

regulatory policy design, as often several different regulatory instruments are applied

simultaneously. We take this topic up in the next section.




18
  Of course, a large expansion of natural gas-fired generation could have significant
impacts on the market for natural gas in the West.


                                                                                              25
2.4 The Interaction of Regulatory Options



Often, debates over the choice of the appropriate regulatory instrument fail to take into

account the fact that any regulation will likely coexist with a host of other regulations that

can impact the problem of interest. This is a particularly relevant issue when discussing

market-based environmental regulations. The key advantage of market-based
mechanisms is that they afford the regulated industry more flexibility as to how, and even

how much, to comply. When the market-based mechanism is overlaid onto a series of

other regulations, however, this flexibility can be greatly reduced. Nowhere is this truer

than in the electricity industry, with its history of both strong economic and

environmental regulation.

         The limitations of overlapping regulation can have both positive and negative

impacts. Research has shown that the economic regulation of firms, rather than a

motivation to minimize costs, can drive their choice of compliance option under a cap-

and-trade system (see Fowlie, 2006). This can, for example, lead to investments in

capital intensive technologies being made by firms with the most favorable regulatory

treatment, rather than those with the lowest cost.

         On the other hand, when the market-based regulation is applied only locally,

traditional regulatory instruments can limit the leakage and reshuffling problems that

would otherwise arise. Indeed, regulators in both California and the RGGI states have

expressed a commitment to using energy efficiency standards and to promoting

alternative energy while developing a cap-and-trade system. Both regions are relying

upon these other measures, in part, to limit the problems of a localized cap-and-trade
market.19


19
     RGGI Emissions Leakage Multi-State Staff Working Group (March 2007).


                                                                                            26
Yet these measures, which include aggressive commitments to renewable energy and to

energy efficiency, as well as direct oversight of the procurement decisions of regulated

utilities in their regions, will no doubt limit the impact of the cap-and-trade program.

California’s electricity industry may be the most extreme case, with regulations of many

flavors directed at reducing GHG. In addition to funding for energy efficiency and a RPS

target of 20 percent of energy consumed by 2010, there are also explicit penalties and
laws aimed at preventing investment in new coal-plants.20 Before energy efficiency

targets are considered, the RPS alone should account for approximately half of the

growth in demand for electricity in California between now and 2020. When expected

energy efficiency is accounted for, California’s RPS and energy efficiency programs will

likely meet almost 95 percent of load growth leaving compliance with AB 32 down to

reducing current emissions to 1990 levels.21 If California pursues some of the more
aggressive proposed policies, (increasing RPS to 33 percent increasing energy efficiency,

demand response, and PV), then these programs alone will enable California to reach its

1990 emissions levels and be in compliance with AB32, without engaging in cap and

trade.22



Potential Emissions Leakage and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI):
Evaluating Market Dynamics, Monitoring Options, and Possible Mitigation Mechanisms.
p.26-39.
20
   Only California’s investor-owned-utilities (IOUs), representing approximately 70
percent of state load, are required by law to increase renewable generation to 20 percent
of load. Based on publicly-owned-utilities (POU) renewable targets the California
Energy Commission projects that POUs will meet 10 percent of their load by 2013 with
renewable energy (CEC, 2007a, p.33).
21
   The California Energy Commission projects 2020 energy efficiency based upon the
IOUs long-term procurement plans for the years 2009 through 2016 and POU program
expectations (CEC, 2007a).
22
   The California Energy Commission’s Scenario 5A, “High Energy Efficiency and
Renewables in CA only”, which includes such aggressive scenarios predicts 2020 carbon
emissions to be close to 1990 carbon levels (CEC, 2007b, p.130).


                                                                                           27
     A similar trend can be observed nationwide. Existing state RPS programs are

projected to meet approximately 60 percent of their state load growth between now and

2020. Congress is currently debating a national RPS and targets as high as 20 percent

renewable generation by 2020 have been written into bills. Given current forecasts of

load growth, renewable supplies could meet all new demand. If such a bill passed it

would reduce the electric sector’s compliance flexibility under any national GHG cap-

and-trade system.23



3.0 Summary



     In this paper, we have discussed the confluence of two recent trends: the growth in

popularity of market-based environmental regulations and the increase in regulatory

actions taken at a local level. We have pointed out how these trends can conflict with

each other. The geographic reach of the regulator is an important consideration when

determining the most effective form of environmental regulation. Market-based

regulations, such as cap-and-trade, can be problematic for regulators with limited

geographic reach. Despite this fact, greenhouse gas policies in the US are currently

moving forward on a local basis, and cap-and-trade is an important element of these plans.

There is a significant risk that the limited reach of these programs could lead them to be

undermined either through the exodus of physical plants to unregulated regions or

through a reshuffling of deliveries from sources outside the regulated area. In electricity

markets, shipments are relatively low-cost and difficult to track to specific ultimate

sources. The risk of regional markets adjusting to new carbon regulations in their midst




23
  Six national cap and trade bills are currently under consideration in the U.S. Congress.
These bills on average target 1990 emissions levels in 2020. See Larsen (2007) for a
comparative analysis.


                                                                                           28
by a simple realignment of supply, rather than absolute reduction in emissions, is

therefore relatively high.

    Less flexible regulatory mechanisms, such as mandates or subsidies for “clean”

alternative energy sources or energy efficiency standards, although less efficient when

applied on a large scale, may be the only kinds of regulations that can produce

meaningful results on a local level. In fact, the trade-offs are subtle. Even efforts that are

effective in lowering local consumption from polluting sources can be diluted if they
result in lower prices and hence increased consumption from those dirty sources

elsewhere. In order to choose the policy with the lowest chance of spillovers to

unregulated jurisdictions, a regulator is faced with evaluating whether the price impacts

of subsidies produce fewer spillovers than the leakage and reshuffling effects of standards

or market-based regulations. In most of the markets we discuss here, particularly

electricity, the leakage and reshuffling problems are almost certainly more pronounced

than any price impacts on fossil fuels.

    These results highlight an important question. What are local regulators actually

trying to achieve with their GHG emissions policies? Are the goals truly limited to

forcing down the carbon footprint from activities within their jurisdiction? If so, one

must keep in mind that the net carbon reductions from the policies proposed by a locality

as large as California, assuming it achieves all its goals without circumvention, would

amount to less than 200 MMTCE economy-wide, while China’s emissions are forecasted

to rise by several thousand MMTCE by 2015 (see Auffhammer and Carson, 2006).

    Given this fact, it becomes clear that the local initiatives are largely symbolic unless

they facilitate change beyond their local regions. It is useful to consider the policies that

are most likely to have broader impacts, either by making it easier for other jurisdictions

to adopt effective GHG regulations or by influencing the set of technologies that are

available to reduce emissions. Here, it is useful to consider how generally applicable

either the regulatory or technological lessons are.


                                                                                           29
    For all of the reasons laid out in the paper, it seems likely that the experiences with

local regulations are unlikely to have much bearing on their effectiveness at a broader

level. For example, while a California cap-and-trade policy for the electricity industry

may be easily undermined by reshuffling and leakage, these issues are much less likely to

be a problem on a national level. (Electricity is not a globally traded commodity.)

Given political realities, though, an ineffectual California policy may make it less likely

that a federal cap-and-trade policy will be adopted, even if the problems California
experiences are unlikely to be replicated for a broader scale policy. On the other hand, if

local policies lead to what are effectively demonstration projects of various technologies,

their successes or failures will be important first steps in adopting effective low-carbon

technologies on a more global scale.




                                                                                              30
                                      References


Aldy, Joseph E., Scott Barrett, and Robert N. Stavins. 2003.Thirteen plus One: A
Comparison of Global Climate Policy Architectures. Climate Policy. 3: 373–397.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Richard T. Carson. 2006. Forecasting the Path of China’s
CO2 Emissions: Offsetting Kyoto – and then Some. UC Berkeley, Department of
Agricultural and Resource Economics working paper.

Becker, Randy, and Vernon Henderson. 2000. Effects of Air Quality Regulations on
Polluting Industries. The Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2): 379-421.

Borenstein, Severin. 2007. Electricity Rate Structure and the Economics of Solar Power.
Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper 172. University of California
Energy Institute.

Bushnell, James. 2007. The Implementation of California AB 32 and its Impact on
Wholesale Electricity Markets. Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper
170. University of California Energy Institute.

Bushnell, James, Carla Peterman and Catherine Wolfram. 2007. California’s Greenhouse
Gas Policies: How Do They Add Up? UC Energy Institute working paper.

California Energy Commission. 2007a. Scenario Analyses of California’s Electricity
System: Preliminary Results for the 2007 Integrated Energy Policy Report. CEC-200-
2007-010-SD.

California Energy Commission. 2007b. Scenario Analyses of California’s Electricity
System: Preliminary Results for the 2007 Integrated Energy Policy Report. Appendices.
CEC-200-2007-010-SD-AP.

California Energy Markets. 2007. Southwest Utilities Undaunted by CPUC’s New GHG
Contract Policy. January 26.

Eilperin, Juliet. 2007. Western States Agree to Cut Greenhouse Gases. Washington Post,
February 27.

Ellerman, Denny, et al. 2000. Markets for Clean Air. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Fowlie, Meredith L. 2007. Incomplete Environmental Regulation and Leakage in
Electricity Markets. University of Michigan working paper.

_______. 2006. Emissions Trading, Electricity Industry Restructuring, and Investment in
Pollution Abatement. University of Michigan working paper.


                                                                                      31
Greenstone, Michael. 2002. The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial
Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census
of Manufactures. Journal of Political Economy. 110(6): 1175-1219.

Holland, Stephen, Christopher Knittel and Jonathan Hughes. 2007. Greenhouse Gas
Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards? Center for the Study of Energy Markets
Working Paper 167. University of California Energy Institute.

Kolstad, Jonathan, and Frank Wolak. 2003. Using Environmental Emissions Permit
Prices to Raise Electricity Prices: Evidence from the California Electricity Market.
Stanford University working paper.

Larsen, John. 2007. Comparison of Economy-wide Climate Change Proposals in the
110th Congress, 1990-2050. World Resources Institute. (last updated May 10, 2007).

Market Advisory Committee. 2007. Recommendations for Designing a Greenhouse Gas
Cap-and-Trade System for California.
http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/documents/2007-06-29_MAC_FINAL_REPORT.PDF

Nordhaus, William D. 2007. To Tax or Not to Tax: Alternative Approaches to Slowing
Global Warming. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. 1(1): 26–44.

Potts, Brian H. 2006. Regulating Greenhouse Gas Leakage: How California Can Evade
the Impending Constitutional Attacks. Electricity Journal. 19(5): 43-53.

RGGI Emissions Leakage Multi-State Staff Working Group. 2007. Potential Emissions
Leakage and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI): Evaluating Market
Dynamics, Monitoring Options, and Possible Mitigation Mechanisms.

Stavins, Robert N. 1998. What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment?
Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 12(3): 69-88.

Weitzman, Martin. 1974. Prices versus Quantities. Review of Economic Studies. 61(4):
477-491.

Wiser, Ryan, Mark Bolinger, and Matt St. Clair. 2005. Easing the Natural Gas Crisis:
Reducing Natural Gas Prices through Increased Deployment of Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory working paper (LBNL-
56756). http://eetd.lbl.gov/EA/EMP/reports/56756.pdf.




                                                                                       32
FIGURE 1: STATE-LEVEL RENEWABLE PORTFOLIO STANDARDS

             FOR ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION




                               RPS Stringency
                                  > 15% by 2015
                                  < 15% by 2015
                                  No RPS




                                                      33
     FIGURE 2: ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AND CARBON LIMITS UNDER
                   CALIFORNIA CAP-AND-TRADE


                                               Importing Clean Power
                                    All WECC Sources Eligible for Import into California
                   200



                                                                     CA Forecast Demand
                          150
        Cumulative CO2 [MMT]
                 100




                                     CA Emissions Target
       50          0




                                0               200                      400                600
                                                  Electricity Output [TWh]

Note: The blue line traces cumulative CO2 emissions in 2004 as a function of cumulative
                2004 electricity output from power plants in the WECC.




                                                                                           34
                          Table 1: Renewable Supply in the U.S.


                                        2005 Renewable Supply
                                                         % of state
                    NERC region            TWh              load
                    ASCC                             0.0       0.2%
                    FRCC                             5.8       2.6%
                    HICC                             0.7       6.8%
                    MRO                              5.8       2.6%
                    NPCC                            12.3       4.4%
                    RFC                              8.9       1.2%
                    SERC                            21.6       1.9%
                    SPP                              1.2       1.3%
                    TRE                              4.6       1.4%
                    WECC                            31.2       5.0%
                     Total                          92.0

.
    Sources: 2005 renewable supply: Electric Power Monthly, March 2006, Table 1.14B
             2005 state load: Electric Power Annual 2005 – State Data Tables
              http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/electricity/epa/epa_sprdshts.html




                                                                                      35
 Table 2: Energy Produced in 2004 by Major Fuel Source and Sub-Region (TWh)



               California   AZ-NM       OR-WA        Rest of      Total     % Total

                                                    WECC         WECC        WECC

Large Hydro       29.6        6.9        101.5        17.5        155.5       23%

  Nuclear         30.3        28.1        9.0          0          67.4        10%

Renewables        28.5        1.0         5.1          6.1        40.7         6%

Natural Gas       96.2        32.4        22.5        36.9        188         27%

     Oil           3.4        <.1          .3          .2          3.9         1%

    Coal           3.0        65.8        14.0       146.2        229         33%

                 191.0       134.3       152.4       206.9        684.6



Source: U.S. Energy Information Adminstration (2004). EIA-906 and EIA-860 databases.




                                                                                 36
