                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   REFERENCE POINTS AND THE THEORY OF THE FIRM

                                            Oliver D. Hart

                                        Working Paper 13481
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13481


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




This article is based on the inaugural Coase Lecture, presented at the London School of Economics
in February, 2007. I am grateful to Paul Niehaus for research assistance and to the U.S. National Science
Foundation through the National Bureau of Economic Research for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2007 by Oliver D. Hart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Reference Points and the Theory of the Firm
Oliver D. Hart
NBER Working Paper No. 13481
October 2007
JEL No. D23,D86,K12

                                              ABSTRACT

In this article I argue that it has been hard to make progress on Coase's theory of the firm agenda because
of the difficulty of formalizing haggling costs. I propose an approach that tries to move things forward
using the idea of aggrievement costs, and apply it to the question of whether a transaction should be
placed inside a firm (in-house production) or in the market place (outsourcing).

Oliver D. Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu
                                    INTRODUCTION

       Let me begin by saying that it is a great pleasure to write this article for two

reasons. First, I am a great admirer of Ronald Coase and his work, which has had an

enormous influence on me. Second, my article takes as its starting point Coase’s 1937

paper on the nature of the firm, which Coase began while he was an undergraduate at

LSE and published in Economica a few years later when he was on the staff.

       I will divide this article into two parts. First, I will discuss Coase’s 1937 paper

and what followed. One of my themes will be that it has been quite difficult to make

progress on the Coasian agenda. In the second part I’ll turn to some recent work (with

John Moore) on contracts as reference points. I will argue that this may be helpful in

moving things along. Not surprisingly, this part of the paper is preliminary and

speculative.



                         I. COASE (1937) AND WHAT FOLLOWED

       In his 1937 article, Coase first raised the question of why we have firms at all in a

modern market economy. If, as economists usually suggest, markets are so good at

allocating resources, why do we need firms? Coase recognized that the other side of the

question also had to be answered. Firms cannot always be better at allocating resources,

since if they were we wouldn’t see markets.

       In D. H. Robertson’s words (Robertson (1923, p.85)), we find “islands of

conscious power in this ocean of unconscious co-operation like lumps of butter

coagulating in a pail of buttermilk.” The challenge is to explain the relative amounts of

butter and buttermilk.




                                                                                             2
        Coase’s question is breathtakingly simple and original. It is hard to find anybody

before formulating the issue in such stark terms.

        In order to convince oneself that Coase’s question is still relevant in the early part

of the 21st century, consider the following:

(1) In February 2007 there were 41 companies in the world with a market value of equity

greater than $100 billion. 1

(2) In 2007, Wal-Mart, the largest U.S. employer, had 1.8 million employees. 2

(3) The value of transactions in US firms is approximately equal to that in US markets. 3

(4) As Table 1 shows, the employee-weighted average size of firms – that is, the average

number of employees in the same firm as a randomly selected employee – is sizable,

ranging from 296 to 935 in different countries in 1988 and 2001. 4



                           Employee- Weighted Average Size of Firms

            Country                                       Year

                                            1988                        2001

                France                         811                       727

              Germany                          769                       725

                 Italy                         474                       296

                Spain                          306                       328

          United Kingdom                       859                       935


                                                Table 1

(5) In a sample of 43 countries, 2/3 of the growth in industries over the 1980s came from

growth in the size of existing firms. 5



                                                                                             3
(6) The boundaries of firms keep changing. In 2006 the world wide value of mergers and

acquisitions exceeded $4 trillion. 6

       How did Coase answer the question of why firms and markets coexist? Coase

argued that each way of organizing economic activity is costly. He suggested that the

two most obvious costs of using the market/price mechanism are: (a) discovering what

the market prices are, and (b) negotiating a contract for each exchange transaction.

Economists since Coase have referred to these as “haggling” costs (although I don’t

believe that Coase uses this term). “Argument” costs might also be appropriate for (b).

       According to Coase, haggling costs are avoided inside the firm because

bargaining is replaced by authority: an employer tells an employee what to do and (within

limits) the employee obeys. However, authority is also costly. Coase emphasizes two

main costs. First, as a firm gets bigger, the entrepreneur or manager running it will find it

increasingly difficult to organize the firm’s activities given his or her limited

(intellectual) capacity. Second, and related to this, the person in charge will make

mistakes.

       Coase’s questions about why firms and markets co-exist are brilliant, but his

answers are less satisfactory. There are at least three problems with them. First, it has

been very difficult to formalize or operationalize haggling costs, as I will explain further

below. Second, Coase’s costs of using the firm are unconvincing. Why can’t an

overstretched manager hire another manager to help him out? Third, it seems optimistic

and unrealistic to suppose that placing a transaction inside a firm eliminates all haggling:

there are many examples in practice of serious and costly disagreements inside firms.

Coase has made life hard for his followers by never attempting to write down a formal




                                                                                               4
model. Interestingly, as far as I know, Coase has also never shown any indication that he

thinks that such an activity is in the least bit worth while!

       Why has it been difficult for economists since Coase to operationalize haggling

costs? The reason for this can be traced to a paper published in 1960 by an economist

every bit as important and famous as Ronald Coase called … Ronald Coase. Coase

(1960), writing on the seemingly entirely different topic of externalities, developed a

theory with the following implication. Suppose that you can provide a good (or service)

that is worth more to me than it costs you to produce – say it’s worth 20 to me and costs

you 10. Then it would be silly for us not to trade the good at some price between 10 and

20 since we are both made better off. We will probably argue about what the price

should be – I would like p=10 and you would like p=20. But presumably we’ll settle on

something in between, e.g., we might split the difference at p=15.

       Now if we realize that this is going to happen, why don’t we agree on p=15 right

away and avoid the haggling costs? This argument, that rational parties will avoid, or

bargain around, haggling costs “in the twinkling of an eye,” is an implication of what has

become known as the Coase Theorem. 7

       To emphasize the point, Coase (1960) is problematic for followers of Coase

(1937) because is suggests that haggling costs may be small or even zero. In other words,

markets may not be so costly after all.

       How has the literature dealt with this difficulty? Mainly by sidestepping the issue

and introducing new features. For example, the transaction cost literature (see

Williamson (1971) and Klein et al. (1978)) has emphasized that firms will be efficient

relative to markets when parties make large relationship-specific investments and cannot




                                                                                            5
write good (i.e., complete) contracts. The property rights approach (see Grossman and

Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990)) has refined these ideas by arguing that, in the

presence of relationship-specific investments and incomplete contracts, firms and markets

are both costly; which organizational firm is chosen will depend on such things as the

relative importance of the parties’ relationship-specific investments. 8

       The transaction cost literature does not take a formal approach and has implicitly

assumed the existence of haggling (or rent-seeking) costs: it has not confronted the issue

of how to model them. The more formal property rights approach has sided with Coase

(1960), thereby avoiding haggling costs. In a typical model the parties bargain costlessly

ex post, and the focus is on ex ante investment inefficiencies. I have argued elsewhere

(Hart and Moore (2007)) that, while such an approach can yield useful insights about

optimal asset ownership, it is unlikely to be helpful for studying the internal organization

of large firms. Specifically, in a world of Coasian bargaining, it is hard to see why

important aspects of organizational form such as authority, hierarchy, and delegation

matter. Why wouldn’t the parties simply bargain about everything all the time, using

monetary sidepayments?

       In my view, in order to make progress on the Coasian agenda, we must move

away from Coase (1960) and back in the direction of Coase (1937). We need to bring

back haggling costs! This will be the subject of the second part of the paper.

            II. PUTTING HAGGLING COSTS BACK INTO THE PICTURE

       A recent paper with John Moore (Hart and Moore (2008)) tries to incorporate

something akin to haggling costs. I will begin by describing it and then apply it to the

theory of the firm.




                                                                                             6
       The best way to introduce the paper is to go back to the example where a seller

(henceforth S) can provide a good that costs 10 and is worth 20 to a buyer (henceforth B).

To fix ideas imagine that we are talking about a musical evening that B is arranging at his

house, and that B wants S to sing. The musical evening is worth 20 to B and S’s cost of

performing (an effort cost, say) is 10.

       For the moment ignore the fact that B could engage other singers or that S could

perform elsewhere on the night in question. Earlier I argued that B and S might agree to

trade at a price of 15. That discussion implicitly assumed that, once B and S agreed,

trade would proceed smoothly. But suppose that is not so. In particular, assume that B

and S each has some discretion about the “quality” of performance they provide, i.e., how

pleasant they make the experience for the other party.

       S can perform within the letter rather than the spirit of the contract, or can stint on

quality. For example, she can be rude to B’s guests or refuse to give autographs. B can

quibble about the details of performance or be slow in paying.

       To use the language of Hart and Moore (2008), each party has the discretion to

provide “perfunctory” ( basic ) or “consummate” (exemplary ) performance. It is worth

emphasizing that this is a significant departure from the standard contracting literature.

The literature usually assumes that trade is perfectly enforceable ex post (e.g., by a court

of law). Here we are assuming that only perfunctory performance can be enforced;

consummate performance is always discretionary.

       What determines whether a party provides consummate performance? Hart and

Moore (2008) appeal (quite loosely) to a number of ideas from the behavioral economics

literature. It is assumed that a party is roughly indifferent between providing perfunctory




                                                                                               7
and consummate performance – consummate performance costs only slightly more or

may even be slightly pleasurable – and will provide consummate performance if he is

“well treated” but not if he is “badly treated” (negative reciprocity).

        Importantly it is supposed that a party feels “well treated” if he gets what he

believes that he is entitled to; that a contract is a reference point for perceived

entitlements; and that in the absence of a reference point entitlements can diverge,

possibly wildly.

        Let’s apply these ideas to our 20-10 example. First, let’s put in a time line.



                        Date 0                                  Date 1

                         |__________________________________|

                        Parties meet            Musical evening takes place

                                               Figure 1

The time line captures the idea that B and S will typically write a contract some months

before the musical evening takes place (date 0) rather than the night before (date 1). One

reason for this is that each will have more alternatives earlier on. In fact, I’m going to

assume that there is a competitive market for sellers, i.e., singers, at date 0.

        Let’s suppose first that, although B and S sign a contract at date 0, they leave the

determination of how much B will pay S until the night before the concert, date 1. This

may seem odd and indeed I will show that it is a bad idea. If B and S don’t specify price,

then p can be anywhere between 10 and 20. What might each party feel entitled to?

        As mentioned, Hart and Moore (2008) takes the view that entitlements can

diverge. S can convince herself that she is hugely talented and that her presence is the




                                                                                               8
entire reason the evening will be a success. S is entitled to p = 20. B has a dimmer view

of S’s ability and contribution and thinks that S is worth much less: p should be 10.

       Even though B and S have these different views of what p should be, they are

rational enough to come to some agreement; let’s say they split the difference at p = 15.

However, each feels shortchanged and aggrieved. B thinks that he has paid 5 too much;

S thinks that she has been paid 5 too little. Neither of them is in the mood to provide

consummate performance.

       The precise assumption made in Hart and Moore (2008) is that each party

“shades” on consummate performance in proportion to the amount he feels aggrieved.

Since B is aggrieved by 5, B shades to the point where S’s payoff falls by 5θ, where θ is

the constant of proportionality: it might be .2, say. And since S is aggrieved by 5, S

shades to the point where B’s payoff falls by 5θ.

       The bottom line is that if B and S leave the price open until the night before the

concert, there will be a total deadweight loss of 10θ due to shading. This is money down

the drain. It reduces the value of B and S’s relationship from 10 to 10 (1-θ). If θ = .2, the

relationship is worth 8 instead of 10.

       Economists don’t like deadweight losses (nor does anyone else). Can anything be

done to avoid them here? The answer is yes. Note first that ex post Coasian bargaining

at date 1 does not do the job. The reason is that shading is not contractible, and thus a

contract not to shade is not enforceable. To put it another way, if B offers to pay S more

not to shade, e.g., B offers p = 16, then while this will indeed reduce S’s shading (from

5θ to 4θ) since S will feel less aggrieved, it will increase B’s shading (from 5θ to 6θ)

because B will feel more aggrieved! Total deadweight losses remain at 10θ. However,




                                                                                             9
there is a simple solution: put the price in the contract at date 0. Since I have supposed

that there is a competitive market for singers at date 0, B will be able to hire S for p = 10.

With p = 10 specified in the contract, there is nothing for B and S to argue about at date

1. The fact that B and S may disagree about S’s talents as a singer does not matter any

more. B and S have agreed that B will pay S 10, and neither B nor S will be disappointed

or aggrieved when that happens.

       In short, a contract that sets p = 10 in advance eliminates ex post argument and

aggrievement, and hence both parties will be willing to provide consummate

performance. Deadweight losses will be zero and the first-best is achieved. 9

       Aggrievement and shading costs are a bit like haggling costs, and so the above

model moves us in the direction of Coase (1937). However, we have to add one further

ingredient to get to a theory of the firm.

       Let’s now introduce the realistic notion that not all the details of the musical

evening can be anticipated at date 0. To make it simple, imagine that the musical evening

can be carried out in two ways, i.e., according to two methods (we might be talking about

the exact songs, who are the other performers, the order of the program, etc.); see Figure

2.

       Method 1 yields value 20 and costs 10, as above. Method 2 yields value 14 to the

buyer and costs the seller 8. Assume that the methods cannot be specified in the date 0

contract, e.g., because they are too complicated to describe in advance. However, the

choice between them becomes clear at date 1. Note that with these numbers Method 1 is

more efficient than Method 2 since it generates higher surplus.




                                                                                             10
                                       Method 1                Method 2

                       Value               20                     14

                       Cost                10                      8

                       Surplus             10                      6

                                                Figure 2

       Compare two different organizational forms. In the first B and S fix the price of

the good at date 0 (at 10, say) and determine that S will be an independent contractor. In

other words this is a market exchange between two distinct economic “entities.” I will

take this to mean that S has the right to decide on the details of production, i.e., on the

choice between Methods 1 and 2. 10 I believe that this accords with the common

understanding of what it means to be an independent contractor.

       What will S do? Given that the price is fixed, S will pick Method 2 since it is

cheaper. This is inefficient. In addition, B will be aggrieved that S didn’t choose Method

1 – B will feel entitled to this and will regard S’s choice as ungenerous. B is

shortchanged or aggrieved by 6 (his payoff would be 6 higher under Method 1), and will

shade to the point where S’s payoff falls by 6θ. Total surplus = 6(1 – θ).

       Now consider a second organizational form. B and S agree at date 0 that S is an

employee: S will work for B at a fixed wage (10, say). I’m going to take this to mean

that B has the right to decide on the choice between Method 1 and Method 2 – and indeed

this accords with common usage of the term “employment.” Given the fixed wage, B

will, of course, choose Method 1 since it gives B more value. This is efficient. S will be

aggrieved that B did not choose Method 2, but S’s aggrievement is only 2. Total surplus

= 10 – 2θ.




                                                                                              11
       The conclusion is that in this example employment is the better arrangement.

Employment is good for two reasons. First, the production method matters more to B

than to S and so it is efficient that B chooses it. Second, and related, S’s aggrievement

will be low because S doesn’t care that much. 11

       Now change the numbers. Keep Method 1 the same but suppose Method 2 yields

value 14 and costs 2.

                                       Method 1               Method 2

                        Value             20                    14

                        Cost              10                      2

                        Surplus           10                    12

                                               Figure 3

Method 2 is now more efficient. Under employment, however, the buyer will choose

Method 1, yielding surplus 10 – 8θ. Independent contracting is superior here because the

seller will select Method 2, yielding surplus 12 – 6θ. 12

       We see that employment is good if the production method matters more to B than

to S, while independent contracting is good if the production method matters more to S

than to B.

       One point worth emphasizing is that in neither of the above examples is the

following contract optimal: leave the choice of price and method until date 1, i.e., rely on

unconstrained Coasian bargaining. This would always yield the efficient method, but the

aggrievement costs would be high. In Figure 2 the parties would agree on Method 1, but

since there are ten dollars of surplus to argue over, shading costs equal 10 θ: net surplus =

10(1- θ), which is less than that obtained under the employment contract. In Figure 3,




                                                                                            12
there are twelve dollars of surplus to argue over and net surplus = 12(1- θ), which is less

than that obtained under independent contracting.

       The examples in Figures 2 and 3 are obviously toy ones (for instance, there are

only two production methods), but I believe that they contain the ingredients of a theory

of the choice between doing a transaction “in the market place,” i.e., through independent

contracting, and “inside the firm,” i.e., through employment. The theory is in the spirit of

Coase (1937) but perhaps a bit more satisfactory in some respects. I’ve replaced

haggling costs by aggrievement costs, but they are not so different since both have to do

with not getting your way. I have stressed that who controls or decides the production

method is a key issue in choosing between the two organizational forms. I have also

emphasized that aggrievement costs arise under employment as well as under

independent contracting.

       I have not had to suppose, as Coase did, that managers of large firms make

mistakes, in order to explain why not everything is done inside the firm.

       There are, of course, many things missing from the framework described above.

One important one is that it has been supposed that the cost of production is always borne

by the seller. In practice it may be possible to transfer some costs to the buyer,

contractually, through a cost-sharing arrangement. Note, however, that if B bears most of

the costs, it may also be efficient for B to control the production method, since B now

cares about this more than S. That is, one might expect a positive correlation between

B’s bearing the production cost and the use of the employment relationship. 13 Of course,

a disadvantage of transferring costs to B is that S will have little incentive to keep them

low. Introducing cost sharing and worker/manager effort would enrich the model greatly.




                                                                                              13
        Even with these qualifications, our model has some plausible empirical

implications. The model suggests that outsourcing is likely to be efficient when a

detailed contract can be written about the nature of the good to be delivered; since in this

case B’s value will be pretty insensitive to the choice of production method, while S’s

cost may not be (see Figure 3). In contrast, if a detailed contract is hard to write and B’s

value is very sensitive to the details of production, then in-house production may be

better (see Figure 2).

        Hart et al. (1997), in a paper about the choice between government and private

ownership, argue that municipal garbage collection probably falls into the first category,

and fighting wars into the second. The provision of prison services may be somewhere in

between. Using a model based on noncontractible relationship-specific investments, Hart

et al. derive some conclusions about the costs and benefits of privatizing these services.

It may be interesting to revisit their analysis, and the issue of outsourcing more generally,

using an ex post inefficiency model of the type described here.

                                     III. CONCLUSIONS

        Let me conclude. I have argued that it has been hard to make progress on Coase’s

1937 agenda because of the difficulty of formalizing haggling costs. I have sketched an

approach based on the idea of aggrievement costs, and have suggested that it can throw

light on whether a transaction should be placed inside a firm (in-house production) or in

the market place (outsourcing). To emphasize the obvious, the analysis I have presented

is preliminary and rudimentary. How useful it will be in the development of a general

theory of the firm time will tell.




                                                                                          14
                                                  NOTES

1
  http://www.forbes.com/lists/2006/18/06f2000_The-Forbes-2000_MktVal.html, accessed 2 Feb. 2007.
2
  http://www.walmartfacts.com/featuredtopics/?id=3, accessed 2 Feb. 2007.
3
  See Lafontaine and Slade (2007).
4
  These data come from the Structural Business Statistics database, which is maintained by Eurostat, the
statistical department of the European Commission. They are available online at
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/ where they were accessed during February 2007. Employee-weighted
average firm sizes were estimated using the method of Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (2002). They are
biased downwards given the coarseness of the firm size bins in which the underlying Eurostat data are
reported. They are also quite sensitive to the sizes of, and averaging process for, the largest firms, e.g.,
a merger or divestiture could have a large impact on the data for a country. This sensitivity may be
responsible for some of the variability in Table 1.
5
  See Rajan and Zingales (1998).
6
  See The Economist, Indicators section, 13 January 2007.
7
  Of course, the Coase Theorem requires assumptions such as symmetric information, the existence of
enforceable contracts, etc. For a recent summary, see de Meza (1998).
8
  For recent summaries of the transaction cost and property rights literatures, see Gibbons (2005).
9
  An obvious question to ask is what changes between dates 0 and 1? Why does a date 0 contract that fixes
p avoid aggrievement, whereas a date 1 contract that fixes p does not? The ex ante market at date 0
provides a crucial role here. It provides an objective measure of what B and S bring to the relationship.
Given that there are many sellers willing to supply at p=10, S accepts that she can’t expect to receive more
than 10, while B understands that he can’t expect to pay less. Thus, neither party is aggrieved by p=10.
See Hart and Moore (2008) for further discussion.
10
   That is, S has the residual rights of control in the sense of Grossman and Hart (1986).
11
   The reader may wonder whether there are contracts that do even better than the employment contract,
i.e., achieve surplus greater than 10-2θ. One possibility is to set a very high contract price, e.g., p=20.
Suppose that neither party feels entitled to more than 100% of the gains from trade, and each party has the
right to quit the relationship. Then Method 1 will be chosen both under employment (for the same reason
as in the text) and under independent contracting (if S chooses Method 2, B will quit) and there will be no
aggrievement since there is nothing to argue about. In other words, the first-best can be achieved.
However, as Hart and Moore (2008) show, this is a knife-edge result, depending on the absence of
uncertainty. With a small bit of uncertainty, the employment contract with p=10, say, is optimal, i.e.,
maximum surplus = 10-2θ.
12
   I have implicitly assumed that, under independent contracting, the seller can choose the method without
violating the original contract. But if the original contract is tight this may not be true. Switching methods
may correspond to a “change order,” in which case both parties may have to approve. This raises
interesting new possibilities. For a more general discussion of change orders, see Bajari and Tadelis (2001).
13
   Correlations like this are studied in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994).


                                             REFERENCES

BAJARI, P. and TADELIS, S. (2001). Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of Procurement
       Contracts. The RAND Journal of Economics, 32, 387-407.
COASE, R. (1937). The Nature of the Firm. Economica, 4, 386-405.
      (1960). The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics, 3, 1-44.
DE MEZA, D. (1998). The Coase Theorem. Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law
GIBBONS, R. (2005). Four Formal(izable) Theories of the Firm?, Journal of Economic Behavior and
       Organization, 58, 200-45.
GROSSMAN, S. and HART, O. (1986). The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and
       Lateral Integration. The Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691-719.
HART, O. and MOORE, J. (1990). Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm. The Journal of Political
       Economy, 98, 1119-1158.


                                                                                                           15
      and        (2007). Incomplete Contracts and Ownership: Some New Thoughts. American
       Economic Review, 97, 182-86.
      and         (2008). Contracts as Reference Points. Forthcoming in The Quarterly Journal
       of Economics.
       SHLEIFER, A, and VISHNY, R. (1997). The Proper Scope of Government: Theory and an
       Application to Prisons. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1127-1161.
HOLMSTROM, B and MILGROM, P. (1994) The Firm as an Incentive System. American Economic
       Review, 84, 972-991.
KLEIN, B., CRAWFORD, R., and ALCHIAN, A. (1978). Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents, and
       the Competitive Contracting Process. Journal of Law and Economics, 21, 297-326.
KUMAR, K., RAJAN, R., and ZINGALES, L. (2002). What determines Firm Size?, Mimeo, Graduate
       School of Business, University of Chicago
LAFONTAINE, F. and SLADE, M. (2007). Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries:
       The Evidence. Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Literature
RAJAN, R. and ZINGALES, L. (1998). Power in a Theory of the Firm. The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 113, 387-432.
ROBERTSON, D. (1923). The Control of Industry. Cambridge Economic Handbooks, Nisbet.
WILLIAMSON, O. (1971). The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure Considerations. The
       American Economic Review, 61, 112-23.




                                                                                                    16
