NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL DIVERSIFICATION PUZZLE IS NOT AS BAD AS YOU
THINK
Jonathan Heathcote
Fabrizio Perri
Working Paper 13483
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13483

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and no necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Sebnem
Kalemli-Ozcan, Nobu Kiyotaki and Eric Van Wincoop for thoughtful discussions and seminar participants
at the Board of Governors, Bocconi, Bank of Canada, Boston College, Chicago, Cornell, Federal Reserve
Banks of Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, San Francisco and Richmond, European University Institute,
Georgetown, Harvard, IMF, LSE, MIT, NYU, Penn, Princeton, Stanford, SUNY Albany, Texas Austin,
UC San Diego and Berkeley, USC, Virginia, Wisconsin, the 2004 AEA Meetings, CEPR ESSIM,
SED, Minnesota Workshop in Macroeconomics Theory and NBER EFG summer meetings for very
helpful comments. The datasets and computer code used in the paper are available on our websites.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jonathan Heathcote and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The International Diversification Puzzle Is Not As Bad As You Think
Jonathan Heathcote and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 13483
October 2007
JEL No. F36,F41
ABSTRACT
In simple one-good international macro models, the presence of non-diversifiable labor income risk
means that country portfoliosshould be heavily biased toward foreign assets. The fact that theopposite
pattern of diversification is observed empirically constitutes the international diversification puzzle.
We embed aportfolio choice decision in a frictionless two-country, two-good version of the stochastic
growth model. In this environment, which is a workhorse for international business cycle research,
we derive a closed-form expression for equilibrium country portfolios. These are biased towards domestic
assets, as in the data. Home bias arises because endogenous international relative price fluctuations
make domestic stocks a good hedge against non-diversifiable labor income risk. We then use our our
theory to link openness to trade to the level of diversification, and find that it offers a quantitatively
compelling account for the patterns of international diversification observed across developed economies
in recent years.
Jonathan Heathcote
Dept. of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC Bldg. 5th Floor
Washington, DC 20057
jhh9@georgetown.edu
Fabrizio Perri
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1169 Heller Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
fperri@umn.edu

1

Introduction

Although there has been rapid growth in international portfolio diversification in recent years,
portfolios remain heavily biased towards domestic assets. For example, foreign assets accounted,
on average, for only around 25% of the total value of the assets owned by U.S. residents over
the period 1990-2004. There is a large theoretical literature that explores whether observed low
diversification should be interpreted as evidence of incomplete insurance against country-specific
risk (see, for example, Baxter and Jermann, 1997, and Lewis, 1999). These papers share a common
conclusion: relative to the prediction of frictionless models, too little diversification is observed
in the data. In response, recent theoretical work on diversification has focused on introducing
frictions that can rationalize observed portfolios. The set of candidate frictions is long and includes
proportional or fixed costs on foreign equity holdings (Lewis, 1996; Amadi and Bergin, 2006;
Coeurdacier and Guibaud, 2006), costs in goods trade (Uppal, 1993; Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2000;
Coeurdacier, 2006), liquidity or short sales constraints (Michaelides, 2003; Julliard, 2004), price
stickiness in product markets (Engel and Matsumoto, 2006), weak investor rights concentrating
ownership among insiders (Kho et. al., 2006), non-tradability of nontraded-good equities (Tesar,
1993; Pesenti and van Wincoop, 2002; Hnatkovska, 2005) and asymmetric information in financial
markets (Gehrig, 1993; Jeske, 2001; Hatchondo, 2005; and van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp, 2007).
In this paper, we take a different approach. We develop a frictionless model in which perfect risk
sharing is in fact wholly consistent with relatively low levels of international diversification. We
argue that previous theoretical benchmarks delivered the wrong answers because the models were
too simple to capture the key diversification motives associated with country-specific business cycle
risks. Our environment is the two-country extension of the stochastic growth model developed by
Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992 and 1995, henceforth BKK), which is a workhorse model for
quantitative international macroeconomics. While BKK allow for a complete set of Arrow securities
to be traded between countries, we instead follow the tradition in the international diversification
literature and assume that households only trade shares in domestic and foreign firms. BKK and
others have shown that the international stochastic growth model is broadly consistent with a
large set of international business cycle facts. We show that the same model rationalizes observed
levels of international diversification. Since our model is frictionless, this finding casts doubt on
the quantitative role of frictions in understanding observed portfolios.
One contribution of our paper is to show that given particular assumptions on preferences and

1

technologies, equilibrium portfolio choices can be characterized analytically.2 In this case, the equilibrium portfolio choice depends on only two parameters: (i) the relative preference in consumption
for domestically-produced versus imported goods, and (ii) capital’s share in production. When
these parameters are set to the values used by BKK, our expression implies portfolios comprising
80% domestic stocks and 20% foreign stocks. Moreover, this portfolio perfectly insures consumers
against country-specific productivity shocks. We conclude that observed low levels of diversification
should not be interpreted as indicating a low degree of international risk sharing.
To better understand the predictions of our model for portfolio choice we compare and contrast
our economy to those considered by Lucas (1982), Baxter and Jermann (1997), and Cole and
Obstfeld (1991). Lucas (1982) points out that in a symmetric one-good two-country model, perfect
risk pooling involves agents of each country owning half the claims to the home endowment and
half the claims to the foreign endowment. Baxter and Jermann (1997) extend Lucas’ model in one
direction by introducing production while retaining the single-good assumption. They show that if
returns to capital and labor are highly correlated within a country, then agents can compensate for
non-diversifiable labor income risk by aggressively diversifying asset holdings. In their examples,
fully diversified portfolios typically involve substantial short positions in domestic assets.
Cole and Obstfeld (1991) extend Lucas’ analysis in a different direction. They retain the focus
on an endowment economy, but assume that the two countries receive endowments of different
goods that are imperfect substitutes. These goods are then traded, and agents consume bundles
comprising both goods. They show that changes in relative endowments induce off-setting changes
in the terms of trade. When preferences are log-separable between the two goods, the terms of
trade responds one-for-one to changes in relative income, effectively delivering perfect risk-sharing.
Thus, in sharp contrast to the results of Lucas or Baxter and Jermann, any level of diversification
is consistent with complete risk-pooling, including portfolio autarky.3
One important difference in our analysis relative to Baxter and Jermann (1997) is that we allow
for imperfect substitutability between domestic and foreign-produced traded goods, following Cole
and Obstfeld (1991). Thus, in our model, changes in international relative prices provide some
insurance against country-specific shocks and, in the flavor of the Cole and Obstfeld indetermi2

The assumptions required to derive an analytical expression for the portfolio choice are (i) preferences are separable between consumption and leisure and logarithmic in consumption, and (ii) all production technologies are
Cobb-Douglas, which implies a unitary elasticity of substitution between traded goods.
3
Kollmann (2006) considers a two-good endowment economy with more general preferences. He finds that equilibrium diversification is sensitive to both the intra-temporal elasticity of substitution between traded goods, and the
inter-temporal elasticity of substitution for the aggregate consumption bundle.

2

nacy result, portfolio choice does not have to do all the heavy-lifting when it comes to delivering
perfect risk-sharing. In contrast to Cole and Obstfeld, however, the presence of production and
particularly investment in our model means that returns to domestic and foreign stocks are not automatically equated, and thus agents face an interesting portfolio choice problem. Home bias arises
because relative returns to domestic stocks move inversely with relative labor income in response
to productivity shocks. This pattern is due jointly to international relative price movements and
to the presence of investment and capital, and it accounts for the difference between the portfolio
predictions of our model relative to those of one-good models explored in previous work.
We conduct a sensitivity analysis in which we consider the implications for diversification of
varying two key parameters: the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign-produced
goods, and the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution for the composite consumption good. We
show that home bias is a robust prediction of the model for all plausible values for these parameters.
We also extend the model to introduce preference shocks as a second source of risk, and one that
induces very different relative price dynamics in response to a shock. Our low equilibrium diversification result also survives here, while the model with both productivity and preference shocks
delivers a realistically low unconditional equilibrium correlation between relative consumption and
the real exchange rate.
The closed-form expression we derive for equilibrium portfolios makes it straightforward to
assess whether the model is useful for understanding variation in international diversification across
countries and across time. In particular, the model suggests that differences in diversification across
space and time should be related in a non linear fashion to changes in trade openness. We find that
this theoretical relationship is both qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with the empirical
pattern for a large sample of developed economies over the period 1990-2004. We also find that
using a simple relation from the model together with trade data can explain around a third of the
cross-country variation in portfolio diversification and about 15% of the variation in diversification
across time, suggesting that risk sharing considerations are indeed an economically important factor
in understanding the determination and the evolution of country portfolios.
In the next section we describe the model and state our main result. Section 3 offers some
intuition for equilibrium portfolios. Section 4 discusses some extensions of the basic model. Section
5 contains the empirical analysis. Section 6 concludes. Proofs, details about numerical methods,
and a description of the data are in the Appendix.

3

2

The Model

The modeling framework is the one developed by Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1995). There are two
countries, each of which is populated by the same measure of identical, infinitely-lived households.
Firms in each country use country-specific capital and labor to produce an intermediate good. The
intermediate good produced in the domestic country is labeled a, while the good produced in the
foreign country is labeled b. These are the only traded goods in the world economy. Intermediategoods-producing firms are subject to country-specific productivity shocks. Within each country
the intermediate goods a and b are combined to produce country-specific final consumption and
investment goods. The final goods production technologies are asymmetric across countries, in that
they are biased towards using a larger fraction of the locally-produced intermediate good. This
bias allows the model to replicate empirical measures for the volume of trade relative to GDP.
We assume that the assets that are traded internationally are shares in the domestic and foreign
representative intermediate-goods-producing firms. These firms make investment and employment
decisions, and distribute any non-reinvested earnings to shareholders.

2.1

Preferences and technologies

In each period t the economy experiences one event st ∈ S. We denote by st = (s0 , s1 , ..., st ) ∈ S t
the history of events from date 0 to date t. The probability at date 0 of any particular history st is
given by π(st ).
Period utility for a household in the domestic country after history st is given by4


U c(st ), n(st ) = ln c(st ) − V n(st )

(1)

where c(st ) denotes consumption at date t given history st , and n(st ) denotes labor supply. Disutility from labor is given by the positive, increasing and convex function V (.). The assumption
that utility is log-separable in consumption will play a role in deriving a closed-form expression
for equilibrium portfolios in our baseline calibration of the model. In contrast, the equilibrium
portfolio in this case will not depend on the particular functional form for V (.).
Households supply labor to domestically located perfectly-competitive intermediate-goods-producing
firms. Intermediate goods firms in the domestic country produce good a, while those in the foreign
4

The equations describing the foreign country are largely identical to those for the domestic country. We use star
superscripts to denote foreign variables.

4

country produce good b. These firms hold the capital in the economy and operate a Cobb-Douglas
production technology:
(2)


t
θ
F z(st ), k(st−1 ), n(st ) = ez(s ) k(st−1 ) n(st )1−θ ,

where z(st ) is an exogenous productivity shock. The vector of shocks [z(st ), z ∗ (st )] evolves stochastically. For now, the only assumption we make about this process is that it is symmetric. In the
baseline version of the model, productivity shocks are the only source of uncertainty.
Each period, households receive dividends from their stock holdings in the domestic and foreign
intermediate-goods firms, and buy and sell shares to adjust their portfolios. After completing asset
trade, households sell their holdings of intermediate goods to domestically located final-goodsproducing firms. These firms are perfectly competitive and produce final goods using intermediate
goods a and b as inputs to a Cobb-Douglas technology:
(3)


G a(st ), b(st ) = a(st )ω b(st )(1−ω) ,


G∗ a∗ (st ), b∗ (st ) = a∗ (st )(1−ω) b∗ (st )ω ,

where ω > 0.5 determines the size of the local input bias in the composition of domestically
produced final goods.
Note that the Cobb-Douglas assumption implies a unitary elasticity of substitution between
domestically-produced goods and imports. The Cobb-Douglas assumption, in conjunction with
the assumption that utility is logarithmic in consumption, will allow us to derive a closed-form
expression for equilibrium portfolios. Note, however, that a unitary elasticity is within the range
of existing estimates: BKK (1995) set this elasticity to 1.5 in their benchmark calibration, while
Heathcote and Perri (2002) estimate the elasticity to be 0.9. In a sensitivity analysis we will explore
numerically the implications of deviating from the logarithmic utility, unitary elasticity baseline.
We now define two relative prices that will be useful in the subsequent analysis. Let t(st ) denote
the terms of trade, defined as the price of good b relative to good a. Because the law of one price
applies to traded intermediate goods, this relative price is the same in both countries:
(4)

t(st ) =

qb∗ (st )
qb (st )
=
qa (st )
qa∗ (st )

Let e(st ) denote the real exchange rate, defined as the price of foreign relative to domestic consumption. By the law of one price, e(st ) can be expressed as the foreign price of good a (or good b)

5

relative to foreign consumption divided by the domestic price of good a (or b) relative to domestic
consumption:
e(st ) =

(5)

2.2

qa (st )
qb (st )
=
qa∗ (st )
qb∗ (st )

Households’ problem

The budget constraint for the domestic household is given by
(6)



c(st ) + P (st ) λH (st ) − λH (st−1 ) + e(st )P ∗ (st ) λF (st ) − λF (st−1 )
= qa (st )w(st )n(st ) + λH (st−1 )d(st ) + λF (st−1 )e(st )d∗ (st )

∀t ≥ 0, st

Here P (st ) is the price at st of (ex dividend) shares in the domestic firm in units of domestic
consumption, P ∗ (st ) is the price of shares in the foreign firm in units of foreign consumption,
λH (st ) (λ∗H (st )) denotes the fraction of the domestic firm purchased by the domestic (foreign)
agent, λF (st ) (λ∗F (st )) denotes the fraction of the foreign firm bought by the domestic (foreign)
agent, d(st ) and d∗ (st ) denote domestic and foreign dividend payments per share, and w(st ) denotes
the domestic wage in units of the domestically-produced intermediate good. The budget constraint
for the foreign household is
(7)



c∗ (st ) + P ∗ (st ) λ∗F (st ) − λ∗F (st−1 ) + (1/e(st ))P (st ) λ∗H (st ) − λ∗H (st−1 )
= qb∗ (st )w∗ (st )n∗ (st ) + λ∗F (st−1 )d∗ (st ) + λ∗H (st−1 )(1/e(st ))d(st )

∀t ≥ 0, st

We assume that at the start of period 0, the domestic (foreign) household owns the entire
domestic (foreign) firm: thus λH (s−1 ) = 1, λF (s−1 ) = 0, λ∗F (s−1 ) = 1 and λ∗H (s−1 ) = 0.
At date 0, domestic households choose λH (st ), λF (st ), c(st ) ≥ 0 and n(st ) ∈ [0, 1] for all st and
for all t ≥ 0 to maximize
(8)

∞ X
X


π(st )β t U c(st ), n(st )

t=0 st

subject to (6) and a no Ponzi game condition.
The domestic households’ first-order condition for domestic and foreign stock purchases are,

6

respectively,
X

Uc (st )P (st ) = β

(9)



π(st+1 |st )Uc (st , st+1 ) d(st , st+1 ) + P (st , st+1 )

st+1 ∈S
t

t

∗

X

t

Uc (s )e(s )P (s ) = β



π(st+1 |st )Uc (st , st+1 )e(st , st+1 ) d∗ (st , st+1 ) + P ∗ (st , st+1 )

st+1 ∈S

where we use Uc (st ) for

∂U (c(st ),n(st ))
∂c(st )

and (st , st+1 ) denotes the t + 1 length history st followed by

st+1
The domestic household’s first-order condition for hours is
(10) Uc (st )qa (st )w(st ) + Un (st ) ≥ 0
=

if n(st ) > 0

Analogously, the foreign households’ first-order condition for domestic and foreign stock purchases and hours are, respectively,
#

d st , st+1 + P (st , st+1 )
(11)
= β
π(st+1 |s
e(s )
e (st , st+1 )
st+1 ∈S
X


Uc∗ (st )P ∗ (st ) = β
π(st+1 |st )Uc∗ (st , st+1 ) d∗ (st , st+1 ) + P ∗ (st , st+1 )
P (st )
Uc∗ (st )
t

"

X

t

)Uc∗ (st , st+1 )

st+1 ∈S

and
(12) Uc∗ (st )qb∗ (st )w∗ (st ) + Un∗ (st ) ≥ 0
=

2.3

if n∗ (st ) > 0.

Intermediate firms’ problem

The domestic intermediate-goods firm’s maximization problem is to choose k(st ) ≥ 0, n(st ) ≥ 0 for
all st and for all t ≥ 0 to maximize
∞ X
X

Q(st )d(st )

t=0 st

7

taking as given k(s−1 ), where Q(st ) is the price the firm uses to value dividends at st relative to
consumption at date 0, and dividends (in units of the final good) are given by


 

(13) d(st ) = qa (st ) F z(st ), k(st−1 ), n(st ) − w(st )n(st ) − k(st ) − (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) .
In this expression δ is the depreciation rate for capital. Analogously, foreign firms use prices
Q∗ (st ) to price dividends in state st , where foreign dividends are given by


 

(14) d∗ (st ) = qb∗ (st ) F z ∗ (st ), k ∗ (st−1 ), n∗ (st ) − w∗ (st )n∗ (st ) − k ∗ (st ) − (1 − δ)k ∗ (st−1 ) .
The domestic and foreign firms’ first order conditions for n(st ) and n∗ (st ) are

(15) w(st ) = (1 − θ)F z(st ), k(st−1 ), n(st ) /n(st )

(16) w∗ (st ) = (1 − θ)F z ∗ (st ), k ∗ (st−1 ), n∗ (st ) /n∗ (st ).
The corresponding first order conditions for k(st ) and k ∗ (st ) are
X

(17) Q(st ) =




Q(st , st+1 ) qa (st , st+1 )θF z(st , st+1 ), k(st ), n(st , st+1 ) /k(st ) + (1 − δ)

st+1 ∈S

(18) Q∗ (st ) =

X




Q∗ (st , st+1 ) qb∗ (st , st+1 )θF z ∗ (st , st+1 ), k ∗ (st ), n∗ (st , st+1 ) /k ∗ (st ) + (1 − δ)

st+1 ∈S

The state-contingent consumption prices Q(st ) and Q∗ (st ) obviously play a role in intermediate–
goods firms’ state-contingent decisions regarding how to divide earnings between investment and
dividend payments. We assume that domestic firms use the discount factor of the representative
domestic household to price the marginal cost of foregoing current dividends in favor of extra
investment.5 Thus

(19) Q(st ) =

π(st )β t Uc (st )
,
Uc (s0 )

Q∗ (st ) =

π(st )β t Uc∗ (st )
.
Uc∗ (s0 )

5

Under the baseline calibration of the model, the solution to the firm’s problem will turn out to be the same for
any set of state-contingent prices that are weighted averages of the discount factors of the representative domestic
and foreign households. Note that each agent takes Q(st ) as given, understanding that their individual atomistic
portfolio choices will not affect aggregate investment decisions.

8

2.4

Final goods firms’ problem

The final goods firm’s static maximization problem in the domestic country after history st is
max



a(st ),b(st )

G(a(st ), b(st )) − qa (st )a(st ) − qb (st )b(st )

subject to a(st ), b(st ) ≥ 0.
The first order conditions for domestic and foreign firms may be written as

(20)

qa (st ) = ωG(a(st ), b(st ))/a(st ),

qb∗ (st ) = ωG∗ a∗ (st ), b∗ (st ) /b∗ (st ),

2.5

Definition of equilibrium

qb (st ) = (1 − ω)G(a(st ), b(st ))/b(st ),

qa∗ (st ) = (1 − ω)G∗ a∗ (st ), b∗ (st ) /a∗ (st ).

An equilibrium is a set of quantities c(st ), c∗ (st ), k(st ), k ∗ (st ), n(st ), n∗ (st ), a(st ), a∗ (st ), b(st ),
b∗ (st ), λH (st ), λ∗H (st ), λF (st ), λ∗F (st ), prices P (st ), P ∗ (st ), r(st ), r∗ (st ), w(st ), w∗ (st ), Q(st ), Q∗ (st ),
qa (st ), qa∗ (st ), qb (st ), qb∗ (st ), productivity shocks z(st ), z ∗ (st ) and probabilities π(st ) for all st and
for all t ≥ 0 which satisfy the following conditions:
1. The first order conditions for intermediate-goods purchases by final-goods firms (equation 20)
2. The first-order conditions for labor demand by intermediate-goods firms (equations 15 & 16)
3. The first-order conditions for labor supply by households (equations 10 & 12)
4. The first-order conditions for capital accumulation (equations 17 & 18),
5. The market clearing conditions for intermediate goods a and b :

(21) a(st ) + a∗ (st ) = F z(st ), k(st−1 ), n(st )

b(st ) + b∗ (st ) = F z ∗ (st ), k ∗ (st−1 ), n∗ (st ) .

6. The market-clearing conditions for final goods:

(22)


c(st ) + k(st ) − (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) = G a(st ), b(st )

c∗ (st ) + k ∗ (st ) − (1 − δ)k ∗ (st−1 ) = G∗ a∗ (st ), b∗ (st ) .

9

7. The market-clearing condition for stocks:
(23) λH (st ) + λ∗H (st ) = 1

λF (st ) + λ∗F (st ) = 1.

8. The households’ budget constraints (equations 6 & 7)
9. The households’ first-order conditions for stock purchases (equations 9 & 11).


10. The probabilities π(st ) are consistent with the stochastic processes for z(st ), z ∗ (st )

2.6

Equilibrium portfolios

PROPOSITION 1: Suppose that at time zero, productivity is equal to its unconditional mean
value in both countries (z(s0 ) = z ∗ (s0 ) = 0) and that initial capital is equalized across countries,
k(s−1 ) = k ∗ (s−1 ) > 0. Then there is an equilibrium in this economy with the property that
portfolios in both countries exhibit a constant level of diversification given by
(24) 1 − λ = λF (st ) = λ∗H (st ) = 1 − λH (st ) = 1 − λ∗F (st ) =

1−ω
1 + θ − 2ωθ

∀t, st

Moreover, in this equilibrium stock prices are given by
(25) P (st ) = k(st ), P ∗ (st ) = k ∗ (st )

∀t, st .

PROOF: See the appendix
We prove this result by showing that these portfolios decentralize the solution to an equalweighted planner’s problem in the same environment. In particular, we consider the problem of a
planner who seeks to maximize the equally-weighted expected utilities of the domestic and foreign
agents, subject only to resource constraints of the form (21) and (22). We then describe a set of
candidate prices such that if the conditions that define a solution to the planner’s problem are
satisfied, then the conditions that define a competitive equilibrium in the stock trade economy are
also satisfied when portfolios are given by equation (24).

3

Intuition for the result

What explains the finding that two stocks are sufficient to effectively complete markets in this
economy, and how should we understand the particular expression for the portfolios that deliver
10

perfect risk sharing in equation (24)? We now build intuition for these results from two different
perspectives. First, we take a macroeconomic general equilibrium perspective, and combine a set
of equilibrium conditions that link differences between domestic and foreign aggregate demand and
aggregate supply in this economy. These equations shed light on how changes in relative prices
coupled with modest levels of international portfolio diversification allow agents to achieve perfect
risk-sharing. We then take a more micro agent-based perspective, and explore how, from a pricetaking individual’s point of view, returns to labor and to domestic and foreign stocks co-vary in
such a way that agents prefer to bias portfolios towards domestic assets.

3.1

Macroeconomic Intuition

We now develop three key equations that are helpful for understanding the macroeconomics of how
the equilibrium portfolio choices, defined in equation (24), deliver perfect risk-sharing.
The first equation is the hallmark condition for complete international risk-sharing, relating
relative marginal utilities from consumption to the international relative price of consumption.
Since the utility function is log-separable in consumption, this condition is simply
(26) c(st ) = e(st )c∗ (st ) ∀st ,
which we can write more compactly as ∆c(st ) = 0, where ∆c(st ) denotes the difference between
domestic and foreign consumption in units of the domestic final good.
The second key equation uses budget constraints to express the difference between foreign and
domestic consumption as a function of relative investment and relative GDP. Assuming constant
portfolios, where λ denotes the fraction of the domestic (foreign) firm owned by domestic (foreign)
households, domestic consumption is given by
c(st ) = qa (st )w(st )n(st ) + λd(st ) + (1 − λ)e(st )d∗ (st )


(27)
= (1 − θ)y(st ) + λ θy(st ) − x(st ) + (1 − λ)e(st ) θy ∗ (st ) − x∗ (st )
where the second line follows from the definitions for dividends, and the assumption that the
intermediate-goods production technology is Cobb-Douglas in capital and labor. Given a similar
expression for foreign consumption, the difference between the value of consumption across countries

11

is given by
(28) ∆c(st ) = (1 − 2(1 − λ)θ)∆y(st ) + (1 − 2λ)∆x(st )
Note that in the case of complete home bias (λ = 1), the relative value of consumption across
countries would simply be the difference between relative output and relative investment. For
λ < 1, financial flows mean that some fraction of changes in relative output and investment are
financed by foreigners.
Equations (26) and (28) do not depend on the elasticity of substitution between traded goods,
and can therefore be applied unchanged to the one-good models that have been the focus of much
of the previous work on portfolio diversification (in a one-good model e(st ) = 1). It is useful to
briefly revisit some important results in this existing literature, prior to explaining why the portfolio
predictions from the two-good model that is the focus of this paper differ so sharply.
Lucas considers a one-good endowment economy, which we can reinterpret in the context of (28)
by setting θ = 1 and ∆x(st ) = 0 for all st . In this case it is immediate that perfect risk pooling
is achieved when agents hold 50 percent of both domestic and foreign shares in each period, i.e.
λ = 0.5.6
Baxter and Jermann (1997) study a one-good economy with production. They argue that since
the Cobb-Douglas technology implies correlated returns to capital and labor, agents can effectively
diversify non-diversifiable country-specific labor income risk by aggressively diversifying claims to
capital. Assuming firms in both countries target a constant capital stock, in which case ∆x = 0,
achieving perfect risk-sharing (∆c = 0) in the context of equation (28) means picking a value for λ
such that the coefficient on ∆GDP is zero. The implied value for diversification is 1 − λ = 1/(2θ),
which is exactly the portfolio described by equation (2) in Baxter and Jermann. If capital’s share θ
is set to a third, the value for λ that delivers equal consumption in the two countries is −0.5. Thus,
as Baxter and Jermann emphasize, a diversified portfolio involves a negative position in domestic
assets.7
6

Cantor and Mark extend Lucas’ analysis to a simple environment with production. However, they make several
assumptions that ensure that their economy inherits the properties of Lucas’. In particular, (i) domestic and foreign
agents have the same log-separable preferences over consumption and leisure, (ii) productivity shocks are assumed to
be iid through time, (iii) firms must purchase capital and rent labor one period before production takes place, and
(iv) there is 100% depreciation. When their two economies are the same size, assumptions (ii) and (iii) ensure that
in an efficient allocation capital and labor are always equalized across countries. Thus to deliver perfect risk-sharing,
the optimal portfolio choice simply has to ensure an equal division of next period output, which is ensured with
Lucas’ 50-50 portfolio split.
7
Note that equation (28) suggests that there will always exist a portfolio that delivers perfect risk sharing as

12

Our model enriches the Baxter and Jermann analysis along two dimensions. First, we explicitly
endogenize investment. With stochastic investment, equation (28) indicates that, in general, no
constant value for λ will deliver ∆c(st ) = 0, the perfect risk-sharing condition. Thus, in a onegood model, perfect risk-sharing is not achievable with constant portfolios. However, our second
extension relative to Baxter and Jermann is to assume that the two countries produce different
traded goods that are imperfect substitutes when it comes to producing the final consumptioninvestment good. As we now explain, the Cobb-Douglas technology we assume for combining
these traded goods implies an additional equilibrium linear relationship between ∆y(st ), ∆(ct ) and
∆x(st ) - our third key equation - such that perfect risk-sharing can be resurrected given appropriate
constant portfolios.
From equations (5), (20) and (21), domestic GDP (in units of the final good) is given by

(29) y(st ) = qa (st ) a(st ) + a∗ (st ) = qa (st )a(st ) + e(st )qa∗ (st )a∗ (st )
= ωG(st ) + e(st )(1 − ω)G∗ (st )
Similarly, foreign GDP is given by
(30) y ∗ (st ) = (1/e(st ))(1 − ω)G(st ) + ωG∗ (st )
Combining the two expressions above, ∆y(st ), the difference between the value of domestic and
foreign GDP, is linearly related to the difference between domestic and foreign absorption:

(31) ∆y(st ) = (2ω − 1) G(st ) − e(st )G∗ (st )

= (2ω − 1) ∆c(st ) + ∆x(st )
This equation indicates that changes to relative domestic versus foreign demand for consumption
or investment automatically change the relative value of intermediate output. The fact that countries devote a constant fraction of total final expenditure to each of the two intermediate goods
long as ∆x is strictly proportional to ∆GDP. Thus, as an alternative to assuming ∆x = 0, we could assume, for
example, that firms invest a fixed fraction of output, so that x(st ) = κGDP (xt ). In this case, in a one-good world,
∆x = κ∆GDP. Now consumption equalization requires that ∆c = [(1 − 2(1 − λ)θ) + (1 − 2λ)κ] ∆GDP = 0 which
2θ−1
implies λ = 2(θ−κ)
.
As an example, if the investment rate κ is equal to 0.2 and capital’s share is 1/3, the value for λ that delivers
consumption equalization is −1.25, implying an even larger short position in domestic assets than the one predicted
by Baxter and Jermann. The intuition is simply that foreign stocks are now a less effective hedge, since following an
increase in foreign output, foreign investment rises, reducing income from foreign dividends.

13

means that the size of the effect is proportional to the change in demand, where the constant of
proportionality is (2ω − 1). When the technologies for producing domestic and foreign final goods
are the same (ω = 0.5), changes to relative demand do not impact the relative value of the outputs
of goods a and b. When final goods are produced only with good a (ω = 1), an increase in domestic
demand translates into an equal-sized increase in the relative price of good a (assuming no supply
response). For intermediate values for ω, the stronger the preference for home-produced goods, the
larger the impact on the relative value of domestic output.
Note that this equation is independent of preferences and the asset market structure, and follows
solely from our Cobb-Douglas assumption, implying a unitary elasticity of substitution between the
two traded goods.
We can now combine our three key equations, (26), (28) and (31) to explore the relationship
between portfolio choice, relative price movements, and international risk-sharing. We start by
substituting (31) into (28) to express the difference in consumption as a function solely of the
difference in investment:8
(32) ∆c(st ) = (1 − 2(1 − λ)θ) (2ω − 1)(∆c(st ) + ∆c(st )) + (1 − 2λ)∆x(st )
which implies that
(33) µ∆c(st ) =

(1 − 2λ)
| {z }

direct f oreign f inancing

∆x(st ) + (2ω − 1) (1 − 2(1 − λ)θ)∆x(st )
|
{z
}
indirect f oreign f inancing

where µ is a constant.
There is a unique value for λ such that the right hand side of (33) is always equal to zero. In
particular, simple algebra confirms that this value is defined in Proposition 1 (equation 24).
As a first step towards understanding the implications of equation (33) for portfolio choice, we
first revisit a result due to Cole and Obstfeld (1991), who consider a two-country endowment economy. They show that when domestic and foreign agents share the same log-separable preferences
for consuming the two goods, then a regime of portfolio autarky (100 percent home bias or λ = 1)
delivers the same allocations as a world with a complete set of internationally-traded assets. In the
context of our model, considering an endowment economy effectively implies ∆x = 0, in which case
equations (28) and (31) become two independent equations in two unknowns, ∆c and ∆y. The only
8

Alternatively, one could substitute out investment to derive an equation linking ∆y(st ) to ∆c(st ).

14

possible solution is ∆c = ∆y = 0. Thus for any choice for λ, including the portfolio autarky value
λ = 1 emphasized by Cole and Obstfeld, perfect risk-pooling is achieved. The reason is simply
that differences in relative quantities of output are automatically offset one-for-one by differences
in the real exchange rate, so y = ey ∗ . Thus movements in the terms of trade provide automatic and
perfect insurance against fluctuations in the relative quantities of intermediate goods supplied.9
In contrast to the Cole and Obstfeld result, only one portfolio delivers perfect risk-pooling in
our economy. Furthermore, portfolio autarky is only efficient in the case when there is complete
specialization in tastes, so that ω = 1. The reason for these differences relative to their results is
that with partial depreciation and persistent productivity shocks, efficient investment will not be
either constant or a constant fraction of output; rather, as in a standard growth model, positive
persistent productivity shocks will be associated with a surge in investment. Thus dividends are
not automatically equated across domestic and foreign stocks, and asset income is sensitive to
portfolio choice. Moreover, these investment responses mediate relative price movements, so that
relative earnings also fluctuate in response to productivity shocks. Nonetheless, the Cole and
Obstfeld result is useful in that it reminds us that absent changes in relative investment, automatic
insurance delivered through changes in the terms of trade would automatically deliver perfect riskpooling. Thus one way to think about the role of portfolio diversification is to ensure that the cost
of funding changes in investment is efficiently split between domestic and foreign residents.
We can use equation (33) to understand the effect of an investment shock ∆x(st ) on relative
consumption, ∆c(st ). Absent any diversification, an increase in ∆x(st ) would reduce ∆c(st ) proportionately. For λ < 1 some of the cost of additional domestic investment is paid for by foreign
shareholders directly (the first term on the right hand side) or indirectly through changes in relative
prices (the second term). The direct foreign financing effect depends on the difference between the
fraction of domestic stock held by foreigners relative to domestic agents ((1 − λ) − λ). The indirect
effect works as follows: an increase in relative domestic investment increases the relative value of
domestic output in proportion to the factor (2ω − 1) (see eq. 31). This captures the fact that an
increase in relative demand for domestic final goods has a positive effect on the terms of trade for
9
Cole and Obstfeld also consider a version of the model with production. In this version the two goods may
be consumed or used as capital inputs to produce in the next period. Like Cantor and Mark (1988) they assume
100 percent capital depreciation. When production technologies are Cobb-Douglas in the quantities of the two
goods allocated for investment, portfolio autarky once again delivers perfect risk-sharing. The reason is that the
assumptions of log separable preferences and full depreciation imply that consumption, investment and dividends
are all fixed fractions of output, so that ∆x = κ∆GDP . Given this relationship, equations 28 and 31 reduce to two
independent equations in two unknowns, ∆c and ∆GDP . Thus total dividend income in any given period is again
independent of the portfolio split.

15

the domestic economy. The fraction of this additional output that accrues as income to domestic
shareholders is given by the term (1 − 2(1 − λ)θ) , which in turn amounts to labor’s share of income
(1 − θ) plus the difference between domestic and foreign shareholder’s claims to domestic capital
income (λθ − (1 − λ)θ) . The equilibrium value for λ is the one for which the direct effect and
the indirect effects exactly offset, so that changes in relative investment have no effect on relative
consumption.
Why do portfolios exhibit home bias? If the lion’s share of income goes to labor (θ < 0.5) and,
and if preferences are biased towards domestically-produced goods (ω > 0.5), then the indirect
effect of an increase in relative domestic investment on relative consumption is positive (the second
term in (33) is positive). It is positive because the change in the terms of trade triggered by
an increase in domestic demand favors domestic agents. Because the relative values of domestic
earnings increases, domestic residents can afford to finance (by holding most of domestic equity)
the bulk of an increase domestic investment while still equalizing consumption across countries.

3.2

Microeconomic intuition

The key to understanding optimal portfolio choice from the perspective of an individual agent is
to understand how the returns to domestic and foreign stocks co-vary with non-diversifiable labor
income. If returns to domestic stocks co-vary negatively with labor earnings, then domestic stocks
will offer a good hedge against labor income risk, and agents will prefer a portfolio biased towards
domestic firms. In Section 2.6 we described an equilibrium in which perfect risk sharing is achieved,
and in which home bias is in fact observed. This suggests that domestic stock returns do in fact
co-vary negatively with labor income. At first sight, this might seem a rather puzzling result, given
that the production technology is Cobb-Douglas, suggesting a constant division of output between
factors. We now explain how two key features of the BKK environment, durable capital and relative
price dynamics, interact to give rise to this negative covariance.
First, recall that perfect risk sharing means equalizing the value of consumption across countries,
state by state: c(st ) = e(st )c∗ (st ).
The difference between the value of domestic and foreign earnings (in units of the domestic final
good) is

(34) qa (st )w(st )n(st ) − e(st )qb∗ (st )w∗ (st )n∗ (st ) = qa (st )(1 − θ) F (st ) − t(st )F ∗ (st )

16

Thus the relative value of domestic earnings rises in response to an increase in z(st ) relative to
z ∗ (st ) if and only if the increase in the relative production of good a relative to good b exceeds
the increase in the terms of trade (i.e. the price of good b relative to good a). In our economy
this condition is satisfied: thus a positive domestic productivity shock is good news for domestic
workers.
Now to rationalize the finding that agents prefer to bias their portfolios towards domestic stocks
we need to show that in response to a positive domestic productivity shock, the return to domestic
stocks declines relative to the return to foreign stocks, and thus that domestic stocks offer a good
hedge against non-diversifiable labor income risk.
Period t returns on domestic and foreign stocks (in units of the domestic final good) are given
by
(35) r(st ) =

d(st ) + P (st )
,
P (st−1 )

r∗ (st ) =

e(st ) d∗ (st ) + P ∗ (st )
e(st−1 )
P ∗ (st−1 )

Using the expressions for equilibrium stock prices - P (st ) = k(st ) and P ∗ (st ) = k ∗ (st ) - along
with the definitions for dividends, these returns can alternatively be expressed as
θqa (st )F (st )
(36) r(s ) =
+ 1 − δ,
k(st−1 )
t

e(st )
r (s ) =
e(st−1 )
∗

t



θqb∗ (st )F ∗ (st )
+1−δ
k ∗ (st−1 )



The difference between the aggregate returns to domestic versus foreign stocks is then

(37)




r(st )P (st−1 )−r∗ (st )e(st−1 )P ∗ (st−1 ) = θqa (st ) F (st ) − t(st )F ∗ (st ) +(1 − δ) k(st−1 ) − e(st )k ∗ (st−1 )
The first term in this expression captures the change in relative income from capital, and it has
exactly the same flavor as the change in relative earnings: through this term, a positive domestic
productivity shock will increase the relative return on domestic stocks as long as the terms of trade
does not respond too strongly. However, there is also a second term in the expression for relative
returns, as long as depreciation is only partial. This captures the fact that part of the return to
buying a stock is the change in its price. A positive domestic productivity shock drives up the real
exchange rate e(st ) and thus drives down the relative value of undepreciated domestic capital (since
final consumption and investment are perfectly substitutable in production, the relative price of
capital is equal to the relative price of consumption). Whether relative returns to domestic stocks

17

rise or fall in response to a positive productivity shock depends on whether the first or second
term dominates. In the model described above, the second term dominates, meaning that when
faced with a positive shock, owners of domestic stocks lose more from the ensuing devaluation of
domestic capital than they gain from a higher rental rate.
We are not the first to relate portfolio choice to the pattern of co-movement between labor income
and domestic and foreign stock returns. Cole (1988), Brainard and Tobin (1992), and Baxter and
Jermann (1997) argued that in models driven entirely by productivity shocks, one should expect
labor income to co-move more strongly with domestic rather than foreign stock returns, thereby
indicating strong incentives to aggressively diversify. Bottazzi, Pesenti and van Wincoop (1996)
argued that this prediction could be over-turned by extending models to incorporate additional
sources of risk that redistribute income between capital and labor, and thereby lower the correlation
between returns on human and physical capital. They suggested terms of trade shocks as a possible
candidate. We have shown that in fact it is not necessary to introduce a second source of risk: the
endogenous response of the terms of trade to productivity shocks is all that is required to generate
realistic levels of home bias. The existing empirical evidence on correlations between returns to
labor and domestic versus foreign stocks is, for the most part, qualitatively consistent with the
pattern required to generate home bias. Important papers on this topic are Bottazzi et. al. (1996),
Palacios-Huerta (2001), and Julliard (2002).
3.2.1

Impulse responses

To further our understanding of how perfect risk sharing is achieved with time-invariant and homebiased portfolios, it is helpful to examine the response of macro variables to a productivity shock
in this economy. In order to do so, we must first fully parameterize the model. We discuss our
calibration in detail in the next section, and report parameter values in Table 1. Figure 1 plots
impulse responses to a persistent (but mean reverting) positive productivity shock in the domestic
country. The path for productivity in the two countries is depicted in panel (a). Stock returns, labor
earnings, financial wealth and stock prices are all plotted in units of the domestic final consumption
good.
In the period of the shock, the relative return to domestic labor increases, and the gap between
relative earnings persists through time (see panel c). The differential can persist because labor
is immobile internationally. In the period of the shock, realized returns to foreign stocks exceed
returns to domestic stocks, reflecting a decline in the relative value of domestic capital (panel b).

18

(a) Productivity

0.8
Domestic
Foreign

4.7

Percentage deviation from ss

Domestic
Foreign

4.6

0.4

4.5
0.3

Percent

0.2
0.1

4.4
4.3
4.2

0

4.1
0

5

10
15
Quarters

20

4

25

0

(d) Real Exchange Rate

5

10
15
Quarters

20

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.22

0.35

0.35

Percentage deviation from ss

0.4

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14

5

10
15
Quarters

20

5

25

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
Domestic
Foreign

0.1
0.05

0

5

10
15
Quarters

20

10
15
Quarters

25

25

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

Domestic
Foreign
0

5

Figure 1: Impulse responses to a domestic productivity shock

19

20

(f) Stock prices

0.4

0

0

(e) Financial Wealth

0.24

0.12

Domestic
Foreign

0.7

0.1

25

Percentage deviation from ss

Percentage deviation from ss

4.8

0.5

−0.1

Percentage deviation from ss

(c) Labor Earnings

(b) Stock Returns

0.6

10
15
Quarters

20

25

After the first period, however, returns to domestic and foreign stocks are equalized. The reason
for this result is simply that stocks are freely traded and thus equilibrium stock prices must adjust
to equalize expected returns, up to a first-order approximation.10
Because agents do not adjust their portfolios in response to the shock, the decline in the relative
value of domestic stocks on impact means that financial wealth for home-biased domestic agents
declines relative to the wealth of foreigners (panel e). This means that in the periods immediately
following the shock, even though returns are equalized, the total asset income accruing to foreign
agents is larger, because they hold more financial wealth in total. This additional asset income
exactly offsets foreigners’ lower labor income, and the relative value of consumption is equalized.
Over time, the domestic productivity shocks decays, while the real exchange rate remains above
its steady state level. As a consequence, foreign labor income eventually rises above domestic labor
income. But notice that now, because of capital accumulation in country 1 (panel f), domestic
wealth now exceeds foreign wealth, and this compensates domestic residents for the fact that they
expect relatively low earnings during the remainder of the transition back to steady state.
To summarize, from the point of view of an individual worker / investor, optimal portfolio choice
can be interpreted in the usual way as depending on the covariances between non-diversifiable labor
income and the returns on domestic and foreign stocks. The key feature of this environment, however, is that these covariances are endogenous and depend critically on the dynamics of investment
and relative prices. An important message from the preceding analysis is that the model makes
clear predictions about the signs of these covariances, and, perhaps surprisingly, returns to domestic
labor and capital tend to co-move negatively, even though the model is frictionless and the only
shocks are Hicks-neutral innovations to TFP.

3.3

Diversification and the trade share

When ω = 0.5, so that changes in demand fall equally on domestic and foreign intermediate
goods, relative output and earnings are automatically equated across countries (∆y(st ) = 0 in
equation 31). This reflects the fact that changes in relative quantities are exactly canceled out by
offsetting changes in the terms of trade, as in Cole and Obstfeld (1991). In this case, perfect risk
sharing implies a constant real exchange rate (e(st ) = 1), so that relative stock returns are also
10

More formally, comparing the first order conditions for the domestic agent for domestic and foreign stocks we get
»
–
» ∗ t
–
r(st , st+1 )
r (s , st+1 )
t
Est
=
E
.
s
c(st , st+1 )
c(st , st+1 )

20

equated across countries (the second term in equation 37 drops out). Thus, as in Cole and Obstfeld’s
endowment economy, any portfolio automatically delivers perfect insurance against country-specific
risk, and the equilibrium value for λ is indeterminate.
For ω 6= 0.5, there is a unique equilibrium portfolio defined by equation (24). A lower trade
share (a larger value for ω) implies a lower value for diversification, (1 − λ). The intuition is as
follows. For ω > 0.5, reducing the trade share implies that in response to a positive domestic
productivity shock, the associated increase in domestic investment is increasingly targeted towards
domestic intermediate goods. This attenuates the increase in the relative price of the (relatively
scarce) foreign intermediate good, and magnifies the increase in relative domestic earnings. Thus,
as the import share is reduced, non-diversifiable labor income becomes a more important risk that
agents want to hedge in financial markets. This pushes agents towards more asymmetric portfolios,
which continue to favor the asset (domestic stocks) whose return co-moves negatively with earnings.

3.4

Diversification and labor’s share

Equation (24) indicates that the larger is labor’s share, the stronger is home bias. This is the
opposite of the Baxter and Jermann (1997) result, who found that introducing labor supply made
observed home bias even more puzzling from a theoretical standpoint. Both results are easy to
rationalize. The larger is labor’s share, the larger is the increase in relative domestic earnings
following a positive productivity shock, and thus the greater is the demand for asset’s whose return
co-varies negatively with domestic output. In our economy, that asset is the foreign stock. In the
Baxter and Jermann one-good world, it is the domestic stock.
Van Wincoop and Warnock (2006) emphasize a different force that can also deliver home bias
in two-good models: negative covariance between the real exchange rate and the return differential
between domestic and foreign stocks. If domestic stocks pay a relatively high return in states of
the world in which domestic goods are expensive (i.e. the real exchange rate is low) then, since
domestic residents mostly consume domestic goods, they may prefer to mostly hold domestic stocks.
Note that this effect is not the driver of home bias in our basic set-up. In fact Van Wincoop and
Warnock (2006) show that this mechanism generates home bias only when the coefficient of relative
risk aversion exceeds one. By contrast, our model generates substantial home bias even with risk
aversion equal to one.11 The most important difference between our environment and theirs is that
they abstract from labor income. In the presence of non-diversifiable labor income, portfolio choice
11

We experiment with alternative values for risk aversion in Section 4.2.

21

is driven primarily by the covariance between relative excess stock returns and labor income (rather
than exchange rates). We conclude that abstracting either from imperfect substitutability between
traded goods (as in Baxter and Jermann) or from labor supply (as in van Wincoop and Warnock)
leads to an incomplete account of the theoretical determinants of portfolio choice.

4

Sensitivity Analysis

Three key assumptions are required to deliver our closed-form expression for portfolio choice: first,
that the elasticity of substitution between traded intermediate goods is unity (so that the G functions are Cobb-Douglas); second, that utility is logarithmic in consumption; and third, that there
is only one type of shock. We now experiment with relaxing these assumptions. The main finding
from these experiments is that a strong bias toward domestic assets is a robust feature of this
model: the only case in which home bias disappears is when the elasticity of substitution between
domestic and foreign goods is very high, in which case portfolios resemble those in the one-good
model.
In order to compute equilibrium country portfolios in a general set-up we must fully specify
the remaining parameters of the model, including a stochastic process for productivity shocks.
Most parameters are straightforward to calibrate, since variations on this model have been widely
studied. Here we mostly follow Heathcote and Perri (2004), who show that a similar model economy
can successfully replicate a set of key international business cycle statistics for the U.S. versus an
aggregate of industrial countries over the period 1986-2001. Table 1 below reports the values.

22

Table 1. Parameter values
Preferences
Discount factor

β = 0.99
1+φ

V (.) = v n1+φ

Disutility from labor

v = 9.7,

φ=1

Technology
Capital’s share

θ = 0.34

Depreciation rate

δ = 0.025
1 − ω = 0.15

Import share

Productivity Process

 

 

t
t−1
t
z(s )
0.91 0.00
z(s )
ε(s )

=

+

∗
t
∗
t−1
0.00 0.91
z (s )
z (s )
ε∗ (st )


ε(st )



ε∗ (st )





 ∼ N 

0
0

 
,

0.0062

0.00

0.00

0.0062




We then solve the model numerically, and compute average values for diversification in simulations.12 Solving for equilibria numerically requires a non-standard numerical method, since
standard linearization techniques cannot handle the consumers’ portfolio problem. The numerical
technique we employ is described in detail in Appendix B.

4.1

Elasticity of substitution and risk aversion

The Cobb-Douglas aggregator for producing final goods implies a unitary elasticity of substitution
between the traded goods a and b. This elasticity is towards the low end of estimates used in
the business cycle literature. Panel (a) of figure 2 shows how the average equilibrium level of
diversification changes as the elasticity of substitution, σ, is varied from 0.8 to 2.5, given a CES
aggregator of the form G(a, b) = (ωa

σ−1
σ

+ (1 − ω)b

σ−1
σ

σ

) σ−1 . The main message of the picture is

that for commonly-used elasticities, theory predicts strong (even too strong) home bias. Notice also
that increasing substitutability strengthens home bias within this range of values for σ. The logic
for this result is that the more substitutable are a and b, the less relative prices change in response
to shocks. This means that following a positive domestic shock, the increase in the relative value
12

Note that, in general, the share of foreign assets in wealth need not to be constant.

23

(b)
Average % of wealth in foreign assets

Average % of wealth in foreign assets

(a)
100
0
-100
-200
-300
-400

1

1.5
2
Elasticity of substitution (σ)

2.5

50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20

1

1.5
2
Relative risk aversion (γ)

2.5

Figure 2: International diversification and elasticity of substitution
of domestic labor earnings becomes larger and, at the same time, the decline in relative domestic
stock returns becomes smaller. Thus agents must overweight domestic stocks to an even greater
extent in order to hedge such risks.
For very high elasticities (values for σ exceeding 4), price movements become so small that,
following a positive domestic shock, returns to domestic stocks exceed returns to foreign stocks,
and the correlation between relative labor income and relative domestic stock returns turns positive.
For such high elasticities, the two-good model is sufficiently close to the one-good model that its
portfolio implications are similar. In particular it is optimal for the individual to hedge against
shocks to relative labor income by shorting domestic assets. Thus the average portfolio displays a
very strong - and counter-factual - foreign bias.
Panel (b) of figure 2 shows how diversification changes as we change the coefficient of relative
risk aversion, γ. Notice that higher risk aversion leads to higher home-bias. Changing the risk
aversion coefficient does not impact the two equilibrium relationships (equations 28 and 31) developed in Section 3.1. Changing γ does, however, change the pattern of co-movement between
domestic and foreign consumption consistent with perfect risk-sharing. In particular, since higher
risk aversion corresponds to a lower inter-temporal elasticity of substitution for consumption, γ −1 ,
desired consumption becomes less sensitive to changes in relative prices. Thus in choosing portfolios, agents want to ensure that their total income does not decline too much in periods when
domestic productivity falls and the relative price of domestic consumption increases (e(st ) declines).

24

This pushes agents further towards domestic stocks, whose relative return rises in periods when
domestic productivity and earnings decline.

4.2

Preference shocks and the Backus Smith evidence

In equilibria of our benchmark model, the real exchange rate is perfectly correlated with the ratio
between real domestic consumption and real foreign consumption. To see this consider the impact
in the model of an increase in domestic productivity. This raises domestic relative to foreign
consumption (because of efficient risk sharing and home bias in consumption) and at the same time
causes a depreciation of the exchange rate (because the price of the more abundant domesticallyproduced good falls). This mechanism is actually consistent with a large body of empirical evidence
which studies the response of international relative prices to productivity shocks.13 As Backus and
Smith (1993) first noted, however, for most countries the raw correlation between the real exchange
rate and relative consumption is either close to zero or negative. This failure of the prototypical
international business cycle model is well-known, but it raises the question of whether the model
delivers realistic portfolios only at the cost of counter-factual co-movement between international
relative prices and relative quantities. In this section we argue that this is not the case. In
particular, we modify the basic model to make it consistent with the Backus-Smith evidence, and
then show that the home bias motive remains (in fact it is strengthened).
We begin by noting that when productivity shocks are the only shocks in the model, the high
conditional correlation between relative productivity and the real exchange rate mechanically translates into a high unconditional correlation between relative consumption and the exchange rate.
This suggests that one way to address the Backus-Smith evidence is to simply introduce an additional source of risk, so as to decouple conditional from unconditional correlations. In particular,
we experiment with introducing taste shocks, following Stockman and Tesar (1995), as a simple
reduced-form way to model demand-side shocks.
13

See, for example, Acemoglu and Ventura (2002), Debaere and Lee (2004), and Pavlova and Rigobon (2007).
These papers use different methodologies to identify productivity shocks and find support for this mechanism in a
cross section of countries. For the United States the evidence is more mixed: Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2006) find
no evidence of this mechanism, while Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006) find that in response to US productivity
growth, the US real exchange rate depreciates strongly.

25

We modify the representative agent’s utility functions as follows:
(38)


n(st )1+φ
t
U c(st ), n(st ), ζ(st ) = eζ(s ) ln c(st ) − v
1+φ

∗ t
n∗ (st )1+φ
U c∗ (st ), n∗ (st ), ζ ∗ (st ) = eζ (s ) ln c∗ (st ) − v
1+φ

where the vector of taste shocks [ζ(st ) ζ ∗ (st )] evolves exogenously according to a similar process
to the one we assumed for productivity shocks. In particular, we assume that innovations to taste
shocks are uncorrelated across countries, uncorrelated with innovations to productivity shocks, and
that taste shocks and productivity shocks are equally persistent.
To understand why taste shocks lower the correlation between the real exchange rate and relative
consumption, consider the effect of a positive taste shock in country 1. In response to the shock,
consumers in country 1 will want to increase current consumption and this, because of the home
preference bias in consumption, will raise the world demand for good a. Since productivity in
country 1 (the producer of good a) is unchanged, the price of good a relative to good b will tend to
rise, inducing more labor input in country 1. Thus, in equilibrium, relative consumption and relative
output will increase, while the terms of trade and the real exchange rate will fall, inducing a negative
conditional correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange rate. Since productivity
shocks induce a positive conditional correlation, the equilibrium unconditional correlation between
relative consumption and the real exchange rate will depend on the relative volatility of the two
types of risk.
Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows how the correlation changes as the volatility of taste shocks is
increased from 0 to 1.2 times the volatility of productivity shocks. Notice that when the volatility
of taste shocks is similar to the volatility of productivity shocks, the correlation between the real
exchange rate and relative consumption is close to zero, and thus consistent with the Backus-Smith
evidence.14
Panel (b) of the figure shows the crucial part of this experiment: how does the equilibrium
average share of foreign assets change as we increase the size of taste shocks? The panel shows that
the larger are taste shocks, the stronger is the bias toward domestic assets. This indicates that do14

It is also easy to assess how taste shocks affect standard business cycle statistics produced by the model. Broadly
speaking, taste shocks mostly affect statistics related to consumption; in particular, relative to models without taste
shocks, they tend to increase volatility of consumption relative to output, to reduce the correlation between domestic
consumption and domestic output, and to lower the international correlation of consumption relative to the one of
output. Even for volatile taste shocks (volatility 1.5 times that of productivity shocks) the statistics generated by
the model are well within the range of corresponding empirical moments for OECD countries.

26

(b) Average percentage of wealth in foreign assets
20

0.8

15

0.6

10
Percentage

Correlation

(a) Correl. between real exchange rate and relative consumption
1

0.4
0.2

5
0

0

-5

-0.2

-10

-0.4
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

-15
0

1.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Volatility of taste shocks (fraction of volatility of productivity shocks)

Figure 3: The role of taste shocks
mestic stocks are a good hedge against taste shocks. To understand why, recall that when domestic
demand increases (ζ(st ) is high), domestically-produced goods become relatively expensive, and
the real exchange rate appreciates. This change in international relative prices raises the relative
return on domestic stocks, which is good news for domestic high-marginal-utility investors. Thus
the same relative price movement that resolves the Backus-Smith puzzle also makes local stocks
even more attractive to investors.

5

Explaining diversification across countries and time

The main analytical result of this paper, summarized in Proposition 1, offers a prediction for the
levels of international diversification we should observe across countries, and establishes a link
between international diversification and the trade share. In this section, we take these predictions
to the data in order to assess the extent to which our model can shed light on the patterns of
international diversification that we see across countries and over time. The first issue we need to
confront is that our model focuses on a world with two symmetric countries, while international
diversification data are drawn from countries which are heterogenous in many dimensions, including
size, level of development, and the extent of financial liberalization. One possible way to deal with
this issue would be to enrich our basic model to include many heterogenous countries and to then
bring such a model to the data; we view that as an interesting project, but one that is beyond the

27

scope of this paper.15
Here we address the issue in two ways. First, we restrict our empirical analysis to a relatively
homogenous and financially liberalized group of countries: high income economies (as classified
by the World Bank) over the period 1990-2004. Second, within this group, we assess whether
factors omitted in the model, such as size or level of development, are important empirical factors
in explaining diversification patterns.

5.1

Data

Taking the reciprocal of the expression in Proposition 1 we obtain
(39)

1
1
= 2θ + (1 − θ)
,
1−λ
1−ω

which is a linear relationship between the reciprocal of diversification, 1/(1 − λ), and the reciprocal
of the trade share, 1/(1 − ω). Our measure of international diversification in the model, 1 − λ, is
both the ratio of gross foreign assets to wealth and the ratio of gross foreign liabilities to wealth.
Thus to construct empirical measures of diversification we need data on gross foreign assets, gross
foreign liabilities, and total country wealth. We obtain data on total gross foreign assets (F A)
and total gross foreign liabilities (F L) from the exhaustive dataset collected by Lane and MilesiFerretti (2006). Since ours is a general equilibrium macroeconomic model, it is appropriate to
focus on broad measures of diversification. Thus our empirical measures of both F A and F L
include portfolio equity investment, foreign direct investment, debt (including loans or trade credit),
financial derivatives and reserve assets (excluding gold). We identify total country wealth as the
value of the entire domestic capital stock plus gross foreign assets less gross foreign liabilities:
K + F A − F L. One important issue regarding the capital stock is whether it should be measured
at book value (i.e. by cumulating investment) or at market value (as reflected, for example, in
stock prices). Ideally, one would like to construct a measure of capital that is consistent with the
valuation of foreign assets and foreign liabilities. Unfortunately, values for some asset categories
15

We did experiment with one dimension of heterogeneity. In particular we considered an extension of our main
model in which the two countries differ in terms of population. We then solve this version of the model numerically,
given the parameter values described in Table 1, and compare the average equilibrium level of diversification to
the level predicted by equation 24. We find that, for the smaller economy, the equilibrium level of diversification
exceeds that which would be observed in the corresponding symmetric-size economy, while for the larger economy,
the equilibrium level of diversification is below that which would be prediction by (24), given the country’s import
share. However, these differences are generally small (less than 1%), unless the smaller country is both very open
and very small.

28

(such as foreign direct investment) are constructed using book values, while others (such as portfolio
equity investment) are constructed using market values. In light of this issue we construct two series
for the capital stock. In our baseline approach, we start from the initial capital stock figures in
Dhareshwar and Nehru (1993), and then construct time series by cumulating investments from the
Penn World Tables 6.2 (as, for example, in Kraay et. al. 2006). We label this measure KB . We then
compute an alternative measure of the capital stock, KM , which uses information on stock market
growth to revalue the publicly-traded component of the capital stock.16 We measure international
diversification for country i in period t as
(1 − λ)it =

F Ait + F Lit
.
2 (Kit + F Ait − F Lit )

We measure the trade share for country i in period t, using national income data from the Penn
World Tables 6.2, as
(1 − ω)it =

Importsit + Exportsit
.
2GDPit

The final piece of evidence we need is capital’s share of income, θ. Consistently with evidence
reported in Gollin (2002) we will assume θ to be constant over time and across countries at a value
of 0.34.

5.2

Diversification across countries

In this section we abstract from time variation in diversification, and focus on explaining average
diversification across countries. Figure 4 summarizes our main findings. The circles in the figure
represent the time averages (over the period 1990-2004) for the reciprocal of diversification 1/(1 −
λ)it (computed using KB ) and the reciprocal of the trade share 1/(1 − ω)it for each country in
the group of high income economies for which we have data. Note that there is a great deal
of heterogeneity in both the trade share and the diversification share, with both shares ranging
from around 10% to over 100%. The solid line shows the relationship between these two variables
obtained estimating equation (39) using OLS. The shaded area represents the 95% confidence
band (using heteroscedasticity-corrected standard errors) around the OLS prediction, while the
dashed line is the relationship between trade and diversification implied by the model, assuming
θ = 0.34. The figure suggests that the trade share is an important factor in explaining the variation
16

The construction of both measures of K is discussed in detail in Appendix C

29

1/10%

KOR

Reciprocal of Diversification
1/20%

JPN

1/50%
1/100%

1/30%

NOR
KWT

SGP

BEL NLD
MLT
CYP

ISR
CAN
AUTISL

ITA
GRC
GER

PRT
DNK FINNZL
SWE
CHE

ESP

USA
AUS

FRA

GBR

IRL
LUX
1/100%

1/50%

1/30%

Data

1/20%
Reciprocal of Trade Share
Linear Fit

1/10%

95% CB

Model

Figure 4: Diversification and trade shares: data and model
in international diversification across countries.17 The quantitative predictions from our theory
regarding both the level of diversification and the relation between diversification and trade lie
within two standard deviations of the data estimates.
In Table 2 we report the results of the regression depicted in the picture (column 1), along with
various other robustness checks. In all of these regressions the dependent variable is the reciprocal
of average diversification over the period. Regressions 1, 3 and 5 include only a constant and the
reciprocal of the trade share as independent variables, while regressions 2, 4 and 6 also include,
as controls, the log of average GDP per capita (PPP adjusted) and the log of average population.
Regressions 1 through 4 use diversification measures computed our benchmark measure of the
capital stock (constructed cumulating investment), while regressions 5 and 6 use the capital stock
measure that incorporates stock market information. Finally, regressions 3 and 4 (LAD) compute
17

Portes and Rey (2003) and Collard et al. (2007) also highlight a strong empirical relation between trade in assets
and trade in goods.

30

the coefficients by minimizing absolute deviations. These results are less sensitive to outliers.
The first row reports the coefficient on the reciprocal of the trade share, as estimated in the
data (the first six columns) and as predicted by the model (the last column). Notice that in all
cases the coefficient is significantly different from zero (at the 1% level) confirming the strong link
between trade and financial diversification. Quantitatively the coefficients estimated empirically
are not far from the one predicted by the model: in all specifications except (5) one cannot reject
at the 5% significance level the hypothesis that the coefficient estimated in the data is equal to
the one predicted by the model. The second and third rows assess the effect of GDP per capita
and size on international diversification. Our symmetric model is silent about the effects of those
variables; nevertheless it is interesting to assess i) whether these variables are indeed statistically
correlated with diversification, and ii) whether the relation between trade and diversification is
affected by the inclusion of these variables. In particular, since it is well known that small countries
and rich countries tend to trade more, one might wonder whether trade matters for diversification
only to the extent that trade proxies for size or GDP per capita. The numbers in the table do not
support this conjecture. Rather, columns 2, 4 and 6 indicate that size and GDP per capita are not
statistically related to diversification, as long as the openness variable is retained.18 Furthermore,
the statistical and economic significance of the relationship between diversification and trade is
largely unaffected by whether or not these additional controls are included.
The row labeled “Predicted median diversification” in Table 2 reports the predicted diversification for a hypothetical country with the median value of the independent variables, based on the
regressions and on the relationship implied by the model. The numbers in this row indicate that the
prediction of the theory for this median economy is statistically close to the level of diversification
observed in the data (for specification 1 this result could have been anticipated simply by looking
at Figure 4 and noticing that the model line lies within the shaded area). Finally, the R2 figures
in the last row suggest that differences in openness to trade can alone explain between 30 and 40
percent of cross-country variation in portfolio diversification.
We conclude that the predictions of the model regarding the level of diversification and the
relationship between diversification and trade are qualitatively and quantitatively helpful for understanding the cross-section of country portfolios in developed economies. Of course, a significant
18

This result crucially hinges on the fact that we have selected a group of fairly homogenous countries. We have
also repeated the analysis for a larger group of countries including developing economies and found that, although
the strong link between trade and diversification remains, income per capita becomes an important determinant of
diversification, with richer countries being more diversified.

31

Table 2. Cross-sectional regressions
Dependent variable is reciprocal of diversification, 1/(1 − λ)i
OLS, KB

1/openness

LAD, KB

OLS, KM

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.54†
(0.16)

0.48†
(0.17)

0.69†
(0.11)

0.59†
(0.24)

0.45
(0.08)

0.41†
(0.13)

Log GDP per capita

-2.05
(1.48)

-0.72
(1.02)

-1.49
(1.02)

Log population

0.09
(0.26)

0.05
(0.27)

0.06
(0.23)

Predicted median diversif.
Observations
R2

0.41†
(0.04)

0.43†
(0.04)

0.45†
(0.06)

0.50†
(0.08)

0.41†
(0.04)

0.42†
(0.04)

29
0.38

29
0.44

29
0.30

29
0.33

29
0.39

29
0.43

Model
θ = 0.34

0.66

0.40

Note: numbers in parentheses are heteroscedasticity-corrected (for the OLS specifications) standard errors. Bold statistics
are significantly different from zero at the 1% level. A † superscript on a data statistic indicates that the corresponding
model statistic lies within the two standard deviation band around the data

fraction of heterogeneity in diversification is not explained by our model, reflecting the reality that
countries differ in multiple dimensions in addition to openness. For example, the fact that United
Kingdom and Luxembourg are excessively diversified from the standpoint of the theory (see Figure
4) is probably related to those countries’ special positions as international financial centers.

5.3

Diversification over time

In this section we explore the panel dimension of our dataset to assess whether our framework can
also be used to understand the evolution of international diversification in recent years. Strictly
speaking, diversification does not change over time in equilibria of our baseline model. However,
suppose that between period t and period t+k country i experienced an unexpected and permanent
change in ω, the parameter which determines the trade share. Then equation (39) would hold in
both periods, and taking differences would imply

(40)

1
1−λ




−
i,t+k

1
1−λ

"


= (1 − θ)
i,t

1
1−ω




−
i,t+k

1
1−ω

 #
.
i,t

Thus changes over time in the reciprocal of diversification for a country should be linearly related
to changes over time in the reciprocal of its trade share. In order to focus on changes in the trade

32

share in the data that are (possibly) persistent and unanticipated, we examine changes over five year
intervals.19 In Table 3 we explore whether equation (40) can shed light on changes in diversification
over time in our sample of countries. Regressions 1 through 3 use diversification constructed using
our benchmark capital measure KB , while regressions 4 through 6 use our alternative capital
measure, KM . In columns 1 and 4 we estimate equation (40) directly, including a constant in the
regressions. The results show that time differences in the reciprocal of openness are indeed linearly
related to time differences in the reciprocal of diversification. The estimated regression coefficients
are not statistically different from the one predicted by the model.
Table 3. Changes regression
Dependent variable is change in the reciprocal of diversification
OLS, KB

Model
θ = 0.34

OLS, KM

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.98†
(0.17)

1.06
(0.18)

0.94
(0.09)

0.65†
(0.13)

0.75†
(0.14)

0.65†
(0.08)

Change in log GDP pc

-2.68
(0.81)

-1.46
(0.64)

-2.50
(0.84)

-1.76
(0.95)

Change in log pop.

0.57
(1.56)

-2.46
(1.35)

1.15
(1.64)

-2.01
(3.38)

Change in 1/openness

0.16
(0.01)
No

0.16
(0.01)
No

Observations

279

R2

0.20

Predicted median divers. change
Country & period dummies

Yes

0.15
(0.01)
No

0.15
(0.01)
No

Yes

279

279

279

279

279

0.24

0.77

0.12

0.18

0.72

0.66

0.02

Note: numbers in parentheses are heteroscedasticity corrected standard errors. Bold statistics are significantly different
from 0 at the 1% level. A data statistic with † indicates that the corresponding model statistic lies within the two
standard deviation band around the data

Columns 2, 3, 5 and 6 add controls to the basic regressions. We find it interesting that even
after including growth in GDP per capita and population and (in specifications 3 and 6) country
and period dummies - and thus allowing for a variety of factors to affect changes in diversification
- the link between trade and diversification remains strongly significant and quantitatively similar
to the link predicted by the model. Finally the row labeled “Predicted median divers. change”
reports the change in diversification (as predicted by the data and by the model) for a hypothetical
19

Specifically, our data points include changes of the relevant variables over all possible five year intervals within
the period 1990-2004, for all 29 countries for which we have data. This gives a total of 279 observations. We have
also conducted the analysis focusing on changes over three and seven year intervals, and found that results are not
significantly affected. These results are available on the authors’ web pages.

33

country whose initial diversification and whose changes in trade openness and other independent
variables are equal to their respective median values in the sample.20 Note that the data (columns
1, 2, 4 and 5) predict a sizeable increase in diversification (around 15%) for this median country,
while the model, in which increased diversification stems only from increased trade, predicts a much
smaller increase (around 2%).
To summarize, the data suggest that growth in trade is linked to growth in diversification, and
this link is qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with the link predicted by our model. At the
same time, in the context of our model, the observed growth in trade over the period 1990-2004 can
only explain slightly more than ten percent of the increase in international diversification we have
observed over the same period. Investigating the causes of the unexplained growth in diversification
is an interesting direction for future research.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we have shown that standard macroeconomic theory predicts patterns for international
portfolio diversification that are broadly consistent with those observed empirically in recent years.
The economic model we used to generate theoretical predictions for portfolio choice was a standard
two-country two-good version of the stochastic growth model that has been widely used in business
cycle research. We conclude that, from the perspective of standard macroeconomic theory, the
observed bias towards domestic assets is not a puzzle. We have explored the economics underlying
this result, and argued that the dynamics of investment and international relative price movements,
elements which have been largely overlooked in the existing literature on portfolio choice, are central
to understanding portfolio choice.
Important questions remain. In our analysis we have focussed primarily on the predictions of our
model for portfolio diversification. However, it is well known that it is difficult to reconcile many
features of asset prices with the predictions of stochastic general equilibrium production economies.
For example, relative to the predictions of our model, actual stock prices and real exchange rates
appear excessively volatile. A general equilibrium theoretical resolution of these pricing puzzles is
required to bridge the gap between the macroeconomic theory and empirical finance literatures on
portfolio choice. A somewhat less ambitious task for future work is to build a multi-country version
20

Specifically, the median value for initial diversification (across countries and five year periods) is 29% (for both
definitions of capital), the median (annualized) change in trade share is 0.33%, and the median (annualized) growth
in GDP per capita and population are 3.7% and 0.5% respectively.

34

of the model which allows for multi-lateral trade in goods, and multi-lateral diversification in assets.
Such a model would lead to a better understanding of the separate roles of size and openness in
understanding portfolio diversification. It would also generate richer predictions linking trading
patterns to distributions of foreign assets and liabilities by country.

References
[1] Acemoglu, D., and J. Ventura, 2002, The world income distribution, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 659-694.
[2] Amadi, A., and P. Bergin, 2006, Understanding international portfolio diversification and
turnover rates, Working paper, UC Davis.
[3] Backus, D.K., P.J. Kehoe, and F.E. Kydland, 1992, International real business cycles, Journal
of Political Economy 101, 745-775.
[4] Backus, D.K., P.J. Kehoe, and F.E. Kydland, 1995, International business cycles: theory and
evidence, in: T. Cooley, ed., Frontiers of business cycle research (Princeton University Press,
Princeton) 331-356.
[5] Backus, D.K., and G. Smith, 1993, Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic exchange
economies with non-traded goods, Journal of International Economics 35, 297-316.
[6] Basu, S., J.G. Fernald and M.S. Kimball, 2006, Are technology improvements contractionary?,
American Economic Review 96(5), 1418-1448.
[7] Baxter, M., and U. Jermann, 1997, The international diversification puzzle is worse than you
think, American Economic Review 87(1), 170-180.
[8] Baxter, M., U. Jermann, and R.G. King, 1998, Non-traded goods, non-traded factors, and
international non-diversification, Journal of International Economics 44(2), 211-229.
[9] Beck T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2000, A new database on financial development
and structure, World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.
[10] Bottazzi, L., P. Pesenti, and E. van Wincoop, 1996, Wages, profits and the international
portfolio puzzle, European Economic Review 40(2), 219-254.
[11] Brainard, W.C., and J. Tobin, 1992, On the internationalization of portfolios, Oxford Economic
Papers 44, 533-565.
[12] Cantor, R., and N.C. Mark, 1988, The international transmission of real business cycles,
International Economic Review 29(3), 493-507.
[13] Coeurdacier, N., 2006, Do trade costs in goods markets lead to home bias in equities?, Working
paper, ESSEC Business School.
[14] Coeurdacier, N., and S. Guibaud, 2006, A dynamic equilibrium model of imperfectly integrated
financial markets, Working paper, ESSEC Business School.
35

[15] Cole, H.L., 1988, Financial structure and international trade, International Economic Review
29(2), 237-259.
[16] Collard, F., H. Dellas, B. Diba, and A. Stockman, 2007, Home bias in goods and assets,
Working paper, CNRS-GREMAQ.
[17] Cole, H.L., and M. Obstfeld, 1991, Commodity trade and international risk sharing, Journal
of Monetary Economics 28, 3-24.
[18] Corsetti, G., L. Dedola and S. Leduc, 2006 Productivity, external balance and exchange rates:
evidence on the transmission mechanism among G7 countries, NBER Working Paper 12483.
[19] Debaere, P., and H. Lee, 2004, The real side determinants of countrys’ terms of trade: A panel
data analysis, Working paper, University of Texas.
[20] Dhareshwar A., and V. Nehru, 1993, A new database on physical capital stock: sources,
methodology and results, Revista de Analisis Economico 8, 37-59.
[21] Devereux, M., and A. Sutherland, 2006, Solving for country portfolios in open economy macro
models, Working paper, University of British Columbia.
[22] Engel, C. and A. Matsumoto, 2006, Portfolio choice in a monetary open-economy DSGE model,
Working paper, University of Wisconsin.
[23] Evans, M. and Hnatkovska, V., 2007, Solving general equilibrium models with incomplete
markets and many financial assets, Working paper, Georgetown University.
[24] Gehrig, T., 1993, An informational-based explanation of the domestic bias in international
equity investments, Scandivanian Journal of Economics 95(1), 97-109.
[25] Gollin D., 2002, Getting income shares right, Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 458-474
[26] Gomme, P., and P. Klein, 2006, Second-order approximation of dynamic models without the
use of tensors, Working paper, University of Western Ontario.
[27] Hatchondo, J.C., 2005, Asymmetric information and the lack of international portfolio diversification, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
[28] Heathcote, J., and F. Perri, 2002, Financial autarky and international business cycles, Journal
of Monetary Economics, 49(3), 601-627.
[29] Heathcote, J., and F. Perri, 2004, Financial globalization and real regionalization, Journal of
Economic Theory 119(1), 207-243.
[30] Heston A., R. Summers, and B. Aten, 2006, Penn World Table Version 6.2, Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.
[31] Hnatkovska, V., 2005, Home bias and high turnover: Dynamic portfolio choice with incomplete
markets, Working paper, University of British Columbia.
[32] Jeske, K., 2001, Equity home bias: Can Information cost explain the puzzle?, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta Economic Review.
36

[33] Julliard, C., 2002, The international diversification puzzle is not worse than you think, Working
paper, LSE.
[34] Julliard, C., 2004, Human capital and international portfolio choice, Working paper, LSE.
[35] Kho, B.C., R.M. Stulz, and F.E. Warnock, 2006, Financial globalization, governance, and the
evolution of the home bias, BIS Working Paper 220.
[36] Kollmann, R., 2006, International portfolio equilibrium and the current account, Working
paper, University of Paris XII.
[37] Kraay A. ,N. Loayza, L. Serven and J. Ventura, 2005, Country portfolios, Journal of the
European Economic Association, 3(4): 914-945
[38] Lane, P. R.and G Milesi-Ferretti (2006). The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004, CEPR Discussion Papers
5644
[39] Lewis, K., 1996, What can explain the apparent lack of international consumption risksharing?, Journal of Political Economy 104(2), 267-297.
[40] Lewis, K., 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of Economic
Literature, XXXVII, 571-608.
[41] Lucas, R.E. Jr, 1982, Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world, Journal of
Monetary Economics 10, 335-359.
[42] Michaelides, A., 2003, International portfolio choice, liquidity constraints, and the home equity
bias puzzle, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28(3), 555-594.
[43] Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff, 2000, The six major puzzlies in international macroeconomcis:
Is there a common cause?, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 15, eds. Bernanke and Rogoff,
339-390.
[44] Palacios-Huerta, I., 2001, The human capital of stockholders and the international diversification puzzle, Journal of International Economics, 54(2), 309-331.
[45] Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon, 2007, Asset prices and exchange rates, Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.
[46] Pesenti, P., and E. van Wincoop, 2002, Can nondurables generate substantial home bias?,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 34(1), 25-50.
[47] Portes, R., and H. Rey, 2005, The determinants of cross-border equity flows, Journal of International Economics 65, 269-296.
[48] Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe, 2004, Solving dynamic general equilibrium models using a
second-order approximation to the policy function, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
28, 645-658.

37

[49] Stockman, A., and L. Tesar, 1995, Tastes and technology in a two-country model of the business
cycle: Explaining international comovements, American Economic Review, 85(1),168-185.
[50] Tesar, L., 1993, International risk-sharing and non-traded goods, Journal of International
Economics 35, 69-89.
[51] Tille, C., and E. van Wincoop, 2007, International capital flows, Working paper, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
[52] Uppal, R., 1993, A general equilibrium model of international portfolio choice, Journal of
Finance XLVIII(2), 529-553.
[53] van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp, 2007, Information immobility and the home bias
puzzle, Working paper, NYU.
[54] van Wincoop, E., and F. Warnock, 2006, Is home bias in assets related to home bias in goods?,
Working paper, University of Virginia.

38

Appendix A. Proof of proposition 1

Let G(st ) and F (st ) be compact notations for G(a(st ), b(st )) and F z(st ), k(st−1 ), n(st ) .
The equations that characterize a solution to the planner’s problem are:
1. First order conditions for hours:
ωG(st ) (1 − θ)F (st )
+ Un (st ) ≥ 0
a(st )
n(st )
ωG∗ (st ) (1 − θ)F ∗ (st )
Uc∗ (st ) ∗ t
+ Un∗ (st ) ≥ 0
b (s )
n∗ (st )
Uc (st )

2. First order conditions for allocating intermediate goods across countries:
Uc (st )ωG(st )/a(st ) = Uc∗ (st )(1 − ω)G∗ (st )/a∗ (st )
Uc (st )(1 − ω)G(st )/b(st ) = Uc∗ (st )ωG∗ (st )/b∗ (st )

3. First order conditions for investment:


t
t
X
e t) =
e t , st+1 ) ωG(s , st+1 ) θF (s , st+1 ) + (1 − δ)
Q(s
Q(s
a(st , st+1 )
k(st )
st+1 ∈S


X
ωG∗ (st , st+1 ) θF ∗ (st , st+1 )
∗ t
∗ t
e
e
+ (1 − δ)
Q (s ) =
Q (s , st+1 )
b∗ (st , st+1 )
k ∗ (st )
st+1 ∈S

where
e t) =
Q(s
e ∗ (st ) =
Q

1
1
(1 − ω) G∗ (st ) a(st )
π(st )β t Uc (st ) + π(st )β t Uc∗ (st )
2
2
ω
G(st ) a∗ (st )
1
1
ω
G(st ) a∗ (st )
π(st )β t Uc∗ (st ) + π(st )β t Uc (st )
2
2
(1 − ω) G∗ (st ) a(st )

4. Resource constraints of the form (21) and (22).
Consider the set of allocations that satisfies this set of equations, i.e. the solution to the planner’s
problem. We now show there exists a set of prices at which these same allocations also satisfy the set
of equations defining equilibrium in the stock trade economy (see Section 2.5), given the portfolios
described in equation (24). In other words, we can decentralize the complete markets allocations
with asset trade limited to two stocks and constant portfolios.
Let intermediate-goods prices be given by equations (20). Then condition (1) for the stock trade
economy is satisfied. Let wages be given by equations (15) and (16). Then condition (2) for the
stock trade economy is satisfied. Substituting these prices into condition (1) from the planner’s
problem gives condition (3) for the stock trade economy. Let the real exchange rate by given by
39

equation (5). Then combining conditions (2) and (3) from the planner’s problem gives condition
(4) for the stock trade economy. Condition (4) from the planner’s problem translates directly into
conditions (5) and (6) for the stock trade economy. Condition (7) - stock market clearing - follows
immediately from the symmetry of the candidate stock purchase rules.
Condition (8) is that households’ budget constraints are satisfied. Given constant portfolios,
the domestic household’s budget constraint simplifies to
c(st ) = qa (st )w(st )n(st ) + λd(st ) + (1 − λ)e(st )d∗ (st )
Substituting in the candidate function for w(st ), the resource constraint for intermediate goods,
and the definitions for dividends (and suppressing the state-contingent notation) gives
c = qa (1 − θ)(a + a∗ ) + λ (qa θ(a + a∗ ) − x) + (1 − λ)e (qb∗ θ(b + b∗ ) − x∗ )
Using the candidate expression for the real exchange rate gives
c = (1 − θ + λθ) (qa a + eqa∗ a∗ ) − λx + (1 − λ)θ (qb b + eqb∗ b∗ ) − (1 − λ)ex∗
Now using the candidate expressions for intermediate goods prices and collecting terms gives
c = [ω + (1 − λ)(θ − 2ωθ)] G + e [(1 − ω) − (1 − λ) (θ − 2ωθ)] G∗ − λx − (1 − λ)ex∗
Using the resource constraint for final goods firms gives
G = [ω + (1 − λ)(θ − 2ωθ)] G + e [(1 − ω) − (1 − λ) (θ − 2ωθ)] G∗
+(1 − λ)(G − c) − (1 − λ)e(G∗ − c∗ )
Given the candidate expression for the real exchange rate, and exploiting the assumption that
utility is logarithmic in consumption, condition (2) for the planners problem implies
c = ec∗ .
Thus the budget constraint can be rewritten as
G = [ω + (1 − λ)(1 + θ − 2ωθ)] G + e [(1 − ω) − (1 − λ) (1 + θ − 2ωθ)] G∗
Finally substituting in the candidate expression for λ confirms that the domestic consumer’s budget
constraint is satisfied. The foreign consumer’s budget constraint is satisfied by Walras’ Law.
Condition (9) is the households’ inter-temporal first order conditions for stock purchases. Substituting condition (2) from the planner’s problem into condition (3), the planner’s first order
conditions for investment may be rewritten as


X
ωG(st , st+1 ) θF (st , st+1 )
t
t
t
Uc (s ) = β
π(st+1 |s )Uc (s , st+1 )
+ (1 − δ)
a(st , st+1 )
k(st )
st+1 ∈S


X
ωG∗ (st , st+1 ) θF ∗ (st , st+1 )
∗ t
t
∗ t
Uc (s ) = β
π(st+1 |s )Uc (s , st+1 )
+ (1 − δ)
b∗ (st , st+1 )
k ∗ (st )
st+1 ∈S

40

Multiplying both sides of the first (second) of these two equations by k(st ) (k ∗ (st )) gives


X
ωG(st , st+1 )
t
t
t
t
t
t
Uc (s )k(s ) = β
π(st+1 |s )Uc (s , st+1 )
θF (s , st+1 ) + (1 − δ)k(s )
a(st , st+1 )
st+1 ∈S


X
ωG∗ (st , st+1 ) ∗ t
∗ t
∗ t ∗ t
t
∗ t
θF (s , st+1 ) + (1 − δ)k (s )
π(st+1 |s )Uc (s , st+1 )
Uc (s )k (s ) = β
b∗ (st , st+1 )
st+1 ∈S

Let stock prices by given by
(41) P (st ) = k(st ), P ∗ (st ) = k ∗ (st )

∀t, st .

Substituting these candidate prices for stocks, the prices for intermediate goods, the wage, and the
expressions for dividends into the planner’s first order conditions for investment gives the domestic
household’s first order condition for domestic stock purchases, and the foreign household’s first
order condition for foreign stock purchases. The remaining two first-order conditions for stock
purchases follow immediately by substituting condition (2) from the planner’s problem into these
two conditions.

Appendix B. Computational algorithm
Here we describe the algorithm that allows us to solve for equilibrium portfolio holdings in the
generalized version of the model described in Section 4. By generalized, we mean parameterizations
for which Proposition 1 does not apply, and for which portfolios must be characterized numerically.
Our algorithm can be used to solve for equilibria in more general international macro models with
portfolio choice, and thus it complements the recent work of Devereux and Sutherland (2006), Tille
and van Wincoop (2007), and Evans and Hnatkovska (2007). Matlab programs that implement
this algorithm are available on the authors websites. We now outline the steps of the algorithm
Step 1. Pick a non-stochastic symmetric steady state equilibrium (i.e. an equilibrium in which
agents know that productivities z(st ), z ∗ (st ) are constant and equal to 0). We denote such a steady
state with the vector [λH , λ∗F , X, Y ], where λH , λ∗F ∈ R are the fractions of local stocks held by
home and foreign residents, respectively, X ∈ Rn is the vector of non portfolio state variables (i.e.
productivities and capital stock.).while Y ∈ Rm is the vector of non portfolio control variables (i.e.
consumption, investment, terms of trade etc.). Notice that first order conditions plus symmetry
uniquely pin down X and Y , while any value λ0 = λH = λ∗F is a non-stochastic symmetric steady
state equilibrium.
Step 2. Compute decision rules λH,t+1 = g1 (λH,t , λ∗F,t , Xt ), λH ∗ ,t+1 = g2 (λH,t , λ∗F,t , Xt ), Xt+1 =
g3 (λH,t , λ∗F,t , Xt , εt+1 ), Yt = g4 (λH,t , λ∗F,t , Xt ) that characterize the solution to a second-order approximation of the stochastic economy around the steady state. The functions g1 , g2 , g3 , and g4
are quadratic forms in their arguments and can be computed using the methods described by
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004) or Gomme and Klein (2006) among others. Note that in order to
apply those method here it is necessary to slightly modify the model by adding a small adjustment
cost for changing the portfolio from its steady state value. This step yields decision rules for all
variables (including portfolio decisions) that are correct up to a second-order approximation, in
a neighborhood of the steady state around which the economy is linearized. However, we do not
yet know whether the steady state portfolio λ0 we started with is equal to the average equilibrium
41

portfolio in the true stochastic economy.
Step 3: Starting from our guess for the steady state, simulate the model for a large number
of periods using the decision rules from Step 2, and compute the average share of wealth held by
domestic agents along the simulation. If this average share is different from the initial steady state
share, we set the new guess for the steady state portfolio, λ1 , equal to the average simulated share
and return to Step 1. If the simulated average is equal (up to a small tolerance error) to the initial
steady state λ0 , then λ0 constitutes a good approximation of the long run portfolio holdings and
we take it as the solution to our portfolio problem.
As a test, we apply this method to our benchmark parameterization and to the one-good model
of Baxter and Jermann (for both these cases we know the true portfolio solution). In both cases our
algorithm converges very rapidly to the true solution, regardless of the initial guess. We also find
that the portfolio adjustment costs can be set to an arbitrarily small (but positive) number, such
that changing the size of these costs locally (e.g. doubling their size) does not affect the solution.
Appendix C. Data
The countries we use in our analysis in Section 6 are the high income economies (as classified by
the World Bank) for which have foreign asset position and capital stock data. This group includes
the following 29 countries (the codes used in Figure 5 are in parentheses) Australia (AUS), Austria
(AUT), Belgium (BEL), Canada (CAN), Cyprus (CYP), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN), France
(FRA), Germany (GER), Greece (GRC), Iceland (ISL), Ireland (IRL), Israel (ISR), Italy (ITA),
Japan (JPN), Korea (KOR), Kuwait (KWT), Luxembourg (LUX), Malta (MLT), Netherlands
(NLD), New Zealand (NZL), Norway (NOR), Portugal (PRT), Singapore (SGP), Spain (ESP),
Sweden (SWE), Switzerland (CHE), United Kingdom (GBR), United States (USA). The data on
gross international diversification positions (total foreign assets and foreign liabilities) are in US
dollars and are from Lane and Milesi Ferretti (2006).
We denote by KB,i,t our baseline measure (in US Dollars) for the capital stock in country i in
period t. We construct KB,i,t by multiplying GDP in US dollars (as reported by Lane and Milesi
Ferretti, 2006) by the capital-output ratio. The capital-output ratio is computed as follows: in
1989 we take it directly from Dhareshwar and Nehru (1993), who report both physical capital stock
and GDP figures. After 1989 we construct the capital-output ratio in period t + 1 for country i,

k
using the following recursion:
y
i,t+1

 


 
 
yi,t+1
k
x
k
= (1 − δ)
+
y i,t+1
yi,t
y i,t
y i,t
where



yi,t+1
yi,t



is the growth rate of GDP for country i (PPP adjusted, in constant prices (chain
 
method) from the Penn World Tables (PWT) 6.2), xy
is the ratio between investment and GDP
i,t

(both PPP adjusted, in current prices, from PWT 6.2), δ is the depreciation rate which, in the
absence of better information, we set equal to 6% (this value is also used by Kraay et al. 2005) for
all countries and for all years.
Given KB,i,t , we can derive a panel for our alternative measure of capital, KM,i,t The idea
behind this alternative measure is that part of the capital stock of a country is comprised of assets
of firms quoted on the stock market, and thus we can measure the growth of the value of this
capital simply by measuring the growth of stock prices. For the remaining (non-publicly-traded)
42

portion of the capital stock we simply assume the same growth rate as for our baseline measure
KB,i,t More specifically, we assume that in 1989 KM,i,t = KB,i,t , while for the subsequent years we
use the following recursion:
KM,i,t+1 = (KM,i,t − Si,t )g(KB,i,t ) + Si,t g(Pi,t )
where Si,t is the value of the stock market in country i at year t (from Beck et. al., 2000), g(KB,i,t )
is the growth rate of the baseline capital stock in country i, and g(Pi,t ) is the growth rate for stock
prices in country i (computed using the growth rate of the Morgan Stanley Capital International
(MSCI) index for country i). For five countries in our sample (Cyprus, Iceland, Kuwait, Malta and
Luxembourg) we do not have the MSCI country index, and so we simply replace g(Pi,t ) with the
growth rate of the total stock market value, g(Si,t ). The complete dataset is available online on the
authors websites.

43

