NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK TOLERANCE AND ALCOHOL DEMAND AMONG ADULTS AND OLDER
ADULTS
Dhaval Dave
Henry Saffer
Working Paper 13482
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13482

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. We wish to thank Michael Grossman and session participants
at the International Health Economics Association World Congress 2005 for valuable suggestions,
and Li Ma for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Dhaval Dave and Henry Saffer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Risk Tolerance and Alcohol Demand Among Adults and Older Adults
Dhaval Dave and Henry Saffer
NBER Working Paper No. 13482
October 2007
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
This study has two primary goals. These are the examination of the effect of risk tolerance on individuals'
demand for alcohol and second, the examination of the demand for alcohol by older adults over the
age of 55. The data sets employed are multiple waves from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). While risk tolerance can impact the level of alcohol consumption,
it may also affect the sensitivity of demand to prices. There are parallels between the economist's and
the psychologist's concept of risk tolerance. Research on attitudes towards risk by psychologists is
part of a larger theoretical and empirical literature on personality traits. Psychologists have found risk
tolerance to be an important determinant of alcohol consumption. The empirical results indicate that
risk aversion has a significant negative effect on alcohol consumption, with the prevalence and consumption
among risk-tolerant individuals being six to eight percent higher. Furthermore, the tax elasticity is
similar across both risk-averse and risk-tolerant individuals. This suggests that tax policies may be
effective in deterring alcohol consumption even among those who have a higher propensity for alcohol
use. The significance of research on alcohol demand by individuals ages 55 and older is highlighted
by the increased potential for alcohol-related adverse consequences among this demographic group.
Comparing younger adults (ages 21-54) with older adults, responses to taxes and prices are higher
among the older sub-population. The tax elasticity is estimated at -0.05 for younger adults, compared
to -0.20 for older adults.
Dhaval Dave
Bentley College
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
Henry Saffer
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
hsaffer@gc.cuny.edu

I.

Introduction
Over 55 percent of the U.S. adult population are current drinkers.1 While the overall prevalence

rate has remained relatively stable over the past decade, there is some evidence that problematic
drinking may be on the rise (Figures 1-3). Data from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions indicate that the number of adults with an alcohol abuse or dependence disorder has
increased by 14 percent between 1991-1992 and 2001-2002, adjusting for population growth (Grant et
al., 2004). There is extensive literature documenting the association between such excessive drinking
and lost productivity, crime and violence, injuries, and premature mortality.2 In 2000, there were a total of
140,000 alcohol-attributable deaths, making alcohol consumption the third leading cause of mortality
behind smoking and poor diet or inactivity (Mokdad at al., 2004). Alcohol-related morbidity also imposes
considerable strain on the public healthcare system. Among the uninsured, hospital stays related to
alcohol abuse comprise the fourth most common reason for hospitalization, and a quarter of all alcoholrelated stays involve Medicaid patients (Owens et al., 2007). Estimates place the overall economic costs
of alcohol abuse at $228 billion annually.3 Amidst these concerns, the public sector has regulated the
sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages through taxation, controls over distribution and availability,
and use restrictions.
While there is a large literature examining the demand for alcohol, there remain several gaps that
may further inform on the effectiveness of public policies aimed at controlling alcohol consumption. This
study revisits the demand for alcohol, addressing some of these gaps and extending the literature in two
novel aspects. The first is the inclusion of risk preference in the demand for alcohol. There is some
common ground between how economists and psychologists view risk preference. This links the
economic concept of risk to a larger literature on personality characteristics. Cutler and Glaeser (2005)
show that unobserved heterogeneity across individuals accounts for most of the variance in alcohol
consumption and other unhealthy behaviors. Typically, in studies of alcohol demand (as well as of other
risky behaviors or health investments), out of necessity, such differences are subsumed in the residual
without further consideration, due to lack of information.

1

Calculation from the 2006 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.
See NIAAA (2000), and Parker and Auerhahn (1998) for a review of these studies.
3
This estimate is based on the cost-of-illness approach conducted by Harwood (2000). The estimated
costs in 1998 amount to $184.6 billion, which in current 2006 dollars comprise $228 billion.
2

1

This study explicitly considers the confounding effect of preferences towards risk-taking in the
alcohol demand function, utilizing unique data on risk tolerance from two large-scale population surveys:
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Research on
risk tolerance by psychologists links the economist’s concept to a larger theoretical and empirical
literature on personality traits (Vlek and Stallen, 1980), and shows that attitude towards risk may also be
an important predictor of alcohol use and other addictive behaviors. Thus, incorporating risk tolerance in
the demand function may improve the estimation process.
Accounting for risk tolerance may also inform on any differential effects of prices and policy on
alcohol use across heterogeneous sub-populations. The most fundamental law in economics posits that
increases in costs would be expected to lower alcohol consumption. Various econometric studies have
found confirmation of this negatively-sloped demand function for alcohol. However, an estimation of the
average price or policy response for the overall population may mask important differences across
groups. While many individuals regularly consume alcohol without imposing internal or external harm, the
distribution of alcohol consumption in the U.S. is far from uniform.4 Among current drinkers, the top
quintile is responsible for over 65 percent of total alcohol consumption, and the top decile is responsible
for 55 percent of total consumption.5 Since it is immoderate or problem drinking that leads to high social
costs, it is important to determine whether policies are affecting the behavior of target groups most likely
to over-consume alcohol. Dave (2005, 2007), for instance, shows that in the case of illicit drugs, hardcore
users are less price-responsive relative to casual users, which may limit the effectiveness of further
increases in drug prices towards reducing heavy drug use. Data from the HRS indicate that individuals
with the highest level of risk tolerance consume almost 30 percent more alcohol and are 32 percent more
likely to binge, relative to the most risk-averse individuals.6 Guiding effective public policy requires
information on whether the impact of price-based policies differs across groups that significantly differ in
their alcohol consumption. Even if risk tolerance raises participation in risky behaviors, these individuals
may still be relatively price-sensitive, in which case policies that raise the cost of consuming alcohol would
also be effective in reducing use among the heavy users. On the other hand, if tolerance towards risk
4

Indeed this skewness in the distribution of consumption among individuals is the motivation behind the
widespread use of the two-part model with log transformation (Manning et al., 1995).
5
Calculations are based on reported data for total number of drinks consumed in the prior month by
individuals ages 21 and older, from the 2005 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.

2

tempers the effect of prices, then broad cost-based policies may have limited efficacy and more targeted
interventions may be necessary. From an exploratory standpoint, this analysis will also shed light on
whether and if so, by what extent, price responsiveness varies across a fundamental indicator of
personality. There have been no prior studies that have investigated the effects of risk tolerance in the
individual’s alcohol demand function.
The second contribution of this study is a separate focus on older adults. Incorporating
consistent information from the PSID and the HRS allows separate analyses for adults (ages 21-54) and
older adults (age 55+). While alcohol consumption generally declines over the life cycle, younger cohorts
have had increasing prevalence of alcohol consumption particularly at older ages (NIAAA, 2000). For
instance, comparing individuals aged 60 years and older, drinking prevalence is 26.7 percent among
those born between 1924 and1930 versus 36.2 percent among those born between 1931 and 1940.
Figures 1-3 also show that overall alcohol prevalence as well as heavy drinking has generally trended
upwards among older adults over the past decade. Surveys conducted in health-care settings generally
find an increasing prevalence of alcohol-related disorders among the older demographic, in contrast with
general population-based surveys. Looking at elderly hospital admissions, for example, 6 to 11 percent
exhibit symptoms of alcoholism. The rate increases to 14 percent among elderly hospital emergency
department admissions (Council on Scientific Affairs, 1996).
In addition to general alcohol-related harms, older individuals may be particularly susceptible to
other adverse consequences. For instance, aging can increase sensitivity to alcohol-related health
effects due to a reduced tolerance for alcohol (NIAAA, 1998). Equal amounts of alcohol consumption
lead to a higher blood alcohol concentration (BAC) as the individual ages due to a decrease in the
amount of body fluid in which to dilute the alcohol. Reduced tolerance also induces the onset of alcoholrelated effects, such as compromised cognitive and behavioral functioning, at lower doses. Higher use of
prescription medications among the elderly further raises the likelihood of adverse alcohol-related
interactions. Pringle et al. (2005) find that among adults ages 65 and older, 77 percent of prescription
drug users are exposed to medications with potentially adverse interactions with alcohol. Furthermore,
among users of such alcohol-interactive drugs, 19 percent reported concomitant alcohol use. Even after
adjusting for more intensive use of medications, older adults (65+) account for a disproportionately large
6

Binge drinking in the HRS is defined as consuming 4 or more drinks in a single occasion.

3

share of adverse drug reactions (Moore et al., 2007). Despite these concerns, there is very limited
research on alcohol use among the older sub-population. Broad population-based studies show that
alcohol taxes and prices deter use. However, it is not clear whether certain groups of interests have
higher or lower price sensitivity. The aging of the demographic combined with an increased potential for
alcohol-related harms underscores the relevance of examining the demand and price-sensitivity for older
adults.
II.

Relevant Studies
An extensive empirical literature by economists has examined the impact of the price of alcoholic

beverages on consumption. A review of older studies, based on individual-level data, suggests that the
demand for alcohol is responsive to shifts in prices though there is considerable variation in estimates of
the price elasticity (Leung and Phelps, 1993). More recent studies confirm this negative price response,
and further point to important differences among certain demographic groups. Manning et al. (1995),
based on data from a supplement to the 1983 National Health Interview Survey, find that the median
drinker is price responsive, with an estimated elasticity of -1.19; however, the elasticity significantly
decreases in magnitude for the heavy drinkers. In fact, at the 95th percentile of drinkers, they cannot
reject the hypothesis that demand is perfectly inelastic. Kenkel (1996), using the same data, further
shows that the price responsiveness varies considerably and positively with respect to drinking-related
health information. Heavy drinking by the most-informed consumers is much more price elastic than
moderate drinking, while the estimated price elasticities of heavy drinking for the least-informed
consumers are not statistically significant. Chaloupka and colleagues (2002) provide a good review of the
literature looking at the effects of alcohol prices on consumption and indicators of alcohol abuse such as
motor vehicle fatalities, adverse health effects, and violence and crime.
Studies have also considered specific demographic sub-populations and found differences,
though not always consistently, with respect to the price sensitivity. Laixuthai and Chaloupka (1993)
employ data from the 1982 and 1989 Monitoring the Future (MTF) surveys of high school seniors. They
find that for both years, higher beer excise taxes significantly reduced the frequency of drinking as well as
the probability of heavy drinking. Using longitudinal data on youths ages 17-29 from the MTF surveys,
Grossman et al. (1998) apply the rational addiction paradigm of Becker and Murphy (1988) to estimate a
long-run price elasticity of -0.65. Chaloupka and Wechsler (1996) investigate college drinking patterns

4

and find significantly negative price effects for underage drinking and binge drinking among female
students. However, no effects are found for males. Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) utilize data from the
National Household Surveys of Drug Abuse (1988, 1990, and 1991) to estimate differential price
responses for various demographic groups. They find similar price elasticities for the frequency of past
month alcohol use among males and females; however, blacks were found to be less sensitive relative to
other races and especially whites. Cook and Moore (2001) study youth drinking patterns from the
National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY) 1979 cohort. Their results indicate that among youths
between the ages of 17 to 32, the excise tax on beer has a significant deterrent effect on past month
participation though not on bingeing. For some specifications, elasticity estimates suggest that females
may be more price-sensitive. Saffer and Dave (2006) study alcohol consumption among adolescents
based on the MTF and the NLSY-97 data. They find that measures of alcohol participation and bingeing
are responsive to the weighted price of alcohol. Analyses stratified on various demographic
characteristics suggest that the elasticity estimates are larger for females and for whites. While the
literature has focused on the overall population and youths, there have been no studies that have
specifically investigated the price response of older adults.
According to NIAAA (2000), alcohol use and abuse are best viewed as functions of a combination
of genetic, psychological and social influences. Although the association between psychiatric disorders
and alcohol has been widely researched by psychologists (Kessler et al., 1996), there has been little work
in this area by economists. Only one study to date has considered differential demand responses with
respect to mental disorders. Saffer and Dave (2005) estimate the effect of mental illness on the demand
for addictive substances, including alcohol participation. They show that individuals with a history of
mental illness are 26 percent more likely to consume alcohol. Accounting for the endogenous selection of
mental illness, individuals diagnosed with a mental disorder in the past year or in their lifetime are also
found to be more sensitive to alcohol prices relative to healthy individuals. The price elasticity for
individuals with a recent or lifetime mental illness is estimated at -0.49 to -0.63, versus -0.38 for
individuals with no mental illness.
There has been no research that has integrated personality traits into the economist’s alcohol
demand function. Specifically, no prior study has considered the differential response of demand to price
variations, across measures of risk tolerance. Research by psychologists has linked the economist’s

5

concept of risk tolerance to broader aspects of personality.7 For instance, Cloninger’s (1987)
tridimensional personality scale employs as its foundation characteristics measuring an individual’s
propensity towards “harm avoidance,” “novelty seeking,” and “reward dependence” – which closely
resemble the economist’s concept of risk tolerance. Each of these traits is considered moderately
heritable, developmentally and situationally stable, and associated with specific neural systems that
mediate different types of stimulus-response relationships (Menza et al., 1993). Thus, these components
of risk tolerance reflect an underlying biogenic structure of personality that may interact with
environmental stimuli.
Several empirical evaluations have applied the tridimensional model to substance-abusing
populations (Howard et al., 1997). Individuals who score high on “novelty seeking” and low on “harm
avoidance” are more likely to have early onset of alcohol abuse, for instance. These individuals are
defined by Cloninger as confident and danger-seeking, and correspond well to economist’s classification
of individuals who are highly tolerant of risk. While psychologists have long studied the “addiction-prone
personality,”8 this study is the first to incorporate measures of risk tolerance into estimates of the alcohol
demand function and in relationship to the individual’s response to economic factors.
III.

Analytical Framework
One objective of this study is to assess how risk tolerance affects an individual’s alcohol use and

their response to shifts in the price of alcohol. Since alcohol is ultimately a consumer good, this question
can be framed within the context of utility theory with uncertain income.
(1)

U = f ( A , Y; e )

Equation 1 specifies an individual’s utility as a function of alcohol consumption (A) and income Y that can
be used to consume other goods, with exogenous preference parameter (e). The marginal utility of
alcohol consumption is positive and diminishing.9 The positive outcomes associated with alcohol use

7

Research on risk preference by psychologists (Vlek and Stallen, 1980) and by economists (Rabin, 2002)
also tends to overlap to some degree.
8
A recent work of the same title (Barnes et al., 2000) provides an empirical study of the etiology of
alcohol and drug abuse and personality. Findings suggest that there is a causal link between personality
traits and the onset of alcohol abuse.
9
The utility function may also be extended to incorporate the addictive stock accumulated through past
alcohol consumption. This stock has a negative effect on current utility, reflecting tolerance or harmful
addiction, and a positive effect on the current utility, reflecting the reinforcement of past consumption on
current consumption. Expanding the model does not alter the basic conclusions with respect to risk
tolerance.

6

include intoxication and stimulation of the dopamine receptors in the brain’s pleasure center. Moderate
alcohol use can also have positive health effects and improve social functioning. Short-run negative
consequences of drinking include dehydration and gastrointestinal disorders, reduced productivity, an
increased probability of accidental injury including automobile accidents, perpetrating or being a victim of
violence or crime, and sexual abuse. Long-run effects can also include addiction, loss of employment,
problems in interpersonal relationships, and more serious health consequences such as cirrhosis of the
liver and obesity (NIAAA, 2000).
The role of an individual’s tolerance towards risk in the alcohol demand function stems from the
fact that these outcomes are probabilistic rather than known with certainty. The potential positive and
negative effects of alcohol consumption map into a potential set of gains and losses in income or utility.
The consumer maximizes an expected utility function that takes into account these subjective
probabilities and the set of gains and losses.10 Concavity of the expected utility function with respect to
income is equivalent to risk aversion, and the more concave (that is, the higher is the degree of
diminishing marginal utility of income) the more risk averse is the consumer.11 Intuitively, a risk-averse
individual places a higher weight on the loss in income than on an equal sized gain. As the expected
utility function becomes less concave (more convex), the degree of risk aversion declines and the
individual becomes more tolerant of risk. In this case, the weight attached to the potential loss from
alcohol consumption declines, and conversely is shifted towards greater weight on the potential gain from
alcohol consumption. Ceteris paribus, it follows from expected utility maximization that individuals who
are more risk tolerant will have a higher demand for alcohol. Simple correlations generally confirm this
prediction. Andrucci et al. (1989) and Gerra et al. (1999) show that individuals with high levels of noveltyseeking and low levels of harm-avoidance are more likely to abuse substances. Similarly, Barsky et al.
(1997) link increased tolerance towards risk with higher alcohol consumption. However, these studies do
not estimate this link within a demand framework, and do not control for other factors that are correlated
with alcohol use and may be confounding this relationship.
10

For instance, if the individual will experience a decline in income by among L from adverse reactions to
alcohol consumption realized with subjective probability p, then the following expected utility function is
maximized: p*U(Y – L) + (1-p)*U (Y).
11
Risk aversion is therefore a function of the second derivative of the expected utility function, though it
needs to be normalized in order to make the consumer’s behavior invariant to transformation of the
expected utility function. The Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion normalizes the second derivative by

7

The degree of risk aversion may also affect an individual’s response to alcohol price and policy.
Since risk-tolerant individuals are more likely to consume alcohol, and may do so at immoderate levels, it
is important to determine whether public policy prescriptions of higher alcohol taxes would be effective for
this high-use group. In this respect, theory is ambiguous. Generally, price sensitivity depends inversely
on the magnitude of the second derivative of the utility function with respect to alcohol consumption, the
rate at which marginal utility diminishes. The faster the rate of decrease, the less price-sensitive is the
consumer. Since, in its general form, income (and other goods) can interact with alcohol consumption in
the utility function, risk aversion may therefore have an effect on the price elasticity of demand. If
marginal utility of alcohol use diminishes rapidly for risk-tolerant individuals, then they may be less
responsive to price. On the other hand, risk tolerant consumers may have a higher price elasticity if their
rate of diminishing marginal utility is lower. Studies, based on the Cloninger tridimensional scale, have
generally found that two different types of temperaments have a higher propensity for alcohol abuse
(Howard et al., 1997). Type I temperaments have low novelty-seeking, but high harm-avoidance and
reward-dependence characteristics. Type 2 temperaments have high novelty-seeking traits but score low
on harm-avoidance and reward-dependence. Thus, it is difficult to say a priori how marginal utility
diminishes for these consumers, and therefore how they would react to shifts in costs. Due to this
theoretical ambiguity, the nature of the price response for risk tolerant versus risk-averse individuals
remains an empirical question.
Empirical Models
The following specifications will be estimated based on the above discussion.12
(2)

Aist = B0 + B1 Pst + B2 Ris + B3 Yist + B4 Xist + B5 Hist + μs + νt + εist

Equation (2) represents the alcohol demand function for the ith individual residing in state s at year t.
Alcohol consumption (A) depends on prices and policies (P) regulating the sale and consumption of
alcohol, income (Y), and other socio-demographic factors (X) such as age, gender, race, and education,
with ε representing a classical error term. An indicator (R) that dichotomizes individuals as risk averse or
risk tolerant will also be included. Alternative models that contain measures of physical and mental health

dividing it by the first: -U’’(Y) / U”(Y).
12
In the case of dichotomous alcohol participation, models will be estimated via probit. Where measures
on intensity of use are available, models will be estimated for log use conditional on participation, within a
two-part modeling framework. Standard errors are adjusted for correlation at the individual level, using

8

status (H) are also estimated. Studies have found that mental illness raises participation in substance
use including alcohol, consistent with the self-medication hypothesis (Saffer and Dave, 2005). Certain
physical ailments (diabetes, gastrointestinal disorders) or even general poor health may also reduce the
individual’s demand for alcohol. Since the key policy instrument (alcohol taxes) vary at the state level
over time, it is important to control for unobserved state-specific factors and time trends. Specifications
are therefore estimated with a vector of state (μ) and year (ν) fixed effects.13
In order to allow for differential price responses across risk-tolerant and risk-averse individuals,
the above specification can be expanded to include an interaction between the price measure (P) and the
indicator of risk tolerance (R). In some specifications where limited sample size is an issue, differential
price responses are estimated using such an interaction effect. These specifications restrict the effect of
other factors to be the same across groups, while allowing the price effect to differ. However, in general,
a more flexible formulation based on sample stratification is followed to allow for differences in all
parameters across risk tolerance.
(3)

Aist | Risk Averse = B0 + B1 Pst + B2 Yist + B3 Xist + B4 Hist + μs + νt + εist

(4)

Aist | Risk Tolerant = α0 + α1 Pst + α2 Yist + α3 Xist + α4 Hist + γs + δt + ηist

Comparison of the parameters (B1) and (α1) informs on whether risk-tolerant individuals are more or less
sensitive to price changes, relative to risk-averse individuals.
IV.

Data

Panel Study of Income Dynamics
The empirics are based on two large-scale population surveys, the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics and the Health and Retirement Study. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is a
longitudinal study of a representative sample of individuals and their family units, conducted by the
Institute of Social Research. Originating in 1968, the PSID core sample combines the Survey Research
Center sample, which is a cross-sectional national sample, and the Survey of Economic Opportunity
sample, which is a national sample of low-income families. From 1968 till 1996, individuals from families

STATA’s cluster option.
13
Longitudinal data from the PSID and the HRS also permit the estimation of person fixed effects models.
However, since the policy variables are measured at the state level, including individual fixed effects
would deplete degrees of freedom and inflate the standard errors. As long as the policy variables at the
state level are orthogonal to the individual, omitting the person-specific fixed effects will not affect the
consistency of the estimates. Furthermore, since the risk aversion instrument is time-invariant, this also

9

in the core sample were interviewed every year, including adults as they have grown older and their
respective family units. From 1997, data collection became biennial. A number of other changes were
also made, including a reduction in the core sample and the introduction of a refresher sample of post1968 immigrant families and their adult children, in order to keep the sample representative.
A dichotomous indicator for current alcohol consumption is constructed from the PSID data.
Among individuals between the ages of 21 to 54, 66 percent are current drinkers; the prevalence
decreases with age as evidenced in the older cohort from the Health and Retirement Study. Detailed
information on various health measures is also available. An index of functional difficulties associated
with bathing, dressing, eating, walking, and getting outside is created and ranges from zero to five.
Dichotomous measures are also constructed for lifetime diagnoses of hypertension, diabetes, heart
disease, and stroke. A depression scale, ranging from zero to four, measures the number of depressionrelated symptoms experienced in the past month. Indicators for age, gender, race, ethnicity, marital
status, and education are defined and included in the models. Measures of labor force attachment are
also constructed, capturing whether the individual is currently working (part time or full time), unemployed,
or retired. Additional variables are defined in Table 1.
Health and Retirement Study
The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is conducted by the Institute for Social Research at the
University of Michigan. It is an ongoing longitudinal study, which began in 1992 and is repeated
biennially.14 Prior to 1998, the HRS cohort included individuals born between 1931 and 1941, and a
separate Study of Assets and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) included individuals born
before 1924. Since 1998, AHEAD respondents have been contacted as part of a joint data collection
effort with the HRS, and the sample frame was also expanded by including cohorts born between 1924
and 1930 and those born between 1942 and 1947. As older adults are over-represented in the HRS, this
is an ideal dataset, in terms of sample size and available information on correlates of alcohol use, to
study alcohol demand for this segment of the population. The present analysis utilizes the first seven
waves, spanning 1992 through 2005, and restricts the sample to older adults ages 55 and over. This
yields a maximum sample size of about 107,000 person-wave observations.

precludes controlling for individual fixed effects in the preferred specifications.
14
Blacks, Hispanics, and Florida residents are oversampled. Sampling weights are provided to adjust for

10

Both dichotomous and continuous measures of alcohol use are constructed. The dichotomous
indicator measures whether the individual currently participates in drinking. The individual is also asked
about their frequency and intensity of alcohol consumption.15 Based on these questions, a measure of
the average number of drinks consumed daily is obtained. Approximately 35 percent of older adults are
current drinkers. Among those who drink, slightly less than one drink is consumed daily on average.16
The HRS is administered for the specific purpose of studying life-cycle changes in health and
economic resources, and includes detailed information on various health outcomes. A composite index is
defined to measure difficulties associated with mobility. It ranges from zero to five and indicates
difficulties in walking one block, walking several blocks, walking across a room, climbing one flight of
stairs, and climbing several flights of stairs. Additional indicators are defined separately for whether the
respondent reports that he or she has been diagnosed with the following illnesses: diabetes, heart
disease, stroke, and high blood pressure. The HRS contains a depression scale, as defined by the
Center for Epidemiologic Studies (CES), which ranges from zero to eight. This CESD score measures
the sum of adverse mental health symptoms for the past week (listed in Table 1). Studies have confirmed
the validity and reliability of the CESD scale as a screening instrument for the identification of major
depression in older adults (Irwin et al., 1999).
Measures are selected from the HRS to ensure consistency with variables constructed from the
PSID. Indicators for age, gender, race, ethnicity, marital status, and education are defined and included
in the models. Measures of labor force attachment are also constructed, capturing whether the individual
is currently working (part time or full time), unemployed, or retired. Real income is calculated for each
individual from all available sources including earnings, pension, supplemental security, social security

unequal probabilities of sample selection.
15
In waves 1 and 2, the respondent is asked directly about the number of drinks that they consume per
day, in general. The responses are categorical, which are coded at their midpoints and top-coded at five
or more drinks. For waves 3-7, the respondent is asked about the number of days that they consume
alcohol in an average week, and the number of drinks consumed on average when they drink. The
responses to these questions are continuous. To ensure consistency with the questions in waves 1 and
2, responses in waves 3-7 are also top-coded at 5 or more drinks daily. Very few drinkers are in the top
category (2.25 percent). While the change in the questions after wave 2 is a potential concern, restricting
the sample to waves 3-7 does not significantly alter the results. Estimating a spline model by interacting
the price measure with a dichotomous indicator to represent the break also yields similar estimates to
those reported.
16
A standard drink is considered to be the amount of beverage containing approximately 0.5 ounces of
alcohol. This is about 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of distilled spirits.

11

retirement, and other government transfers deflated by the consumer price index.17 Description of these
covariates is provided in Table 1.
Risk Tolerance Module
A module probing the individual’s tolerance towards risk is administered to 11,707 individuals in
the first wave of the HRS and 8,125 entrants into the study in subsequent waves. Measures of risk
aversion are obtained from a series of questions involving willingness to gamble over lifetime income with
varying probabilities. The module has undergone considerable testing in order to minimize
misunderstandings and additional complications in interpretation, and to ensure consistency with the
economist’s concept of risk preference. Barsky et al. (1997) provide a detailed analysis of the survey
instrument. Answers to the questionnaire separate the individuals into four distinct categories of risk
preference, ranging from the most risk tolerant to the most risk averse.18 The majority of respondents 55
years and older (64 percent) can be classified in the most risk-averse category, with 15 percent
comprising the second most risk-averse group, and 21 percent divided equally among the two least riskaverse categories. In order to maximize sample sizes and ensure consistent comparison in the stratified
models, an indicator for the most risk-averse category is included in the specifications. When stratifying
across risk tolerance, the most risk-averse individuals (64 percent) are compared to the other three
categories.19
One validation of the HRS risk tolerance instrument comes from relating it to behaviors that would
be expected to vary with an individual’s propensity to take risks (Barsky et al., 1997). Data from the HRS
indeed show that more risk-averse individuals participate less in risky behaviors such as smoking and
drinking. Risk-averse individuals would also be expected to take steps to insure themselves; this is
confirmed by the simple means, which indicate that the prevalence of health insurance and life insurance

17

Models were also estimated with alternate measures, including net household income. Since this
measure is missing for a larger proportion of the sample, reported specifications control for individual
income instead. Results between the two measures are similar.
18
The categories can be ranked in order, without any functional form restrictions on the preference
parameters or the utility function.
19
Results are not qualitatively affected in comparing the most risk-averse (64 percent of the sample) with
the most risk-tolerant (11 percent), excluding the middle two categories. The direction of the effects
remains the same, though the magnitude of the differences is expectedly larger since the comparison
involves the two extreme categories of risk tolerance. While the risk module has undergone testing
before being included in the HRS, interpretation or misreporting may lead to errors in classifying an
individual into the exact risk category. However, in dichotomizing the risk measure into risk aversion
versus risk tolerance, such classification errors are minimized.

12

is higher among those who are risk averse, relative to those who are more risk tolerant. For instance, in
wave 1, the difference in coverage rates between the most risk averse and the most risk-tolerant
individuals (prior to obtaining Medicare) is six percentage points. Barsky et al. (1997) also look at selfemployment and immigration status. One of the largest voluntary risks is self-employment since the
income stream of the self-employed generally has a higher variance that that for salaried employees.
Similarly, immigration into the U.S. and migration within the U.S. may also be indicative of a more daring
personality. In the HRS, self-employment, immigrant status, and region of residence (western U.S.) are
significantly correlated with risk tolerance in the expected direction. Risk tolerance is also found to be a
significant predictor of the composition of household assets. More risk-averse respondents have a higher
share of their portfolio in relatively safe assets, such as Treasury bonds and savings accounts, whereas
more risk-tolerant individuals are more likely to place their assets in equities.
Since virtually all respondents in the HRS only partake in the risk module once, the measure of
risk tolerance is time-invariant. This is not a concern since studies have shown that personality traits
associated with risk tolerance are generally stable, have a biogenic basis, and have some constancy
across various situations (Howard et al., 1997; Menza et al., 1991). A very small subset of individuals
(n=717) responded to the module in both waves 1 and 2. Barsky et al. (1997) show that the distribution of
risk aversion is relatively stable for these individuals across both waves.
The PSID contains the identical risk tolerance module as the HRS. This allows a comparison of
estimates for a large representative sample of older individuals from the HRS with adults from the PSID,
based on equivalent sets of specifications. The PSID analysis is restricted to three waves that contain
information on the respondent’s alcohol use: 1999, 2001, and 2003. While about 6,900 households
overall (comprising of about 11,000 individuals) are surveyed in 1999, the risk tolerance module is
administered to a subset of individuals. For specifications based on risk tolerance, the sample size is
limited to 9,700 person-wave observations.
Based on the PSID, about 43 percent of adults between the ages of 21 and 54 can be
categorized as the most risk-averse. This is less than the rate in the HRS, though the variation can be
attributed to the difference in the age groups and other sample characteristics. When restricting the PSID
sample to individuals 55 years of age and older, the prevalence of risk aversion (62.3 percent) is much

13

closer to that found in the HRS (63.9 percent). The consistency of these rates across two independent
samples is validating. Appendix 1 provides added information on the risk preference module.
Appended Variables
Information on the respondent’s state of residence is available in the PSID and made available to
this project for the HRS. Policy measures affecting the sale and consumption of alcohol are merged to
records in both datasets based on the interview period and the state of residence. As a proxy for the cost
of alcohol, the state excise tax on beer is utilized for several reasons.20 First, focusing on the state
excise tax bypasses the simultaneity between price and demand. Changes in the state-level excise tax
are plausibly exogenous to the individual’s alcohol demand, often changing in response to the state’s
budgetary needs. Excise tax rates on wine and liquor are poor proxies for the prices of wine and liquor in
control (monopoly) states because such states derive most of their revenue from the sale of wine and
liquor from the price markups rather than from the excise taxes. Beer, however, is sold privately in
monopoly states. Changes in excise tax rates within states over time are also strongly correlated with
changes in the respective alcohol beverage price. A one-cent increase in the excise tax has been shown
to raise the price by at least as much (Kenkel, 2005; Young and Bielinska-Kwapisz, 2002). Excise tax
rates on beer, wine and liquor are also highly correlated as are their prices (ρ > 0.5). Thus, the beer tax
provides a good proxy for the cost of alcohol while bypassing colinearity issues with including multiple tax
rates in the specification. While some uniformity has emerged in certain other alcohol-related regulations
such as the minimum purchase age or blood alcohol concentration (BAC) limits, there remains substantial
variation in alcohol excise taxes. States have enacted widely differing rates, leaving considerable room
for policy manipulation. For instance, the beer tax currently ranges from $0.02 per gallon in Wyoming to
$1.07 per gallon in Alaska. Thus, estimates of the tax elasticity also provide a direct estimate of the effect
of an important public policy tool. Furthermore, the price elasticity of alcohol demand can be recovered
from the tax elasticity based on the percent of the tax represented in the price and the tax pass-through
rate. Data on the state-level excise tax for beer are obtained from the Brewers' Almanac, published
annually by the U.S. Brewers' Association.

20

The nominal federal excise tax on beer has remained constant since 1991, after increasing from $9 to
$18 per gallon that year. Shifts in the real value of the federal excise tax will be captured in the time
dummy variables.

14

In order to control for state-level sentiment related to alcohol regulation and other policy shifts
concurrent to taxes, three additional measures are included in the specifications. The first is a
dichotomous indicator for those states that control the wholesaling and/or retailing of distilled spirits.21
The second measure represents the percent of the state population residing in dry counties where there
is no sale of alcoholic beverages (available from the Brewers Almanac). A dichotomous indicator is also
created for whether the given state had an effective 0.08 BAC per se law in the month and year that the
respondent was interviewed. In these states, it is illegal to drive or operate a motor vehicle with a BAC at
or above 0.08 percent in and of itself, and impairment does not need to be demonstrated. As of July
2004, all states plus D.C. had adopted these laws. However, since the sample period covers 1992-2005,
there was considerable variation due to the timing of when the laws were enacted in each state (National
Conference of State Legislatures website).
Weighted means for the full HRS and PSID samples along with stratification by risk tolerance are
presented in Table 1. Risk-tolerant individuals are found to have a significantly higher prevalence of
drinking as well as higher daily consumption. There are also important differences in risk tolerance
across demographic groups. For instance, males are relatively more risk tolerant as are Whites. Risktolerant individuals are also less likely to be married, and their schooling distribution is shifted more
towards higher levels of education. Both the PSID and the HRS show that risk tolerance is similarly
positively correlated with parental education. Among older risk-tolerant individuals, more are likely to be
unemployed and fewer are currently working or retired. Income also seems to increase with risk
tolerance, consistent with a higher average return for individuals who may be bearing greater risks
through self-employment or working in riskier occupations. There is some evidence across both age
groups that risk-tolerant individuals have fewer indications of physical illnesses, but a higher indication of
depression. It is noteworthy that certain characteristics of the state or residence also vary across riskaverse and risk-tolerant groups. For instance, those who are risk averse are more likely to reside in
states with stricter alcohol regulations: higher alcohol taxes, more likely to have enacted BAC 0.08 laws,
higher percentage of the population residing in dry counties, and state monopoly on retailing and
wholesaling of alcoholic beverages. While these simple correlations may reflect other observed and

21

Over the sample period, there are 18 such monopoly states: AL, IA, ID, ME, MI, MS, MT, NH, NC, OH,
OR, PA, UT, VT, VA, WA, WV, and WY.

15

unobserved factors, they also point to risk tolerance as a potential confounder in an individual’s alcohol
demand and its sensitivity to prices and policy. The multivariate models presented in the next section
account for these differences.
V.

Results
Table 2 presents estimates of the baseline specification in equation (2), for adults (ages 21-54)

based on the PSID and older adults (ages 55 and up) based on the PSID and the HRS. The first column
estimates a basic model for adults utilizing a sparse set of covariates. Beer tax has a significant and
negative effect on current alcohol participation, with the tax participation elasticity estimated at -0.04.
This specification controls for unobserved state sentiment towards alcohol regulation by including
indicators for the BAC 0.08 per se law and for whether the state controls the retailing and / or wholesaling
of alcoholic beverage. The percent of the state population residing in dry counties is also included.
Enactment of the BAC 0.08 law significantly reduces current drinking as does residing in a state with
more dry counties. For instance, a 10 percent increase in the population residing in dry counties is
associated with a four percentage point decline in the probability of drinking. These regulations raise the
non-monetary cost of consuming alcohol, through higher penalties and search or time costs, and
therefore reduce alcohol participation. Residing in a monopoly state that controls the distribution of spirits
seems to increase the probability of drinking. This may reflect substitution from the consumption of spirits
to the consumption of beer or wine (Nelson, 2003; Holden and Wagenaar, 1990). Even if total ethanol
consumption is lower in monopoly states, higher alcohol participation may be reflecting higher beer
consumption relative to liquor.
Since the PSID analysis is based on three waves, it is not feasible to control for unobserved state
sentiment through state-level fixed effects. There is not sufficient variation in the excise tax rate within
each state over this period to allow for the fixed effects. For example, regressing the tax on state and
year fixed effects yields an R-squared of 0.99, suggesting that only about one percent of the variation in
taxes represents within-state variation. Hence, specification 1 proxies for unobserved state sentiment
through other measures of alcohol regulation. Specification 2 controls for state-level fixed effects for
comparison. As expected, the lack of state-specific time-series variation results in imprecision, inflating
the standard error for the tax effect. However, it is somewhat reassuring that the magnitude of the effect

16

and the elasticity remain similar. Subsequent models utilizing the PSID omit the state fixed effects in
favor of a more parsimonious set of controls for state sentiment.
Specification 3 expands on the basic model by incorporating risk aversion, labor market behavior,
parental education, and health measures. Risk-averse individuals have a significantly lower probability of
current alcohol participation relative to those who are more tolerant of risk. Unadjusted means showed a
difference in participation by about 11 percentage points. In the multivariate model, this effect diminishes,
though still remaining sizeable at 5.8 percentage points. The tax elasticity is significantly negative and
remains stable at -0.04.
Demographic variations in alcohol demand are often taken for granted and attributed to
differences in tastes or culture. However, incorporation of risk tolerance in the alcohol demand function
can inform on some of these differences. For instance, males participate more in drinking. However,
after controlling for risk tolerance in specification 3, the marginal effect of being male on participation
declines by over two percentage points.22 This is consistent with males being more tolerant of risk, as
indicated by the simple means. Similarly, it is true that non-Whites have been consistently found to have
a lower drinking prevalence. Part of this effect may reflect differences in attitudes towards risk, especially
for Blacks who are more likely to be risk averse. Similarly, while married individuals drink less, the effect
magnitude is diminished upon controlling for risk since married individuals tend to be relatively more risk
averse.
Educated individuals are more likely to participate in drinking, though here also the effect
magnitude diminishes for those who have completed college since there is a positive association between
risk tolerance and education. There is a small significantly positive effect of income on drinking, with the
elasticity estimated at 0.10.23 The coefficients on the age categories confirm that drinking prevalence
declines with age. Relative to individuals not in the labor force (disabled, homemakers, students), those
who are employed, unemployed, or retired also have higher alcohol participation. Drinking is negatively
associated with household size. This may reflect lower drinking prevalence in households with children
present or in family units, where the individual may be internalizing the external costs of their drinking on
22

Specification 3 also controls for health measures, which may have confounded prior estimates of
demographic effects. However, in comparing specification 3 to an equivalent model excluding risk
tolerance, the patterns remain similar.
23
Since the dependent variable captures any alcohol participation, this net income effect reflects both a

17

household members. For the PSID sample, the effects of health measures are generally insignificant.
This may be due to the low prevalence of some of these illnesses in the adult population, or it may reflect
that at least for younger adults (21-54), these health outcomes may not have consistent effects on
drinking propensity. For older adults (below), these health conditions lead to significant reduction in
alcohol participation.
Specifications 4 and 5 estimate the demand function for adults 55 years of age and older, based
on the HRS. Since the HRS sample is observed for a maximum of seven waves (1992-2005), there is
sufficient variation in excise taxes within states over this period to allow for state fixed effects. Increases
in the beer tax significantly reduce current drinking among older adults. Furthermore, the older
demographic appears to be far more price-sensitive relative to younger adults; the tax elasticity is about
four to five times larger and is estimated at between -0.17 and -0.22. To ascertain that this increase in
the tax response relative to the younger demographic is not an artifact of the sampling differences
between the PSID and the HRS, a similar specification is also estimated for the PSID restricted to older
adults. Specification 6 suggests that the estimated marginal effect and elasticity are robust across both
the PSID and the HRS samples. These estimates indicate that drinking among older adults is more
sensitive to prices, relative to the general population.24
The simple means suggest that older risk-averse individuals have a lower prevalence of drinking
by about 5.4 percentage points. Specification 6 shows that while the effect diminishes somewhat after
controlling for other confounders, it remains significant at 3.3 percentage points. The effects of the other
covariates are generally similar to those discussed above.
The next set of specifications reported in Table 3 explore whether response to taxes varies
across risk-averse and risk-tolerant individuals across both age groups. These models estimate
equations (3) and (4), stratifying the samples based on risk tolerance. For both age groups, increases in
the beer tax significantly reduce alcohol participation, with higher elasticities being estimated for the older
demographic as before. Among younger adults from the PSID, the marginal effect of the tax is relatively
similar for both risk-averse and risk-tolerant individuals.25 A likelihood-ratio (LR) test was implemented to

positive income effect for moderate drinking and a potentially negative effect for heavy drinking.
24
This may reflect a change in beverage composition among older drinkers, who may prefer wine or
spirits over beer, relative to younger drinkers.
25
Similarly, the marginal effects for the policy measures including Percent Dry and Monopoly state are

18

check if the marginal effect is significantly different across both risk aversion categories;26 there is no
significant difference. For older adults in the HRS, the marginal effect and the tax elasticity suggest that
risk-tolerant individuals may be more sensitive to prices relative to those who are more risk averse.
However, this difference is not statistically significant based on the LR test. These estimates suggest that
even among groups that are more likely to consume and abuse alcohol, demand is relatively sensitive to
prices.
Specification Checks
The models thus far have considered the response of taxes at the extensive margin, on the
decision to currently consume alcohol. Policies may also affect the intensity of consumption, conditional
on being a drinker. Data on average daily number of drinks consumed from the HRS allow estimation of
the alcohol demand function at the intensive margin. Specification 1 in Table 4 suggests that taxes can
also reduce the level of alcohol consumption, though the consumption elasticity (-0.086) is smaller in
magnitude compared to the participation elasticity for older adults. This is consistent with demand studies
for the general population, which have also found larger elasticities at the extensive margin; that is, most
of the price effect operates through the decision to drink rather than the level of drinking conditional on
participation (Chaloupka et al., 2002; NIAAA, 2000; Manning, 1995). Risk aversion continues to be a
significant predictor of alcohol consumption. Across models 1 and 2, risk-averse drinkers consume
between 5.5 and 8.6 percent less alcohol.
Model 2 also allows for the tax effect at the intensive margin to differ between the risk categories.
Since alcohol participation among older adults is about 35 percent, estimating the conditional demand
significantly restricts the sample size. Thus, a parsimonious specification, which includes an interaction
term between the beer tax and risk aversion, is employed to allow any difference in the tax effect. The
coefficient on the interaction term is positive, suggesting that risk-tolerant individuals may be more
sensitive to taxes. However, the large standard error on the interaction effect does not allow the rejection

also stable across both risk groups.
26
This test is performed by estimating a model with all individuals, and including interaction terms for all
variables except the alcohol policy and also including the risk aversion indicator. The LR test is carried
out by comparing the values of the log-likelihood function with and without the restrictions imposed: LR =
-2[ln L* - ln L RISK AVERSE - ln L RISK TOLERANT]. If the restriction is valid as under the null hypothesis, then
imposing it should not lead to a large reduction in the log-likelihood function for the overall sample (ln L*).
The ratio is asymptotically distributed as a Chi-squared density function with degrees of freedom equal to
the number of restrictions, which is one because only the alcohol tax coefficient is restricted.

19

of the null that the tax response is similar across both groups. This is consistent with the alcohol
participation models which also followed the same pattern.
While these results suggest that excise taxes do have an impact on the level of alcohol use,
across both risk groups, it is specifically problem drinking that imposes externalities and is the target of
public policy. Specifications 3 and 4 therefore examine the tax response on chronic drinking, conditional
on being a current drinker. Chronic drinking is defined by a dichotomous indicator for whether the
respondent consumes more than two drinks daily, on average.27 Approximately 10 percent of drinkers in
the HRS fall in this category. The estimated tax elasticity is significantly negative and of a similar
magnitude to the participation elasticity among all individuals. The interaction effect in model 4 is
insignificant, suggesting that taxes can reduce the propensity of chronic alcohol use even among risktolerant individuals. Risk aversion has a negative effect on problem consumption, though the coefficients
are imprecisely estimated. Unadjusted means show that the prevalence of chronic drinking is significantly
higher among risk-tolerant individuals by about 10 percent.
Specification 5 exploits the longitudinal waves of the HRS and restricts the sample to everdrinkers. This results in a slight difference in the control group that is used for identification of the tax
response. That is, among those individuals who drink, some may shift in and out of current drinking
status. This model checks whether this response is related to changes in the excise tax. Thus,
individuals who never drink and therefore do not change their drinking status over the sample period are
excluded. The tax elasticity declines somewhat in magnitude from -0.17 to -0.10. This is presumably
because current drinking propensity for ever-drinkers is less responsive to prices. Also, in the prior
specification, never-drinkers served as part of the control group against which to compare the responses
of those who do drink. By excluding the never-drinkers, ever-drinkers who change their alcohol
participation are being compared to those who do not. Employing this alternative control group for
identification, the tax elasticity of older adults continues to be larger in magnitude relative to younger
adults.
Economic models of addiction typically predict that current consumption depends on past
consumption (as a proxy for the accumulated addictive stock) due to the reinforcement effect. Thus,
27

Redefining the chronic use indicator to reflect more than 3 drinks daily does not significantly alter the
results. The elasticity magnitude declines to about -0.20 and the standard errors inflate due to the lower

20

current addictive consumption would also be a function of past prices.28 Specification 6 includes both the
current and the one-year lagged excise tax. Since excise taxes within a state are highly correlated over
time due to infrequent changes, the standard errors are substantially inflated. However, judging from the
magnitudes, the current and lagged tax effects in specification 6 almost add up to the current tax effect in
specification 5 that excludes the lagged excise tax. This suggests that the contemporaneous tax
response may also be picking up the effect of past taxes, and may in some sense be more indicative of
the long-run elasticity that takes account of changes in past and present prices on current consumption.
While the estimates and differences have been interpreted with respect to the economist’s
concept of risk aversion, one potential concern is that the risk instrument may be reflecting differences in
time preference rather than attitudes towards risk per se. Theoretically, some of the effects of risk
tolerance are difficult to disentangle from the effects of differential discount rates. For instance, more
present-oriented individuals with a high discount rate would also be predicted to participate more in risky
activities such as alcohol and cigarette use since they are likely to discount the future harmful
consequences. From a policy perspective, it is immaterial whether the risk-tolerant group is reflecting a
more dismissive attitude towards risk or a higher discount rate. Since these individuals, regardless of
whether they are risk-tolerant or present-oriented or both, are heavier consumers of alcohol, it is
important to explore the extent to which their demand is sensitive to variations in taxes. Nevertheless, for
interpretation purposes, it may be helpful to determine that the risk tolerance instrument is indeed picking
up variation in attitudes towards risk.
The HRS administered a module on preferred consumption paths to 198 respondents in order to
elicit estimates of time preference parameters. Barsky et al. (1997) show that for these individuals, their
degree of risk aversion is uncorrelated with time preference. Alternately, specifications 7-9 in Table 4
also confirm that the risk tolerance categories are reflecting variations beyond discount rates. Individuals
in the HRS are also asked about their relevant financial planning horizon. While certainly prone to

prevalence of this measure of heavy use.
28
This is the case for myopic addiction wherein the individual maximizes current utility and does not
consider future consequences. With rational addiction, wherein the individual maximizes lifetime utility,
current consumption depends on past and future consumption (Becker and Murphy, 1988). Hence,
demand would also be a function of future prices in addition to contemporaneous and lagged prices.
Since the focus of this study is on risk tolerance and differences in responses across risk tolerance, the
rational addiction framework is abstracted from. Empirically identifying the effects of current, past, and
future prices is complicated by the collinearity in the price series.

21

measurement error and noise, variations in the planning horizon, conditional on age, would partially
reflect differences in time preference. Accounting for age, more future-oriented individuals with lower
discount rates should take greater account of future events and therefore have more distant planning
horizons. The marginal effects and elasticity estimates remain robust to controlling for the individual’s
reported planning horizon. The tax elasticity for older adults continues to be larger than younger adults,
and there are no significant differences in the tax response across risk groups. Combined with earlier
evidence that the risk tolerance module correctly predicts behaviors that it would be expected to predict a
priori (self-employment, insurance status, etc.), there is some evidence that the measure is indeed
indicative of an individual’s propensity to undertake risk.
Sample Attrition
Selective sample attrition is not a concern with the PSID sample since the analysis employs only
three waves (1999-2003) and the demographic of interest comprises young adults in relatively good
health. In the HRS, however, selective attrition may be relevant due to the longer period of study and the
older demographic. The average mortality rate between waves is 2.3 percent. Thus, about 14 percent of
the individuals who were surveyed in the first wave (1992) have died by the seventh wave (2004). The
mortality rate for the HRS sample is consistent with the Social Security Administration life table mortality
rates (Kapteyn et al., 2006).
The specific concern is that since alcohol-related illnesses are a significant cause of premature
death, mortality among the heavy drinkers may lead to a progressively selective sample in later waves
that consumes less alcohol. Results thus far consistently indicate that older adults are far more
responsive to tax policies than younger adults. It is important to determine if this effect is being driven by
attrition bias. If the heavier drinkers, who may be less responsive to price, are being progressively
excluded from the sample, then the remaining price response may be biased upwards. Controlling for
physical and mental health status alleviates some of this concern. Table 5 also presents two additional
strategies to inform on potential bias due to such attrition.
First, specifications 1-3 utilize a balanced sample that only includes individuals who are observed
in all seven waves. If selective attrition is severe, then results from the unbalanced panel (Tables 2 and
3) versus the balanced panel would be expected to be different. Comparing the marginal effects and tax
elasticities from the balanced panel to those reported earlier, there are no material differences.

22

The second approach employs inverse probability weights (IPW) to adjust for selection bias due
to observable characteristics (Fitzgerald, Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1998). This involves using baseline
characteristics (gender, race, ethnicity, education, parental education, religion, and native-born) along
with other time-varying factors (age indicators, wave indicators, census division indicators) and lagged
covariates (income, marital status, and health insurance) to predict survival status. Most importantly,
observed illness conditions in the previous wave and the number of drinks consumed in the previous
wave are also included to predict survival. Since past health status is observed, this model is able to
correctly predict about 77 percent of the attritors, based on a very conservative cutoff of 0.9 for the
predicted probability; with the standard cutoff of 0.5, the prediction rate is 92 percent. The IPW correction
involves weighting observations by 1/pi, where pi represents the probability of survival, therefore giving
more weight in the regression to those individuals whose observable characteristics predict higher
attrition rates. The results in specifications 4-6 show that the elasticity magnitudes decline somewhat as
expected, since attrition bias may have inflated the price response. However, the general pattern of
results and conclusions remains unaffected.
VI.

Discussion
Economists have long recommended increases in the price of alcohol as a tool to reduce

consumption and related external costs. However, these recommendations have generally been based
on studies of the overall population or limited demographic subgroups. Specifically, there have been no
prior studies that have considered the drinking behavior of the older demographic. Given the aging of the
population combined with an increased potential for alcohol-related harms, it is important to study
whether older adults respond to tax policies and to what extent. This study is the first to provide
estimates comparing the tax response of younger and older adults. Results indicate that not only is
alcohol use (participation, intensity, and heavy drinking) among older adults responsive to taxes, but
these adults also have much higher tax elasticities compared to younger adults. Thus, higher excise
taxes would be particularly effective in curtailing use for this sub-population.
While the analysis in this study focused on state-level excise taxes to provide direct estimates of
an important policy tool, the tax elasticity can also be translated into the price elasticity for comparison.
Specifically, if taxes are passed through to prices at a rate of α, then the following characterizes the
relation between the price elasticity εP and the tax elasticity εT (Kenkel, 2005): εP = εT (α * T/P)-1

23

If α is one, as would be the case under competitive conditions, then a one-cent increase in the tax would
lead to a corresponding one-cent increase in price. Under monopolistic conditions, with a constant
elasticity demand curve, α would exceed one. Indeed studies have generally found the pass-through rate
to be larger than one, on the order of 1.6 to 2 or more (Kenkel, 2005; Young and Bielinska-Kwapisz,
2002). Employing an α of 1.5 and noting that excise taxes account for about eight to nine percent of the
price of beer, the price elasticity can be determined by multiplying the tax elasticity by a factor of 7.4.
Thus, the participation elasticity for younger adults (ages 21-54) is between -0.31 and -0.37. Adults ages
55 and older have a much larger price response, with the participation price elasticity estimated at
between -1.28 and -1.63. Furthermore, their conditional consumption elasticity is between -0.64 and 0.81. Thus, older adults appear to be among the most price sensitive of all demographic subgroups.
Estimates of the alcohol demand function and the price elasticity have also abstracted from
important person-specific differences in personality traits such as attitudes towards risk. At worst, these
individual-level differences are not accounted for at all, and at best, they are purged through individual
fixed effects. No prior study has specifically incorporated the economist’s concept of risk tolerance into
the empirical demand function. Accounting for risk can partially explain some persisting demographic
variations previously attributed to tastes or culture. For instance, drinking prevalence is partly higher
among males due to a higher tolerance towards risk. Similarly, a higher degree of risk aversion among
Blacks and married individuals can also partially explain why these individuals are less likely to consume
alcohol. Future research may benefit from considering the confounding effects of risk tolerance on other
risky health behaviors, particularly smoking.
Since risk-tolerant individuals are found to participate more in drinking and have a higher level of
consumption, it is also important to determine whether their alcohol use responds to tax policy. This
group, through their higher consumption, also bears a greater share of the responsibility of the societal
costs of alcohol abuse. There are some indications that while overall drinking prevalence remained
stable over the past decade, problem drinking may be trending upwards. Data from the Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) show that the median prevalence of binge drinking has increased
from 14.4 percent (1992) to 16.1 percent (2002). Similarly, chronic drinking has also increased from 3.0

24

to 5.9 percent over this period.29 Since the majority of drinkers consume alcohol safely with little external
harm, the rationale for higher taxes falls on whether high-participation groups curb their consumption in
response to higher costs. There is a tradeoff in terms of the social gains from making heavy users face
higher prices that reflect the full social costs of their drinking versus the burden of higher prices on
moderate drinkers (Manning et al., 2005). If, for instance, risk-tolerant individuals are not price-sensitive
then increasing taxes may have a greater proportional effect on light or moderate drinkers and would not
be effective in reducing alcohol-related harms. Estimates from this study, however, suggest that this is
not the case; risk-tolerant individuals are just as responsive to excise taxes relative to risk-averse
individuals, if not more. These results therefore strengthen the rationale for raising alcohol excise taxes
as a policy tool for deterring use among groups likely to over-consume alcohol.

29

Binge drinking in the BRFSS is defined as having 5 or more drinks on a single occasion, at least once
in the past month. Chronic drinking is defined as consuming more than two drinks daily for males and
more than one drink daily for females. These rates correspond to individuals 18 years of age and older.

25

References
Andrucci, G. et al. “The Relationship between MMPI and Sensation Seeking Scales to Adolescent Drug
Use”, Journal of Personality Assessment, vol. 53, p. 253-324, 1989.
Barnes GE, Murray RP, Patton D, Bentler PM, and Anderson RE, The Addiction-Prone Personality,
Springer: New York, 2000.
Barsky, R. Juster, T. Kimball, M. Shapiro, M. “Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An
Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, p. 537579, May, 1997.
Becker GS and Murphy KM, “A theory of rational addiction,” Journal of Political Economy, 96(4):675-700,
1988.
Chaloupka FJ and Laixuthai A, “Do youths substitute alcohol and marijuana? Some econometric
evidence,” Eastern Economic Journal, 23(3):253-276, 1997.
Chaloupka FJ and Wechsler H, “Binge drinking in college: the impact of price, availability, and alcohol
control policies,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 14(4):112-124, 1996.
Chaloupka FJ, Grossman M, and Saffer H, “The effects of alcohol price on alcohol consumption and
alcohol-related problems,” Alcohol Research and Health, 26(1):22-34, 2002.
Chatterji P, Kaestner R, Markowitz S, and Dave D, “Alcohol abuse and suicide attempts among youth,”
Economics and Human Biology, 2(2), p. 159-180, 2004.
Cloninger, R. “A Systematic Method for Clinical Description and Classification of Personality Variants”
Archives of General Psychiatry, vol. 44, p. 573-588, 1987.
Coate, D., and M. Grossman, "Effects of Alcoholic Beverage Prices and Legal Drinking Ages on Youth
Alcohol Abuse," Journal of Law and Economics, 31, p. 145-171, 1988.
Cook PJ. And Moore MJ, “Environment and Persistence in Youthful Drinking Patterns,” in: Risky Behavior
Among Youth, ed. J. Gruber, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Council on Scientific Affairs, “Alcoholism in the elderly,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
275(10), p. 797-801, 1996.
Cutler and Glaeser “What Explains Differences in Smoking Drinking and Other Health Related
Behaviors?” NBER Working Paper, no. 11100, 2005.
Ding W, Lehrer SF, and Rosenquist JN, “The impact of poor health on education: new evidence using
genetic markers,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12304, June 2006.
Fitzgerald J, Gottschalk P, Moffit R. (1998). An Analysis of Sample Attrition in Panel Data: The Michigan
Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Journal of Human Resources. 33(2):251-299.
Gerra, G. Zaimovic, A. Rizzi, O. and Timpano, M. “Substance Abuse Among Secondary-school Students
and its Relationship with Social Coping and Temperament” Bulletin on Narcotics vol. LI, no. 1 and 2,
1999.
Grant BF, Dawson DA, Stinson FS, Chou SP, Dufour MC, and Pickering RP. “The 12-month prevalence
and trends in DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence: United States, 1991-2002 and 2001-2002,” Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 74:3, p. 223-234, 2004.

26

Grossman, M. Chaloupka F. and Sirtalan S. “An Empirical Analysis of Alcohol Addiction: Results from the
Monitoring the Future Panels”, Economic Inquiry, 36:1, p. 39-48, 1998.
Harwood, H. Updating Estimates of the Economic Costs of Alcohol Abuse in the United States:
Estimates, Update Methods, and Data. Report prepared by The Lewin Group for the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 2000.
Holder HD, and Wagenaar AC, “Effects of the elimination of a state monopoly on distilled spirits' retail
sales: a time-series analysis of Iowa,” British Journal of Addiction, 85(12):1615-25, 1990.
Howard MO, Kivlahan D, and Walker RD, “Cloninger’s Tridimensional Theory of Personality and
Psychopathology: Applications to Substance Use Disorders,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58:48-66,
1997.
Irwin M, Artin KH, Oxman MN. (1999). Screening for depression in the older adult: criterion validity of the
10-item Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D). Archives of Internal Medicine.
159(15):1701-4.
Kapteyn A, Michaud PC, Smith J, Van Soest A. (2006). Effects of Attrition and Non-Response in the
Health and Retirement Study. RAND Working Paper WR-407.
Kenkel, D. “New Estimates of the Optimal Tax on Alcohol”, Economic Inquiry, 34(2), p. 296-319, 1996.
Kenkel D. “Are Alcohol Tax Hikes Fully Passed Through to Prices: Evidence from Alaska,” American
Economic Review, 95(2): 273-277, 2005.
Kessler, R. Crum R. Warner L. Nelson C. Schulenberg J. and Anthony J., “The Lifetime Co-occurrence of
DSM-III-R Alcohol Abuse and Dependence with other Psychiatric Disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey”. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54: 313-321, 1996.
Leung S.F. and Phelps C. E., “My kingdom for a drink….? a review of estimates of the price sensitivity of
alcoholic beverages,” in Economics and The Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems, eds. M.E., Hilton,
and G. Bloss, Washington: US Government Printing Office, 1993.
Manning, W. Blumberg, L. and Moulton, L. “The Demand for Alcohol: The Differential Response to Price”,
Journal of Health Economics, 14(2), p 123-148, 1995.
Markowitz S and Grossman M, “The effects of beer taxes on physical child abuse,” Journal of Health
Economics, 19(2), p. 271-282, 2000.
Menza, M. Golbe, L. Cody, R. Forman, N. “Dopamine-related Personality Traits”, Neurology, XLIII, p.505598, 1993.
Mokdad AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, and Gerberding JL. “Actual Causes of Death in the United States,
2000,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 291:10, p. 1238-1246.
Moore TJ, Cohen MR, and Furberg CD, “Serious Adverse Drug Events Reported to the Food and Drug
Administration, 1998-2005,” Archives of Internal Medicine, 167(16): 1752-1759, 2007.
National Conference of State Legislatures website. http://www.ncsl.org/programs/lis/dui/dui-home.htm
Nelson J. “Advertising Bans, Monopoly and Alcohol Demand: Testing for Substitution Effects Using State
Panel Data,” Review of Industrial Organization, 22(3), 2003.
NIAAA, 10th Special Report to Congress on Alcohol and Health, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, Washington, DC, 2000

27

NIAAA, Alcohol Alert No. 40: Alcohol and Aging, Bethesda, MD: 1998.
Owens P, Myers M, Elixhauser A, Brach C. Care of Adults With Mental Health and Substance Abuse
Disorders in U.S. Community Hospitals, 2004—HCUP Fact Book No. 10. AHRQ Publication No. 07-0008,
January 2007.
Parker RN and Auerhahn K, “Alcohol, drugs and violence,” Annual Review of Sociology, 24, p. 291-311,
1998.
Picone G., F. Sloan and J. Trogdon, “The effect of the tobacco settlement and smoking bans on alcohol
consumption” Health Economics, 13, 2004.
Pringle KE, Ahern FM, Heller DA, Gold CH, and Brown TV, “Potential for Alcohol and Prescription Drug
Interactions in Older People,” Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(11): 1930-1936, 2005.
Rabin M, “A perspective on psychology and economics,” European Economic Review, 82:34-55, 2002.
Saffer H. and Chaloupka, F. “Demographic Differentials in the Demand for Alcohol and Illicit Drugs”
National Bureau of Economic Research, (with Frank Chaloupka) in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use
and Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic Research, Chaloupka, F. Bickel, W.
Grossman, M. and Saffer, H. eds. University of Chicago Press: Chicago, June 1999.
Saffer, H., and Dave, D. “Mental Illness and the Demand for Alcohol, Cocaine and Cigarettes”, Economic
Inquiry, vol. 43, no. 2, April 2005.
Saffer, H., and Dave, D. “Alcohol Advertising and Alcohol Consumption by Adolescents,” Health
Economics, 15(6): 617-637, 2006
Vlek, C. and Stallen, P. “Rational and Personal Aspects of Risk”, Acta Psychologica, 45, 273-300, 1980.
U.S. Brewers Association. Brewers Almanac. Washington D.C.: U.S. Brewers Association, Various Years.
Young DJ and Bielinska-Kwapisz A, “Alcohol Taxes and Beverage Prices,” National Tax Journal,
55(1):57-73, 2002.

28

Table 1
Weighted Sample Means
PSID and HRS
Variable

Definition

Alcohol
Participation

Dichotomous indicator for currently
drinker

Drinks

Risk Averse

Average number of drinks consumed
daily
State excise tax on beer, adjusted by
the consumer price index, in dollars per
gallon
Dichotomous indicator for high degree
of risk aversion

Age

Age of respondent

Male

Dichotomous indicator for male

Black

Dichotomous indicator for Black
PSID: Dichotomous indicator for race
other than Black, White or Hispanic
HRS: Dichotomous indicator for race
other than Black or White

Real Beer
Tax

Other Race
Hispanic
High School 1
Some College
1

College 1
Education
Missing
Real Income
Married
Working
Unemployed
Retired
Household
Size

Parental
Education

Dichotomous indicator for Hispanic
Dichotomous indicator for highest level
of school completed being high school
Dichotomous indicator for highest level
of school completed being some college
Dichotomous indicator for highest level
of school completed being college
PSID: Dichotomous indicator for
respondents whose education level is
missing
Income from all sources, adjusted by
the consumer price index, in thousands
of dollars
Dichotomous indicator for married
Dichotomous indicator for full-time or
part-time work
Dichotomous indicator for unemployed
Dichotomous indicator for complete
retirement
Number of members residing in the
household
PSID: Dichotomous indicator for
whether mother or father is a college
graduate
HRS: Dichotomous indicator for
whether mother and father have
completed at least 8 years of schooling

All

PSID: Ages 21 – 54
Risk
Risk
Averse
Tolerant

0.6607
(0.4735)
_

0.6421***
(0.4795)
_

0.7528
(0.4315)
_

HRS: Ages 55 and older
All
Risk
Risk
Averse
Tolerant
0.3508
(0.4772)

0.3590***
(0.4797)

0.4131
(0.4924)

0.3466
(0.7569)

0.3537***
(0.7713)

0.4304
(0.8321)

0.1301
(0.0843)
0.6388
(0.4803)
67.857
(9.8728)
0.4453
(0.4970)
0.0912
(0.2879)

0.1315***
(0.0876)
_

0.1257
(0.0819)
_

63.256***
(6.5705)
0.4442***
(0.4969)
0.0990***
(0.2986)

62.5130
(6.4683)
0.4988
(0.5000)
0.0873
(0.2823)

0.0319
(0.1758)
0.0586
(0.2348)
0.3599
(0.4800)
0.1947
(0.3960)
0.1853
(0.3885)
_

0.0349
(0.1835)
0.0631
(0.2431)
0.3914***
(0.4881)
0.1986***
(0.3989)
0.1890***
(0.3915)
_

0.0376
(0.1902)
0.0656
(0.2475)
0.3299
(0.4702)
0.2315
(0.4218)
0.2555
(0.4361)
_

0.1286
(0.0911)
0.4293
(0.4950)
39.599
(9.2743)
0.4707
(0.4992)
0.1204
(0.3254)

0.1355***
(0.0966)
_

0.1276
(0.0925)
_

41.834***
(8.2736)
0.4537***
(0.4979)
0.1512***
(0.3583)

40.706
(8.1738)
0.5647
(0.4959)
0.0977
(0.2970)

0.0400
(0.1959)
0.0690
(0.2534)
0.0753
(0.2639)
0.0719
(0.2583)
0.0992
(0.2990)

0.0165*
(0.1275)
0.0140
(0.1174)
0.0465*
(0.2105)
0.0341
(0.1816)
0.0433*
(0.2035)

0.0245
(0.1545)
0.0171
(0.1297)
0.0373
(0.1896)
0.0336
(0.1802)
0.0543
(0.2266)

0.7321
(0.4429)

0.8657
(0.3410)

0.8691
(0.3373)

40.549
(45.3307)
0.6402
(0.4800)
0.8149
(0.3884)
0.0400
(0.1961)
0.0106
(0.1024)
2.9389
(1.4876)

42.831***
(48.7359)
0.6400
(0.4801)
0.8927
(0.3096)
0.0272
(0.1627)
0.0137**
(0.1163)
2.8248
(1.4072)

47.200
(44.7324)
0.6265
(0.4838)
0.8916
(0.3110)
0.0346
(0.1827)
0.0076
(0.0868)
2.7918
(1.3977)

13.068
(22.8338)
0.6256
(0.4840)
0.3811
(0.4857)
0.0080
(0.0889)
0.4762
(0.4994)
2.1433
(1.1061)

14.242***
(22.8532)
0.6843***
(0.4648)
0.4756***
(0.4994)
0.0099***
(0.0989)
0.3910***
(0.4880)
2.2593
(1.1260)

16.034
(24.2785)
0.6724
(0.4693)
0.5207
(0.4996)
0.0131
(0.1139)
0.3477
(0.4762)
2.2457
(1.1292)

0.2516
(0.4339)

0.1901***
(0.3925)

0.3214
(0.4671)

0.5153
(0.4998)

0.5566***
(0.4968)

0.6133
(0.4870)

29

Functional
Difficulties
Hypertension
Diabetes
Heart
Disease
Stroke

Depression
BAC 08
Percent Dry

PSID: Count of the difficulties
associated with: 1) bathing, 2) dressing,
3) eating, 4) walking, 5) getting outside
HRS: Count of the difficulties
associated with: 1) walking 1 block, 2)
walking several blocks, 3) walking
across a room, 4) climbing 1 flight of
stairs, 5) climbing several flights of
stairs
Dichotomous indicator for whether
respondent has been diagnosed with
high blood pressure
Dichotomous indicator for whether
respondent has been diagnosed with
diabetes
Dichotomous indicator for whether
respondent has been diagnosed with
heart disease
Dichotomous indicator for whether
respondent has ever had a stroke
PSID: Number of depression-related
symptoms in the past month: 1) sad, 2)
nervous, 3) restless, 4) hopeless
HRS: Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale; Sum of mental
health symptoms in the past week: 1)
depressed, 2) everything an effort, 3)
restless sleep, 4) not happy, 5) lonely,
6) sad, 7) could not get going, 8) did not
enjoy life
Dichotomous indicator for whether the
state has an effective 0.08 BAC per se
law in the given interview period
Percent of state population residing in
dry counties in the given period
Dichotomous indicator for whether the
state controls the sale of distilled spirits
Dichotomous indicator for whether the
respondent’s relevant financial planning
horizon is the next 5-10 years
Dichotomous indicator for whether the
respondent’s relevant financial planning
horizon is longer than 10 years

0.0404
(0.2749)

0.0202***
(0.1757)

0.0298
(0.2168)

0.9945
(1.4179)

0.8650***
(1.3234)

0.8047
(1.2751)

0.1517
(0.3587)

0.1667**
(0.3728)

0.1420
(0.3491)

0.4745
(0.4994)

0.4598***
(0.4984)

0.4384
(0.4962)

0.0494
(0.2166)

0.0527
(0.2234)

0.0443
(0.2058)

0.1431
(0.3501)

0.1448**
(0.3519)

0.1383
(0.3452)

0.0289
(0.1676)
0.0097
(0.0981)

0.0269
(0.1617)
0.0117
(0.1074)

0.0205
(0.1417)
0.0076
(0.0868)

0.2315
(0.4218)
0.0738
(0.2614)

0.1909***
(0.3930)
0.0527
(0.2234)

0.1800
(0.3842)
0.0499
(0.2176)

0.5247
(0.9900)

0.4572***
(0.9191)

0.5500
(0.9675)

1.4394
(1.9073)

1.3232***
(1.8755)

1.3770
(1.9079)

0.4812
(0.4997)
0.0429
(0.0934)
0.3152
(0.4646)

0.4379
(0.4962)
0.0578***
(0.1094)
0.3706***
(0.4831)

0.4525
(0.4978)
0.0394
(0.0893)
0.3317
(0.4709)

0.4778
(0.4995)
0.0299
(0.0698)
0.2956
(0.4563)

0.5000***
(0.5000)
0.0309***
(0.0692)
0.3086***
(0.4619)

0.5311
(0.4990)
0.0284
(0.0685)
0.2909
(0.4542)

Monopoly
State
Planning
_
_
_
Horizon 5-10
0.2751 0.2851***
years
(0.4466)
(0.4515)
Planning
_
_
_
Horizon 10+
0.0789 0.0879***
years
(0.2696)
(0.2832)
27,531
4,430
5,280
101,477
43,487
Observations
Notes: Means are weighted by the sampling weights. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Number
of observations listed represents the maximum number. For some variables, the actual sample size is
less due to missing information. Asterisks denote that the difference in means between the Risk Averse
and Risk Tolerant samples is statistically significant as follows: *** significant at the one-percent level, **
significant at the five-percent level, * significant at the ten-percent level.
1 Due to a large number of missing observations for education in the PSID, a separate category for
missing information is created. Thus, the appropriate means for high school, some college, and college
should be interpreted with respect to the percent of non-missing observations.

30

0.3141
(0.4642)
0.0971
(0.2961)
23,449

Table 2
Alcohol Participation
PSID and HRS
Sample
Dataset
Variable

PSID
1

Ages 21 - 54
PSID
2

-0.1588***
(0.0445)
[ε = -0.037]
_

-0.2198
(0.2200)
[ε = -0.050]
_

Age 61-65

0.1681***
(0.0084)
-0.1595***
(0.0108)
-0.1769***
(0.0225)
-0.1982***
(0.0194)
0.0124
(0.0137)
0.0278**
(0.0139)
0.0850***
(0.0140)
0.0021***
(0.0002)
-0.1567***
(0.0093)
-0.0078
(0.0139)
-0.0182
(0.0156)
-0.0230
(0.0155)
-0.0518***
(0.0160)
-0.0612***
(0.0167)
-0.0779***
(0.0183)
_

Age 66-70

Ages 55 and older
HRS
5

PSID
3

HRS
4

-0.5308***
(0.1247)
[ε = -0.224]
_

0.1692***
(0.0084)
-0.1420***
(0.0119)
-0.1767***
(0.0228)
-0.2019***
(0.0207)
0.0129
(0.0138)
0.0241*
(0.0140)
0.0808***
(0.0141)
0.0019***
(0.0002)
-0.1539***
(0.0093)
-0.0116
(0.0140)
-0.0253
(0.0157)
-0.0321**
(0.0156)
-0.0620***
(0.0160)
-0.0717***
(0.0168)
-0.0897***
(0.0184)
_

-0.1877***
(0.0735)
[ε = -0.042]
-0.0583***
(0.0147)
0.1453***
(0.0152)
-0.1495***
(0.0184)
-0.1340***
(0.0519)
-0.0330
(0.0687
0.0134
(0.0312)
0.0557*
(0.0282)
0.0666**
(0.0293)
0.0019***
(0.0003)
-0.1222***
(0.0171)
-0.0324
(0.0385)
-0.0274
(0.0406)
-0.0424
(0.0405)
-0.0606
(0.0407)
-0.0697*
(0.0415)
-0.1025**
(0.0440)
_

_

_

_

Age 71-75

_

_

_

Age 76-80

_

_

_

Employed

_

_

Unemployed

_

_

Retired

_

_

0.1044***
(0.0247)
0.1289***
(0.0304)
0.1423**
(0.0544)

Real Beer Tax
Risk Averse
Male
Black
Other Race
Hispanic
High School
Some College
College
Real Income
Married
Age 26-30
Age 31-35
Age 36-40
Age 41-45
Age 46-50
Age 51-55

31

PSID
6

0.1594***
(0.0057)
-0.1088***
(0.0072)
-0.1298***
(0.0124)
-0.0746***
(0.0102)
0.0909***
(0.0073)
0.1718***
(0.0091)
0.2405***
(0.0098)
0.0010***
(0.0002)
0.0090
(0.0056)
_

-0.4525***
(0.1618)
[ε = -0.173]
-0.0329***
(0.0074)
0.1677***
(0.0075)
-0.0812***
(0.0104)
-0.1302***
(0.0166)
-0.0417***
(0.0142)
0.0583***
(0.0102)
0.1201***
(0.0121)
0.1806***
(0.0130)
0.0008***
(0.0002)
0.0068
(0.0080)
_

-0.5721***
(0.1826)
[-0.130]
-0.0574*
(0.0340)
0.1720***
(0.0368)
-0.1242**
(0.0493)
-0.4996***
(0.0738)
0.0160
(0.2487)
-0.1750*
(0.1023)
0.0093
(0.1276)
-0.1612
(0.1195)
0.0022***
(0.0005)
-0.0541
(0.0432)
_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

-0.0195***
(0.0045)
-0.0390***
(0.0062)
-0.0568***
(0.0066)
-0.1240***
(0.0063)
_

-0.0175***
(0.0054)
-0.0452***
(0.0082)
-0.0537***
(0.0102)
-0.0765***
(0.0146)
0.0416***
(0.0105)
0.0358
(0.0235)
0.0565***
(0.0101)

-0.0193
(0.0338)
-0.0250
(0.0451)
-0.0058
(0.0556)
-0.1091
(0.0820)
0.1348**
(0.0650)
0.1057
(0.1105)
0.1249*
(0.0629)

_
_

Household
Size
Parental
Education
Functional
Difficulties
Hypertension

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

Diabetes

_

_

Heart Disease

_

_

Stroke

_

_

Depression

_

_

-0.0218***
(0.0083)
-0.4052***
(0.0466)
0.0443***
(0.0092)
Yes***
No

_

BAC 08
Percent Dry

_

-0.0219***
(0.0057)
0.0358*
(0.0186)
-0.0399
(0.0248)
0.0118
(0.0178)
-0.0229
(0.0330)
-0.0242
(0.0369)
0.0144
(0.0582)
0.0108
(0.0074)
-0.0143
(0.0141)
-0.3725***
(0.0744)
0.0515***
(0.0150)
Yes***
No

_

_

-0.0182***
(0.0029)
0.0340***
(0.0078)
-0.0294***
(0.0026)
-0.0094
(0.0069)
-0.1372***
(0.0084)
-0.0371***
(0.0087)
-0.0672***
(0.0146)
-0.0040**
(0.0016)
_

_

_

_
_
_
_
_
_
_

-0.0109
(0.0206)
0.0890
(0.0534)
-0.0447**
(0.0228)
-0.0381
(0.0329)
-0.1061**
(0.0477)
-0.0056
(0.0432)
-0.0863
(0.0795)
0.0187
(0.0174)
-0.0423
(0.0319)
-0.0905
(0.1683)
0.0146
(0.0334)
Yes
No

Monopoly
_
_
_
State
Year Indicators
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
State
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Indicators
Pseudo R2
0.077
0.089
0.089
0.135
0.145
0.117
Percent
0.625
0.634
0.657
0.672
0.680
0.672
Correctly
Classified
Observations
26,762
26,762
9,545
107,509
66,374
1,935
Notes: Specifications are estimated via Probit, and marginal effects are reported. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered robust. Tax elasticities, evaluated at the sample means, are reported in
brackets. Significance is denoted as follows: *** significant at the one-percent level ** significant at the
five-percent level * significant at the ten-percent level. Significance of the tax effect is based on a onetailed test. Percent correctly classified is calculated using a cutoff based on the observed mean
prevalence of alcohol participation for each corresponding sample.

32

Table 3
Alcohol Participation
Stratified by Risk Preference
Sample
Variable
Real Beer Tax
Male
Black
Other Race
Hispanic
High School
Some College
College
Real Income
Married
Employed
Unemployed
Retired
Household Size
Parental Education
Functional Difficulties
Hypertension
Diabetes
Heart Disease
Stroke
Depression
BAC 08
Percent Dry
Monopoly State
Age Indicators
Year Indicators

PSID: Ages 21 - 54
Risk Averse
Risk Tolerant
1
2

HRS: Ages 55 and older
Risk Averse
Risk Tolerant
3
4

-0.2157**
(0.1094)
[ε = -0.056]
0.1988***
(0.0227)
-0.1056***
(0.0264)
-0.1006
(0.0826)
-0.0417
(0.1095)
0.0294
(0.0428)
0.1176***
(0.0402)
0.1401***
(0.0411)
0.0013***
(0.0004)
-0.1390***
(0.0260)
0.1146***
(0.0361)
0.1549***
(0.0483)
0.1927**
(0.0696)
-0.0167**
(0.0085)
0.0561*
(0.0302)
-0.0466
(0.0343)
-0.0008
(0.0266)
-0.0498
(0.0465)
-0.0423
(0.0532)
0.0949
(0.0787)
0.0023
(0.0114)
-0.0127
(0.0211)
-0.3604***
(0.1066)
0.0585**
(0.0228)
Yes
Yes**

-0.3863**
(0.1942)
[ε = -0.159]
0.1641***
(0.0094)
-0.0750***
(0.0126)
-0.1211***
(0.0205)
-0.0613***
(0.0169)
0.0586***
(0.0123)
0.1252***
(0.0151)
0.1573***
(0.0164)
0.0007***
(0.0002)
0.0094
(0.0099)
0.0443***
(0.0129)
0.0447
(0.0311)
0.0562***
(0.0124)
-0.0173***
(0.0036)
0.0316***
(0.0095)
-0.0280***
(0.0032)
-0.0097
(0.0084)
-0.1401***
(0.0101)
-0.0258**
(0.0107)
-0.0503***
(0.0181)
-0.0022
(0.0020)
_

-0.5987**
(0.2902)
[ε = -0.205]
0.1729***
(0.0126)
-0.0904***
(0.0181)
-0.1367***
(0.0286)
0.0012
(0.0257)
0.0575***
(0.0181)
0.1159***
(0.0203)
0.2200***
(0.0213)
0.0007**
(0.0003)
0.0046
(0.0135)
0.0365**
(0.0178)
0.0220
(0.0362)
0.0577***
(0.0173)
-0.0193***
(0.0049)
0.0404***
(0.0135)
-0.0329***
(0.0045)
-0.0089
(0.0119)
-0.1278***
(0.0149)
-0.0620***
(0.0149)
-0.0990***
(0.0246)
-0.0066***
(0.0028)
_

_

_

_

_

Yes***
Yes***

Yes***
Yes***

-0.1822**
(0.0977)
[ε = -0.037]
0.0875***
(0.0203)
-0.1918***
(0.0257)
-0.1775***
(0.0671)
-0.0349
(0.0843)
-0.0054
(0.0455)
-0.0107
(0.0401)
-0.0029
(0.0404)
0.0026***
(0.0004)
-0.1139***
(0.0219)
0.0881***
(0.0323)
0.1108***
(0.0372)
0.0769
(0.0942)
-0.0262***
(0.0075)
0.0157
(0.0231)
-0.0373
(0.0360)
0.0210
(0.0235)
-0.0002
(0.0461)
0.0002
(0.0491)
-0.0924
(0.0836)
0.0180*
(0.0096)
-0.0130
(0.0186)
-0.3651***
(0.1055)
0.0412**
(0.0196)
Yes**
Yes

33

State Indicators
Pseudo R2
Percent Correctly
Classified
Observations
Notes: See Table 2

No
0.077
0.636

No
0.100
0.664

Yes***
0.143
0.675

Yes***
0.153
0.686

4,355

5,190

43,181

23,183

34

Table 4
HRS: Older Adults
Specification Checks
Sample

Dependent Variable
Specification

Real Beer Tax
Risk Averse

Intensive Margin

Ever Drinkers
Current
Current &
Price Effect
Lagged
Price
Effects
Alcohol
Alcohol
Participation Participation
5
6

Log
Drinks
1

Log
Drinks
2

Chronic
Consumption
3

Chronic
Consumption
4

-0.6243*
(0.4064)
[ε = 0.086]
-0.0549***
(0.0193)
_

-0.8929**
(0.4281)
[ε = 0.109]
-0.0864***
(0.0337)
0.2298
(0.1987)
_

-0.2023*
(0.1330)
[ε = -0.278]

-0.1909*
(0.1374)
[ε = -0.265]

-0.3921**
(0.2040)
[ε = -0.100]

-0.0063
(0.0057)
_

-0.0041
(0.0100)
-0.0156
(0.0575)
_

-0.0212**
(0.0085)
_

Pt: -0.3431
(0.4908)
Pt-1: -0.0496
(0.4656)
-0.0212**
(0.0085)
_

Time Preference
All

Risk Averse

Risk
Tolerant

Alcohol
Participation
7

Alcohol
Participation
8

Alcohol
Participation
9

-0.5717***
(0.1739)
[ε = -0.216]

-0.5355***
(0.2085)
[ε = -0.215]

-0.6031**
(0.3094)
[ε = -0.208]

-0.0322***
(0.0086)
_

_

_

Real Beer Tax * Risk
_
_
Averse
Planning Horizon 5-10
_
_
_
_
0.0402**
0.0386***
0.0425***
years
(0.0094)
(0.0117)
(0.0159)
Planning Horizon 10+
_
_
_
_
_
_
0.0571**
0.0406**
0.0822***
years
(0.0156)
(0.0194)
(0.0263)
Year Indicators
Yes**
Yes**
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
State Indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
Yes***
R2 / Pseudo R2
0.080
0.080
0.083
0.083
0.141
0.141
0.130
0.131
0.135
Percent Correctly
0.610
0.609
0.674
0.674
0.675
0.673
0.670
Classified
Observations
24,635
24,635
24,612
24,612
46,212
46,212
54,237
35,423
18,796
Notes: See Table 2. Each column represents a separate regression model. All specifications include the extended set of covariates listed in
Table 2.

35

Table 5
HRS: Older Adults
Sample Attrition

Alcohol
Participation
1

Alcohol
Participation
2

Sample Attrition
Inverse Probability Weighting 1
Risk
All
Risk Averse
Risk
Tolerant
Tolerant
Alcohol
Alcohol
Alcohol
Alcohol
Participation Participation Participation Participation
3
4
5
6

-0.5871***
(0.1998)
[ε = -0.219]
Yes***
Yes***
0.151
0.684

-0.5446**
(0.2398)
[ε = -0.217]
Yes***
Yes***
0.153
0.684

-0.6751**
(0.3621)
[ε = -0.224]
Yes***
Yes***
0.130
0.686

Sample
All
Dependent Variable
Specification
Real Beer Tax

Balanced Sample
Risk Averse

-0.3671**
(0.1797)
[ε = -0.147]
Yes***
Yes***
0.137
0.676

-0.2902*
(0.2115)
[ε = -0.125]
Yes***
Yes***
0.134
0.676

-0.5451*
(0.3331)
[ε = -0.185]
Yes***
Yes***
0.146
0.677

Year Indicators
State Indicators
R2 / Pseudo R2
Percent Correctly
Classified
Observations
40,599
26,544
14,036
55,137
35,740
19378
Notes: See Table 2. Each column represents a separate regression model. All models include the
extended set of covariates listed in Table 2.
1 Inverse probability weights are predicted using baseline characteristics (gender, race, ethnicity,
education, parental education, religion, and native-born) along with other time-varying factors (age
indicators, wave indicators, census division indicators), lagged covariates (income, marital status, health
insurance), and health status and alcohol consumption in the prior wave.

36

Figure 1

Alcohol Prevalence (Past Month Use)
Mean, by Age Groups (BRFSS)

0.7
0.6

0.58 0.58

0.61

0.57 0.57 0.58

0.61

0.59 0.6

0.5
0.4

0.38 0.39

0.43
0.38

0.4

0.41 0.41 0.42

0.44

0.59

0.45

21-54
55+

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

37

2003

2005

Figure 2

Binge Drinking (5+ Drinks on one occasion, Past Month)
Median Prevalence, by Age Groups (BRFSS)

30
25

26.6
23.5

23.4

26.2

27.3

24.4

20
15

18-34
13.5

13.4

15.1

13.6

10

7.7

50-64
65+

9.2

6.8

7.3

2.4

2.7

2.3

2.8

2.7 3.1

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

38

35-49

14.7

7.5

5
0
1992

8.6

16.6

2004

Figure 3

Chronic Drinking (Average 2+ Drinks Daily)
Median Prevalence, by Age Groups (BRFSS)

9
8.3

8
7

7

6
5.1

5
4

4.1

3

3
2.6

2

1.6

3.9
2.6
2.3
1.6

1.5

1
0
1992

1994

1996

35-49

4.2

4
2.8
2.6

5

18-34

5.3
4.8

3.4
3

50-64
65+

2.7 2.8

1.8

1998

2000

39

2002

2004

Appendix 1
Risk Tolerance Module
Classification of individuals into four ordinal categories of risk tolerance is derived from the
following questions asked in the HRS and the PSID modules.

1)

Suppose that you are the only income earner in the family, and you have a good job
guaranteed to give you your current (family) income every year for life. You are given
the opportunity to take a new and equally good job, with a 50-50 chance it will double
your (family) income and a 50-50 chance that it will cut your (family) income by a third.
Would you take the new job?

If the answer to the first question is “Yes,” then the interviewer continues to another hypothetical scenario
that increases the amount of income loss from a third to ha half.

2)

Suppose the chances were 50-50 that it would double your (family) income and 50-50
that it would cut it in half. Would you still take the new job?

If the answer to the first question is “No,” then the interviewer presents another scenario similar to (1) but
with a lower income loss (from a third to 20 percent).

3)

Suppose the chances were 50-50 that it would double your (family) income and 50-50
that it would cut it by 20 percent. Would then take the new job?

The most risk-averse individuals answer “No” to questions (1) and (3), rejecting both the one-third
and one-fifth income loss scenarios. The second most risk-averse group of individuals answers “No” to
question (1) and “Yes” to question (3); they reject the income loss of one-third but accept the scenario
with an income loss of one-fifth. The third group (with a lower degree of risk aversion) answers “Yes” to
question (1), accepting the one-third income loss, but answers “No” to question (2), rejecting the one-half
income loss. The fourth group comprising of the most risk-tolerant individuals answer “Yes” to both
questions (1) and (2), accepting both the one-third and one-half income loss scenarios.
In the PSID, the module includes these three scenarios along with two others that probe with
higher and lower income losses relative to (2) and (3) respectively. If the individual answers “Yes” to
question (2) willing to accept the risk of a one-half income loss, then he/she is asked about a scenario
with a three-fourths income loss:

40

4)

Now, suppose that the chances were 50-50 that the new job would double [your/your
family] income, and 50-50 that it would cut it by 75 percent. Would you still take the new
job?

If the individual answers “No” to question (3), unwilling to accept an income loss of one-fifth, then he/she
is asked about a scenario with a potential income loss of ten percent.
5)

Now, suppose that the chances were 50-50 that the new job would double [your/your family]
income, and 50-50 that it would cut it by 10 percent. Then, would you take the new job?

Thus, in the PSID, individuals can be divided into six ordinal categories of risk aversion; the two extra
categories separate out the most risk-averse and the most risk-tolerant (categories 1 and 4) further.
However, to ensure consistency with the four-category classification employed in the HRS, questions (4)
and (5) are not utilized here. The following decision tree summarizes the full module.

Figure A1
(1)
Income Cut by 1/3
Yes

No

(2)
Income Cut by 1/2
Yes

(3)
Income Cut by 1/5

No

Yes

(4)
Income Cut by 3/4
Yes

Category 4b

No

(5)
Income Cut by 1/10
No

Category 3

Category 2

Category 4a

Yes

Category 1b

No

Category 1a

Category 1a represents the most risk-averse individuals, and Category 4b represents the most risktolerant individuals. For this study, a dichotomous indicator is defined for risk-averse individuals who fall

41

in Category 1, relative to all others. The distinction between 1a versus 1b, and 4a versus 4b can only be
made in the PSID. The following distribution of individuals results across the four divisions in the PSID
and the HRS.
Table A1
Distribution of Risk Aversion
Risk Classification
PSID (Ages 21-54)
HRS (Ages 55+)
Category 1 (Most Risk-Averse)
42.9
63.9
Category 2
15.4
13.1
Category 3
18.6
10.3
Category 4 (Most Risk-Tolerant)
23.0
12.7
Observations
9,710
118,902
Note: Frequencies are weighted by the sampling weight.

42

