NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF WORK-CONDITIONED TRANSFERS ON MARRIAGE AND
CHILD WELL-BEING: A REVIEW
Jeffrey Grogger
Lynn Karoly
Working Paper 13485
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13485

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jeffrey Grogger and Lynn Karoly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Effects of Work-Conditioned Transfers on Marriage and Child Well-Being: A Review
Jeffrey Grogger and Lynn Karoly
NBER Working Paper No. 13485
October 2007
JEL No. I3,J0
ABSTRACT
Transfer payments to poor families are increasingly conditioned on work, either via wage subsidies
available only to workers or via work requirements in more traditional welfare programs. Although
the effects of such programs on employment are fairly well understood, relatively little is known about
their effects on marriage or child well-being. We review a small number of studies that provide such
information here. Our discussion of marriage is couched in terms of a theoretical model that draws
from the efficient-household literature. The model is consistent with the wide range of effects that
we observe and suggests an explanation for some of the observed differences. The theoretical framework
in which we couch our review of results on children is likewise consistent with the observed variation
between programs and among children of different ages.
Jeffrey Grogger
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu
Lynn Karoly
RAND
lynn_karoly@rand.org

I. Introduction
Social insurance payments increasingly take the form of conditional cash
transfers, requiring certain types of behavior from recipients in order to qualify for aid.
In developed countries, the conditions generally take the form of work requirements. The
American Temporary Aid to Needy Families (TANF) program requires most recipients to
work at least part-time; benefits from the American Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
are available only to consumers who work; the British Working Tax Credit (WTC) is
available only to consumers who work at least 16 hours per week; and the Canadian SelfSufficiency Program (SSP), which ran during the 1990s, provided an earnings
supplement to welfare recipients who were willing to leave the dole and take a full-time
job.
The objective of conditioning transfers on work is to increase the employment of
low-wage workers. Not surprisingly, it is often effective. A large and growing body of
research shows that conditioning welfare programs on work typically raises the
employment, and sometimes the income, of welfare recipients (Grogger and Karoly
2005). The EITC and WTC have also been credited with increasing employment among
low-wage workers (Hotz and Scholz 2003; Blundell and Hoynes 2004; Brewer, et al.
2004; Francesconi and van der Klaauw 2007).
Less well-understood are the effects of work-conditioned transfer programs on
other aspects of behavior. Two elements of behavior with the potential for lasting
consequences are marriage and child well-being. We review the limited evidence on
these topics in this paper.

1

Work-conditioned transfers could influence marital incentives in at least two
conflicting ways. On the one hand, they may improve single parents' options outside of
marriage, in which case they might reduce marriage. On the other hand, they may
increase marital surplus, which should increase marriage.
Changes in marital surplus may come about for two reasons. First, the transfer
program may relax the budget constraint the couple would face if married, by subsidizing
the wage of one or both spouses, for example. Second, program rules regarding who
must satisfy the work requirement may influence the extent to which the couple can
specialize efficiently between market work and home production. Programs which let the
couple choose presumably promote efficient specialization, with the high-wage spouse
devoting more time to work and the low-wage spouse devoting more time to home
production. Greater specialization within marriage may increase marital surplus.
Work-conditioned transfer programs could affect children in multiple ways as
well. If they increase parental income, then parents should have greater resources to
devote to their children, which might favorably affect child development. At the same
time, work requirements could reduce the time that parents have to spend with their
children. Depending on the quality of substitute care, this could be either harmful or
beneficial. Whether children gain or lose on balance is again an empirical matter.
We focus our attention on three North American programs: the Minnesota Family
Investment Program (MFIP), the Incentives-Only version of MFIP (MFIP-IO), and
Canada's SSP. All three of these transfer programs were designed to increase
employment among welfare recipients. All three involved a wage incentive. In MFIP
and MFIP-IO, the incentive involved a reduction in the rate at which recipient earnings

2

were implicitly taxed by the welfare system. SSP involved an explicit earnings
supplement for recipients willing to work full-time. MFIP-IO was a pure financial
incentive scheme; MFIP and SSP were conditioned on work. All three programs were
implemented as social experiments. In this paper we review estimates from previous
studies of their effects on marriage and children.
In the next section we discuss the three programs in more detail. We focus both
on their work incentives and on other features of the programs that could have influenced
marriage or child outcomes. In section III we begin with a theoretical analysis of how the
programs might affect marriage. Our theoretical model is based on the efficient
household framework of Chiappori (1992). To the best of our knowledge, our paper and
the contribution by Francesconi, Rainer, and van der Klaauw (in this Symposium)
represent the first efforts to use such models to study the effects of transfer programs on
marriage. The efficient-household approach provides a natural way to model the
structure of welfare programs as they apply to both single- and two-parent families. In
contrast, previous research on marriage and welfare has focused on the incentives for
marriage that arise from the structure of welfare programs as they apply to single-parent
families (Hoffman and Duncan 1995; Hoynes 1997; Moffitt 1990, 1994; Schultz 1994;
Bitler et al. 2004; Brewer et al. 2004; Francesconi and van der Klaauw 2007; Gregg,
Harkness, and Smith in this Symposium). The efficient household approach proves to be
consistent with a wide range of behavior. This is a virtue, since the programs that we
review had widely differing effects on marriage. Our analysis suggests an explanation
for some of those differences.

3

Section IV analyzes the effects of work-conditioned transfers on child well-being.
As with the effects of such programs on marriage, we present a theoretical framework
which acknowledges the multi-faceted effects that work-conditioned transfers might have
on child well-being. The range of effects that we observe suggests different mechanisms
by which welfare programs and earnings supplements might affect child outcomes.
II. The Programs
All three of the programs we consider were designed to increase employment
among welfare recipients. All three were implemented during the 1990s as social
experiments, meaning that recipients (or families initially applying for welfare) were
randomly assigned to either a treatment or control group. The control group was enrolled
in the traditional welfare program, AFDC in the United States or Income Assistance (IA)
in Canada.
A. MFIP and MFIP-IO
MFIP-IO involved a substantial financial incentive. Relative to AFDC, MFIP-IO
imposed a much lower implicit tax on the earnings of recipients who worked. For a
family of 3, the tax rate was zero for roughly the first $200 1 of monthly earnings. For
earnings above that threshold and below roughly 140 percent of the federal poverty line,
the tax rate was roughly 62 percent. In the AFDC program, in contrast, the tax rate was
100 percent after the first four months of work.
MFIP employed the same tax schedule as MFIP-IO and added a work
requirement. Single parents who had received aid for at least 24 months in any 36-month
period were required to participate in a welfare-to-work program or work at least 30
1

All monetary amounts are expressed in terms of national currency, that is, in US dollars for MFIP and
MFIP-IO and Canadian dollars for SSP. During most of the sample period, one Canadian dollar was worth
about 75 US cents.

4

hours per week. In effect, this means that the program differed between two groups who
took part in the experiment. For new applicants, that is, families who were randomly
assigned when they first applied for aid, MFIP primarily provided a financial incentive.
For most ongoing recipients, that is, families who were randomly assigned at the time of
their regular biannual recertification interviews, MFIP involved both a financial incentive
and the work requirement.
MFIP also involved a program for two-parent families. As in the rest of the
United States, the vast majority of Minnesota welfare recipients were single parents, but
about 10 percent of the caseload consisted of two-parent families that qualified for aid
under the AFDC-Unemployed Parent (AFDC-UP) program. Two-parent MFIP families
faced the same tax schedule as single parents. They became subject to the work
requirement after receiving aid for 6 months in any 12-month period, but AFDC-UP
families were subject to similar work requirements. Only one of the parents was required
to satisfy the work requirement. The choice of who worked was left up to the couple.
The two-parent program relaxed eligibility rules as compared to AFDC-UP.
Under AFDC-UP, the principal earner (usually the husband) had to demonstrate a recent
work history in order for the family to qualify for benefits. While receiving benefits, he
could work no more than 100 hours per month. MFIP eliminated the work-history
requirement and the 100-hour rule.
In the event that the family split up while on aid, the custodial parent (most often
the mother) became subject to MFIP's single-parent rules. Similarly, single-parent MFIP
recipients became subject to the two-parent MFIP rules if they married during the
experiment. In the control sample, single-parent AFDC recipients became subject to

5

AFDC-UP rules if they married, and if an AFDC-UP family broke up, the custodial
parent became subject to AFDC rules. 2
Random assignment for both MFIP and MFIP-IO began in April 1994 and
continued through March 1996. The program was implemented in three urban counties
and four rural counties. The single-parent program differed somewhat between the rural
and urban areas; we focus here on the results from the urban counties. The two-parent
program was the same in both settings; we focus on pooled results here in order to
increase the sample size. Until 1998, the control group was subject to AFDC (or AFDCUP) rules. In June 1998, both the control and the treatment group became subject to the
rules of Minnesota's TANF program. Thus the experiment essentially ended roughly two
to four years after random assignment.
Panels A and B of Table 1 report the effects of MFIP-IO and MFIP, respectively,
on several key economic outcomes. Although these outcomes are not our main focus,
they provide useful context for the results to follow. Standard analyses predict that the
programs' financial incentives should have increased employment and welfare receipt
(see, e.g., Grogger and Karoly 2005, ch. 3). At the same time, MFIP's work requirement
should have reinforced the employment effect while counteracting the effect on welfare
receipt. For the most part, the estimated impacts of the programs are consistent with
these predictions.

2

One other MFIP feature, common to singe-parent and two-parent families and available under both MFIP
and MFIP-IO, pertained to parental use of child care providers. Specifically, under MFIP providers were
directly reimbursed for child care services, whereas under AFDC the parent or parents paid providers and
then were reimbursed. By reducing the need to finance child care costs up front, the intent was to provide
an additional financial incentive to work.

6

Table 1 presents the programs' impacts during the third year after random
assignment and for the sixth year after random assignment, after the experiments had
ended. At each point in time, the table records the control group mean, followed by the
impact estimate defined as the difference in mean outcomes between the treatment and
control groups. Significance levels for the program impacts are shown as well. These
data are drawn from Gennetian, Miller, and Smith (2005). 3
Focusing on the impact estimates in the third year after random assignment,
MFIP-IO had at most small positive effects on employment and no significant effect on
earnings. It raised welfare receipt and welfare payments significantly for both recent
applicants and ongoing recipients. It caused income, which for welfare recipients
consists primarily of earnings and welfare payments, to rise, but the effect was significant
only for ongoing recipients at the three-year mark.
MFIP increased the employment, earnings, welfare receipt, and welfare payments
of both single-parent groups three years after random assignment. All of these effects are
at least marginally significant, except for the earnings impact among recent applicants.
Consistent with theoretical predictions, the employment impacts of MFIP are larger than
those of MFIP-IO. MFIP also raised employment to a greater extent among recipients,
who were subject to the work requirement for a greater portion of the sample period, than
among applicants.
The impacts for two-parent families show that MFIP had essentially no effect on
the likelihood that at least one parent was employed. However, it had a significant
negative effect on the likelihood that both parents worked. Most of this effect stemmed
from reductions in employment on the part of the mother (Miller et al. 2000). In the
3

See tables A2 and A3 in Gennetian, Miller, and Smith (2005).

7

context of Chiappori’s (1992) model, this reduction in employment could be the result
intra-household bargaining, which should shift in the mother’s favor if the single-parent
component of MFIP improves her non-martial option. As we will see below, it could
also be the result of efficient specialization stemming from the wage subsidy and work
rules of MFIP’s two-parent program. MFIP also caused earnings to fall and welfare
receipt and payments to rise, although its effects on income were insignificant. For both
MFIP-IO and MFIP, the impact estimates measured at the six-year mark show the
program had little persistent effect after the experiment came to an end.
B. SSP
SSP provided a wage supplement to IA recipients randomly assigned to treatment
who were willing to leave the IA program and work full-time, defined to mean at least 30
hours per week. The supplement was equal to one-half the difference between the
participant's earnings and a target level of income. The implicit tax rate on earnings was
thus 50 percent, which was substantially lower than the IA tax rate.
The program was carried out in two locations, British Columbia and New
Brunswick. The target income level was $37,000 per year in British Columbia and
$30,000 per year in New Brunswick, presumably reflecting differences in living costs
between the two provinces. The IA tax rates varied between the provinces too, as well as
over time. For at least part of the study period, implicit tax rates were as high as 100
percent in both locations. 4

4

Until September 1995, the tax rate in New Brunswick was 100 percent for monthly earnings in excess of
$200. After September 1995 it fell as low as 65 percent. Until April 1996, the tax rate in British Columbia
was 75 to 100 percent on earnings in excess of $200 per month. After that it was 75 to 100 percent on all
earnings.

8

Eligibility for random assignment was restricted to single parents who had been
receiving IA for at least one year. From the time of random assignment, they had one
year to start working full-time and claim the supplement. From the time of the initial
claim, recipients could continue to receive the supplement for up to three years, so long
as they continued to work full-time. During that period, they were free to stop working
and begin receiving IA again if they so chose.
Although initial eligibility was restricted to single parents, marriage (either
statutory or common-law) did not disqualify recipients from continuing to receive the
supplement. In fact, the SSP supplement was independent of the income received by
other household members. On the one hand, this implies that SSP's tax treatment of
couples was more generous than that of IA, which taxed all household members' income
equally in determining benefits. On the other hand, it implies that eligibility for the
supplement was conditioned on the mother’s working at least 30 hours per week. The
SSP earnings benefit was also independent of family size, unlike IA benefits, which were
higher for larger families.
Random assignment for SSP began in November 1992 and extended through
March 1995. Thus the last supplement payment would have been made in March 1999.
The program was implemented in large parts of both British Columbia and New
Brunswick.
Panel C of Table 1 shows how SSP affected employment, earnings, transfer
receipt, transfer payments, and income in each of the provinces at the quarter 12 and
quarter 18 follow-up. 5 Consistent with its primary intent, SSP raised full-time

5

All data for SSP are drawn from Michalopoulos et al. (2002). The figures in Table 1 are drawn from
Tables C3 and C4.

9

employment significantly in both locations in the short term. It reduced traditional
welfare receipt, but program take-up was high enough to raise the probability of receiving
some sort of transfer payment, either welfare or the SSP supplement. By increasing both
earnings and transfer payments, it increased income significantly. Despite the differences
between British Columbia and New Brunswick, SSP had similar short-term effects in
both provinces. By the 18th quarter after random assignment, SSP's effects had
dwindled to zero in British Columbia, but they persisted in New Brunswick.
III. Work-Conditioned Transfers and Marriage: Theory and Evidence
A. An Efficient Household Model of Marital Incentives
Our model of marriage is motivated by models of efficient households along the
lines of Chiappori (1992). Since most welfare recipients are single mothers, we discuss
the model primarily from the perspective of a single parent deciding whether to marry a
potential husband. The pool from which the potential husband is chosen, and the
mechanism by which the choice is made, are outside the scope of the model.
Furthermore, although our discussion of the model is cast primarily in terms of the single
mothers’ marriage decision, the logic of the model can also be used to analyze the
divorce decision of an initially married couple. We illustrate this point explicitly toward
the end of subsection 3.
Our marriage model has two key assumptions. The first is that consumers have
egoistic preferences that are a function of their own leisure and their own consumption of
a private consumption good. The second is that marriage is efficient. This means that a
couple consisting of a single mother and her potential husband will marry if, as compared
to remaining single, marriage would increase the utility of at least one of the parties

10

without reducing the utility of the other. Put differently, they will marry if the marriage
would generate positive surplus. As in Becker (1981), positive surplus may arise due to
gains from specialization within marriage, whereby one spouse specializes in market
work and the other specializes in home production. A second implication of efficiency is
that, if marriage takes place, the couple will allocate consumption and leisure so as to
achieve a point on their marital utility-possibility frontier.
In this setting, transfer programs may affect marriage in two ways: they may
affect the location of the marital utility-possibility frontier, which affects marital surplus,
and they may affect the parties' non-marital alternatives. Under AFDC, benefits are
available only to adults with children. Under IA, adults with children qualify for
substantially higher benefits than adults without children. Since children in single-parent
families overwhelmingly live with their mothers, this means that the transfer programs
may affect the single mother's non-marital alternatives, but generally would have no
effect on her prospective husband's alternatives outside of marriage. 6 Thus we begin our
analysis by considering how our three transfer programs affect the non-marital utility of
single mothers.
1. Single mothers
We assume that the single mother's utility Um is an increasing function of her
leisure and consumption, denoted by Lm and Cm, respectively. Given a wage wm and nonlabor income y, her maximized utility is given by Vm(wm, y). We assume that the welfare
program for which she is eligible provides a maximum benefit of G1, which is reduced
proportionately at the tax rate τ for each dollar of earnings. Assuming that the single
6

Francesconi, Rainer, and van der Klaauw (in this Symposium) propose an interesting alternative in which
the husband is indirectly affected outside of marriage due to his concern for child quality, which is a
function of the mother’s non-market time.

11

mother has no other non-labor income, maximizing utility subject to the welfare-program
budget constraint yields
V m ( w m (1 − τ ), G1 ) = max U m ( Lm , C m )
s.t. C m = w m (1 − τ )h m + G1

where hm = T-Lm denotes hours of work or labor supply and T denotes total time
available. 7 We compare the single mother's maximized utility under the experimental
transfer programs to her maximized utility under the traditional welfare programs.
a. MFIP-IO
MFIP-IO provided a financial incentive to work in the form of a lower tax rate on
earnings. Whereas the AFDC tax rate was 100 percent after the first four months of
employment, the marginal tax rate of MFIP never exceeded 62 percent. Since τ MFIP <
τAFDC, the MFIP-IO budget set was larger than the AFDC budget set, implying that
V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 ) ≥ V m ( w m (1 − τ AFDC ), G1 ) . In words, the single mother was
(weakly) better off under MFIP-IO than under AFDC.
b. MFIP
The tax rate under MFIP was the same as that under MFIP-IO. The difference was
that MFIP imposed a work requirement, or a floor on hours of work, on recipients who
had received aid for 24 months or more. Maximized utility in the presence of an hours
floor (denoted by h ) is given by
V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 ; h) = max U m ( Lm , C m )
s.t. C m = w m (1 − τ MFIP )h m + G1 ; h m ≥ h
= wm h m ; h m < h
7

Throughout the analysis, we assume implicitly that the single mother's earnings are low enough to make
her income-eligible for welfare. In the simple setting here, this amounts to assuming that wmhm<G1/τ.

12

Whether MFIP increases the single mother's utility in comparison to AFDC is
ambiguous. By itself, the higher tax rate increases maximized utility, but by itself, the
hours floor tends to reduce it. The net effect will depend on the single mother's
preferences.
c. SSP
Like MFIP, SSP involved an hours floor as well as a tax rate that was lower than
that of the traditional welfare program. One difference between SSP and MFIP is that
SSP was voluntary. This difference is important because it implies that a single mother
could never be worse off in the SSP treatment group than in the IA control group,
because she always had the option to remain on IA.
Under IA, with maximum benefit G1 and tax rate τIA, the consumer's maximized
utility is given by V m ( w m (1 − τ IA ), G1 ) . SSP provided workers with a supplement equal
to one-half the difference between the worker's earnings and a target earnings level
denoted by E. For consumers who worked in excess of the hours floor h , the budget
constraint can be written as
C m = w m h m + τ SSP ( E − w m h m )
= w m (1 − τ SSP )h m + τ SSP E
where τ SSP = 1/2. This takes the same form as the IA budget constraint, where the
"virtual benefit" τ SSP E plays the same role as G1. Because SSP is voluntary, the single
mother's maximized utility under SSP is given by the greater of V m ( w m (1 − τ IA ), G1 )
and V m ( wm (1 − τ SSP ), τ SSP E; h) .

13

2. Two-parent families
Two-parent families consist of the mother and her husband, whose quantities are
denoted with s superscripts (for spouse). The assumption of egoistic preferences means
that the mother and her husband derive utility only from their own leisure and
consumption. The assumption of efficiency in intrahousehold allocations means that a
family with wages wm, ws and non-labor income y will solve a problem of the form

max U m ( Lm , C m )
s.t. U s ( Ls , C s ) = u s
C m + C s = wm h m + w s h s + y
for some value of the husband's utility u s . Varying u s traces out the marital utilitypossibility frontier. Transfer programs affect the location of the marital frontier by
affecting after-tax wages, non-labor income, and by the conditions they impose on hours
of work. The particular value of u s at the family's solution will generally depend on wm,
ws, and y.
A critical point of our approach is that the efficiency of marriage and the range of
feasible efficient allocations within marriage are determined by each party's best
alternative outside of marriage. If the location of the marital frontier is such that at least
one party could be made better off by marrying, without making the other party worse
off, then the couple will marry. Otherwise, they remain unmarried. Thus transfer
programs influence marriage both by affecting the single mother's non-marital alternative
and by affecting the couple's marital frontier. Relative to the traditional two-parent
welfare programs faced by the control groups, MFIP and SSP (weakly) expand the
marital frontier, as we discuss next.

14

a. AFDC-UP and IA in two-parent families
Like their corresponding single-parent counterparts, both AFDC-UP and IA tax
earnings. IA taxes both adults' earnings at the same rate; AFDC-UP may tax the mother's
earnings at a different rate than her husband's, depending on his paternity status. 8 Denote
the tax rate on the single mother's earnings by τ m and the tax rate on the spouse's earnings
by τ s.
In addition to taxing earnings, AFDC-UP imposes work requirement and a ceiling
on the labor supply of the principal earner. We assume that these constraints apply to the
husband, since the principal earner is defined as the spouse whose recent labor force
attachment was used to satisfy the work-history requirement (Hoynes 1996). IA imposes
no such hours limits.
Denote the work requirement by h ′ , the hours ceiling by h , and benefits paid to
two-parent families by G2. The family solves
max U m ( Lm ,C m )
s .t . U s ( Ls ,C s ) = u s

(1)

C m + C s = w m ( 1 − τ m )h m + w s ( 1 − τ s )h s + G2
h' ≤ h s ≤ h

where h’ > 0 and h =100 for AFDC-UP, and h’=0 and h =T for IA.
b. MFIP
There are three key differences between MFIP and AFDC-UP. First, two-parent
families faced the lower MFIP tax rate rather than the higher AFDC tax rate. Second,
MFIP allowed either parent to satisfy the work requirement. Third, MFIP eliminated the
8

AFDC and MFIP generally tax the co-resident father's earnings at the same rate as the mother's,
independent of his marital status. If the mother's husband is not the father of her children, his tax rate will
depend on whether or not he is included in the assistance unit. IA treats co-residing partner's income the
same independent of marital or paternity status.

15

100 hour rule, that is, it raised h from 100 to T. These changes expand the family's
budget set, implying that the family's marital utility-possibility frontier under MFIP
(weakly) dominates its marital frontier under AFDC-UP.
c. SSP
Unlike IA benefits, the IA earnings supplement is only a function of the mother's
earnings. In terms of (1), this means that τ s = 0. Furthermore, the mother's earnings were
taxed at τ SSP = .5, rather than the higher rate τ IA. All else equal, these two features imply
that the marital frontier under SSP (weakly) dominates the marital frontier under IA,
assuming that the virtual SSP benefit τ SSPE at least equals the IA benefit G2. For most
families, the virtual SSP benefit exceeds the IA benefit. However, for large families, we
could have G2 > τ SSP E, since IA benefits grow with family size whereas the SSP
supplement does not. Nevertheless, since the families in the SSP group were always free
to receive IA, it follows that the budget set facing the SSP group was never smaller than
that facing the IA group. Thus the marital frontier facing the SSP group (weakly)
dominates the marital frontier facing the IA group.
Before employing the model to analyze marriage decisions, we note one
important distinction between MFIP and SSP as relates to married couples. MFIP
imposed a work requirement which could be satisfied by either parent, reduced the tax
rate on both parents' earnings, and eliminated the hours ceiling on the principal earner. It
thus promoted efficient specialization within marriage as between the market and home
production. The high-wage parent could simultaneously satisfy the work requirement
and earn a higher after-tax wage without being bound by the 100-hour rule. The lowwage spouse could specialize to a greater extent in home production.

16

In SSP, the mother had to satisfy the work requirement. In other words, the only
way for her family to benefit from the wage supplement and the lower tax rate on other
worker's earnings was for the mother to work 30 hours per week. In families where the
mother was the low-wage worker, this feature of the program worked against efficient
specialization. Tying eligibility for benefits to the mother’s labor supply likely reduced
the extent to which the other features of the program could increase marital surplus.
3. Marriage decisions
In our model, transfer programs affect marriage incentives both by affecting the
location of the marital frontier and by affecting the value of the mother's non-marital
option. However, the potential husband's non-marital options are not affected by changes
in the program, since non-custodial fathers are eligible for little if any assistance. Figure
1 illustrates the potentially conflicting incentives for marriage that arise.
The figure plots the utility of a single mother receiving AFDC on the y-axis and
the utility of her prospective husband on the x-axis. The point
(Vs(ws,0), Vm(wm(1-τ AFDC),G1) represents the parties' non-marital alternatives, that is, their
maximized utilities outside of marriage. The solid curve represents their marital utilitypossibility frontier under the rules of the AFDC-UP program.
The location of the marital frontier in relation to the non-marital alternatives
depends on the surplus generated by the marriage. The magnitude of the surplus, in turn,
is influenced by the potential for gains from specialization within marriage (Becker
1973). As illustrated, the couple is unmarried because there is no point along the marital
frontier at which, as compared to their non-marital alternatives, at least one party can be
made better off by marrying without the other party being made worse off. This happens

17

because the parties would enjoy insufficient gains from specialization if they were to
marry, possibly because of the high tax rate and low hours ceiling of the AFDC-UP
program. In other words, program rules that heavily tax earnings or impose restrictive
hours constraints may limit the scope for specialization and thus reduce the benefits of
marriage.
MFIP changes the situation in two ways. By eliminating the hours ceiling and
reducing tax rates, MFIP expands the resources potentially available to the couple. It
thus improves the marital frontier, shifting it out to the dotted curve. If MFIP caused no
other changes, this would be enough to induce the couple to marry, since at all points on
the new marital frontier between X and Y, at least one party is better off married than
single, and the other party is no worse off.
Of course, MFIP also changes the single mother's non-marital alternative. As
discussed above, MFIP could either improve it or worsen it. The lower tax rate would
tend to raise the single mother's non-marital utility, whereas the hours floor would tend to
reduce it. If the net effect of MFIP on the single mother's non-marital utility were not too
positive, then the improvement in the marital frontier would induce the couple to marry.
If MFIP left the single mother with non-marital utility in excess of
~
V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 ) , however, the couple would remain unmarried, despite the
expansion of the marital frontier.
The analysis of SSP proceeds similarly. Under IA, couples remain unmarried if
their non-marital utility is such that neither party can be made better off by marrying
without making the other party worse off. SSP's lower tax rates tend to improve the
marital frontier, and since take-up of SSP is voluntary, the marital frontier for the SSP

18

group (weakly) dominates the marital frontier for the IA group. At the same time, SSP
improves the single mother's utility outside of marriage. If the relative gains in marital
and non-marital utility are such that non-marital utilities fall within the marital frontier,
then the couple will marry. Otherwise, they remain unmarried.
Although we have cast the discussion to this point in terms of the decision
problem facing a single mother, the logic of the model extends to initially-married
couples as well, as illustrated in Figure 2. Under AFDC, the couple's non-marital
alternatives are given by Vs(ws,0) and Vm(wm(1-τ AFDC),G1). The couple is married since
their non-marital alternatives are dominated by the marital utility-possibility frontier
under AFDC-UP (the solid curve). Despite the high tax rate and restrictive hours ceiling,
the couple is married, due to strong gains from specialization within marriage.
MFIP changes the couple's marital frontier and the mother's non-marital
alternative. By reducing the tax rate and eliminating the hours ceiling, MFIP expands the
marital frontier, shifting it out to the dotted curve. By itself, the improvement in the
couple's marital frontier would tend to preserve their marriage. However, the program's
lower tax rate also improves the mother's non-marital alternative, although the work
requirement for single parents tends to worsen it. So long as the net effect on the
mother's non-marital option leaves her with non-marital utility less than
~
V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 ) , the couple will remain married. However, if the mother's non~
marital utility under MFIP exceeds V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 ) , then the couple will
divorce, despite the improvement in their marital frontier.
Our model thus shows that transfer programs can either increase or decrease
marriage. Furthermore, it shows that such an effect can arise either from changes in entry

19

into marriage or from changes in divorce. The net effect depends on how program rules
affect the couple's utility under marriage and on how the rules affect the mother's utility
outside of marriage.
B. Evidence

1. Data
Although the MFIP evaluation relied on administrative data to measure
employment and welfare receipt, it relied on survey data to measure marriage. Roughly
40 percent of the administrative-data sample was randomly selected to participate in a 36month survey, to which 81 percent of those sampled responded. The 36-month interview
collected data on marital status and living arrangements.
Starting several years later, further data on the entire administrative-data sample
were collected from administrative records. Public records were searched for information
about marriages and divorces; these enable a longer-term analysis of MFIP's effect on
legal marital status, but provide no information about separations or informal cohabiting
arrangements. These data can be used to corroborate the three-year results based on
survey data and to estimate the effect of MFIP on legal marital status roughly six years
after random assignment.
The SSP evaluation primarily made use of survey data collected at the time of
random assignment and at 18-month intervals thereafter. Survey data provide
information on demographic characteristics of study participants and their households as
well as data about marriage.

20

2. The Impacts of Work-Conditioned Transfers on Marriage and Divorce
Panels A and B of Table 2 present the estimated impacts of MFIP-IO and MFIP,
respectively, on marriage and divorce at the three-year and six-year follow-ups. The
format of Table 2 is the same as that of Table 1. The main dependent variables are
dichotomous. The main survey-based measure equals one if the respondent said that she
was married and living with her spouse at the time of the 36-month interview. The
marriage measures based on administrative data equal one if records showed that a
single-parent recipient married during the first three years after random assignment (or
during the first six years for the measures at the longer-term follow-up).
Considering first the results for single parents, we see that all but one of the
estimated impacts for both MFIP and MFIP-IO are positive. This is true for both the
three-year and the six-year measures. In terms of our model, this suggests that the effect
of these programs on the marital possibility frontier was sufficiently positive to outweigh
the effects of any potential improvement in the single mother's non-marital alternative.
However, only one of the estimates is statistically significant.
The results for two-parent families show that MFIP had a large and significant
positive effect on marriage. At the three-year mark, the marriage rate for the MFIP
controls was 48.3 percent. The marriage rate for the MFIP group was a whopping 19.1
percentage points higher. In the context of our model, this suggests that MFIP's salutary
effect on the marital utility-possibility frontier was more than enough to outweigh any
potential negative effect arising from improvements in the mother's non-marital
alternative.

21

The next two rows of the table shed some light on the nature of the positive
marriage effect. Part of it stemmed from a relatively small and insignificant reduction in
divorce. The larger effect involved a 9.5 percentage point reduction in separations.
MFIP apparently was more successful in keeping families from separating than in
keeping them from divorcing once separated. The importance of separations is
reinforced by the next line of the table, which shows that MFIP had small effects on
divorce as measured by public records. At the six-year mark, however, the divorce effect
becomes larger and significant, suggesting that MFIP's initial success in reducing
separations manifested itself over time as a reduction in divorces.
SSP, with its larger sample sizes, generated significant effects on marriage in both
provinces. Surprisingly, however, the program had opposite effects in the two sites. At
the 36-month interview, SSP reduced marriage by 2.8 percentage points in British
Columbia, but raised it by 3.8 percentage points in New Brunswick. The estimates from
the 54-month interview are not significantly different from zero, but neither are they
significantly different from the 36-month estimates.
Of course, these results are logically consistent with our model. They indicate
that, in British Columbia, SSP's effect on the single-mother's non-marital alternative
exceeded its effect on her marital frontier, whereas in New Brunswick, its effects were
just the opposite. In this sense, it is a virtue that our model is consistent with such a
broad range of behavior. At the same time, it would be desirable to more concretely
explain why the same program had different effects in different locations.
A natural first step is to ask whether SSP had different effects on other aspects of
behavior which might explain its different effects on marriage. This line of inquiry only

22

deepens the puzzle. As seen in Panel C of Table 1, the program's effects on employment,
welfare receipt, and income--the primary outcomes that the program was intended to
affect--were similar across provinces.
Harknett and Gennetian (2003) attempt to explain the puzzle by asking whether
province-level differences in SSP participants' characteristics could explain why the
effects of the program on marriage differ by province. To do this, they regressed a
marital-status dummy on a treatment-group dummy, a vector of participant
characteristics, and interactions between the treatment-group dummy and those
characteristics. The interaction terms failed to explain the difference in marriage effects
between provinces. Harknett and Gennetian suggest that differences in culture between
the two provinces might play a role.
An alternative explanation suggested by our model hinges on differences in the
scope for specialization owing to differences in the state of the labor market between the
two provinces. Recall that gains from specialization within marriage affect the location
of the marital utility-possibility frontier. The greater the scope for such gains, the greater
is the extent to which the program encourages marriage. Recall also that the structure of
SSP limits the scope for efficient specialization in cases where the mother is the lowwage worker. Since SSP benefits depend on the mother's labor supply, the program
largely eliminates the possibility of what we might refer to as traditional specialization,
whereby the husband specializes in market work and the mother specializes in home
production. To the extent married couples specialize under SSP, it would involve nontraditional specialization, with the mother working and the husband engaging in home
production.

23

The attractiveness of non-traditional specialization, in turn, should depend on the
state of the labor market for men. In strong labor markets, the opportunity cost of the
husband's specializing in home production would be relatively high, whereas in weak
labor markets, it would be relatively low. When SSP was operating, labor markets in
British Columbia were strong relative to those in New Brunswick. Among high-school
educated men between the ages of 20 and 44, who would likely participate in the same
marriage markets as SSP recipients, unemployment rates were 10.5 percent in British
Columbia and 17.9 percent in New Brunswick. Among high school dropouts, the
respective unemployment rates were 16.8 and 27.6 percent (Harknett and Gennetian
2003). Thus the structure of SSP interacted with the state of the labor market may have
limited gains to specialization in British Columbia to a greater extent than in New
Brunswick. This may explain why SSP's effect on the mother's non-marital option
dominated its effect on the marital frontier in British Columbia, but had the opposite
effect in New Brunswick.
Of course, it would be desirable to bolster this argument with empirical evidence.
Since there are no data on husbands' time allocation or employment to provide any direct
evidence, we appeal instead to indirect evidence that appears in the analysis of Harknett
and Gennetian (2003). If potential husbands' opportunity costs play an important role in
explaining the marriage effects, then they should play a role within province as well as
between provinces. Thus within New Brunswick, the largest positive effects on marriage
should obtain for groups with the lowest opportunity costs, and within British Columbia,
the largest negative effects should obtain for groups with the highest opportunity costs.

24

Indeed we find such a pattern in the data. In New Brunswick, the largest positive
effect obtains for 19-to 24-year-olds. In British Columbia, the largest negative effects
obtain for 40-to-49-year-olds. Since men's wages rise with age, this pattern is consistent
with the notion that the opportunity cost of home production among men plays a role in
explaining the effects of SSP on marriage.
IV. The Effects of Work-Conditioned Transfers on Child Well-Being
A. Theoretical Framework

The efficient household model predicts that, within two-parent households,
changes in one spouse's non-marital alternative should influence the intra-household
allocation of resources (Chiappori 1992). Such changes could affect child well-being.
However, since marriage rates are low in most of the studies we consider, it seems
doubtful that the primary effects of these transfer programs on child well-being would
operate through intra-marital bargaining.
Since most children reside in single-mother households, we think about child
well-being in terms of a variant of Becker’s (1965, 1981) model of household production
in which a single mother seeks to maximize a utility function that includes her own utility
and the utility of her children. 9 Her optimization problem is subject to a budget
constraint that differentiates adult- versus child-specific consumption and to a production
function that governs how inputs such as parental time and other purchased goods and
services produce child outcomes (e.g., cognitive development, schooling attainment, or
health status). The mother makes decisions about how to allocate her time between work,
time spent with children or in other home production activities, and leisure. She also
makes decisions about how her children’s time is allocated between activities such as
9

This section draws on Grogger and Karoly (2005), Chapter 9.

25

schooling or non-schooling activities (e.g., leisure time or, for older children, time spent
working, helping with household chores, or caring for younger siblings). Choices are
also made regarding other resources that foster children’s development, such as learning
resources in the home, the quality of child care or schools attended, and the neighborhood
where the family lives.
Within this framework, work-conditioned transfer programs may affect family
decisionmaking in ways that could have either favorable or unfavorable effects on child
outcomes, and those effects may vary with the age of the child (Duncan and ChaseLansdale 2001; Zaslow et al. 2002). First, as noted above, a primary objective of the
work-conditioned transfer programs we examine is to increase parental work effort. Prior
research indicates that increased maternal work effort affects child health and
development, although the findings suggests that the direction of the effect depends upon
such factors as the nature of the mother’s job, the change in family income, the quality of
child care for younger children and changes in time use for older children, and the
mother’s mental health (Morris et al. 2001; Brooks-Gunn et al. 2001).
In single-parent families, the substitution of maternal care for non-maternal care is
likely to be greatest for preschool-age children as opposed to older children who are
already in school. Experimental evaluations of high-quality center-based preschool
programs have been shown to improve behavioral and cognitive outcomes for
disadvantaged children (see Karoly, Kilburn and Cannon, 2005, for a recent review).
Other research has demonstrated a linkage between the quality of child care and afterschool care environments and children’s developmental outcomes and school success
(Vandell and Shumow, 1999; and Vandell and Wolfe, 2000; Vandell and Pierce, 2003).

26

The effect of work-conditioned transfer programs will thus depend upon choices the
mother makes with respect to substitute care for her children and those choices will be
constrained by the price and quality of care options available to her.
Changes in family income that accompany conditional cash transfer programs can
also affect child well-being. Increases in family income may lead families to increase
investments in their children such as higher quality child care, better schools or other
educational inputs, or improved residential location. Indeed, an extensive body of
research documents linkages between family income and child development, although the
favorable effects appear to be stronger for younger children and families starting from
low income levels (Duncan and Brooks-Gunn, 1997; NICHD Early Child Care Research
Network, 2006). To the extent that work-conditioned transfer programs raise family
income, we might expect to see favorable effects on child outcomes, especially for
younger children.
Child outcomes may also be affected by other areas of family decisionmaking
such as family formation and child bearing. If work-conditioned transfer programs raise
marriage or reduce divorce, children may gain if two-parent household devote greater
time and financial resources to child-rearing. Evidence suggests that two-parent
households may be beneficial for children, although the research is not definitive (Amato,
2005). Likewise, if work-conditioned transfer programs reduce subsequent childbearing,
children may benefit because existing resources in the family can be invested in a smaller
number of children—the so-called “quality-quantity” tradeoff (Becker and Tomes, 1976).
In sum, work-conditioned transfer programs may affect child well-being based on
the tradeoffs parents make between time spent working and time spent with children and

27

between the consumption of goods and services that benefit adults versus those that
directly benefit children. The effects on children may operate through a number of
different pathways. The most important such pathways are likely to include changes in
parental employment and family income, since the changes in marriage that we observe
are mostly small. Other intermediate behaviors that can affect child outcomes include
choices about child care and childbearing. As children transition to adolescence and
young adulthood, they begin to make their own choices about their time allocation such
as time spent in school, on homework, or in delinquent activities. They also have more
control over the inputs that contribute to their own human capital production such as
attitudes toward school and work or other decisions that affect their life course such as
teen childbearing. Overall, this discussion suggests that work-conditioned transfer
programs may generate positive, negative or neutral effects on children, and the impacts
may vary with the child outcome considered such as cognitive, social or emotional
development, school achievement or attainment, delinquent behavior, or health. The
effects may also vary with the age of the child.
B. Evidence

1. Data
The MFIP, MFIP-IO and SSP evaluations collected an array of data on children in
the experiments from a variety of sources. Although child well-being can be
conceptualized and measured in numerous ways, there were efforts to collect common
measures in several key domains between these evaluations. In the discussion that
follows, we focus on education and behavior outcomes, where the former include school
achievement measures and measures of educational progress (e.g., grade repetition,

28

special education use, dropping out of school, attending college) and the latter include
measures of behavior problems or, for older youth, the incidence of arrests. We also
consider labor market and fertility outcomes among older youth. Measures may be based
on standardized test instruments, parent or teacher reports, or child self-reports (in the
case of older youth). 10
In MFIP and MFIP-IO, in-depth information on child outcomes was collected for
only a subset of the full evaluation sample. At the 36-month follow-up, the full range of
child-specific data were collected for treatment and control group families with at least
one child age 2 to 9 at the time of randomization and who were enrolled in the first seven
months of the study (April to October 1994) (Gennetian and Miller, 2000). One child in
the eligible age range was selected at random and information was collected from
maternal reports on the focal child’s school performance (parental report on achievement,
grade repetition and expulsions/suspensions), and behavior problems (Behavior Problems
Index, Positive Behavior Scale). Since some information was collected for all children
age 5 to 18 at the time of follow-up, results were also reported for a subset of the
outcomes for all children age 10 to 13 at the time of random assignment. At the 36month follow-up, outcomes are reported separately for children of single-parent recent
applicants and ongoing recipients in urban areas.
The most recent MFIP follow-up matched children in the study sample to 3rd and
5th grade reading and math achievement test scores based on school records for 2001 to

10

We do not discuss results for measures of child health collected in MFIP and SSP. Generally, these
measures were not significant and when they were, they would not materially affect our conclusions.

29

2003 (Gennetian, Miller and Smith 2005). 11 Children with 3rd grade scores were
approximately age 0 to 3 at the time of randomization, while those with 5th grade scores
were ages 2 to 5. The follow-up period ranged from five to nine years depending upon
whether families were enrolled later or earlier in the two-year randomization period.
Results were reported only for MFIP urban single-parent applicants and recipients and for
two-parent families; no results were reported for MFIP-IO.
In SSP, information on children was collected at the 36- and 54-month follow-up
interviews and the information collected varied with the age of the child. Results
reported in Michalopoulos et al. (2002) stratify results for children who were 1 or 2 years
of age at random assignment (and therefore 4 or 5 years of age at the 36-month follow-up
and 5.5 to 7.5 years of age at the 54-month follow-up), those who were 3 or 4 years of
age at random assignment (6 or 7 and the first follow-up and 7.5 to 9.5 at the second
follow-up), those who were 13-15 at random assignment (16 to 18 and 17.5 to 20.5 at the
two follow-ups) and those age 16 or 17 at random assignment (outcomes measured only
when ages 20.5 to 22.5 at the 54-month follow-up). 12
At the first follow-up, the school achievement data included the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R) for children age 15 and under at the time of random
assignment. A math score was also collected for those age 3 to 4 at random assignment
and average achievement was rated by parents of all sampled children. Other educational
measures included parent reports of grade repetition, special education use and behavior
11

We focus on the results for reading and math scale scores. The findings are similar for a proficiency
score measure which is a dichotomous indicator as to whether or not the child had met grade-level
expectations in the subject.
12
The 54-month SSP follow-up did not include children who were age 5 to 12 at random assignment. This
age group was included in the 36-month follow-up, although results were reported for those age 3 to 8 and
9 to 15 at random assignment. For the younger age group, significant favorable effects were found for
school achievement and health measures, while significant unfavorable effects were found for the older age
group in behavior and school achievement outcomes (Morris and Michalopoulos, 2000).

30

problems. At older ages, youth and young adults self-reported employment status, and
whether they had ever had a baby or been arrested. Results are reported separately for
the British Columbia and New Brunswick samples. However, we focus on results for the
pooled sample given the similarity in the results by province and the smaller sample sizes
that result when the data are stratified.
2. The Impacts of Work-Conditioned Transfers on Child Outcomes
Table 3 presents the effects of MFIP-IO and MFIP on child outcomes, while
Table 4 provides parallel results for SSP. Both tables follow a similar format as Tables 1
and 2, although we also include a measure of the reported effect size for the study
impacts for MFIP. 13
As of the 36-month follow-up, MFIP-IO had one significant effect among
applicant children age 2 to 9 at study entry, namely a reduction in school performance
with a modest effect size (0.2). For the same age group, MFIP had no significant effect
on applicants, but it had unfavorable effects on children age 10 to 13 at enrollment,
specifically a drop in school performance and an increase in the rate at which parents
were contacted by their child’s school about problem behavior. Among the other
outcomes shown in Table 3 measured at 36-months, while not significant, the effects of
MFIP-IO and MFIP on children of urban applicants are also, for the most part, in an
unfavorable direction. Likewise, MFIP's longer-term effects on 3rd and 5th grade
achievement scores are all unfavorable for children of applicants, although only the effect
on 3rd grade reading is significant.

13

The effect size is a standardized measure of impact and is defined as the program impact (treatment
minus control group difference) divided by the standard deviation of the outcome for treatment and control
groups combined. In Table 3, we show the absolute value of the effect size where it was reported in the
MFIP evaluation. Effect sizes were not reported in the SSP evaluation.

31

Among single-parent ongoing recipients, the results are more favorable,
especially in the short-term. As of the 36-month follow-up, MFIP-IO raised school
performance and reduced behavior problems (as measured by both the Behavior
Problems Index and Positive Behavior Scale). MFIP had a similar effect (with the
exception of no change in the Positive Behavior Scale). In both cases, the effect sizes are
modest (between 0.1 and 0.2). Among ongoing recipients, MFIP had no significant
effect on children age 10 to 13 at random assignment. Long-term results are available
only for the MFIP. For both younger and older age cohorts, the effect of MFIP on
reading and math scores was positive although, only the effect on the 3rd grade reading
score was significant.
For MFIP children in two-parent families, only longer-term results are available.
As seen in Table 3, the program had no significant effects on either reading or math
scores for children of two-parent ongoing recipients. Moreover, the signs of the
estimates differ between 3rd and 5th graders.
The differential effect of MFIP-IO and MFIP as between single-parent applicants
and recipients may be attributable to the differential effect of the reforms on employment
and income in the two groups, at least in the short-term. Recall from Table 1 that, as of
the 36-month follow-up, MFIP-IO and MFIP raised employment and income for
recipients but not for applicants. These differences suggest that children in single-parent
recipient families benefited from the increase in family income that resulted from the
greater work effort combined with the financial work incentive. 14

14

This inference is consistent with the findings reported in Clark-Kauffman, Duncan, and Morris (2003) for
a larger set of welfare experiments. Based on measures of child achievement assessed two to five years
after program entry, they conclude that the effects on children are more favorable when programs raise

32

Overall, for single-parent recipients, there does not appear to have been a
detrimental effect of increased employment. Indeed, other data from the evaluation show
that single-parent recipients significantly increased their use of child care, with a
significant gain in both the fraction using formal child care (i.e., center-based care) and
informal child care (Gennetian and Miller, 2000). 15 Children in single-parent recipient
families may have also benefited from the improved marriage outcomes discussed in the
prior section. On the other hand, the lack of any significant effect on achievement scores
for children in two-parent recipient families suggests that the greater marital stability for
the two-parent MFIP group did not translate into improved academic outcomes for the
children who were under age 5 at the time of randomization.
The results for SSP, presented in Table 4, suggest further that the favorable
effects of increased income in single-parent families may be most beneficial for children
who were preschool-age at the time of the income supplement. As indicated in Table 1,
through the period of eligibility, SSP increased monthly income for single-parent
recipients in both provinces by a magnitude that was comparable to the gain experienced
by MFIP single-parent recipients. Focusing on the results disaggregated by age group but
pooled across the two provinces, SSP had no significant effects on a range of outcomes,
either for children age 1 to 2 at random assignment or for those age 13 to 15. 16

family income through generous earnings supplements compared with those that only mandate increased
work effort.
15
There was no significant change in the overall use of child care or in the type of care used for singleparent applicants despite the policy change in provider reimbursement incorporated into the MFIP reforms.
The MFIP and SSP reforms did not include changes in the generosity of child care subsidies, in contrast to
other reforms like the Working Families’ Tax Credit in Britain. Francesconi and van der Klaauw (2007)
find that the added child care tax credit contributed to the increased employment and use of formal child
care among low-income single mothers.
16
While there is no difference at the 36-month follow-up in parental reports of school achievement among
those age 13 to 15 at random assignment, student reports show a significant negative effect on overall

33

For those age 3 to 4, however, SSP led to a significant short-term increase in the
math skill score and in the parental report of general school achievement. Among the
outcomes measured at the 54-month interview, there is a significant decline in the use of
special education for this same age cohort. In addition, while there was no difference in
average school achievement, parents were significantly more likely to rate their child as
above average and less likely to rate them below average as compared with the control
group (results not shown). As with MFIP, among the SSP treatment group with
preschool-age children at the time of randomization, greater income and work effort were
accompanied by an increased use of child care, particularly informal care providers, and
an increase in hours spent in care and instability in care arrangements (Michalopoulos et
al. 2002). These favorable effects are only significant in the British Columbia sample,
but not the New Brunswick sample. It is notable that this difference goes against a
possible beneficial effect of marriage on child outcomes given that the favorable effect of
SSP on marriage was found only in New Brunswick. However, the smaller provincespecific sample sizes reduce the power to test this hypothesis.
The SSP results also suggest that there may be a negative effect on outcomes for
children who were nearing the transition to adulthood at the time of the income
supplement. Those age 16 to 17 at random assignment were found to have an increased
likelihood of ever having had a baby as of the 54-month follow-up, at least in New
Brunswick.
Other research pooling experimental data from MFIP and SSP with other welfare
experiments conducted over the same time period provide further support for the

achievement, as well as a higher frequency of delinquent activity and alcohol use. These outcomes were
not assessed at the 54-month follow-up.

34

hypothesis that preschool-age children benefit when welfare programs or earnings
supplements increase family income and increase the use of the center-based child care
(Morris, Gennetian and Duncan 2005). There is also some evidence to indicate that
adolescents do not benefit in the same way from an increase in family income. Rather,
unfavorable effects may result from the increase in maternal employment and an increase
in responsibilities in the home environment for the adolescent (e.g., caring for younger
siblings) (Morris, Gennetian, Duncan and Houston 2007).
V. Conclusion

The efficient household model provides a useful means of analyzing the
incentives for marriage that arise from both the single-parent and the two-parent
components of work-conditioned transfer programs. The model points out that such
programs may cause marriage either to rise or to fall. This is because they may improve
the non-marital options facing single mothers, but at the same time, they may expand the
marital utility-possibility frontier.
The limited empirical evidence yields both positive and negative effects, which
raises the question of how such programs might be designed to better promote marriage.
At a fairly obvious level, any aspect of the program which only reduced non-marital
utility, or which only expanded the marital frontier, should increase marriage. Of course,
such factors may also affect the household's allocation of resources, which is something
that policy makers would want to take into account.
A less obvious lesson is that, in order to promote marriage, transfer programs
should be structured so as to maximize the potential for efficient specialization within
marriage. To the extent that it is efficient for the high-wage spouse to specialize more in

35

work and the other spouse to specialize more in home production, program rules that
work against such specialization reduce the gains to marriage. MFIP promoted efficient
specialization to a greater extent than SSP, since it allowed the couple to choose who
satisfied the work requirement. This may explain why MFIP had more consistent
positive effects on marriage than SSP.
The different effects that SSP had in the different provinces may have stemmed
from an interaction between the program's incentives for marital specialization and the
state of the labor market. Since SSP was tied to the mother's labor supply, it provided an
incentive for the mother to work and, if there was to be any specialization within the
household, for the husband to engage in home production. In British Columbia, where
the labor market was relatively strong, the opportunity costs of such non-traditional
specialization were higher than in New Brunswick, where the labor market was weaker.
Work-conditioned transfer programs may also affect the well-being of the
children as a result of changes in marriage, employment, family income, and other
aspects of family decisionmaking. An economic framework provides little clear guidance
as the net results of such changes, suggesting there may be either favorable or
unfavorable effects on child outcomes and that any such effects may vary with the stage
of child development. The empirical evidence from MFIP-IO, MFIP and SSP bears out
this expectation. Favorable effects appear to arise for preschool-age children when workconditioned transfer programs raise family income and increase the use of center-based
child care. Unfavorable outcomes are concentrated among children who are adolescents
when their parents participate in the transfer program, even if family income is increased.

36

Since work-conditioned transfer programs are generally not designed to directly
affect child well-being, to the extent that children gain or lose from such programs, it is
as a result of changes in family behavior that indirectly affect child outcomes. The
experimental evidence from MFIP, SSP, and other welfare program evaluations suggests
that key pathways for affecting child outcomes are changes in family income, the use of
center-based child care, and time-use of adolescents. Interestingly, there is little evidence
to suggest that the formation or maintenance of two-parent families that might result from
such programs have any collateral benefit for children. Instead, to reinforce potential
favorable effects on child outcomes or minimize potential negative consequences, it may
be desirable to accompany work-conditioned transfers with policies designed explicitly to
promote participation in high-quality early childhood programs, after-school programs
for younger school-age children, and youth development programs for adolescents.

37

References

Amato, Paul R., “The Impact of Family Formation Change on the Cognitive, Social, and
Emotional Well-Being of the Next Generation.” Future of Children 15(2) (Fall
2005), 75-96.
Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal 75 (1965),
493-517.
Becker, Gary S. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1981.
Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes. “Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of
Children.” Journal of Political Economy 84 (4, part 2) (1976), S143-S162.
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah Gelbach, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Madeline Zavodny. "The
Impact of Welfare Reform on Marriage and Divorce." Demography 41 (May
2004), 213-236.
Blundell, Richard, and Hilary Hoynes. “Has ‘In-Work’ Benefit Reform Helped the
Labor Market?” In David Card, Richard Blundell, and Richard B. Freeman, eds.
Seeking a Premier Economy: The Economic Effects of British Economic Reforms,
1980-2000. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004, 411-459.
Brewer, M., Duncan, A., Sheppard, A. and Suarez, M. “Did Working Families Tax
Credit Work?” IFS report, June 2004.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Pamela Klebanov, Judith R. Smith, and Kyunghee Lee. “Effects of
Combining Public Assistance and Employment on Mothers and Their Very
Young Children.” Women and Health 32( 3) (2001), 179-210.
Chiappori, Pierre Andre. “Collective Labor Supply and Welfare.” Journal of Political
Economy 100, 1992, 437-67.
Clark-Kauffman, Elizabeth, Greg Duncan, and Pamela Morris. “How Welfare Policies
Affect Child and Adolescent Achievement.” American Economic Review 93(2)
(2003), 299-303.
Duncan, Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, eds. Consequences of Growing Up Poor. New
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997.
Duncan, Greg J. and P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale. “Welfare Reform and Children’s WellBeing.” In Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds., The New World of Welfare,
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2001, pp. 391-417.

38

Francesconi, Marco and Wilbert van der Klaauw. “The Socioeconomic Consequences of
‘In-Work’ Benefit Reform for British Lone Mothers.” Journal of Human
Resources 42, 2007, 1-31.
Francesconi, Marco, Helmut Rainer, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. “The Effects of InWork Benefit Reform in Britain on Couples: Theory and Evidence” 2007, this
Symposium.
Gennetian, Lisa A., and Cynthia Miller. Reforming Welfare and Rewarding Work: Final
Report on the Minnesota Family Investment Program, Volume 2: Effects on
Children. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation,
September 2000.
Gennetian, Lisa A., Cynthia Miller, and Jared Smith. Turning Welfare into a Work
Support: Six-Year Impacts on Parents and Children from the Minnesota Family
Investment Program. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation, July 2005.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Lynn A. Karoly. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005.
Harknett, Kristen, and Lisa A. Gennetian. "How an Earnings Supplement Can Affect
Union Formation Among Low-Income Single Mothers." Demography 40
(August 2003), 451-478.
Hotz, V. Joseph and J. Karl Scholz. "The Earned Income Tax Credit." In Robert A.
Moffitt, ed., Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Hoynes, Hilary W. "Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and
Welfare Participation Under AFDC-UP." Econometrica 64 (March 1996), 295332.
Hoynes, Hilary W. "Does Welfare Play Any Role in Female Headship Decisions?"
Journal of Public Economics 65 (1997), 89-117.
Karoly, Lynn A., M. Rebecca Kilburn, and Jill S. Cannon. Early Childhood
Interventions: Proven Results, Future Promise. Santa Monica, California: The
RAND Corporation, 2005.
Miller, Cynthia, Virginia Knox, Lisa A. Gennetian, Martey Dodoo, Jo Anna Hunter, and
Cindy Redcross. Reforming Welfare and Rewarding Work: Final Report on the
Minnesota Family Investment Program (Vol. 1: Effects on Adults). New York,
NY: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, September 2000.

39

Michalopoulos, Charles, Doug Tattrie, Cynthia Miller, Philip K. Robins, Pamela Morris,
David Gyarmati, Cindy Redcross, Kelly Foley, and Reuben Ford. Making Work
Pay: Final Report on the Self-Sufficiency Project for Long-Term Welfare
Recipients. Ottawa, Canada: Social Research Demonstration Corporation, July
2002.
Moffitt, Robert A. "The Effect of the U.S. Welfare System on Marital Status." Journal of
Public Economics 41 (1990), 101-124.
Moffitt, Robert A. "Welfare Effects on Female Headship with Area Effects." Journal of
Human Resources 29 (Spring 1992), 621-636.
Morris, Pamela A., Lisa A. Gennetian, and Greg J. Duncan. Effects of Welfare and
Employment Policies on Young Children: New Findings on Policy Experiments
Conducted in the Early 1990s. Society for Research in Child Development Social
Policy Report, Volume XIX, Number II, 2005.
Morris, Pamela A., Lisa A. Gennetian, Greg J. Duncan, and Aletha Huston. “How
Welfare Policies Affect Child and Adolescent Development: Investigating
Pathways of Influence with Experimental Data,” working paper, March 2007.
Morris, Pamela A., Aletha C. Huston, Greg J. Duncan, Danielle A. Crosby, and Johannes
Bos. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Children: A Synthesis of Research.
New York, NY: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, March 2001.
Morris, Pamela A. and Charles Michalopoulos. The Self-Sufficiency Project at 36
Months: Effects on Children of a Program that Increased Parental Employment
and Income. Ottawa, Canada: Social Research Demonstration Corporation, June
2000.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, “Duration and Developmental Timing of
Poverty and Children’s Cognitive and Social Development from Birth through
Third Grade.” Child Development 76 (2006), 795-810.
Schultz, T. Paul. "Marital Status and Fertility in the United States: Welfare and Labor
Market Effects." Journal of Human Resources 29 (Spring 1992), 637-669.
Vandell, D. L. and L. Shumow, “After-School Child Care Programs,” The Future of
Children, Volume 9, Number 2, 1999, pp. 64-80.
Vandell, D. L. and K. M. Pierce, “Child Care Quality and Children's Success at School”
in A. Reynolds and M. Wang, eds., Early Childhood Learning: Programs for a
New Century, New York: Child Welfare League, 2003.

40

Vandell, D. L. and B. Wolfe, Child Care Quality: Does It Matter and Does It Need to be
Improved? Washington, D.C.: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services, 2000.
Zaslow, Martha J., Kristin A. Moore, Jennifer L. Brooks, Pamela A. Morris, et al.,
“Experimental Studies of Welfare Reform and Children,” The Future of Children,
Vol. 12, No. 1, Winter/Spring 2002, pp. 79-95.

41

Um

~
V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 )

Marital frontier under
MFIP

X

Y

Vm(wm(1-τAFDC ),G1)

Marital frontier under
AFDC-UP
Vs(ws, 0)
Figure 1

42

Us

Um

Marital frontier under
MFIP

~
V m ( w m (1 − τ MFIP ), G1 )
x
y

Vm(wm(1-τAFDC ),G1)

Marital frontier under
AFDC-UP

Vs(ws, 0)
Figure 2

43

Us

Table 1—Effects of Work-Conditioned Transfer Programs on Employment, Welfare and
Income
Year 3 Follow-Up
Control
mean

Impact

Year 6 Follow-Upa
Control
mean

Impact

A. MFIP-Incentives Only
Urban single-parent, recent applicants (N=3113)
Employment (%)
Monthly earnings ($)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly welfare benefits ($)
Monthly income ($)
Urban single-parent, ongoing recipients (N=1769)
Employment (%)
Monthly earnings ($)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly welfare benefits ($)
Monthly income ($)

56.5
750
31.0
159
910

1.4
-44
4.7
75
32

59.7
1004
18.5
88
1093

-0.5
-33
3.6
22
-11

47.9
501
57.0
359
859

3.7
-3
9.8
82
79

56.6
751
40.0
223
974

2.1
36
1.7
17
35

56.5
750
31.0
159
910

2.9
13
4.7
31
44

***
***
*

59.7
1004
18.5
88
1093

-0.5
-19
1.2
6
-13

47.9
501
57.0
359
859

9.2
51
7.3
48
99

***
*
***
***
***

56.6
751
40.0
223
974

0.8
32
1.5
17
49

65.3
27.0
1166
47.0
318
1483

-0.5
-3.0
-129
13.8
151
22

*
**
***
***

69.1
30.9
1742
28.5
180
1922

***
***

**
***
***
***

***
***

B. MFIP
Urban single-parent, recent applicants (N=4049)
Employment (%)
Monthly earnings ($)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly welfare benefits ($)
Monthly income ($)
Urban single-parent, ongoing recipients (N=1780)
Employment (%)
Monthly earnings ($)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly welfare benefits ($)
Monthly income ($)
Two-parent, ongoing recipients (N=1523)
At least one parent employed (%)
Both parents employed (%)
Monthly earnings ($)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly welfare benefits ($)
Monthly income ($)

44

**

-2.5
-2.6
-104
3.9 *
19
-84
[continued]

Table 1—Effects of Work-Conditioned Transfer Programs on Employment, Welfare and
Income, Continued
Year 3 Follow-Up
Control
mean

Impact

Year 6 Follow-Upa
Control
mean

Impact

C. SSP
Single-parent, ongoing recipients, British Columbia (N=2538)
Employment, full-time (%)
Employment (%)
Monthly earnings (Ç$)
Received welfare (%)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly benefits from welfare and supplement (C$)
Monthly income (C$)
Single-parent, ongoing recipients, New Brunswick (N=2314)
Employment, full-time (%)
Employment (%)
Monthly earnings (Ç$)
Received welfare (%)
Received welfare (%)
Monthly benefits from welfare and supplement (C$)
Monthly income (C$)
a

19.2
33.1
393
68.7
68.7
637
1430

7.1
4.8
36
-6.3
9.8
81
121

19.3
35.9
300
67.2
67.2
490
1105.0

11.2
7.2
63
-10.2
12.3
98
151.0

***
***
***
***
***
***

26.4
39.4
550
54.6
54.6
464
1484

-2.0
-1.4
-22
-1.0
-1.0
-10
-22

***
***
**
***
***
***
***

26.6
44.5
421
59.8
59.8
427
1185

5.4
1.6
39
-6.5
-6.5
-48
-39

For MFIP and MFIP-IO, long-term outcomes are from year 5-6 administrative data. For SSP, long-term outcomes are from quarter
18 administrative data.
NOTES: Statistically significant at the *10 percent, **5 percent, and ***1 percent level.
SOURCE: MFIP-IO and MFIP: Gennetian, Miller, and Smith (2005), Tables 4.1, A.2 and A.3; SSP: Michalopoulos et al. (2002),
Tables C.3, C.4 and C.6.

45

***
***
***
***

Table 2—Effects of Work-Conditioned Transfer Programs on Marriage, Separation, and
Divorce
Year 3 Follow-Up
Sample
size

Control
mean

Impact

Year 6 Follow-Upa
Control
mean

Impact

A. MFIP-Incentives Only
Urban single-parent, recent applicants
Currently married and living with spouse (%)
Urban single-parent, ongoing recipients
Currently married and living with spouse (%)
Ever married, from public records (%)

709

15.1

-2.2

--

--

718
1769

5.8
7.3

5.2
2.0

-13.9

-2.5

1006

15.1

1.7

--

--

724
1780

5.8
7.3

2.8
2.2

-13.9

-1.3

290
290
290
1523

48.3
5.5
16.0
4.7

19.1
-3.1
-9.5
-1.4

***

---11.1

----3.1

12.0

-2.8

**

20.2

-1.6

17.3

3.8

**

25.1

2.5

**

B. MFIP
Urban single-parent, recent applicants
Currently married and living with spouse (%)
Urban single-parent, ongoing recipients
Currently married and living with spouse (%)
Ever married, from public records (%)
Two-parent, ongoing recipients
Currently married and living with spouse (%)
Divorced (%)
Separated (%)
Ever divorced, from public records (%)

**

C. SSP
Single-parent, ongoing recipients, British Columbia
Ever married or common-law
2538
Single-parent, ongoing recipients, New Brunswick
Ever married or common-law
2314
a

For MFIP and MFIP-IO, long-term data are from a 6-year follow-up of administrative records. For SSP, long-term data are from the
54-month survey.
NOTES: Outcomes based on survey responses, except as indicated. Statistically significant at the *10 percent, **5 percent, and ***1
percent level.
SOURCE: MFIP-IO and MFIP: Miller et al. (2000), Tables 4.1, 4.7, 5.1, 5.6, 6.6, and Gennetian, Miller, and Smith (2005), Tables
4.2, B.2, D.1; SSP: Michalopoulos et al. (2002), Tables D.15 and D.16.

46

**

Table 3—Effects of MFIP-IO and MFIP on Child Outcomes
Year 3 Follow-Up
Control
mean

Impact

Year 6 to 8 Follow-Up
Effect
size

Control
mean

Impact

Effect
size

A. MFIP-Incentives Only
Urban single-parent, recent applicants
Age at RA: 2 to 9 (N=394)
School performancea
Ever repeated a grade (%)
Ever in special education (%)
Behavior Problems Indexb
Positive Behavior Scalec
Urban single-parent, ongoing recipients
Age at RA: 2 to 9 (N=573)
School performancea
Ever repeated a grade (%)
Ever in special education (%)
Behavior Problems Indexb
Positive Behavior Scalec

4.3
4.6
17.4
9.8
200.0

-0.2 *
1.2
-2.7
0.9
-3.4

0.2
0.1
-0.1
0.1

------

------

------

4.0
3.6
22.5
12.7
193.7

0.2 *
0.4
-1.4
-1.5 *
6.9 **

0.1
0.0
-0.2
0.2

------

------

------

-0.1
-2.6
-1.9
1.0
-3.2

0.1
0.1
-0.1
0.1

------

------

------

---

---

---

1430
1411

-39 *
-21

0.1
0.1

---

---

---

1451
1416

-13
-18

0.0
0.1

3.7
12.1
33.4

-0.3 **
4.9
11.5 ***

----

B. MFIP
Urban single-parent, recent applicants
Age at RA: 2 to 9 (N=517)
School performancea
Ever repeated a grade (%)
Ever in special education (%)
Behavior Problems Indexb
Positive Behavior Scalec
Age at RA: 0 to 3 (N=439)
Reading score (3rd grade)d
Math score (3rd grade)d
Age at RA: 2 to 5 (N=447)
Reading score (5th grade)d
Math score (5th grade)d
Age at RA: 10 to 13 (N=366)
School performancea
Ever repeated a grade (%)
Parent contact re behavior (%)

4.3
4.6
17.4
9.8
200.0

47

----

----

---[continued]

Table 3—Effects of MFIP-IO and MFIP on Child Outcomes, Continued
Year 3 Follow-Up
Control
mean

Year 6 to 8 Follow-Up
Effect
size

Control
mean

0.2 *
1.8
-4.5
-1.5 *
0.5

0.2
0.1
-0.1
0.0

------

---

---

---

1286
1293

51 *
21

0.2
0.1

---

---

---

1376
1335

31
26

0.1
0.1

3.6
17.7
37.6

0.0
-3.1
6.3

----

---

---

---

1332
1339

12
10

---

---

---

---

1382
1365

-6
-10

---

Impact

Impact

Effect
size

B. MFIP, Continued
Urban single-parent, ongoing recipients
Age at RA: 2 to 9 (N=587)
School performancea
Ever repeated a grade (%)
Ever in special education (%)
Behavior Problems Indexb
Positive Behavior Scalec
Age at RA: 0 to 3 (N=325)
Reading score (3rd grade)d
Math score (3rd grade)d
Age at RA: 2 to 5 (N=486)
Reading score (5th grade)d
Math score (5th grade)d
Age at RA: 10 to 13 (N=318)
School performancea
Ever repeated a grade (%)
Parent contact re behavior (%)
Two-parent, ongoing recipients
Age at RA: 0 to 3 (N=369)
Reading score (3rd grade)d
Math score (3rd grade)d
Age at RA: 2 to 5 (N=394)
Reading score (5th grade)d
Math score (5th grade)d

4.0
3.6
22.5
12.7
193.7

a

----

------

------

----

----

School performance s a parental report rated on a scale of 1 ("not well at all") to 5 ("very well").
The Behavior Problems Index is a 28-item scale where each item is measured on a 3-point scale from 0 to 2, where a higher score
indicates more negative behavior. The summed scale score can range from 0 to 56.
c
The Positive Behavior Scale s a 25-item scale where each item is measured on an 11-point scale from 0 to 10, where a higher score
indicates more positive behavior. The summed scale score can range from 0 to 250.
d
The 3rd and 5th grade reading and math scores are scale scores that can range from 50 to 2,600.
NOTES: Statistically significant at the *10 percent, **5 percent, and ***1 percent level.
SOURCE: Gennetian and Miller (2000), Tables 4.8. 5,5, F.1, F.2 and Gennetian, Miller and Smith (2005), Tables 3.3 and 4.3.
b

48

Table 4—Effects of SSP on Child Outcomes, Single-Parent Ongoing Recipients
Total Sample

a

Age at RA: 1 to 2
Reading score (PPVT-R)a
Average achievementb
Any grade repeated (%)
Ever in special education (%)
Behavior problemsd
Age at RA: 3 to 4
Reading score (PPVT-R)a
Math scorec
Average achievementb
Any grade repeated (%)
Ever in special education (%)
Behavior problemsd
Age at RA: 13 to 15
Average achievementb
Dropped out of school (%)
Attending college (%)
School behavior problems
Currently working (%)
Ever had a baby (%)
Ever been arrested (%)
Age at RA: 16 to 17
Dropped out of school (%)
Attending college (%)
Currently working (%)
Ever had a baby (%)
Ever been arrested (%)

British Columbia Sample

New Brunswick Sample

Year 3 Follow-Up

Year 4.5 Follow-Up

Year 3 Follow-Up

Year 4.5 Follow-Up

Year 3 Follow-Up

Year 4.5 Follow-Up

Control
mean

Control
mean

Impact

Control
mean

Control
mean

Control
mean

Impact

Control
mean

Impact

Impact

Impact

Impact

90.7
---1.5

1.3
---0.0

-3.9
2.5
14.1
1.3

-0.1
-0.1
-1.6
0.0

89.4
---1.5

2.6
---0.0

-3.8
1.6
11.0
1.3

-0.0
0.8
1.2
0.0

92.0
---1.5

0.0
---0.0

-4.0
3.6
17.6
1.3

-0.1
-1.2
-4.8
0.0

91.7
0.3
3.6
5.8
-1.4

1.9
0.1***
0.1*
0.7
-0.0

--3.8
6.9
22.3
1.3

--0.1
0.1
-4.2
0.0

92.7
0.4
3.6
4.4
-1.4

1.4
0.1*
0.1
-0.7
-0.0

--3.8
3.6
22.5
1.3

--0.1
-0.5
-6.6**
-6.6

90.7
0.3
3.7
7.1
-1.4

2.4
0.1
0.2
1.7
-0.0

--3.9
11.0
22.0
1.3

--0.0
0.8
-1.1
0.0

3.5
10.4
1.5
1.4
36.8
---

-0.1
2.6
-0.3
0.0
3.9
---

-28.9
8.6
-33.9
14.1
19.6

-2.9
0.7
-1.1
2.1
0.1

3.5
9.4
1.4
1.4
39.7
---

-0.1
0.8
1.0
-0.2
9.1
---

-23.6
9.1
-37.4
11.5
16.5

-3.0
2.3
-2.4
1.4
1.0

3.3
11.3
1.6
1.4
33.3
---

0.0
4.3
-1.6
0.1
-0.8
---

-34.4
8.1
-30.3
16.8
22.8

-3.5
-1.1
--0.7
3.2
-0.6

------

------

29.3
11.4
58.7
18.1
18.0

4.9
2.5
-3.8
9.7**
-0.9

------

------

29.5
12.8
59.1
13.7
10.3

-0.4
4.4
-0.5
5.3
7.0

------

------

29.2
10.2
58.3
22.2
25.0

9.5
0.7
-7.1
13.7**
-8.1

The PPVT-R is a standardized score on a test of word knowledge.
Average achievement is a parental report rated on a scale of 1 ("not well at all") to 5 ("very well").
c
The math score is the proportion of items answered correctly on a math skills test.
d
Behavior problems is a parental report rated on a scale from 1 ("never") to 3 ("often").
NOTES: Statistically significant at the *10 percent, **5 percent, and ***1 percent level. Sample sizes across columns as follows: Age 1 to 2 at RA: 765, 1159, 342, 615, 423, 544; Age 3 to 4 at
RA: 761, 1137, 370, 628, 391, 509; Age 13 to 15 at RA: 432, 867, 204, 456, 228, 411; Age 16 to 17 at RA: 504, 244, 260.
SOURCE: Gennetian and Miller (2000), Tables 4.8. 5,5, F.1, F.2 and Gennetian, Miller and Smith (2005), Tables 3.3 and 4.3.
b

49

