                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    PERSONNEL ECONOMICS

                                          Edward P. Lazear
                                             Paul Oyer

                                        Working Paper 13480
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13480


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




We thank the editors, James Malcomson, Bentley MacLeod, Scott Schaefer, Jan Zabojnik, and participants
in the Handbook conference at Stanford for comments. This is a draft of a chapter to appear in the
forthcoming Handbook of Organizational Economics, edited by Robert Gibbons and D. John Roberts
and published by Princeton University Press. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Edward P. Lazear and Paul Oyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Personnel Economics
Edward P. Lazear and Paul Oyer
NBER Working Paper No. 13480
October 2007
JEL No. J3,J41,M5

                                             ABSTRACT

In this review of the personnel economics literature, we introduce key topics of personnel economics,
focus on some relatively new findings that have emerged since prior reviews of some or all of the
personnel economics literature, and suggest open questions in personnel economics where future research
can make valuable contributions to the literature. We explore five aspects of the employment relationship
- incentives, matching firms with workers, compensation, skill development, and the organization
of work - reviewing the main theories, empirical tests of those theories, and the open questions in each
area.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
lazear@gsb.stanford.edu

Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
1. Introduction


        Personnel economics is the application of economic and mathematical approaches to
traditional topics in the study of human resource management. This includes topics such as
compensation, turnover, and incentives that are inherently economic, as well as those that do not
at first appear to be economic topics (such as norms, teamwork, worker empowerment, and peer
relationships.) Using the tools from advances in game theory, information economics,
econometrics, and other areas of economics, personnel economics has come a long way over the
last few decades. It now produces a large share of the labor economics literature, has earned its
own code in the Journal of Economic Literature classification system (M5), and has its own
working group within the National Bureau of Economic Research. In this paper, we review how
this literature has developed and discuss some avenues for fruitful future research.
        Personnel economics provides both positive and normative analysis of human resources
practices and methods. On the positive/descriptive side, we study a range of questions. When do
firms choose to use one form of compensation over another? When are teams important? How do
firms find the right workers? When are certain benefits or stock grants given to workers? The list
extends to any decision an employer has to make with respect to its dealings with employees.
That is, personnel economics attempts to describe how human resource practices can best
address an employer’s goals, subject to the constraint that employee actions will be affected by
those practices.
        Perhaps because the subject was taken up by business school economists whose job it is
to teach managers what to do, personnel economics has not shied away from being somewhat
prescriptive. Several MBA textbooks and numerous MBA classes that are either focused on
personnel economics or cover it as part of a broader subject deliver research findings to current
and future managers.1 In many ways, the basic outlines and topics of this chapter are similar to
the syllabi for the MBA classes we teach at Stanford (though the details are surely very
different.) Given the importance of human resources to many organizations’ success and the fact
that labor accounts for the majority of business costs, bringing research findings to managers can
have an important effect.


1
 A recent paper by Bloom and Van Reenan (2007) suggests that managers can benefit from using “modern”
managerial practices, including some specific practices studied in personnel economics.


                                                                                                        1
        In this review, we will introduce the key topics of personnel economics. We will also
focus on some relatively new findings that have emerged since prior reviews of some or all of
the personnel economics literature, such as Gibbons and Waldman (1999), Malcomson (1999),
Prendergast (1999), Murphy (1999), and Lazear (1999, 2000b). Throughout the discussion and in
the conclusion, we will suggest open questions where future research can make valuable
contributions to the literature.
        Personnel economics research has focused on five aspects of employment relationships –
incentives, matching firms with workers, compensation, skill development, and the organization
of work. Though some research focuses on only one of these, much of the literature touches on
multiple parts of jobs. For example, incentives have an effect on which workers accept positions
and the organization of the workplace depends on the skills a firm develops (or selects for).
Nonetheless, these five areas of employment relationships allow for a broad categorization of
research in personnel economics. So we explore each of these in turn, reviewing the main
theories, empirical tests of those theories, and the open questions in each area.
        Before going on, it is worth briefly noting what personal economics is not. Personnel
economics is a branch of labor economics, but there is a great deal of labor economics that is not
personnel economics. Studies that do not consider interactions between a firm and workers or do
not explicitly or implicitly consider a firm trying to maximize some objective (usually profits)
are not personnel economics. Many findings in labor economics are important conceptual or
empirical inputs to, but not part of, personnel economics. For example, labor economists
estimate Mincer-ian earnings functions of the returns to experience and the return to schooling
and they estimate labor supply functions. While these equilibrium outcomes are very important
issues to firms designing personnel policies, they are not strategic choices of the firm. Similarly,
most personnel economics is not policy-oriented. Personnel economics models typically focus on
welfare within a given employment relationship rather than on overall social welfare function. In
the absence of a market failure, firms’ best interests will be the same as those of the economy as
a whole. While there are some exceptions (for example, policy and personnel economics
influence one another in the study of workplace discrimination), the main contributions of
personnel economics to social welfare are in research advances and helping managers to run their
businesses more efficiently rather than in influencing policymakers’ decisions.




                                                                                                     2
2. Incentives


        Firms and employees naturally have opposing interests in that employee effort typically
leads to benefits to the firm and costs to the employee. However, there can be gains from trade if
the value to employers is enough to compensate workers for the cost of their effort. Encouraging
employee effort is a central issue in personnel economics and, as with much of economics, has
led to a large literature on incentives. When effort is contractible, providing efficient incentives
is trivial. But, in the more realistic case where there is hidden action (moral hazard), one of the
keys to successful personnel practices is to design incentives for employees.
        When effort is not contractible, one potential way (though not the only way) to get the
socially efficient level of worker effort is to pay the worker the full value of output – that is, sell
the firm to the worker. The firm could set a base salary to meet the worker’s participation
constraint and let the worker keep all the marginal fruits of his effort. The base salary will need
to be negative – that is, the worker will pay the firm for the right to work there – in order for the
firm to find the employment arrangement profitable. In other words, moral hazard problems can
be solved by making employees the residual claimants on their effort. If individuals own all their
output, they will efficiently match the marginal benefits of their effort to the marginal cost.
        There are employment arrangements that involve selling the firm to the worker (such as
taxi drivers who rent cabs for a shift and keep all fares), but these jobs are exceptions. Why does
this simple model fail for the vast majority of workers who have positive base wages and piece
rates of less than one (and usually zero)? There are many reasons, but they generally relate to the
facts that worker output (that is, measures of the worker’s productivity) is usually imperfectly
related to inputs (that is, the worker’s effort), that firms cannot always credibly commit to reward
effort ex post, and that individuals are typically more risk averse than employers.




2.1.1 The Trade-Off Between Risk and Incentives




                                                                                                          3
        Most theoretical principal-agent models assume that output is an increasing function of
effort and it is also influenced by some unobservable random shock.2 The employee’s utility is
decreasing and concave in effort (that is, his disutility of effort is positive and convex.) Because
he is risk averse, utility is increasing and concave in income. The complication, which makes it
impossible to simply pay the agent for his inputs, is that the principal can only observe the output
measure, so this is the only variable upon which compensation contracts can be based. If the two
parties could write enforceable contracts based on effort, the problem would be simple. The risk
neutral firm would simply pay for effort and the agent would be completely insured.
        The problem for the principal is to set the compensation scheme to maximize profit
subject to incentive compatibility and participation constraints. A key implication is that there is
now a tradeoff between insurance and incentives. Because workers do not like risk, the firm
must dampen the relation of wages to output. If compensation is based largely on output, the firm
may have to provide substantial risk compensation. But if compensation is not based on output,
workers will put forth little effort. The second-best solution, though the “best” compromise,
forces the worker to bear risk and provides the firm with an inefficient amount of effort.
        This model has two key predictions. First, the stronger the incentives, the harder the
employee will work. As we will discuss below, there is ample empirical evidence to suggest that
this relationship holds in most employment relationships. Second, there is a trade-off between
risk and incentives. Everything else equal, in settings where factors beyond the employee’s
control have a relatively large effect on output, incentives will be weaker. As we also discuss
below, probably at least partially due to an inability to make “everything else equal”, the
empirical evidence on this is decidedly mixed.


2.1.2 Distortions in Performance Measures


        Imperfections with performance measurement can lead firms to limit the use of incentives
even when employees are risk neutral. In addition to exogenous shocks to output measures, the
usefulness of a performance measure may also be limited by employees having private


2
 See Prendergast (1999) for a somewhat more detailed description of moral hazard theory. See Johnson (1950) and
Cheung (1969) for important early compensation analyses from the agricultural economics literature and Ross
(1973), Mirrlees (1974), Stiglitz (1975), Bergson (1978), and Holmstrom (1979) for early modern treatments of the
moral hazard problem.


                                                                                                                4
information or their ability to influence the measure without actually advancing the principal’s
goals.
         Gibbons (1987) considers the case where only the worker knows the difficulty of the job
and only the worker knows his true action. Under these circumstances, Gibbons shows that
workers will restrict output (that is, there will be a “ratchet effect”) when the firm cannot commit
not to use information it learns about the difficulty of the task. He argues that this contributed to
the decline of piece rate systems which were extensively used at the end of the 19th century.
         Another class of models considers the implications of employees that can affect the
output measure differently from their effect on actual output. Lazear (1986a) briefly discussed
the implications for incentives and performance measurement when workers can increase
quantity at the expense of quality. Baker (1992) provides a more general model of a firm that
wants to maximize some non-contractible objective (call it V). The firm can write compensation
contracts based on P, which is imperfectly correlated with V. The employee has private
information about how his actions affect both P and V. The firm wants to provide incentives so
that the employee will exert more effort, but has to trade this off against the fact that the
employee may exert effort when that effort has a large effect on P but not V. That is, the firm has
to worry about the fact that incentives drive efficient effort and “gaming” at the same time.
         Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) explore the limits of measurement from a slightly
different perspective. They derive a “multi-tasking” model where an employee engages in two
tasks that affect actual output and measured output differently. Incentive contracts may drive the
employee to under-invest or over-invest in one or both tasks. They discuss how this may explain
the limits of incentive pay for teachers. While incentives may lead teachers to work harder, they
may also focus their effort on teaching rote skills that are rewarded on standardized tests at the
expense of teaching logical reasoning and other skills where the payoff is not easily measured in
the short-term.3 As we discuss below, these models are generally consistent with several
empirical studies showing unintended responses to incentives.4


2.1.3 Subjective Measures of Performance

3
  Lazear (2006) lays out how the performance measures should be designed and how much information about them
should be given to employees when employees engage in multiple tasks.
4
  One case study that shows direct evidence of the importance of multi-task issues is Brickley and Zimmerman
(2001). They show that teacher ratings rose and research output fell at the University of Rochester’s Simon School
of Business after the administration increased the relative importance of teaching in its reward structure.


                                                                                                                     5
           Given the limits of objective performance measures, what alternatives do firms have for
motivating workers? The answer for most employees is various incentives based on subjective
measures of performance. That is, the performance of most employees is monitored by some
supervisor(s) that gets a reasonably accurate, but non-verifiable, signal of how good a job that
employee does. Good performance can then be rewarded through a variety of mechanisms,
including increases in base salary, subjectively determined bonus payments, or promotions.
           Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy (1994), Bull (1987), and MacLeod and Malcomson (1989),
model the use of subjective performance evaluation. They analyze the optimal mix of incentives
based on imperfect objective measures and perfect (but unverifiable) subjective measures. These
models highlight the trade-off between strong incentives from well-designed subjective measures
versus the fact that employees have to trust firms to follow through on the inherently implicit
contracts involved in any non-verifiable performance measure. For example, many Wall Street
firms distribute year-end bonuses to employees based on largely subjective measures of the
individuals’ contributions. The shareholders of those firms would gain in the short-term by
announcing that nobody had earned any bonus in a given year, but the firm would find it hard to
motivate employees in the future.
           As the pioneering career concerns models of Fama (1980) and Holmstrom (1999)
discuss, immediate pay-for-performance is not necessary if current performance affects an
employee’s reputation and future compensation.5 Gibbons and Murphy (1992), building on these
models, analyze employees that exert effort both in response to explicit incentives and in the
hopes of improving employers’ beliefs about their ability. Firms do not need to provide strong
current-period incentives for young workers, who have more reason to be motivated by future
promotions and opportunities. They find some support for the model in the way Chief Executive
Officer compensation varies with age and experience. Chevalier and Ellison (1999), who study
mutual fund managers, find further support for age-based variation in the need for objective
incentives.
           In addition to the limits that come with using implicit contracts for enforcement,
subjective performance evaluation also is limited by differences between actual and measured
performance. There are interesting models of at least three ways that subjective assessments can

5
    See Prendergast (1999) and Gibbons and Waldman (1999) for more detail on career concerns models.


                                                                                                       6
differ from actual productivity. First, employees can take actions that affect their supervisors’
assessments. This issue has been studied in a series of papers on “influence activity” starting
with Milgrom and Roberts (1988). The key idea is that employees will try to influence their
bosses’ decisions in their favor (and not necessarily in the interests of the firm) if their pay does
not properly reflect their productivity. Firms face a trade-off between taking advantage of the
manager’s information and letting the manager manipulate decisions in her own best interests.
For decisions that do not affect the distribution of benefits within the firm, this presents no
problem. But when decisions have distributional implications, the firm may want to commit not
to use information provided by agents. Meyer, Milgrom, and Roberts (1992) and Schaefer (1998)
show how the firm can benefit from a crisis (that is, very bad alternatives for agents) in order to
reduce influence activity and align the interests of employees and the firm.6
        Second, Prendergast and Topel (1996) consider a manager that favors some workers over
others. That is, the manager affects the payoffs of the employees and the distribution of
employee payoffs, in turn, affects the utility of the manager. The firm has to trade off the
informational advantage of the manager regarding the employees’ true performance, the taste for
the manager to have more discretion, and the distortion to incentives caused by favoritism.
Favoritism leads the firm to reduce incentives and to rely on imperfect (but non-corruptible)
objective performance measures.
        Finally, MacLeod (2003) considers the optimal contract when the manager and employee
have different opinions about the employee’s performance. He shows how the optimal implicit
contract will vary with the degree of correlation between the manager’s assessment of the
employee’s performance and the employee’s self-assessment. The model predicts the tendency
of managers to bunch or compress employee’s ratings. MacLeod (2003) also studies the effects
of favoritism, allowing for a more general set of contracts than Prendergast and Topel (1996)
study. He shows that favoritism reduces the incentives of employees that are discriminated
against, leading pay to suffer both due to discrimination and lower effort. This has the interesting
implication that, holding performance constant, measured differences in wages will understate
the importance of manager bias because it will ignore the effect on the employees’ incentives.


6
  Also see Fairburn and Malcomson (2001), who develop an integrated model of incentives and promotions when
managers can engage in influence activity. They argue that managers with sufficient monetary incentives will be
resistant to influence activity when making promotion decisions, which both makes promotion-based incentives
stronger and more efficiently matches workers to appropriate jobs.


                                                                                                                  7
       These models of subjective performance evaluation and implicit contracts have made
important contributions to personnel economics and our understanding of compensation
structure. However, while these models are consistent with anecdotal examples and case studies,
they have not been backed up by a great deal of rigorous empirical corroboration. Hayes and
Schaefer (2000) provide compelling (though indirect) evidence on the importance of implicit
contracts and subjective performance evaluation of executives. They argue that a board of
directors that uses subjective evaluation will reward executives in the current period for actions
that will affect objective measures of performance in future periods. They then show that there is
an important empirical relationship between current pay and future performance and that this
relationship is stronger at firms where they would expect subjective performance measures to be
relatively advantageous for providing efficient incentives.


2.1.4 Relative Performance Evaluation


       Some performance measures, whether objective or subjective, can be improved by
making them depend on an employee’s relative performance rather than some absolute standard.
Relative performance evaluation (RPE) can be used in two different ways. First, firms can use
the performance of a peer group of competitors to filter out shocks that are common to the whole
peer group. This helps the firm to lower the risk (and the associated compensation premium)
imposed on individual employees. As Gibbons and Murphy (1991) and Antle and Smith (1986)
discuss, this idea has the empirical implication that pay will be increasing in the employee’s own
performance but decreasing in the average performance of the reference group. As we discuss
below in Section 4.3, at least in the case of Chief Executive Officers (where their performance
and that of a peer group are easily observed), there is surprisingly little support for filtering out
common shocks of a peer group.
       A second form of RPE is to use fixed rewards for a fixed group of people where the
distribution of rewards is based on the order of the participants’ performance. This form of
reward system, generally known as a tournament, can vary from a group of people competing for
a single promotion (such as to CEO) to a large set of prizes that diminish in value as a person’s
relative performance gets lower (such as at a golf tournament or in the memorable real estate
sales tournament in the drama Glengarry Glen Ross.)



                                                                                                        8
           Tournament theory, as modeled by Lazear and Rosen (1981), models promotions as a
relative game. The compensation at one level of the firm, in addition to motivating individuals at
that level, motivates those at lower levels. There are three basic principles of tournament theory.
First, prizes are fixed in advance and depend on relative rather than absolute performance.
Second, larger spreads in wages at different levels of the hierarchy motivate those at lower levels
to put forth more effort. Third, there is an optimal spread. Although a greater spread increases
effort, at some point the additional wages necessary to compensate workers for the increased
effort is larger than the additional output generated.
           An important variable in the Lazear and Rosen (1981) model is the amount of noise – that
is, to what degree luck affects the probability of winning. When there is more noise (so that luck
becomes relatively more important and effort relatively less important), workers will try less
hard to win because effort has a smaller effect on whether or not they win. In production
environments that are very uncertain, large raises must be given in order to offset the tendency
by workers to reduce effort. Similarly, the number of slots available affects effort. If a firm has
100 vice-presidents and only one slot for president, most VPs will give up trying to become
president thinking that the chance of promotion is too slim. At the other extreme, if there were
100 VP slots and 100 president slots so that every VP knew that she would be promoted to
president, VPs would become complacent.
           The firm can use the size of the spread between pay at various levels to manage effort.
When luck is unimportant, the wage spread will be small. But when luck is important, the firm
needs to increase the spread to increase effort. This may help explain differences in salary
structure across countries or across industries. Lazear and Rosen’s (1981) model implies that
riskier industries (where this is interpreted as risk that affects individual output) should have
larger wage spreads than less risky industries to induce workers to put forth the appropriate
amount of effort.7
           These basic ideas of tournament theory have been extended in numerous ways. For
example, while Lazear and Rosen (1981) focus on relative performance strictly as a means of
generating incentives, Green and Stokey (1983) highlight the potential usefulness of tournaments
in removing common shocks from risky performance measures. They show how individual
incentive contracts compare to tournaments based on variation in how common the shocks to

7
    This prediction also comes from incentive models where agents are risk averse.


                                                                                                      9
agent output are, how easily the firm can observe these shocks, and how many employees
participate in the tournament. Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983) allow for risk-averse employees,
allow the number of participants in the contest to vary, and allow for both rewards and penalties.
They derive a large set of results regarding when tournaments will be more efficient than
incentive schemes that are not based on relative performance and how the optimal incentive
system will vary with the number of participants, environmental uncertainty, and other factors.
       Dye (1984) and Lazear (1989) consider how the potential for collusion, sabotage, or other
forms of non-cooperative behavior in tournaments counter the incentive value of a large spread
in rewards. Chan (1995) considers how firms should balance the incentive value of internal
promotion tournaments against the value of retaining the option to hire an outsider when a senior
opening occurs. In the basic Lazear and Rosen (1981) framework, firms can consider outsiders
and keep tournament incentives strong by increasing the rewards for being promoted. However,
this can cause problems such as influence activity or sabotage. Chan (1995) shows that a
potentially useful alternative is to give insiders a handicap in the tournament.
       Patterns of pay and promotions within firms and in other contest contexts fit the
predictions of tournament theory. Devaro (2006) uses a sample of recent hires and their initial
promotions to fit a structural model of tournaments. He shows the importance of relative, rather
than absolute performance in determining promotions. Knoeber and Thurman (1994) provide
empirical evidence consistent with several specific predictions of tournament theory in the
context of rewards for producers of broiler chickens. They show, for example, that spreads
between prize values affect output. Drago and Garvey (1998), using a survey of Australian firms,
show that individuals are less helpful and work harder when promotion incentives are strong.
Ehrenberg and Bognanno (1990) show that golfers are affected by prize spreads in tournaments.
Finally, Bull, Schotter, and Weigelt (1987) do laboratory experiments on how people respond to
contests with piece rates and tournaments, so “effort” is chosen and stated. The results of their
experiments are generally supportive of tournament theory, though they find that less able people
expend more effort than the theory would predict.


2.1.5 Alternative to Incentives I – Monitoring




                                                                                                    10
        An alternative to financial incentives is to simply monitor workers. If a supervisor can
keep close watch over employees, she can insure that the employee takes the best action.
However, monitoring is typically imperfect, which led to the idea of efficiency wages. Shapiro
and Stiglitz (1984) suggest that a firm will pay workers a wage premium when it cannot perfectly
monitor effort. Workers, facing a choice between earning this wage premium if they work hard
and facing a probabilistic chance of being caught and fired if they shirk, choose to work hard.
        Efficiency wage theory implies a negative relationship between monitoring intensity and
wages.8 The empirical evidence in favor of this prediction is mixed, at best.9 This may be
because the conditions that make efficiency wages optimal for individual employers may not
exist at a large subset of firms in the economy. That is, there could well be many firms that can
monitor very effectively or use output-based incentives, while other firms (such as the one
studied by Cappelli and Chauvin, 1991) use efficiency wages.
        A recent study by Nagin, Rebitzer, Sanders, and Taylor (2002), while not directly testing
the relevance of efficiency wage theory, finds empirical support for the underlying relationship
between employee productivity and the probability of catching employees that do not act in the
firm’s best interests. They run a field experiment at a telephone solicitation company where
employees spend their workdays calling people to ask for donations to charitable organizations.
They find that the rate at which workers “cheat” by trying to get paid for donations people did
not actually make varies in the opposite direction of the rate at which managers audit donations.
When the probability of getting caught goes up, workers cheat less.10 However, based on a
survey of the telephone solicitors, Nagin et al (2002) conclude there is little evidence to support
another key idea in efficiency wage models – that those workers who value a job the most will
react the most to monitoring.


2.1.6 Alternative to Incentives II – Intrinsic Rewards


8
  The monitoring/pay relationship is the primary implication for the personnel economics literature. But Shapiro and
Stiglitz (1984) actually focus on the fact that efficiency wages also lead to equilibrium unemployment. Bulow and
Summers (1986) also model equilibrium efficiency wages and focus on equilibrium unemployment. They discuss
how the reaction to Ford Motor Company’s $5 day for assembly line workers, introduced in 1914, is consistent with
efficiency wage theory.
9
  See Malcomson (1999) and Gibbons and Waldman (1999) for further discussion of the empirical relevance of
efficiency wage theory.
10
   Duflo and Hanna (2005) show that monitoring works in increasing teacher attendance in India. In their case, the
employees do not have to infer the monitoring rate.


                                                                                                                 11
        One way to save on both the costs of incentives and the costs of monitoring is to rely on
the intrinsic value workers get from doing their jobs well. If firms pick workers carefully and
create the right work environment, won’t their employees be productive? In other words,
standard moral hazard models assume that all productive effort is distasteful to the employee.
But perhaps this is not a reasonable assumption.
        All else equal, people who are intrinsically motivated to do certain types of jobs (or, put
another way, those that simply enjoy certain jobs) will go work for firms that let them do those
jobs.11 If the labor market is reasonably competitive, then no matter how much workers enjoy the
job, the firm will still have to pay them to do it because employers will bid wages up to the
person’s marginal product of labor. But, if people like their job enough, why would firms ever
need to provide incentives or monitor workers?
        The answer to this, and the limit to intrinsic motivation, is not that people are not
intrinsically motivated or that they don’t like their jobs (though this is surely true in many cases.)
Rather, it’s that the efficient outcome in most employment relationships is for the employee to
dislike her job on the margin. Put another way, the key assumption in moral hazard models is not
that all effort is distasteful. The key assumption is that the marginal disutility of effort is convex.
        Many employees are intrinsically motivated to expend at least some effort at their jobs.
However, at some point between zero and twenty-four hours of work in a given day, the
marginal cost of an additional hour of work becomes positive. If a somewhat intrinsically
motivated worker had no incentives or monitoring, she would do some work but would stop at
some point. Assuming the person is still productive at the effort level where marginal work
becomes costly, it is efficient to induce her to work more. It makes sense for her to work until the
marginal disutility of her effort hits the marginal value to the firm.
        This in no way implies that intrinsic motivation is not important. In fact, as our
discussion of selection and matching below will make clear, firms should work hard to find
workers who are motivated so as to decrease their own costs of compensation. But it does
suggest that, on the margin, agency theory and other economic principles about motivation and
incentives apply even when workers “like” their jobs.


11
  See Prendergast (2007) for a model of how different forms of intrinsic motivation should affect the matching of
people to employers.


                                                                                                                    12
           While this very simple discussion of intrinsic motivation gets at the key economic issue
regarding intrinsic motivation, it misses some potentially important and subtle effects having to
do with the context of intrinsic motivation. Firms may affect employees’ intrinsic rewards with
the signals they send. Benabou and Tirole (2003) formalize this idea and argue that a traditional
economic model can be reconciled with many of the findings by psychologists about the
demotivating effects of incentives.12 They set up a model where both the employee and the firm
have private information. The employee has better information about his abilities and his own
interests, while the firm has better information about the attractiveness of the task. The contract
offered by the firm affects the employee’s beliefs about the task or the firm’s beliefs regarding
the employee. Under certain conditions, incentives can have negative effects on the employee.


2.2 Responses to Incentives – Empirical Studies


           In a variety of situations where economists have been able to study the effects of
incentives in relatively controlled settings, employees respond to incentives. However, while
incentives “work”, several studies have shown some of the unintended consequences that are
created by employee incentives. That is, the “distortions” predicted by some of the theoretical
work appear to be important empirically. Some of these studies, because they focus on individual
firms, could be capturing mistakes. Others, which show systematic and long-term costs of
incentive schemes, suggest that incentives cannot be implemented perfectly but that the costs are
worth bearing.
           In this section, we review the empirical work on incentives. We first review several
studies that establish that employees respond to incentives. We then discuss studies that show the
importance of distortions in incentive schemes. There are several important empirical papers that
consider how incentives operate in group settings. We defer the discussion of these studies to
Section 6, where we discuss the organization of work.
           Lazear’s (2000a) study of the Safelite Glass Company provides a case study of the effect
of incentives on both effort and worker selection. Safelite switched from paying windshield glass
installers an hourly wage to paying them a piece rate per windshield installed. Because Safelite
implemented the new pay scheme at different times at different locations, Lazear (2000a) could

12
     For a review of many of these papers, see Deci, Koestner, and Ryan (1999).


                                                                                                    13
isolate the effect of the pay scheme while controlling for other company-wide changes. Also,
because he was able to observe many new workers under both pay schemes and could control for
on-the-job learning (that is, tenure effects), he could separate the degree to which any change in
productivity was due to changes in individual worker behavior and to changes in the types of
workers that Safelite was able to attract. He finds that the piece rate system increased
productivity at Safelite by about 44%. About half of this was the pure productivity effect. That
is, the typical windshield installer that worked at Safelite under both pay schemes increased his
productivity by about 22% upon the implementation of the piece rate scheme. The rest of the
increase in productivity was due to the fact that the piece rate scheme led to self-selection of
more productive workers into Safelite (and the self-selection of less productive employees out.)
         Shearer (2004) studies how piece rates affect the productivity of tree planters in British
Columbia. Working in cooperation with the company that employs the tree planters, Shearer was
able to implement a true experiment where a treatment group was randomly assigned to be paid a
piece rate while a control group was paid an hourly wage. This means he cannot estimate a
selection effect of piece rates, but insures the validity of a causal interpretation of the incentive
effect that he measures. Shearer (2004) finds that workers paid through a piece rate are
approximately 20% more productive than those paid by the hour, which is nearly identical to the
effect in Lazear (2000a).
         Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2007) consider how the implementation of an incentive
pay system affects the productivity of managers of fruit pickers on a UK farm. The pickers
themselves are on a piece rate system at all times, but the farm made an unannounced switch to
incentive pay for managers in the middle of one season. Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2007)
show that the average picker’s productivity increased by 21% when his manager’s pay was
related to his productivity. They go on to show that much of this increase is due to the managers
focusing their effort more carefully on those pickers where it will have the largest marginal
effect on productivity, but that at least half is due to the managers being more discriminating in
which workers they select.13
         Freeman and Kleiner (2005) provide a useful reminder that, while incentive pay generally
increases productivity, it does not necessarily increase profits. They study a footwear

13
   Other studies that show evidence that incentives affect employee behavior, but where the exact “incentive effect”
is not as easily interpreted, include Gaynor, Rebitzer, and Taylor (2004), Groves, Hong, McMillan, and Naughton
(1994), and Fernie and Metcalf (1999).


                                                                                                                  14
manufacturer that switched from piece rate pay to an hourly wage as part of an attempt to cut
costs and change its manufacturing processes. The firm implemented numerous other changes at
the time of the change in compensation system, so it is difficult to isolate the exact effect of the
change in pay scheme on productivity. But Freeman and Kleiner (2005) do find a significant
reduction in productivity, and an increase in profits, when piece rates were removed.14
        These studies all show that incentives can be a powerful managerial tool for affecting
individuals’ behavior. Asch (1990) shows the same thing, but highlights the more problematic
side of incentives. She studies Unites States Navy recruiters who were measured, and in some
cases paid, based on their ability to enlist sailors. To the extent that productivity affected
compensation for the recruiters, it was based on whether or not they met annual quotas.
Therefore, recruiter incentives were low if they either had already reached their quotas or if it
became apparent that they would not reach them. Also, due to discounting, the return to recruiter
effort grew as the end of the measurement period approached. Asch (1990) shows that recruiting
success was higher near the end of the year as the end of the measurement cycle approached. So,
while incentives “worked”, they did not work consistently. It is difficult to determine whether
this inconsistency had any negative ramifications for the Navy.
        Courty and Marschke (2004) examine the response of another set of government workers
– managers of job training centers – to non-linear incentives. However, in this case the incentives
are indirect in that performance affects the budget of the job training office and not the
employees’ compensation. Courty and Marschke (2004) show that managers act so as to increase
the expected amount of incentive payouts near the end of each measurement period, but that their
actions generate real costs in terms of lowering the quality of overall training. The incentives
may lead to benefits in terms of overall quality, but it seems likely that these benefits could be
captured without the costs imposed by the focus on year-end results.
        The analyses by Asch (1990) and Courty and Marschke (2004) suggest that incentives
can have a costly and inefficient side to them. However, because these studies are each based on
a single institution (and one that is not subject to competition), it is feasible that they are simply
studies of mistakes. Over time and facing competition, perhaps the Navy and the job training
incentive systems would get changed or driven out of existence. However, there are broader

14
  Note, however, that this profit effect could reverse in the long-term if employees become more productive in the
future due to current effort. See Friedman and Kelman (2007), who show that short-term financial incentives in
British hospitals had long-run effects on productivity.


                                                                                                                 15
(though less direct) studies of unintended consequences of incentives which suggest that firms
choose to live with some of these consequences for the sake of capturing some other benefits.
        Oyer (1998), for example, analyzes the effects of the fact that firms tend to plan their
budgets and their incentive systems around a fiscal year. Executives and salespeople typically
have contracts with a non-linear relationship between pay and performance. Salespeople often
have annual quotas, for example, and many executives receive certain bonus payments only if
they surpass some target. This provides these employees with incentive to try to exert some
discretion over when certain results are achieved. For example, a salesperson who is rushing to
meet a quota near the end of the year may offer a customer a big (but unnecessary) price break if
the customer orders immediately. He shows that, controlling for the calendar seasonality of a
firm’s industry, firms tend to sell more (and at lower margins) near the end of fiscal years than
they do in the middle of the year. They also tend to sell less early in the year, suggesting that
salespeople and/or executives “borrow” from the next year to meet the current year’s quota.15
Larkin (2007), using data from a large software company, finds that salespeople’s reaction to
their incentive contracts cost the firm 6-8% of potential revenue.
        The specific example studied by Larkin (2007), as well as the broader pattern identified
by Oyer (1998), raise the interesting question of why these non-linear contracts are so prevalent
given that they create inconsistency in the production process and cut profit margins at the end of
the year. However, given that these fiscal-year effects have been so common for so long, it
appears there must be some benefit of these contracts that outweighs these apparent costs.
        Chevalier and Ellison (1997) show that non-linearities also lead to persistent distortions
for mutual fund managers, though these non-linearities are not chosen by firms.16 Specifically,
they show that there is a non-linear relationship between mutual fund investment returns over a
calendar year and investment inflows into those funds. As a result, near the end of the year, some
mutual fund managers have an incentive to change the level of risk in their funds. They show
that such changes in risk do occur, suggesting that mutual fund managers choose their portfolios’
risk with more than just maximizing return in mind. Again, given that this distortion has been




15
   See Healy (1985) and Murphy (2000) for further evidence that there is a relationship between executive contracts
and timing of performance within fiscal years.
16
   Also see Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996), who reach similar conclusions about mutual fund managers.


                                                                                                                 16
taking place in a competitive market for a long period, it appears that the costs imposed by this
behavior of mutual fund managers are outweighed by some benefits.17


2.3 Empirical Relevance of the Risk/Incentive Trade-off


         In a series of papers over the last decade, Canice Prendergast has explored the trade-off
between risk and incentives that we discussed above. First, in a review of the incentives literature
at that time (Prendergast, 1999), he argued that the empirical evidence was mixed on the
risk/incentives trade-off.18 Then, in a series of papers, Prendergast (2000, 2002a, 2002b) more
carefully lays out the evidence on the risk/incentive trade-off and offers several explanations for
why the risk/incentive trade-off may be difficult to find in the data even if the underlying idea is
correct.
         In Prendergast (2002a), risky environments are likely to be those where a manager’s
private information is more valuable. A firm will be willing to pay the additional costs to
compensate a manager for additional risk in order to make sure the manager uses his private
information profitably. In other words, the marginal value of the manager’s effort is increasing in
environmental risk such that the natural trade-off between risk and the cost of incentives may be
overwhelmed by a positive relationship between risk and the benefits of incentives. 19 Initial
attempts to test Prendergast’s model have been generally supportive (see Adams, 2005, and
DeVaro and Kurtulus, 2006), though they are limited by the difficulty of finding exogenous
variation in decision rights delegation.
         Prendergast (2002b) presents a model of subjective assessments and shows that either
favoritism or costs to the manager of making assessments can lead firms to find incentives more
valuable when risk is higher. Prendergast (2000) argues that, if the costs of monitoring effort
directly are correlated with risk, then firms may use more incentives in riskier environments
because the requisite risk premium is smaller than the cost of the additional resources that would
be required to directly monitor the agent’s actions.
17
   For other examples of problematic responses to incentives and measurement, see Dranove, Kessler, McClellan,
and Satterthwaite (2003) and Jacob and Levitt (2003).
18
   See Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a) and Jin (2002) for recent evidence that the trade-off holds for American
CEOs.
19
   Zabojnik (1996) draws similar implications in a model where a portion of market risk is related to the manager’s
marginal product and is revealed to the manager before she chooses her effort, though he does not model the
decision rights of the manager.


                                                                                                                  17
       Oyer (2004) offers an alternative reason risk and the value of incentive contracts can be
positively correlated, even when the pay scheme is not meant to affect the agent’s actions. He
develops a model where the employee’s reservation wage and the firm’s value or profits are
correlated with one another because they are both affected by macroeconomic shocks. The firm
ties the employee’s pay to the firm’s success in order to lower contracting and renegotiation
costs if a shock affects the employee’s outside opportunities. In environments where shocks
(and, therefore, risk) are greater, the firm will tie more of pay to firm performance in order to
more closely match compensation to the employee’s outside opportunities. However, if the
environment gets too risky, the firm will abandon performance-based compensation and
renegotiate wages when conditions change. This suggests that the incidence of “incentives” will
be negatively related to risk but the amount of incentive will be increasing in risk.
       Prendergast (1999) summarized the research on the risk/incentive trade-off as of the time
he wrote by saying, “there is some evidence that contracts are designed to optimally trade off
risk against incentives” and “it would not appear that on the margin, the risk measures that have
been considered are the true constraining factors on the provision of incentives.” These
conclusions are still appropriate. But, in the last several years, some of the extensions to the basic
moral hazard model reviewed above have uncovered possible reasons the risk/incentive trade-off
has been so elusive to empirical researchers. The challenge in the years ahead is to design
empirical strategies and measures that can confirm or refute these newer models, as well as the
basic moral hazard model.


3. Matching Firms and Workers


       Matching firms with workers would be an easy process if labor were a commodity like
some other inputs. However, labor is probably the most heterogeneous of all inputs in production
functions. This is true on both sides of the market – the value of a given worker is likely to vary
dramatically across potential employers and the disutility of effort associated with work will vary
for a typical worker across the firms she might work for. Matching the right firms to the right
workers creates economic value of a magnitude that few other economic processes can.
       Given the importance of job market matching, it is not surprising that economists have
been studying the selection process since well before there was a field known as personnel



                                                                                                    18
economics. Important theoretical contributions have come in two varieties – game theoretic
models of asymmetric information and models of efficient matching with symmetric learning
about worker productivity.


3.1 Learning Models


         Suppose individual i's output (y) in period t, if employed at firm j, can be written as
y ijt = α i + μ ij + ε ijt

where α is the innate ability of worker i, μ is the “match” productivity of the worker i/firm j
combination, and ε is a productivity shock. Suppose all three variables on the right-hand side of
the equation are random variables with mean zero and variance σα, σμ, and σε, respectively.
         Consider the case where σα = σμ = 0. In this case, each individual is identical and labor is
a commodity. Efficiency is independent of how workers are matched to firms. If this were a
reasonable representation of the world, then the field of personnel economics would not study
selection of workers.
         Now consider the somewhat more interesting example where σμ = 0, but σα > 0. In this
case, workers differ in their productivity but their productivity is independent of where they
work. Again, selection is uninteresting in this environment as long as information about an
individual’s value of σ is symmetric between firms and the worker.20
         Now consider the more interesting example where σμ > 0. In this case, which is the core
of the matching model in Jovanovic (1979), a worker’s expected productivity in any given period
depends on where she works. In this case, it is important, in terms of economic efficiency, to
maximize the firm/worker match quality (μ). Though exactly who captures the value of this
match quality will differ depending on the competitive environments in the labor and production
markets, the total size of the economy will increase in average match quality. In the absence of
any cost of changing jobs, workers would switch jobs several times early in their careers in
search of the best match. But, given some search or other transaction cost in job switching,
workers will switch jobs only if the expected gains to doing so are large enough.


20
  While selection issues are not important in models with symmetric learning about general ability (that is, ability
that is equally useful to all employers), these models have interesting implications for compensation. See Section 4.1
below.


                                                                                                                   19
         There are two key empirical implications of matching models. First, turnover rates will
decrease in job tenure (that is, the longer a person stays in a job, the less likely she is to leave the
job in any given period.) Second, wages will increase in job tenure.21 Both of these implications
have proven consistent with empirical patterns in numerous studies.22 Unfortunately, these two
implications are also consistent with models of firm-specific human capital. While the patterns in
the data may appear consistent with both models, the managerial implications of these models
are drastically different. If σμ is very high, so that match quality varies, employers should invest
carefully in screening and selection. But if match quality does not vary and firm-specific human
capital is an important driver of productivity, firms should focus on training and other human
capital development.
         Note that the matching literature is vague about what underlies the value of a match (μ).
Two recent models explore this. Lazear (2004a) models a world where all skill is completely
general, but employers value mixes of skills differently. Hayes, Oyer, and Schaefer (2006)
emphasize the value of co-worker specific match quality. Employees are more valuable at some
firms than others because they work more productively with the employees at some firms. While
both these ideas can help get to the root of matching, they do not help with distinguishing
matching from firm-specific human capital. The mix of skills and/or relationships with co-
workers can be developed after taking a job, which would make them a form of firm-specific
human capital rather than ex ante match quality.23
         Two recent papers that look more directly at the importance of matching are Andersson,
Freedman, Haltiwanger, Lane, and Shaw (2006) and Woodcock (2006). Andersson, et al (2006)
examine the matching of the most talented software engineers to the firms with the highest
returns to talent, while Woodcock (2006) analyzes the importance of individual skill, firm
effects, and match-specific productivity on wages. Empirical research along these lines, which
has become more feasible as rich employer-employee datasets have become available, could

21
   This implication will not be strictly true for a given worker over his job tenure if the match quality is immediately
determined and incorporated into the wage. But if the quality of the match is learned over time, this implication will
hold.
22
   Miller (1984) and McCall (1990) extended the basic matching model by considering job-specific and occupation-
specific matching. They generate implications regarding the optimal strategy for trying jobs of different types at the
beginning of careers and find supportive empirical evidence.
23
   Backes-Gellner and Mure (2005) test Lazear’s model using German data on employer-provided training. Their
results suggest that the skills mix idea is enhanced by on-the-job training, though this does not exclude the
possibility that employers select employees that already have (or show the ability to acquire) the range of skills the
firms need.


                                                                                                                     20
shed some light on how the matching process takes place and how much value it creates.24 Also,
research at single firms or small groups of firms that analyzes job applicants, those offered jobs
who do not accept, and those who accept positions might also inform research and practice in
selection and matching.


3.2 Asymmetric Information Models


        While matching models focus on firms and workers that are equally well informed, other
models consider how employees match to firms when one party is better informed. An important
example of how asymmetric information can be critical in the labor market is when a person
knows her ability but a firm has only a noisy estimate. If all workers were honest, firms could
simply ask job applicants about their ability and make hiring decisions based on what the
applicants say. Less qualified applicants have considerable incentive to exaggerate their
qualifications, so firms must find another way to extract this information.
        Two solutions to this problem have been suggested. In the pioneering work of Spence
(1973), employers use costly signals to infer the ability of applicants. The cost to an individual of
obtaining an education is inversely related to her ability (and, therefore, her productivity as an
employee.) Signaling will only solve selection problems when acquiring the signal is sufficiently
costly and when the cost of acquiring it is inversely related to the person’s ability. Also,
signaling is an inefficient solution to the selection process because the cost of acquiring the
signal is a deadweight loss. Another way to separate people of differing skill is to use self-
selection (see Salop and Salop, 1976). If some portion of compensation or other parts of the
employment relationship differ in their value to prospective employees, and if these differences
in value are related to productivity, then more productive employees will self-select into an
organization. While self-selection has the advantage of not wasting the resources involved in
acquiring a signal, it relies on employers being able to find a condition of employment that will
separate people based on ability.
        Lazear (1986a) models how incentive schemes can be useful for signaling and self-
selection. Suppose that potential workers know their ability but employers do not. If productivity


24
   Oyer and Schaefer (2007) also use a newly available data source – directories of employees from law firms’ web
sites – to study the match between firms and workers.


                                                                                                               21
differences cannot be measured on the job, then all employees will be paid the average workers’
productivity. But suppose an employer can measure an individual’s productivity at some cost.
Lazear (1986a) assumes that all employers in the marketplace observe the person’s productivity
when one employer measures it, so the firm will only undertake this measurement if the
employee pays for it (presumably through lower compensation.) Once productivity is measured,
employee wages are bid up to their individual productivity level. If measurement is costless, then
the system fully unravels and everyone is paid exactly their productivity. But, if measurement is
costly enough, then those with relatively low productivity are not willing to pay to be separated
from those with the lowest productivity. As a result, some firms pay a fixed salary for all
workers and attract those of relatively low ability. Other firms set up compensation systems
related to output and measure workers. These firms attract workers above some ability cutoff.
This model implies that, in industries and occupations where it is relatively costly to measure
workers' output, workers will be more likely to be paid straight salaries. This is one reason
salespeople are paid commissions, which is output-based pay, while most high level service
workers are paid salaries. In the latter case, it is more costly to obtain a decent measure of output.
More pooling occurs and proxies for input are used as the pay basis instead.
        Now consider a different type of asymmetric information model that can lead to
inefficiencies in the labor market. Suppose each employee has ability α as in the prior discussion
and firms cannot observe an individual’s ability before hiring her. However, suppose the firm
gets a precise estimate of the person’s ability shortly after hiring her. Then, as Greenwald (1986)
shows in an extension of the early work by Akerlof (1970), under certain conditions, there can be
an inefficient level of employee mobility.25 Firms use their informational advantage to retain
high ability workers when they receive outside offers while not responding to outside offers
made to mediocre performers (known as “lemons” in the paper.) Fearing this information
disadvantage will lead them to the winner’s curse and overpaid lemons, firms are reluctant to
make offers. Thus, in some cases where a worker’s talents would be better put to use at a new
firm, this efficient movement will not take place.
        In some labor markets, this may not be an issue. For example, the productivity of
professional athletes (and academic economists) is readily observable to other teams


25
  Lazear (1986c) also formalizes the adverse selection issue in the employment setting by putting the problem in an
efficient turnover and auction context.


                                                                                                                22
(universities) and the markets for these professionals’ services are quite liquid with significant
volume of trade. However, in other markets, ability is not as easily observed by outsiders and
this observability need not be completely exogenous. Several models have advanced Greenwald
(1986) and Akerlof (1970) by analyzing how employers can best take advantage of their inside
knowledge of their workers’ abilities. For example, Waldman (1984) considers strategic
assignment of employees to jobs within a firm when outside firms take these assignments as
signals of employees’ ability. He shows that employees may not be assigned to the jobs where
they would be most efficient and that pay will depend on job assignment rather than strictly on
ability.
           Milgrom and Oster (1987) extend this idea by considering two classes of workers – a
regular group and a “disadvantaged” group. If it is easier to hide the disadvantaged group than
the regular group, then firms will not promote or pay the skilled members of the disadvantaged
group as much as they pay other skilled workers. This leads to persistent discrimination (that is,
lower wages and under-representation in senior positions) against the disadvantaged workers and
less investment in human capital by members of this group. Bernhardt (1995) also assumes that
incumbent firms can exploit an informational advantage regarding employee ability and that this
advantage may vary across certain classes of workers. He develops a model that is consistent
with several stylized facts of some labor markets. The model also predicts the so-called “Peter
Principle” where some managers are promoted to positions that are no longer appropriate for
their skill levels.26
           While layoffs, or even voluntary turnover, may reveal a “lemons” problem in some cases,
Gibbons and Katz (1991) point out that this will not be the case when a firm fails.27 They predict
that, because of the inferences drawn by employers, the reemployment wages of a worker at a
plant that closes will be higher than the wages of a worker who is laid off from a continuing
operation. They find some empirical evidence to support this prediction, though follow-up
studies have argued that their results are fragile (see Song, 2007, and other work cited there.)
Nonetheless, the insight that there might be more stigma attached to losing a job at a downsizing



26
   For alternative explanations of the “Peter Principle”, see Lazear (2004b) where, on average, early success is at
least partially good luck and Fairburn and Malcomson (2001) where risk averse managers may inefficiently promote
underlings to provide them with more incentive.
27
   This “stigma” of certain layoffs is similar to the signal sent by not getting outside offers in Lazear (1986c).


                                                                                                                23
firm than at one that is closing an operation has become widely used in the labor economics
literature.
           While the asymmetric information literature has been quite successful at developing
realistic models that match some basic stylized facts, there has been relatively little direct
empirical testing or estimation of these models.28 There are several reasons for this and, while
empirical work would certainly be informative, it will likely continue to be difficult. Probably
the biggest challenge to empirical researchers is the lack of measures or proxies for some of the
key parameters in these models. For example, it is hard to find a convincing measure of the
degree to which an employee’s ability is observable to other employers or a proxy for the costs
of measuring an individual’s output.


3.3 Firing and Displacement


           In addition to selecting workers when they hire them, firms have the opportunity to
change their selection of workers at any time by layoffs. If firms could freely adjust wages to an
employee’s marginal product, then worker displacement would not be an issue because workers
would make efficient voluntary decisions about when to leave. However, due to wage
compression within firms, norms against nominal wage reductions, and other factors, workers
often do not voluntarily quit when firms would like them to.
           Most worker displacement is simply the result of some significant negative shock to a
firm or its industry or is the result of an individual proving to be significantly less productive
than the firm anticipated. This type of turnover does not generate particularly interesting insights
into how firms manage their human resource systems, so we do not cover it in detail here. It is
worth noting, however, that displacement typically has negative and economically significant
consequences for workers due to loss of firm-specific human capital (or match-specific
productivity), stigma of losing a job, or other factors. See Farber (2005a) and Kletzer (1998) for
reviews of the frequency and effects of job loss in the United States and Hallock (2006) for a
discussion of the layoff process.
           One way that displacement affects the way firms run their personnel systems is through
limits that are placed on firm’s ability to dismiss workers. A firm making decisions about who to

28
     See DeVaro and Waldman (2006) for one recent empirical study on this issue, focusing on a single large firm.


                                                                                                                    24
hire and whether to hire may act differently if it loses the option of correcting bad hiring
decisions through dismissal. Consider a firm weighing the possibility of taking on a particular
candidate. The firm trades off the expected costs and benefits of hiring that person versus its next
best option (which may be an alternative candidate or it may be to not hire at all.) The firm will
typically have an imperfect estimate of the benefits an employee will bring the firm because it
does not know the person’s ability (or match) exactly and the firm’s business environment could
change in a way that affects the potential employee’s marginal product.
         Consider a firm that is choosing between candidate A and candidate B. Normalize the
person’s expected marginal product of labor in a given period to (and, therefore, their reservation
wage) to 0. But suppose that candidate A produces 0 for sure, candidate B produces either z or -z
(each with 50% probability), and output-contingent contracts are not feasible. Assuming
everyone is risk neutral and the person is hired for only one period, a firm would be indifferent
between the two candidates. However, if the employment match can last multiple periods, then,
under certain conditions and all else equal, the firm will prefer type-B workers for their option
value. In equilibrium, type-B workers will earn a wage premium and only certain types of firms
will want these workers. Lazear (1998) develops a model along these lines, where he explores
the market equilibrium when workers have option value.29 The option value of risky workers will
be highest in contexts where workers are somehow tied to their firms and where it is relatively
easy for employers to dispose of workers that turn out to be unproductive.
         In many cases, firms face barriers to dismissing workers due to legal or other institutional
(for example, union) reasons. This makes the cost of employing workers higher, lowering labor
demand, and can lead to some combination of lower wages and lower employment.30 In addition
to lowering overall labor demand, firing costs can reverse the logic of preferring risky workers
for their option value because substantial negative realizations relative to expected productivity
can be very costly. That is, a firm that cannot lower wages substantially will want to fire a type-B
worker that turns out to have productivity of -z. If firing costs are substantial enough, then the
costs of hiring an unproductive type-B worker can outweigh the option value of having a
29
   See Bollinger and Hotchkiss (2003) for an analysis of risky hires in professional baseball. Lazear (1998) may also
apply to academic labor markets because moving costs tie professors to their institutions while the tenure system
allows schools to displace workers relatively easily.
30
   As Lazear (1990) points out, perfectly efficient labor markets could undo the negative consequences of firing
costs. However, as Lazear (1990), Deterzous and Karoly (1992), DeLeire (2000), Acemoglou and Angrist (2001),
and Autor, Donohue, and Schwab (2006) show, there is substantial evidence that firing costs increase
unemployment.


                                                                                                                  25
productive type-B worker. Oyer and Schaefer (2002) model how equilibrium wages and
employment will change for different types of workers when these workers differ in the
observability of their ability or productivity. They argue that increases in firing costs that are
constant across workers should increase the wage premium to seniority because employers have
more precise estimates of the ability of workers with more experience. They find support for this
model empirically, using labor market and civil rights litigation data around the time of an
increase in employer liability for discrimination in displacement.
       In addition to affecting the “riskiness” of workers a firm would want to hire, firing costs
will also affect the types of workers that a firm will displace. If the costs of firing a worker
increase, a firm will be willing to live with a worse worker because the benefits of firing the
previously marginal worker will no longer outweigh the costs. This implies that those workers
that a firm fires when firing costs are high will be, on average, of lower ability than the ones it
fires when firing costs are low. Empirical support for this idea has been found using variation in
firing costs generated by three different institutional settings – American Civil Rights legislation,
institutional barriers to worker displacement in Europe, and firing restrictions imposed by state
courts and legislatures. Oyer and Schaefer (2000) find evidence consistent with this by using
variation in firing costs by race. Extending this logic one step, the “stigma” that Gibbons and
Katz (1991) argue will go along with displacement should be greater when firing costs are
greater. Canziani and Petrongolo (2001) formalize this idea and find empirical support using data
from Spain around the time of easing of firing restrictions in the mid-1980’s. Kugler and Saint-
Paul (2004) develop a similar model, focusing on the choice of firms to hire workers that are
unemployed or working at other firms. Using variation in firing restrictions across American
states, they find that the “lemons” effect increases in firing costs.


4. Compensation


4.1 The Level of Compensation


       How much will firms pay their employees? In the absence of incentive issues and any
firm-specific productivity, compensation will be just enough to keep employees from leaving the
firm (as long as the firm does not lose money). In equilibrium, this will be equal to the expected



                                                                                                      26
marginal product of the employee’s labor. But how do firms and employees determine an
employee’s marginal product? How do they know what is a reasonable amount to pay? For some
employees with a lot of experience, firms and workers have a pretty good idea of what a
reasonable wage is. But, when an employee enters the labor market, firms have to rely on
observable features such as the person’s education, performance in interviews, and performance
on tests. Over time, firms and employees learn more about the employees’ skill and tailor jobs
and his pay accordingly.31
         Farber and Gibbons (1996) model this learning process. Consider a person entering the
labor market. The firm that hires him expects his productivity (yit) to be
y it = F (α i , X it )
where αi is the innate ability of worker i and X is a set of characteristics that are observable to the
firm (such as education). Because neither the firm nor the individual know the exact value of α,
initial wages are based largely on X. However, over time, the firm observes a set of noisy signals
about yit and updates its estimate of α. Farber and Gibbons (1996) derive empirical implications
of employer learning on the measured correlation between pay and X, as well as how pay is
related to characteristics firms cannot observe at the time of hiring. Using data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth, they find empirical results that are broadly consistent with
employer learning playing a large role in the development of wages over careers.32 Altonji and
Pierret (2001) develop this idea further and point out that, until the learning process is fairly
developed, employers are statistically discriminating on the basis of the observable X
characteristics. A key point in these models is that the level of pay will more closely approximate
the worker’s marginal product as the firm and worker learn about the worker’s true ability.
         Competitive labor markets do not require that workers earn their expected marginal
product in any given period. Firms may set implicit contracts across multiple periods as a means
of facilitating long-term relationships, providing incentives, or more efficiently sharing risk.
Lazear (1979) focuses on the long-term relationship and incentives ideas. He notes that a firm
can provide incentives through fixed wages if the firm pays the worker less than his marginal
product early in his career and more than his marginal product later. After a person has been at

31
  See Waldman (2007) for a more detailed survey of careers in organizations.
32
  Gibbons, Katz, Lemieux, and Parent (2005) and Lluis (2005) extend this learning model and the empirical
analysis in Farber and Gibbons (1996) by noting that employees may have differing productivity in different sectors.
Firms and workers learn about workers’ innate skill, as well as which sector best fits their skills, over time.


                                                                                                                 27
the firm for a while, he has incentives to perform well and avoid being fired in order to enjoy the
rents he has been promised later. Because this ties the worker to the firm, it may also encourage
development of firm-specific human capital. Older workers are “overpaid” in this model and
need to be induced to leave the firm either through a mandatory retirement policy or an
appropriate pension scheme.
       Harris and Holmstrom (1982) model wage dynamics over careers when employees are
risk averse and when firms and workers learn symmetrically about workers’ ability. In their
model, workers are insured against negative shocks to their realizations on ability. In
equilibrium, individuals never have wage decreases and wages increase faster than productivity.
Frank (1984) offers an alternative explanation for why workers may not be paid their marginal
product and why wages are generally thought to be more compressed than productivity. He
argues that, if workers care about their pay relative to their peers within the firm, high ability
workers will be willing to take a wage discount for the value they get from being near the top of
the pay scale.
       A look inside firms shows that actual wage dynamics are driven largely by the jobs
people hold. That is, individual jobs have a fairly narrow band of possible wages. The learning
process that leads to people settling into the appropriate compensation scheme over time appears
to be largely about finding the right job for the person, rather than finding the right pay for
different people doing similar jobs. This can be seen in the firms studied by Lazear (1992),
Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994), and several more recent studies (see Waldman, 2007, for
more details.)


4.2 The Mix of Compensation


       Money isn’t everything, but everything can be expressed in terms of its monetary
equivalent. That is, in most markets, consumers pay some amount of cash in return for a good or
a service. In some labor markets, such as temporary help or “under-the-table” work, transactions
take this form. But most people sell labor services in exchange for a range of cash and other
compensation. Interpreted broadly, the “other compensation” can include standard non-cash
benefits such as health care, retirement benefits, and employer-sponsored child care as well as
“amenities” such as a large or nicely decorated office, low risk of injury or death, or a job that



                                                                                                     28
consists of largely interesting tasks. If all firms had the same cost structure, all employees had
the same preferences, and employees could buy any amenities or benefits from other sources for
the same prices the employer would pay to procure them, then labor would be traded for money
and individuals would buy their own basket of benefits to best suit their needs.
         However, either due to institutional features such as tax incentives or simply due to
economies of scale, firms often have a comparative advantage in providing benefits or amenities
relative to workers. In addition, some firms are better at providing benefits than other firms and
individuals vary in terms of how they value benefits. For example, a restaurant can more cost-
effectively provide meals to its employees than a firm that manufactures ball bearings and some
people place a higher value on food provided by their employer than other people.33
         These forms of differentiation lead to two important conclusions. First, it is often
efficient for firms to provide a compensation package that mixes cash with other things.34
Second, the total economic value of employment relationships can be enhanced by matching
workers who value a given benefit or amenity with firms that have a comparative advantage in
providing that benefit. That is, one of the determinants of the match-specific surplus discussed in
Section 3.1 is the degree to which a firm efficiently provides amenities valued by its employees.
         The classic work by Rosen (1974) laid out the theoretical foundations for this job
differentiation and Rosen (1986) provides an intuitive discussion of how this model leads to the
theory of compensating differentials in labor markets. Rosen (1974) shows how market
equilibrium prices allow inferences about the monetary value of some characteristic. For
example, suppose that we want to determine the monetary equivalent value of interesting work in
a firm. Define X as the proportion of tasks on a given job that are new to the employee. Suppose
that data were available on wages and the proportion of tasks on a job that were new per day.
Consider the following regression:


         Wage on job j = a + b (Proportion of new tasks per day on job j)



33
   For alternative justifications of certain benefits, see Rajan and Wulf (2006), Marino and Zabojnik (2007), and
Oyer (2008). They consider the relationship between benefits, employees’ cost of effort, and productivity.
34
   Employer-provided health care and pensions account for a large share of the cost of employee benefits, as well as
of economics research on benefits. Gruber (2000) reviews the huge literature on employer health insurance. The
large literature on pensions focuses on the various types of pensions offered and how they affect retirement
behavior. See surveys by Lumsdaine and Mitchell (1999) and Lazear (1986b).


                                                                                                                  29
        The coefficient b reveals the value that the market places on having flexibility on the job.
The coefficient reflects the market value and not necessarily the tastes of any one individual.
Employees that value new tasks relatively highly can earn rents by taking jobs at firms that offer
many new tasks and firms that can provide new tasks to workers at relatively low cost can earn
rents by providing a relatively high proportion of new tasks. Rosen (1974, 1986) discusses the
conditions under which the market “price” reflects individual tastes, firm technologies, or
neither.
        There is an empirical literature that attempts to examine the relation of wages to non-
monetary benefits and to determine the “price” of various benefits and amenities.35 These
analyses are very challenging, however, due to the effects of unobserved ability. Consider two
people who are observationally equivalent (same age, education, etc.), but one has more skill that
is observable to employers and unobservable to an econometrician. The higher skill employee
will be able to command higher total compensation. However, due to regressive taxes on cash
compensation and the fact that income effects will generally make the marginal utility of
workplace amenities (relative to cash compensation) higher for higher paid workers, higher
ability workers will take some of their additional compensation in the form of workplace
amenities. As a result, Ehrenberg (1980) found that pensions and wages were positively
correlated (when there should be a tradeoff between the two) and numerous studies have shown
that wages are positively related to benefits.36 This does not mean that hedonic wage theory or
the concept of compensating wage differentials is wrong. It just means that measuring the market
price of these differentials is difficult.
        There are at least three potential ways that future research can get around the challenges
presented by unobserved ability. First, if there are variables that are correlated with whether a
person gets a benefit at work but not otherwise related to that person’s earning potential, then
instrumental variables can be used to identify the salary/benefit trade-off. Olson (2002) uses this
approach to estimate that married women will accept a 20% salary reduction in return for health
insurance, using their husbands’ union status and firm size as an instrument for whether the
women have employer-provided health insurance. While this approach can be useful when

35
   See Antos and Rosen (1975), Thaler and Rosen (1976), Brown (1980), and Woodbury (1983) for early examples
of this literature.
36
   Hamermesh (1999) and Pierce (2002) highlight an interesting implication of the income effects of benefits. They
show that changes in wage inequality in the U.S. in recent decades understate the total increase in compensation
inequality as benefits have become relatively more generous for high-paid workers.


                                                                                                                30
looking at health insurance, the value of other benefits is unlikely to be high enough to allow for
precise estimation of the salary/benefit trade-off. Second, detailed information on multiple job
offers to the same person can provide estimates of trade-offs, assuming the value of the
employee is roughly equal to the various employers. Stern (2004) takes this approach by
surveying scientists about the compensation and research components of their job offers. His
estimates suggest scientists are willing to accept substantial wage decreases to engage in on-the-
job research. However, highlighting a potential weakness of this approach, his estimates are
imprecise because his sample size is small and respondents’ recall of job offer details is likely to
include substantial measurement error. Finally, given that benefits are such an important part of
human resource policies, a large firm might be willing to work with economists to design
experiments that randomize across workers by location. Large firms that have many locations
and are known for providing generous benefits (such as Starbucks or Whole Foods Markets) are
promising candidates. Laboratory experiments may also be helpful for learning about how
people view benefits relative to cash, but the short-term and relatively low stakes nature of that
environment is likely to be an important limitation.


4.3 Equity Ownership


       Over the last few decades, stock and stock options have grown as compensation tools.
This probably reflects several factors, including attempts to increase worker incentives and the
fact that, as economic growth has made workers wealthier, employee risk aversion may have
gotten lower. Think about a middle manager at a large firm. If this person were truly risk neutral,
he would be indifferent between taking his compensation in the form of cash or in terms of
company stock. The stock would have the benefit of aligning his incentives with those of other
shareholders. However, given that this manager’s efforts have only a trivial value on stock
holdings, it would be difficult to generate incentives unless the firm issued him huge amounts of
stock (as in Holmstrom, 1982.) In this case, risk costs would certainly become important. So why
do firms grant stock to employees?
       One possible answer is to retain employees, as in the Oyer (2004) model we discuss
elsewhere. Another possible answer is to attract the right employees. There may be several
“sorting” benefits of making equity compensation part of the employment agreement, even in the



                                                                                                     31
absence of incentives. The manager who has many stock options and a low base salary does not
earn much unless the company does well. Thus, a manager who is willing to take a job under
these circumstances reveals that he believes in the company. This information may be valuable
to investors, whose information about the true value of the company is not as good as that of
managers. See Salop and Salop (1976) and Lazear (2005).
           Similarly, equity compensation, like any other non-cash benefits, may be used when a
firm can provide it at relatively low expense and the employees value it. That is, firms can use
equity-based pay to lower compensation costs by attracting employees that are particularly
optimistic about the firm’s prospects. A slightly different, but closely related, idea is that, if
workers that are optimistic about a firm are also the most productive (perhaps because of
enthusiasm or an understanding of the firm’s environment), then equity-based pay would just
lead to the type of self-selection in Salop and Salop (1976) that we discussed above. See Oyer
and Schaefer (2005) and Bergman and Jenter (2007) for theoretical and empirical analyses of this
idea in the context of broad-based stock option plans.
           While attraction and retention may be important reasons to grant equity to employees,
perhaps the most important justification for equity-based pay is to generate incentives. This
explanation is likely to apply in small firms or among very high-level managers at large firms.
These employees can have an important impact on the firm’s value and the incentive effects of
ownership can outweigh the inefficiency in asking these employees to bear the risk of factors
beyond their control that affect firm value.


4.4 Executive Compensation


           One set of workers that has been widely studied, with much of this work falling in the
arena of Personnel Economists, is top executives. There are several reasons why executives have
received more than their share of attention in the personnel economics literature.37 First,
executives (and especially Chief Executive Officers, or CEOs) receive a great deal of
compensation. The average CEO of a large American company now makes several million
dollars per year and the growth rate over the last few decades has been much faster than for
compensation more generally. Second, due to disclosure regulations, publicly traded firms have

37
     This is certainly true on a per-worker basis and is probably still true on a per-compensation-dollar basis.


                                                                                                                   32
to provide information about both executive compensation and company performance. This
allows empirical economists to create large datasets of individuals’ pay and “performance”
(where performance is a firm’s stock return or measures based on a firm’s or division’s
accounting statements.) For these reasons, CEOs and other executives have been widely studied.
        Murphy (1999) documents the rise in executive-related academic work, as well as
providing a summary of this literature. We refer readers interested in details on the institutional
features, the level and structure, and the politics of executive pay to Murphy’s review.
        We will, however, highlight a few stylized facts from the executive compensation
literature that relate directly to personnel economics. First of all, as one might expect given the
large effect CEOs can have on firms’ outcomes and the relatively easy availability of
performance measures, CEOs have high levels of incentive-based pay. Much of this is based on
explicit incentives such as performance-contingent bonuses and equity ownership. A smaller, but
important, amount of incentives comes in the form of subjective or implicit incentives including
adjustments to salary and bonuses not tied to objective metrics. These incentives vary in ways
that most theories predict, with stronger incentives at firms where the marginal product of the
CEO is likely to be higher (such as larger firms, firms with more capital, and unregulated firms.)
        Murphy (1999) also shows that executive turnover is somewhat based on firm
performance, but that the relationship is not as strong as one might expect and, at least as of the
time of his writing, had weakened over time. He also shows that there is a surprising lack of
relative performance evaluation (RPE) in executive pay. Executives are rewarded (penalized) for
good (bad) macroeconomic conditions, though it would seem easy for firms to filter this
uncontrollable risk out of pay/performance contracts.
        Murphy’s (1999) survey ends with suggestions for future research. He asked why RPE is
scarce?38 Numerous explanations have been suggested since Murphy posed the question. First, in
trying to justify the lack of RPE for executives, Garvey and Milbourn (2003, 2006) have
provided both “supply” (that is, executive-driven) and “demand” (firm-driven) explanations.
They argue that there is RPE for some executives, but that the average effect is small because
there are many cases where RPE is not used. In Garvey and Milbourn (2003), they argue that


38
  See Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) for details on the lack of RPE in executive compensation. Note that
Murphy (1999) also posed the question of why has executive pay increased so much in recent decades. Several
explanations have been put forward. However, because these explanations are largely a debate about corporate
governance rather than personnel policies, we do not address that issue here.


                                                                                                               33
RPE is unnecessary once an executive attains sufficient wealth. Once his assets that are not part
of current compensation are large enough, he can completely undo any position in the firm’s
stock in his private portfolio such that the use of RPE is irrelevant. Consistent with this idea, they
find that younger and less wealthy CEOs, who are less likely to have sufficient assets to unwind
compensation contracts imposed by the firm, have higher levels of RPE. In Garvey and Milbourn
(2006), they suggest that CEOs will try to influence boards of directors to limit RPE when the
market is performing well. They then show empirically that CEOs are more likely to have their
pay indexed during bad times than during favorable markets.
       Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b), influenced by an idea proposed in Fershtman and Judd
(1987), suggest that RPE will be counter-productive when products are strategic substitutes (as in
differentiated Bertrand markets) and when market competition is imperfect. Pay based on
relative output will lead managers to be too aggressive in product market competition. They find
support for this empirically by showing that the typical level of RPE is higher when product
market competition is more intense.
       Oyer (2004) models a case where agents’ reservation wages are driven by systematic
(that is, market-wide) shocks. In order to reduce contracting and turnover costs, firms use equity
ownership knowing that compensation will fluctuate with market conditions. Options or shares
in the firm’s stock can therefore serve two purposes. While providing shares for incentive
purposes would be most efficiently done with RPE, the secondary purpose of efficient
contracting when reservation wages vary is most efficiently done with pay that is indexed to the
market.
       Yet another possible explanation for the lack of RPE is that the marginal return to effort
may be correlated with the state of the market. Suppose the firm’s value (П) is an additively
separable function of the CEO’s effort (e), macroeconomic conditions (θ), and an idiosyncratic
shock (ε), so we can write П = v1e + v2θ + ε. Then it is clearly optimal to filter out the
macroeconomic effects. But if the marginal product of effort (v1) is correlated with the
macroeconomic shock (θ), then the optimal contract will be an increasing function of θ.
       Just as we might expect CEO pay to use RPE, we might also expect relative outcomes to
affect CEO dismissals. Barro and Barro (1990) who focused on bank CEOs, found that pay is not
related to relative outcomes but turnover is. Two more recent and broader studies, however,
show that CEO turnover is affected by both overall market conditions and relative performance



                                                                                                   34
of individual firms. Jenter and Kanaan (2006) and Kaplan and Minton (2006) both show that
CEO turnover is higher when the firm’s industry performs poorly and when the firm
underperforms the industry.




5. Skill Development


         The analysis and discussion to this point has been naïve in that it took the person’s ability
and match-specific productivity as given. In reality, people develop skill over time both before
and after joining a given firm and this skill development affects productivity. As Becker (1964)
laid out in his classic study of human capital, people can develop general skill that is equally
useful to multiple employers (and, therefore, becomes part of what we called ability, or α, in
Section 3.1) or that is more useful to one employer than to any other (and, therefore, becomes
part of the match-specific component, or μ, in Section 3.1.)39
         Becker (1964) argued that the efficient way to divide the investment costs of skill is for
firms to pay for firm-specific human capital acquisition of workers and for workers to pay for
their own general human capital. Any other means of splitting human capital investments costs
will lead to the potential for the firm or the worker to “hold up” the other party after sinking the
cost of a relationship-specific investment.
         This allocation of human capital investment clearly applies in most situations and, in
particular, when the investment is large. For example, almost all people pay the cost of their own
secondary, college, and graduate education. There are exceptions such as firms that sponsor their
employees getting MBAs, but these arrangements often come with a contractual commitment not
to leave the firm for some set period. Similarly, firms generally pay employees the going wage
during training periods and early in job tenure while the employee is largely acquiring the skill
and knowledge necessary to be productive in a given firm.40


39
   One important idea related to human capital is the extent to which incentives to acquire general and firm-specific
human capital are related to promotions, careers within organizations, and even optimal organizational form. See
Kahn and Huberman (1988) on up-or-out contracts, Prendergast (1993) on the relationship between promotion and
firm-specific human capital, and Levin and Tadelis (2005) on partnerships in high-skill industries.
40
   Note that it is often difficult to determine whether a firm or a worker have paid for the acquisition of skill because
we do not generally have complete information on both the compensation arrangements in a given job and what
those arrangements would be in the absence of skill acquisition.


                                                                                                                      35
       Recently, a number of papers have argued that Becker’s optimal allocation of human
capital investments does not appear to be applied in certain situations and tried to explain why.
There are situations that are fairly clear examples of firms paying for the acquisition of workers’
general human capital. For example, Stanford University offers free computer training in a
variety of programs to all employees, sometimes including programs not related to a person’s
current job. Employees who take advantage of this suffer no compensation ramifications and are
allowed to attend the training while being paid. A series of recent papers have attempted to
explain why situations may arise where firms find it in their best interest to pay for employees’
acquisition of general human capital. Most of these papers focus on the same informational
advantage of incumbent firms modeled by Greenwald (1986) and discussed in the prior section.
       An example is Autor (2001), who focuses on a specific example that clearly violates
Becker’s model. Manpower Associates is a large U.S.-based temporary help services firm. This
firm offers potential “temps” free computer training. The training provides skill in common
computer programs, is completely free to the person, and is not coupled with any obligation to
work for Manpower. A person can take this class and then go down the street to another temp
agency or any other employer and use her new computer skills.
       Why would Manpower offer such a program? Autor (2001) argues that the process of
training gives the firm asymmetric information about the ability of the temporary worker. The
firm then can use that information to match temps to assignments in a way that creates rents, at
least until the person has been out on enough assignments that another temporary agency can
infer her ability and where to assign her. He argues that this information advantage may be made
even more valuable when free training helps a temporary help agency attract higher quality
workers. He develops a model of the agency’s acquisition and exploitation of private
information, arguing that it will lead to particular relationships between market wages, training,
and the degree of local temporary labor market competition. He then uses data from a Bureau of
Labor Statistics survey of Temporary Service suppliers and finds evidence that is consistent with
the model’s predictions. For example, firms that offer free training offer slightly lower wages,
but this gap gets smaller in more competitive markets.
       Acemoglu and Pischke (1998) offer a related explanation for firms making investments in
general human capital, based on the information structure in Greenwald (1986). In their model,
firms have some level of monopsony power over workers and can capture some of the rents



                                                                                                    36
associated with acquisition of general human capital. Because workers do not capture the full
value of general human capital investments, they will underinvest in these skills. Some firms
may therefore find it profitable to sponsor this training. They find evidence consistent with the
predictions of their model using a test, in the spirit of Gibbons and Katz (1991), that looks at the
relative wages of German apprentices that stay at the firm that trains them, those that quit and
move to another firm, and those that quit for an exogenous reason (random selection into the
military.)
       In another study, Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) show that, even in the absence of
information asymmetry, firms may sponsor general training if wages in the labor market are
compressed relative to workers’ marginal products. This compression, which they argue can
arise from search costs or other transaction costs or from institutional factors such as unions and
minimum wages, may differ across labor market settings leading firms in some markets to be
relatively likely to sponsor human capital investments.
       Another justification for firms making investments in worker general human capital is
that it may provide incentives for the employee to stay at the firm while in training. Flaherty
(2006) analyzes data from a single non-profit institution’s training programs and from a cross-
section of firms. She finds that training is related to increased employee retention.
       The work by Autor, by Acemoglu and Pischke and, to a lesser extent, by Flaherty focuses
on general training of relatively low-skilled workers. There are interesting examples of firm-
provided general human capital for higher skilled workers, often including cases where the
training is highly visible to outside employers. For example, both of us (the authors) previously
held positions at business schools that offered part-time MBA programs for people with full-time
jobs. Most of these students were sponsored by their employers and were not paid less than
people doing similar jobs (though some firms required workers to partially repay these
investments if they leave before a specified time.) Future research focused on advanced training
and degree programs might provide useful insights into optimal human capital investment for
high-skill workers.


6. Organization of Work




                                                                                                    37
        To this point, we have acted as though a firm picks a single worker to do a well-defined
set of tasks. However, in reality, firms are made up of a group of diverse people doing different
sets of tasks. In this section, we briefly look at how firms decide who does what, who works with
whom, and who works for whom.


6.1 Job Design


        Most firms beyond some minimum size set up organization charts that show individual
jobs designed to do some set of tasks. Several studies of individual companies, including Lazear
(1992), Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994), and Gibbs and Hendricks (2004), show how firms
divide jobs into well-defined pay grades. Given this importance of jobs, how do firms divide
tasks into jobs?
        Rosen (1978) develops a model of firms and workers matching based on the tasks firms
need done and the comparative advantage of workers in performing each of these tasks. (See
Sattinger, 1993, for a review of assignment models.) In many ways, this model matches firms to
workers based on tasks the same way that Rosen (1986) models firms and workers matching
based on employee preferences. A similar model underlies the analysis in Gibbons, Katz,
Lemieux, and Parent (2005), which highlights the importance of assigning workers to their most
productive sector. Gibbons and Waldman (2006), on the other hand, develop a model where
workers develop task-specific human capital so that a person’s job assignment has important
effects on how her career develops.41


6.2 Teams, Worker Interaction, and Human Resource Practices


        Successful human resource management is not simply a matter of giving each individual
proper incentive to engage in work in isolation. If it were, there would be no need for the firm.
Perhaps the greatest value of the firm is that it provides a mechanism for people to work together
and take advantage of complementarities in their skills and interests. The evidence that there can
be gains from assembling workers into teams or groups has to be done at a firm-by-firm level

41
  For other models of how tasks get divided into jobs, see Cremer (1986) on how career concerns affect job design,
Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) on dividing tasks based on skill level, and models discussed in Section 6.3
below on the division of tasks between managers and other employees.


                                                                                                                38
because of the need for data on productivity and team structure. As a result, much of this work
falls into the category of “insider econometrics.” Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) review this
method elsewhere in this volume. We will briefly discuss a few papers related to the issue of
group incentives.
        Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan (2003) study a garment manufacturer that switched from
an individual piece rate system to group-based piece rates. Workers were given some discretion
over when they made the switch. Though the most productive workers had the most to lose
financially from the switch, they tended to be early adopters. Productivity went up (and stayed
higher) overall, suggesting that collaboration was valuable at this company. The gains were
greater for more heterogeneous teams and more able team members had a bigger influence on
others’ productivity than less able team members. Not all manufacturers get such positive results
from the switch to teams, however. King (1998) provides anecdotal evidence of a much different
(and much less successful) transition to teams at Levi’s.
        Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw (2001) look at the effects of team production in the steel
industry. Most firms in their sample pay some sort of group-based incentive, but only some
organize their workers into cooperative teams. They find that productivity is higher at firms that
use teams and that this effect is especially large where the product and production process are
more complicated. Incentive pay is also associated with higher productivity at these firms.42
        What are the sources of these group-based productivity benefits? In some cases, groups
allow people to solve problems better and to take advantage of different skills. Gant, Ichniowski,
and Shaw (2002, 2003), again focusing on the steel industry, show that interactions among a
larger set of workers are associated with higher levels of production.
        Mas and Moretti (2006) show how supermarket clerks are affected by the productivity of
other clerks working at the same time. They find that high-productivity clerks increase the
productivity of peers. Like Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan (2003), they find larger productivity
gains when groups of workers are more diverse in skill. Mas and Moretti (2006) also find
evidence suggesting social pressure is important, because productive checkers have larger effects

42
  Incentives are group-based in these steel mills. However, individual incentive pay can be used to undo some of the
potentially problematic aspects of production in groups of people that may try to capture some of the rents of
production (either from other workers or from the firms.) Bandeira, Barankay, and Rasul (2006) show that managers
on a fruit picking farm allocate workers more efficiently when the managers are given incentive pay. Some of this
productivity improvement comes at the expense of the managers’ friends, who receive worse assignments under the
incentive pay plan.


                                                                                                                 39
on peers that can see them while they work. Similarly, Ichino and Maggi (2000) show that
absenteeism and misconduct has an effect on peers in an Italian bank.
          In addition to these field studies, Falk and Ichino (2006) find noteworthy peer effects in
an experimental environment. Subjects were given a mundane task (stuffing envelopes) and no
financial incentive. Average worker productivity was higher when each person worked in the
same room as another person than when people worked in isolation. The least productive
workers were the most affected by working in a group, so the increase in their output more than
made up for the decrease in output of the most productive workers. The results of all these
studies taken together suggest that, at least in many environments, people prefer working in
groups to working in isolation, people working in groups feel some pressure to keep up with the
efforts of those around them, and/or the most productive workers pressure others into working
harder.
          As the theoretical work of Milgrom and Roberts (1990) and Kandel and Lazear (1992)
suggests, the effectiveness of team-based systems is likely to vary from firm-to-firm due to
complementarities across human resources practices. That is, team-based productivity may be
more important when firms invest in selecting employees carefully, training people in the system
and other practices. Testing this idea empirically is challenging, however, because measuring
productivity is difficult and human resource practices are adopted endogenously. Several studies
(see, for example, Black and Lynch, 2001, Cappelli and Neumark, 2001, and Bloom and Van
Reenan, 2007) have shown that adoption of progressive workplace practices are correlated with
one another and with productivity. However, it is difficult to make any causal statements about
these relationships.
          Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997) allay this concern to some degree by looking at
productivity of individual steel production lines around the time of adoption of modern human
resource practices. They show that these practices increase productivity in these factories and
that the marginal effect of each practice is increasing in the adoption of other practices.


6.3 Hierarchies


          Most people work in a hierarchy with several levels of reporting responsibility. There are
many contributing factors to this standard institutional arrangement and we will not investigate



                                                                                                   40
this in any great detail because it is the focus of another chapter in this volume (see Garicano and
Van Zandt, 2006.)
       As we noted in some detail above, one benefit of hierarchies is that they provide
incentives. Hierarchies can also be a substitute for incentives, however, in that they can provide a
mechanism for monitoring employees directly. Lucas (1978), formalizing ideas in Manne (1965)
and elsewhere, develops a model where some people are simply endowed with superior
management skills. These skills can be interpreted as monitoring, decision making, motivating,
or any other skill that would be more valuable for a manager than for other employees.
       Rosen (1982) distinguishes between the managerial tasks of making choices about what
to produce, strategy, etc. (“management”) and insuring that employees carry out these decisions
(“supervision”). To best utilize superior management skills, it would be efficient to grow firms
ever larger. However, there are diseconomies of scale in supervision, so optimal firm size trades
off these two factors. Rosen’s (1982) model can explain skewed firm size within an industry and
skewed compensation within a firm.
       Garicano (2000) models hierarchies as a means of matching problems to those in an
organization that can most efficiently solve them. There would be no need to use a hierarchical
structure for this issue if everyone knew who was capable of solving which problems. But, when
there are costs of communicating this knowledge, expertise organized by levels efficiently gets
the right person to the right problem. Hierarchies are arranged with the highest skill person at the
top, the next highest skilled people at the next level, and so on to the lowest skill workers at the
bottom. Each new problem enters the firm at the lowest level and gets bumped up the hierarchy
until it reaches the person that can solve it. Given the increasing importance of services and
“knowledge workers”, this idea of knowledge-based hierarchies has become more important. See
Garicano and Van Zandt (2006) for discussion of recent related work.


7. Conclusion


       We have described a great deal of progress in the personnel economics literature. This
research has helped explain how firms operate and has helped shape business education curricula
in recent years. So it seems sensible to ask “where do we go from here?” There is plenty of room
for more work, especially empirical work, in all the areas that we have discussed. But it seems



                                                                                                   41
likely that the highest returns will come from careful analyses of the selection, sorting, and
matching processes. How do firms find the right workers? How important is it that firms find the
right workers for their particular context? Business school curricula and the business press are
filled with many case studies of firms that highlight finding people that match their specific
needs (Southwest Airlines, SAS Institute, and Whole Foods Market are prominent examples).
How do these and other companies generate economic value by finding the right people?
         Another question worth further pursuit is how employees value different fringe benefits.
As employees become wealthier and as technology breaks down the work/leisure divide, firms
are likely to find non-cash compensation more strategically useful. Some of the types of on-the-
job skill development we discussed can also be thought of as non-cash benefits. Why do firms
train employees in computer skills and send them to executive education training? Is it to
increase their productivity, to reward them, or to signal something to or about them?
         In addition to these broad areas, we have also noted some specific questions presented by
recent work that are worth pursuing. What explains the lack of evidence to support the
risk/incentive trade-off predicted by moral hazard models? Are American executives overpaid?
How would we ever know? Other questions will emerge as external and institutional features
evolve. For example, if the returns to skill continue to increase, how will firms manage the
reorganization process as they pay for greater skill while trying to economize on low-skill jobs?
What problems, if any, will result if internal pay differentials grow too large?
         Two empirical methods have become useful in answering these and other questions and
we expect them to continue to grow in influence in personnel economics. First, studies of single
firms, often involving a field experiment, can provide precise analysis of the effects of various
human resource policies. This has proven effective in studying incentives, team-based
production, and the role of jobs, despite the lack of generalizability of these studies. Well-crafted
future studies (and perhaps experiments) can broaden the value of this method to selection, the
wage/benefit trade-off, the use of subjective performance evaluation, training, and other areas.
         The other method is the exploitation of employer-employee datasets, which have become
much more prevalent in recent years.43 These data can provide rich time series detail about firms’
pay structure, growth, employee tenure, etc. The lack of detail on firms’ human resources

43
  See Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) for a recent survey of some of the data and some of the papers that
have used them. Also, see Lazear and Shaw (2007) for a series of studies using datasets of this sort from a variety of
countries to analyze pay and turnover patterns within and across firms.


                                                                                                                   42
practices makes it challenging to frame an economic question in a manner that can be addressed
across the whole dataset. But careful modeling and/or focusing on certain industries or types of
workers often helps make the exercise manageable.
       Personnel economics has come a long way in the last few decades. We have learned a
great deal about the underlying economics of human resource policies. But, through the methods
and ideas we have just mentioned, as well as others we have overlooked or that have not yet
arisen, we believe there will be much more learned in the next few decades.




                                                                                               43
                                         References

Abowd, John M., and Francis Kramarz, 1999. “The Analysis of Labor Markets Using Matched
   Employer-Employee Data,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, eds. Orley C.
   Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist, 2001. “Consequences of Employment Protection? The
   Case of the Americans with Disabilities Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), 915-
   957.

Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1998. “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and
   Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 79-119.

Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 1999. “The Structure of Wages and Investment in
   General Training,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(3), 539-572.

Adams, Christopher, 2005, “Agent Discretion, Adverse Selection and the Risk-Incentive Trade-
   Off,” Working Paper, Federal Trade Commission.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick, 1999. "The Other Side of the Trade-off: The
   Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation," Journal of Political Economy, 107(1), 65-105.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick, 1999. "Executive Compensation, Strategic
   Competition, and Relative Performance Evaluation: Theory and Evidence," Journal of
   Finance, 54(6), 1999-2043.

Akerlof, George A., 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
   Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488-500.

Altonji, Joseph G. and Charles R. Pierret, 2001. “Employer learning and statistical
   discrimination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1), 313-350.

Andersson, Fredrik, Matthew Freedman, John C. Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kathryn Shaw,
   2006, “Reaching for the Stars: Who Pays for Talent in Innovative Industries?” NBER
   Working Paper #12,435.

Antle, Rick and Abbie Smith, 1986. “An Empirical Investigation of the Relative Performance
   Evaluation of Corporate Executives,” Journal of Accounting Research, 24(1), 1-39.

Antos, Joseph R., and Sherwin Rosen. 1975. "Discrimination in the Market for Teachers,"
   Journal of Econometrics 2 (May), 123-150.

Asch, Beth J., 1990. “Do incentives matter? The case of Navy recruiters,” Industrial and Labor
   Relations Review, 43(3), 89S-106S.

Autor, David H., 2001. “Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills Training?”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1409-1448.


                                                                                           44
Autor, David H., John J. Donohue, and Stewart J. Schwab, 2006. “The Costs of Wrongful-
   Discharge Laws,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2), 211-231.

Backes-Gellner, Uschi and Johannes Mure, 2005. “The Skill-Weights Approach on Firm
   Specific Human Capital: Empirical Results for Germany,” working paper, University of
   Zurich.

Baker, George, 1992. “Incentive Measures and Performance Measurement,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 100, 598-614.

Baker, George P., Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy, 1994. “Subjective Performance
   Measures in Optimal Incentive Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1125-1156.

Baker, George P., Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom, 1994. “The Wage Policy of a Firm,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 921-955.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, 2006, “Social Connections and Incentives in
   the Workplace: Evidence from Personnel Data,” working paper, London School of
   Economics.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, 2007, “Incentives for Managers and
   Inequality Among Workers: Evidence from a Firm-Level Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, forthcoming.

Barro, Jason R. and Robert J. Barro, 1990. “Pay, Performance, and Turnover of Bank CEOs,”
   Journal of Labor Economics, 8(4), 448-481.

Becker, Gary S., 1964. Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press.

Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, 2003. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 70(244), 489-520.

Bergman, Nittai K. and Dirk Jenter, 2007, “Employee Sentiment and Stock Option
   Compensation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 84(3), 667-712.

Bergson, Abram. 1978. “Managerial Risks and Rewards in Public Enterprises,” Journal of
   Comparative Economics, 2, 211-25.

Bernhardt, Dan, 1995, “Strategic Promotion and Compensation,” Review of Economic Studies,
   62:2, 315-339.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 2001. “Are CEO’s Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without
   Principals Are,” Quartery Journal of Economics, 116(3), 901-932.

Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch, 2001. “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace
   Practices and Information Technology on Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
   83(3), 434-445.



                                                                                          45
Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenan, 2007, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
   Across Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Bollinger, Christopher R. and Julie Hotchkiss, 2003. “The Upside Potential of Hiring Risky
   Workers: Evidence from the Baseball Industry,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21(4), 923-
   944.

Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. “Opportunity Counts: Teams and
   the Effectiveness of Production Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(4), 613-650.

Brickley, James A., and Jerold L. Zimmerman, 2001, “Changing Incentives in a Multitask
    Environment: Evidence from a Top-tier Business School,” Journal of Corporate Finance,
   7(4), 367-396.

Brown, Charles, 1980. “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 94(1), 113-134.

Bull, Clive, 1987. “The Existence of Self-Enforcing Implicit Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 102(1), 147-159.

Bull, Clive, Andrew Schotter; and Keith Weigelt, 1987. “Tournaments and Piece Rates: An
   Experimental Study,” The Journal of Political Economy, 95(1), 1-33.

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1986. "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with
   Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian Unemployment," Journal of
   Labor Economics, 4(3), 376-414

Canziani, Patrizia and Barbara Petrongolo, 2001. “Firing Costs and Stigma: A Theoretical
   Analysis and Evidence From Microdata,” European Economic Review, 45(10), 1877-1906.

Capelli, Peter and David Neumark, 2001. “Do ‘High-Performance’ Work Practices Improve
   Establishment-Level Outcomes?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(4), 737-775.

Capelli, Peter and Kevin Chauvin, 1991. "An Interplant Test of the Efficiency Wage
   Hypothesis," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 769− 87.

Chan, William, 1996. “External Recruitment versus Internal Promotion,” Journal of Labor
   Economics, 14(4), 555-570.

Cheung, Steven N. S. 1969. The Theory of Share Tenancy: With Special Application to Asian
   Agriculture and the First Phase of Taiwan Land Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.

Chevalier, Judith & Ellison, Glenn, 1997. "Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
   Incentives," Journal of Political Economy, 105(6), 1167-1200.

Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers,” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 389-432.


                                                                                          46
Courty, Pascal; and Gerald Marschke, 2004. ”An Empirical Investigation of Gaming Responses
   to Explicit Performance Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(1), 23-56.

Cremer, Jacques, 1986. “Cooperation in Ongoing Organizations,” The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 101(1), 33-50.

Deci, Edward L., Richard Koestner, and Richard M. Ryan. 1999. “A Meta-Analytic Review of
   Experiments Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation,”
   Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 627-668.

Deleire, Thomas, 2000. “The Wage and Employment Effects of the Americans with Disabilities
   Act,” The Journal of Human Resources, 35(4), 693-715.

Dertouzos, James N. and Lynn A. Karoly, Labor-Market Responses to Employer Liability, Santa
   Monica: RAND Corporation, 1940.

DeVaro, Jed, 2006, “Internal Promotion Competitions in Firms,” RAND Journal of Economics,
  37(3), 521-542.

DeVaro, Jed and Fidan A. Kurtulus. 2006. “An Empirical Analysis of Risk, Incentives, and the
  Delegation of Worker Authority,” Working Paper, Cornell University.

DeVaro, Jed and Michael Waldman. 2006. “The Signaling Role of Promotions: Further Theory
  and Empirical Evidence,” Working Paper, Cornell University.

Drago, Robert and Gerald T. Garvey, 1998. “Incentives for Helping on the Job: Theory and
   Evidence,” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(1), 1-25.

Dranove, David Daniel Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite, 2003. “Is More
   Information Better? The Effects of ‘Report Cards’ on Health Care Providers”, Journal of
   Political Economy, 111(3), 555-588.

Duflo, Esther, and Rema Hanna, 2005. "Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come to
   School," NBER Working Paper, no. 11880.

Dye, Ronald A., 1984. “The Trouble with Tournaments,” Economic Inquiry, 22(1), 147-150.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. 1980. “Retirement System Characteristics and Compensating Wage
   Differentials in the Public Sector,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 33(4), 470-483.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Michael L. Bognanno, 1990. “Do Tournaments Have Incentive
   Effects?” The Journal of Political Economy, 98(6), 1307-1324.

Fairburn, James A. and James M. Malcomson, 2001. “Performance, Promotion, and the Peter
    Principle,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(1), 45-66.

Falk, Armin and Andrea Ichino, 2006, “Clean Evidence on Peer Effects,” Journal of Labor
   Economics, 24(1), 39-57.



                                                                                           47
Fama, E., 1980. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal of Political Economy,
   88(2), 288-307.

Farber, Henry, 2005a. "What Do We Know About Job Loss in the United States?" Working
   Paper #498, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University.

Farber, Henry and Robert Gibbons, 1996. “Learning and Wage Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 111(4), 1007-1047.

Fernie, Sue and David Metcalf, 1999. “It's Not What You Pay it's the Way that You Pay it and
   that's What Gets Results: Jockeys' Pay and Performance,” LABOUR: Review of Labour
   Economics & Industrial Relations, 13(2), 385-411.

Fershtman, Chaim and Kenneth L. Judd, 1987. “Equilibrium Incentives in Oligopoly,” The
   American Economic Review, 77(5), 927-940.

Flaherty, Colleen N., 2006, “The Effect of Employer-Provided General Training on Turnover:
   Examination of Tuition Reimbursement Programs,” working paper, Stanford University.

Frank, Robert H. 1984. “Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Products?” American Economic
   Review, 74(4), 549-571.

Freeman, Richard B. and Morris M. Kleiner, 2005. "The Last American Shoe Manufacturers:
   Changing the Method of Pay to Survive Foreign Competition," Industrial Relations, 44(2),
   307-330.

Gant, Jon, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw, 2002. “Social Capital and Organizational
   Change in High-Involvement and Traditional Work Organizations,” Journal of Economics &
   Management Strategy, 11(2), 289-328.

Gant, Jon, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw, 2003. "Working Smarter by Working Together:
   Connective Capital in the Workplace," Working Paper.

Garicano, Luis, 2000, “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,” Journal
   of Political Economy, 108(5), 874-904.

Garicano, Luis, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006, “Organization and Inequality in a
   Knowledge Economy,” Quarterly Journal Economics, 121(4), 1383-1435.

Garicano, Luis, and Timothy Van Zandt. “Hierarchy,” forthcoming in Handbook of
   Organizational Economics, eds. Robert Gibbons and D. John Roberts. Princeton: Princeton
   University Press, 2006.

Garvey, Gerald and Todd Milbourn, 2003. “Incentive Compensation When Executives Can
   Hedge the Market: Evidence of Relative Performance Evaluation in the Cross Section,” The
   Journal of Finance, 58(4), 1557-1582.




                                                                                         48
Garvey, Gerald and Todd Milbourn, 2006. “Asymmetric Benchmarking in Compensation:
   Executives are Rewarded for Good Luck But Not Penalized for Bad,” Journal of Financial
   Economics 82(1), 197-226.

Gaynor, Martin, James Rebitzer and Lowell Taylor, 2004. “Physician Incentives in Health
   Maintenance Organizations,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 915-931.

Gibbons, Robert. 1987. “Piece-Rate Incentive Schemes,” Journal of Labor Economics, 5(4),
   413-29.

Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz, 1991. “Layoffs and Lemons,” Journal of Labor
   Economics, 9(4), 351-380.

Gibbons, Robert, Lawrence Katz, Thomas Lemieux and Daniel Parent, 2005. “Comparative
   Advantage, Learning, and Sectoral Wage Determination,” Journal of Labor Economics,
   23(4), 681-724.

Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy, 1990, “Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief
   Executive Officers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43, 30s-51s.

Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy, 1992. “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of
   Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(3), 468-505.

Gibbons, Robert, and Michael Waldman, 1999. “Careers in Organizations: Theory and
   Evidence,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David
   Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Gibbons, Robert, and Michael Waldman. 2006. “Enriching a Theory of Wage and Promotion
   Dynamics inside Firms,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(1), 59-107.

Gibbs, Michael, and Wallace Hendricks. 2004. “Do Formal Salary Systems Really Matter?”
   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58(1), 71-93.

Green, Jerry R. and Nancy L. Stokey, 1983. “A Comparison of Tournaments and Contracts,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), 349-364.

Greenwald, Bruce, 1986. “Adverse Selection in the Labor Market,” Review of Economic Studies,
   53(3), 325-347.

Groves, Theodore, Yongmiao Hong, John McMillan and Barry Naughton, 1994. "Autonomy and
   Incentives in Chinese State Enterprises," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 183-209.

Gruber, Jonathan, 2000. “Health Insurance and the Labor Market,” in Handbook of Health
   Economics, eds. A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Hallock, Kevin F., 2006. “Layoffs in Large U.S. Firms from the Perspective of Senior
   Managers,” Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 25, 137-179.




                                                                                         49
Hamermesh, Daniel S., 1999. "Changing Inequality In Markets For Workplace Amenities,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4), 1085-1123.

Hamilton, Barton H., Jack A. Nickerson, and Hideo Owan, 2003. “Team Incentives and Worker
  Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and
  Participation,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), 465-497.

Hayes, Rachel M., Paul Oyer, and Scott Schaefer, 2006. “Co-Worker Complementarity and the
   Stability of Top Management Teams.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations, 22,
   184-212.

Hayes, Rachel M. and Scott Schaefer, 2000. “Implicit Contracts and the Explanatory Power of
   Top Executive Compensation for Future Performance.” RAND Journal of Economics, 31,
   273-293.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom, 1982. “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of
   Economic Studies, 49(3), 315-333.

Healy, Paul M., 1985. "The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions," Journal of
   Accounting and Economics, 7, 85-107.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 74-
   91.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1982. “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13(2), 324-340.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1999. “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective”, Review of
   Economic Studies, 66(1), 169-182.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
   Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
   Organization, 7, 24-52.

Ichino, Andrea, and Giovanni Maggi, 2000. “Work Environment and Individual Background:
    Explaining Regional Differentials in a Large Italian Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    115(3), 1057-1090.

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi, 1997. “The Effects of Human
   Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,”
   American Economic Review, 87(3), 291-313.

Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. “Insider Econometrics,” forthcoming in Handbook
   of Organizational Economics, eds. Robert Gibbons and D. John Roberts. Princeton:
   Princeton University Press.

Jacob, Brian A., and Steven D. Levitt, “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of The Prevalence and
   Predictors of Teacher Cheating”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 843-877.



                                                                                            50
Jenter, Dirk and Fadi Kanaan, 2006. “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evaluation,”
    NBER Working Paper No. 12068.

Jin, Li, 2002. "CEO compensation, Diversification, and Incentives," Journal of Financial
    Economics, 66(1), 29-63.

Johnson, D. Gale. 1950. “Resource Allocation under Share Contracts,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 58, 111-23.

Jovanovic, Boyan, 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 87(5), 972-990.

Kahn, Charles and Gur Huberman, 1988. "Two-Sided Uncertainty and Up-or-out Contracts,"
   Journal of Labor Economics, 6, 423-444.

Kandel, Eugene and Edward P. Lazear, 1992. “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of
   Political Economy, 100(4), 801-817.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Bernadette A. Minton, 2006. “How has CEO Turnover Changed?
   Increasingly Performance Sensitive Boards and Increasingly Uneasy CEOs,” working paper,
   University of Chicago.

King Jr., Ralph T., 1998, “Levi’s Factory Workers are Assigned to Teams, and Morale Takes a
   Hit,” Wall Street Journal, May 20.

Kletzer, Lori G., 1998. “Job Displacement,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1), 115-136.

Knoeber, Charles R. and Walter N. Thurman, 1994. “Testing the Theory of Tournaments: An
   Empirical Analysis of Broiler Production,” Journal of Labor Economics, 12(2), 155-179.

Kugler, Adriana D. and Gilles Saint-Paul, 2004. “How Do Firing Costs Affect Worker Flows in
   a World with Adverse Selection?” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(3), 553-584.

Larkin, Ian, 2007. “The Cost of High-Powered Incentives: Employee Gaming in Enterprise
   Software Sales,” working paper, University of California at Berkeley.

Lazear, Edward P., 1979. “Why is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy,
   87(6), 1261-1284.

Lazear, Edward P., 1986a. “Salaries and Piece Rates,” Journal of Business, 59(3), 405-431.

Lazear, Edward P., 1986b. “Retirement from the Labor Force,” in Handbook of Labor
   Economics, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Lazear, Edward P., 1986c. “Raids and Offer Matching,” Research in Labor Economics, 8, 141-
   165.

Lazear, Edward P., 1989. “Pay Equality and Industrial Politics,” Journal of Political Economy,
   97(3), 561-580.


                                                                                             51
Lazear, Edward P., 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 105(3), 699-726.

Lazear, Edward P. 1992. “The Job as a Concept,” in Performance Measurement and Incentive
   Compensation, ed. William J. Bruns, Jr. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press.

Lazear, Edward P. 1998. “Hiring Risky Workers,” in Internal Labour Market, Incentives, and
   Employment, eds. Isao Ohashi and Toshiaki Tachibanki. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Lazear, Edward P. 1999. “Personnel Economics: Past Lessons and Future Directions,” Journal of
   Labor Economics, 17(2), 199-236.

Lazear, Edward P., 2000a, “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review,
   90(5), 1346-1361.

Lazear, Edward P., 2000b, “The Future of Personnel Economics,” 110, Economic Journal, F611-
   39.

Lazear, Edward P., 2004a. “Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach,” NBER
   Working Paper 9679.

Lazear, Edward P., 2004b. “The Peter Principle: A Theory of Decline,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 112(1), S141-S163.

Lazear, Edward P. 2005. “Output-Based Pay: Incentives, Retention, or Sorting?” Research in
   Labor Economics, 23, 1-25.

Lazear, Edward P., 2006. “Speeding, Terrorism, and Teaching to the Test,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 121(3), 1029-1061.

Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. “Rank Order Tournaments as Optimum
   Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), 841-864.

Lazear, Edward P. and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. An International Comparison of the Structure of
   Wages, Boston: NBER.

Levin, Jonathan, and Steven Tadelis, 2005, “Profit Sharing and the Role of Professional
   Partnerships,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 131-171.

Lluis, Stephanie, 2005. “The Role of Comparative Advantage and Learning in Wage Dynamics
   and Intrafirm Mobility: Evidence from Germany,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4), 725-
   768.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1978, “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of
   Economics, 9(2), 508-523.




                                                                                             52
Lumsdaine Robin and Olivia Mitchell, 1999. “New Developments in the Economic Analysis of
   Retirement,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card.
   Amsterdam: North Holland.

MacLeod, W. Bentley and James M. Malcomson. 1989. “Implicit Contracts, Inventive
  Compatibility, and Involuntary Unemployment,” Econometrica, 57(2), 447-480.

MacLeod, W. Bentley, 2003. “On Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evaluation,” American
  Economic Review, 93(1), 216-240.

Malcomson, James M., 1999. “Individual Employment Contracts,” in Handbook of Labor
   Economics, Vol. III, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Manne, Henry G., 1965. “Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 73(2), 110-120.

Marino, Anthony M. and Jan Zabojnik, 2007. “Work-Related Perks, Agency Problems, and
   Optimal Incentive Contracts,” working paper, USC Marshall School.

Marshall, Alfred, The Principles of Economics, London: MacMillan, 1890.

Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti, 2006, “Peers at Work,” NBER Working Paper #12,508.

McCall, Brian, 1990. “Occupational Matching: A Test of Sorts,” Journal of Political Economy,
  98(1), 45-69.

Meyer, Margaret, Paul R. Milgrom, and D. John Roberts, 1992. “Organizational Prospects,
  Influence Costs, and Ownership Changes,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy,
  1(1), 9-35.

Milgrom, Paul and Sharon Oster, 1987. “Job Discrimination, Market Forces, and the Invisibility
   Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(3), 453-476.

Milgrom, Paul R. and D. John Roberts, 1988. “An Economic Approach to Influence Activities in
   Organizations,” American Journal of Sociology, 94(supplement), S154-S179.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, 1990. “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,
   Strategy, and Organization,” American Economic Review, 80(3), 511-528.

Miller, Robert A., 1984. “Job Matching and Occupational Choice,” Journal of Political
   Economy, 92(6), 1086-1120.

Mirrlees, James, 1974. “Notes on Welfare Economics, Information and Uncertainty,” in Essays
   in Equilibrium Behavior under Uncertainty, eds. M. Balch, D. McFadden, and S. Wu,
   Amsterdam: North Holland.

Murphy, Kevin J., 1999. “Executive Compensation,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III,
  eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland.



                                                                                           53
Murphy, Kevin J., 2000. “Performance Standards in Incentive Contracts,” Journal of Accounting
  and Economics, 30, 245–278.

Nagin, Daniel S., James B. Rebitzer, Seth Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor, 2002. “Monitoring,
   Motivation, and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field
   Experiment,” American Economic Review, 92(4), 850-873.

Nalebuff, Barry J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1983. “Prizes and Incentives Towards a General
   Theory of Compensation and Competition,” Bell Journal of Economy, 14(1), 21-43.

Olson, Craig A., 2002. “Do Workers Accept Lower Wages in Exchange for Health Benefits?”
   Journal of Labor Economics, 20(2), S91-S115.

Oyer, Paul, 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Non-Linear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on
   Business Seasonality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 149-185.

Oyer, Paul, 2004. “Why Do Firms Use Incentives That Have No Incentive Effects?” Journal of
   Finance, 59, 1619-1649.

Oyer, Paul, 2008. "Salary or Benefits?" Research in Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer, 2000. “Layoffs and Litigation,” Rand Journal of Economics,
   31(2), 345-358.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer, 2002. “Litigation Costs and Returns to Experience,” American
   Economic Review, 92(3), 683-705.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer, 2005. “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options To All
   Employees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories,” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 76, 99-133.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer, 2007. “Personnel-Economic Geography: Evidence from Large
   US Law Firms,” working paper, Stanford University Graduate School of Business.

Prendergast, Canice, 1993. “The Role of Promotion in Inducing Specific Human Capital
   Acquistion,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2), 523-534.

Prendergast, Canice, 1999, “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic
   Literature, 37(1), 7-63.

Prendergast, Canice, 2000. “What Trade-Off of Risk and Incentives?” American Economic
   Review, 90(2), 421-425.

Prendergast, Canice, 2002a. “The Tenuous Trade-Off between Risk and Incentives,” Journal of
   Political Economy, 110(5), 1071-1102.

Prendergast, Canice, 2002b. “Uncertainty and Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics, 20(2),
   S115-S137.



                                                                                          54
Prendergast, Canice, 2007. “The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats”, American Economic
   Review, forthcoming.

Prendergast, Canice, and Robert Topel, 1996. “Favoritism in Organizations”, Journal of Political
   Economy, 104: 958-978.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Julie Wulf, 2006, “Are Perks Purely Managerial Excess?”, Journal of
   Financial Economics, 79(1), 1-33.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1974. “Hedonic Methods and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
   Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(1), 34-55.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1978. “Substitution and Division of Labour,” Economica, 45(179), 235-250.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1982. “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal of
   Economics, 13(2), 311-323.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences,” in Handbook of Labor
   Economics, eds. Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Ross, Stephen A. 1973. “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem,” American
   Economic Review, 63(2), 134-39.

Salop, Joanne and Steven Salop, 1976. “Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), 619-627.

Sattinger, Michael, 1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings,” Journal of
    Economic Literature, 31(2), 831-880.

Schaefer, Scott, 1998. “Influence Costs, Structural Inertia, and Organizational Change,” Journal
   of Economics and Management Strategy, 7(2), 237-263.

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1984. “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
   Device,” American Economic Review, 74(3), 433-444.

Shearer, Bruce, 2004. “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence from a Field
   Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(2), 513-534.

Song, Younghwan, 2007. “Recall Bias in the Displaced Workers Survey: Are Layoffs Really
   Lemons?” Labour Economics, 14(3), 325-345.

Spence, Michael, 1973. “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3), 355-
   374.

Stern, Scott, 2004. “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?” Management Science, 50(6), 835-853.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1975. “Incentives, Risk, and Information: Notes Toward a Theory of
    Hierarchy,” Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, 6, 552-79.



                                                                                             55
Thaler, Richard and Sherwin Rosen, 1976. “The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the
   Labor Market,” in Household Production and Consumption, ed. Nester Terleckyj. Studies in
   Income and Wealth no. 40. New York: Columbia University Press (for NBER).

Waldman, Michael, 1984. “Job Assignments, Signalling, and Efficiency,” The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 15(2), 255-267.

Waldman, Michael, 2007. “Connecting Theory and Patterns of Evidence in Internal Labor
  Markets,” forthcoming in Handbook of Organizational Economics, eds. Robert Gibbons and
  D. John Roberts. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Woodbury, Stephen A., 1983. “Substitution Between Wage and Nonwage Benefits,” American
  Economic Review, 73(1), 166-182.

Woodcock, Simon D., 2006, “Match Effects,” working paper, Simon Fraser University.

Zabojnik, Jan, 1996. “Pay-Performance Sensitivity and Production Uncertainty,” Economic
   Letters, 53, 291-296.




                                                                                        56
