NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OVERWEIGHT IN ADOLESCENTS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR HEALTH EXPENDITURES
Alan C. Monheit
Jessica P. Vistnes
Jeannette A. Rogowski
Working Paper 13488
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13488

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

We thank James Kirby, Chad Meyerhoefer, and participants at the AHRQ Health Economics Seminar
for helpful comments and Irina Grafova, Chad Meyerhoefer, and Sam Zuvekas for sharing data with
us. We are indebted to Rizie Kumar for her skillful and diligent work constructing our data file and
to Kathy McMillan of Social and Scientific Systems, Bethesda, MD for assistance in merging geographical
variables to our analytical file. The views in this paper are those of the authors and no official endorsement
by the Department of Health and Human Services, AHRQ, or the National Bureau of Economic Research
is intended nor should be inferred.
© 2007 by Alan C. Monheit, Jessica P. Vistnes, and Jeannette A. Rogowski. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Overweight in Adolescents: Implications for Health Expenditures
Alan C. Monheit, Jessica P. Vistnes, and Jeannette A. Rogowski
NBER Working Paper No. 13488
October 2007
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
We consider two compelling research questions raised by the increased prevalence of overweight among
adolescents. First, what factors explain variation in adolescent bodyweight and the likelihood of being
overweight? Next, do overweight adolescents incur greater health care expenditures compared to those
of normal weight? We address the former question by examining the contribution of individual characteristics,
economic factors, parental and family attributes, and neighborhood characteristics to variation in these
bodyweight outcomes. For the second question, we estimate a two-part, generalized linear model of
health spending. Using data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, our econometric analyses
indicate that adolescent bodyweight and the likelihood of being overweight are strongly associated
with parental bodyweight, parental education, parental smoking behavior, and neighborhood attributes
such as the availability of fresh food markets and convenience/snack food outlets, and neighborhood
safety and material deprivation. Our expenditure model indicates that overweight females have annual
expenditures that exceed those of normal weight by nearly $800 with part of the disparity explained
by differences in mental health expenditures. We use both sets of empirical results to draw implications
for policies to address adolescent overweight.

Alan C. Monheit
School of Public Health
University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey (UMDNJ)
683 Hoes Lane West
Piscataway, NJ 08854-5635
and NBER
monheiac@umdnj.edu
Jessica P. Vistnes
Center for Cost and Financing Studies
Agency for Health Care and Research
540 Gaither Road
Rockville, MD 20850
jvistnes@ahrq.gov

Jeannette A. Rogowski
Department of Health Systems and Policy
University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey (UMDNJ)
335 George Street, Suite 2200
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
and NBER
rogowsje@umdnj.edu

2

I. Introduction
The prevalence of overweight among the US population over the past several decades has
been characterized as reaching epidemic proportions (Institute of Medicine, 2004). According to
data from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), nearly two-thirds of adults were
estimated to be overweight during 1999-2002, an increase of 46 percent over rates for the period
1960-62 (National Center for Health Statistics 2004). These data also reveal that 15.8 percent of
children aged 6 to 11 and 16.1 percent of adolescents aged 12 to 19 were overweight during
1999-2002, representing nearly a four-fold increase over rates for the 1960-62 period.
Coincident with these trends, overweight among adults and children has emerged as a
serious public health concern. Among adults, overweight is a serious risk factor for heart
disease, hypertension, Type 2 diabetes, osteoarthritis, poor female reproductive health, and a
variety of other physical maladies (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2005). Among
children and adolescents, overweight can contribute to a number of physical health problems,
including Type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular risk factors, glucose intolerance, sleep apnea,
menstrual abnormalities, and orthopedic problems. Perhaps equally important, obesity in
children and adolescents can lead to psychosocial problems such as low self-esteem, negative
body image, depression, stigma, discrimination, and teasing and bullying (Institute of Medicine
2004; Ogden et al., 2002).
Health problems associated with overweight also translate into substantial health care
spending. For example, Finkelstein, Fiebelkorn, and Wang (2003) estimated that overweight and
obesity accounted for 9.1 percent of US health expenditures in 1998. Sturm (2002) observed that
the association between obesity and chronic health conditions is equivalent to twenty years of

3
aging, and that obesity is associated with significant increases in inpatient and outpatient
utilization and prescription drug spending. Wang and Dietz (2002) estimated that for the period
1979 to 1999, obesity-related annual hospital costs for children ages 6-17 increased more than
three-fold. Finally, Thorpe et al. (2004) estimated that between 1987 and 2001, the increase in
the prevalence of obesity and in spending by the obese relative to persons of normal weight
accounted for 27 percent of the rise in real per capita spending over this period.
As described in Koplan, Liverman, and Kraak (2004), overweight is a particular concern
for children and adolescents. Apart from the increased likelihood of contracting the adverse
health conditions noted above, nearly 50 percent of overweight children and adolescents will
become obese adults. Such children are thus at risk for the adverse health conditions and
attendant health care costs associated with adult obesity. The social and emotional health
problems of overweight children and adolescents can also pose a significant risk to their
academic progress, lead to behavioral problems, and impede social adjustment during these
critical developmental periods.1 Finally, should overweight children become overweight adults,
they may also obtain lower economic rewards associated with adult overweight and obesity
(Gormaker et al. 1993, Averett and Korenman 1996, Cawley 2000, Conley and Glauber 2005).
As Rashad and Grossman (2004) have noted, public policy interventions in response to
obesity may be most compelling for children and adolescents who are likely to lack the
knowledge necessary for informed nutritional decisions. These informational deficits represent a
kind of “market failure” that justifies educational interventions to enhance awareness about
1

The Institute of Medicine (2004) also reports that among children and adolescents, rates of
overweight are more prevalent in high-risk populations such as children of lower socioeconomic
status and racial and ethnic minorities. To the extent that children in these groups face barriers to
economic success associated with low incomes, single-parent families, low-quality schooling,
and residence in inhospitable urban environments, being overweight may exacerbate the
difficulties of overcoming such impediments.

4
nutrition. Excessive myopia may also cause adolescents to undervalue the longer-term
consequences of food choices and public policy interventions may again be justified.
Additionally, self-control problems may prevent adolescents from taking prudent action in the
short-term to address overeating (see O’Donogue and Rabin 2001 for a discussion of risky
behavior by adolescents). As with smoking behavior, this lack of self control may warrant
government intervention to discourage the consumption of food with poor nutritional content.2
Our focus on adolescents also recognizes that this age group is likely to exhibit greater
independence in their dietary and nutritional choices than younger children. They may also be
subject to less parental supervision regarding sound health habits that can affect bodyweight.
Hence interventions designed to alter behavior may have more of an impact on adolescents than
on younger children.
In this paper, we first examine the extent to which economic factors, parental
characteristics, family structure and composition, and characteristics of neighborhoods and
geographic areas contribute to variation in adolescent bodyweight and to the likelihood of being
overweight. Next, we consider the relationship between adolescent bodyweight and health care
expenditures. This part of the analysis explores whether the relatively high health care costs
associated with adult obesity begin to emerge during adolescence. We also examine whether the
relationship between adolescent overweight and health expenditures reflects the contribution of
weight-related health conditions and whether the prevalence of such conditions differs between
overweight adolescents and those of normal weight. Finally, results from our models of
adolescent bodyweight are used to point to interventions that can potentially reduce overweight
2

Gruber (2002/03) provides a non-technical discussion of the use of excise taxes to address
problems of self control in the context of cigarette smoking. Papers by Jacobson and Bronwell
(2000), Leicester and Windmeijer (2004), and Kim and Kawachi (2006) consider the use of
excise taxes to reduce obesity.

5
in adolescents. As our expenditure models indicate, such reductions could also reduce
adolescents’ health care spending.

II. Conceptual Framework
As noted above, one of our objectives is to assess the contribution of a variety of factors
to adolescent bodyweight and overweight. To frame our cross-sectional analysis, we apply an
approach developed by Chou, Grossman, and Saffer (2004, 2002) and note that individual i’s
bodyweight in period t will depend on his/her energy balance (the difference between energy
consumed, Ci, and expended, Si), the cumulative effect of his/her energy balance in prior periods
(k=1 to t-1), and time-invariant factors, represented by the vector Vi, which determine an
individual’s predisposition to increased bodyweight. We define this relationship as:
t −1

(1) Wit = f [( C i t − S i t ), ∑ (C i k − S i k ),Vi ]
k =1

Rewriting (1) by noting that the terms in the summation and Vi contribute to bodyweight in the
prior period (e.g., period t-1), we obtain:
(2) Wit = f [(Cit − Sit ),Wi ,t −1 ,Vi ]

Thus, bodyweight observed for individual i during the current period will depend on levels of Ci
and Si, bodyweight in the prior period Wt-1, and time-invariant, weight-susceptibility factors
represented by Vi.
Note that equations (1) and (2) describe the technical or ‘production’ relationship
governing the determination of bodyweight. Since we cannot directly observe this process, our
empirical estimates of variation in adolescent bodyweight will be based on reduced-form
empirical models. As in Chou, Grossman, and Saffer (2004), we posit that individual
characteristics (e.g., age, race/ethnicity, gender, and genetics) will affect the technical process by

6
which (C-S) is converted into bodyweight. We also note that current energy balance along with
weight in past periods will also depend on economic, family, and neighborhood characteristics.
Apart from technical production considerations, economic theory suggests that
individuals ‘choose’ their bodyweight through utility maximizing behavior. As noted by Cawley
(2004) and by Chou, Grossman, and Saffer (2004, 2002), bodyweight can enter an individual’s
utility function either directly as an object of choice or indirectly as an input in the production of
health. Thus, an individual chooses optimal levels of bodyweight and health, along with other
commodities, subject to constraints encompassing income, prices of food and other commodities,
time, and the bodyweight production function noted above. Since adolescents exercise some
discretion in their food choices, we incorporate these considerations in our empirical analysis.
Next, we discuss the role of various factors in our model.
Economic factors: Family income and food prices figure prominently as two basic economic
factors that can affect adolescent food consumption and bodyweight. First, adolescents in
families with higher incomes may be better able to afford foods of superior nutritional quality
and lower energy density than lower-income families. Next, adolescents in families with higher
incomes may be better able to take part in a greater range of recreational activities than those in
low-income families.
Lower prices of fast and convenience foods have been found to be associated with
overweight and obesity in adults (Chou, Grossman, and Saffer 2004). In research on children and
adolescents, Chou, Rashad, and Grossman (2005) consider the impact of several types of food
prices on adolescent bodyweight by gender. While they obtain mixed results, their findings
indicate that increases in fast-food restaurant prices reduce adolescent BMI (the body-mass index
described below) for females. Finally, Chou, Grossman, and Safer (2004) note that smokers have

7
higher metabolic rates than non-smokers and consume fewer calories. They include the real price
of cigarettes in their study to account for the possibility that higher prices may discourage
smoking, resulting in increased caloric consumption and higher bodyweight. Chou, Rashad and
Grossman’s (2005) study of overweight in children and adolescents also accounts for geographic
variation in the real price of cigarettes but they find no effect on children’s bodyweight.
Parental and family characteristics: Parental obesity may be related to adolescent overweight
through a genetic predisposition and/or unobserved parental attitudes toward proper health
practices. Early work by Coate (1983) examined the influence of parent’s “fatness” (based on
skinfold measures) and diet to child and adolescent weight. He found that parent’s fatness is a
statistically significant predictor of child and adolescent skinfold growth and obesity, but that
diet is unrelated to these outcomes. These results support an interpretation in which parental
bodyweight affects child overweight through genetics rather than behavior. In more recent work,
Anderson, Butcher, and Levine (2003), Sastry and Plebley (2003) and Chou, Rashad, and
Grossman (2005) used data on mother’s BMI and found it to be strongly related to child
overweight. However, if fathers’ bodyweight provides a genetic contribution to children’s
predisposition for overweight, these analyses omit a critical explanatory variable.3
Parental and family characteristics may affect adolescent bodyweight through their
impact on calories consumed and expended. For example, given the traditional role of mothers
in meal preparation, some time-constrained working mothers may substitute less nutritious fast
and convenience foods for meals prepared at home. Time-constrained mothers also may exercise
less supervision over the food choices of their adolescent children, and higher-income, timeconstrained parents have the means to substitute convenience foods for meals prepared at home.
3

This is an unavoidable problem in analyses of single-mother families since information on the
non-residing father will be missing.

8
Using longitudinal data, Anderson, Butcher, and Levine (2003) found a statistically significant
positive relationship between maternal employment intensity and child overweight for children
ages three to eleven in high income families. We also include parents’ education in our model
since it has played a critical role in a variety of other health outcomes for children (Grossman,
2005), and add a variable indicating whether each parent is a smoker, viewing this as a correlate
of unobserved parental attitudes toward prudent health behaviors. Finally, family composition
and size may affect the ability of parents to adequately supervise the food consumption of their
children and to “stretch” budgets to provide high quality meals.4
Neighborhood and environmental effects: Differences in the design and environmental
characteristics of a neighborhood and the socioeconomic status of its residents may also
contribute to the likelihood that an adolescent will be overweight. Such factors include
opportunities for walking and recreation, neighborhood safety and quality, and the availability of
nutritious food outlets and fast/convenience food stores. Booth, Pinkston, and Poston (2005) cite
a variety of studies focusing on the relationship between such characteristics and adult
bodyweight. These studies suggest that residents of materially deprived neighborhoods have
been found to have higher BMI levels and a greater prevalence of overweight. Other research
using individual and state-level data has found that sprawling geographic areas have residents
with higher bodyweight and obesity than less sprawling areas (Ewing et al. 2003; Vandgrift and
Yoked 2004).
The few studies that have examined the impact of neighborhood characteristics on the
bodyweight of children and adolescents have produced mixed results. For example, Kinra et al.
(2000) found that children ages 5 to 14 living in materially deprived households in the city of
4

Parents’ marital status may also affect adolescent bodyweight should emotional and behavioral
problems associated with divorce or separation lead to eating disorders.

9
Plymouth, United Kingdom, had obesity rates 2.5 times the national average. Sastry and Plebley
(2003) found that immigrant concentration and neighborhood stability were positively related to
the likelihood that an adolescent was overweight. By contrast, Burdette and Whitaker (2004)
found no relationship between neighborhood characteristics such as safety, the availability of
playgrounds, and fast food restaurants on overweight among low-income, pre-school children.
Kandris and Liu (2003) found that when median income was included in multivariate models,
social barriers such as crime and single parenting were not statistically significant predictors of
obesity for children (ages 4 to 18 years of age) living in areas of low income in Indianapolis.
They also found that opportunities for exercise were not statistically predictive of obesity nor
was census tract educational attainment.
Finally, in evaluating the impact of such community-level characteristics on outcomes for
children, Ginter, Haveman, and Wolfe (2000) have cautioned that the reliability of estimates of
neighborhood effects depend on the degree to which family background is included in model
specifications. Sastry and Plebley (2003) also found that inclusion of family characteristics
reduced the contribution of the small number of neighborhood characteristics in their analysis of
children’s bodyweight and obesity.
The relationship between adolescent bodyweight and health care expenditures:
As noted earlier, we examine whether overweight adolescents incur higher health care
expenditures than adolescents of normal weight in order to gain insight into whether the high
health expenditures of overweight adults have their origin during adolescence. While there is a
relatively large literature on variation in child and adolescent bodyweight, and a descriptive
literature regarding the contribution of adult obesity to aggregate health expenditures, we are not
aware of behavioral analyses on adolescent overweight and health care spending. Our analysis

10
seeks to address this gap in research by estimating an empirical model of health expenditures. As
discussed below, this model specification confronts several issues of endogeneity as well as the
critical question of whether any expenditure differentials by bodyweight can be attributed to
health conditions that are associated with overweight in adolescence.

III. Data and Empirical Specification

The data used in this study are from the household component of the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS-HC), a nationally representative two-year household panel
survey sponsored by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). The MEPS
provides national estimates of the civilian, non-institutionalized population’s access to, use of,
and expenditures for health care, their health and health insurance status, demographic
characteristics, economic status, and employment characteristics. It also includes data on
reported (rather than measured) height and weight of adults and children. For children, these data
are reported by parents (or other responsible individuals) while for adults, self-reported data on
height and weight were collected beginning in 2001. For public release, these data are converted
into units of BMI for each adult and child, defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in
meters squared.
For purposes of our analysis, we pool MEPS household survey data for the years 2001
through 2003, the latter year representing the most currently available data at the initiation of our
study.5 We excluded female adolescents who were pregnant, restricted our analysis to

5

Specifically, we begin with data from the second year of panel 5 (corresponding to 2001),
representing the first year in which data on adult height and weight were collected in the MEPS.
We also include data from the first year of panel 6 (corresponding to 2001), the first year of
panel 7 (2002), and the first year of panel 8 (2003). We considered exploiting the panel nature of
MEPS to examine changes in adolescent bodyweight between year one and year two of the

11
adolescents residing with single-mother and two-parent families, and excluded those with
missing or implausible values of BMI. Our resulting data set consists of 6738 adolescents (3463
males and 3275 females) defined as ages 12 to 19 to be consistent with classification of
adolescents in National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from NCHS. We
apply survey weights to our analyses so that our estimates represent annual average estimates for
the three years of pooled data in our sample. We also adjust the standard errors of our descriptive
and multivariate estimates for the complex survey design of MEPS using the relevant survey
commands in STATA.
Data on adolescent and adult BMI and overweight: Data on BMI used to classify children as
overweight are based upon U.S. age-and gender-specific growth charts (BMI-for-age percentiles)
tabulated by NCHS. We use these BMI threshold levels to classify adolescents into four weight
categories: underweight (< 5th percentile); normal weight (5th percentile to < 85th percentile); at
risk of overweight or obesity (85th percentile to < 95th percentile) and overweight (95th percentile
or above).6 For parents, we use the NCHS classification of underweight as BMI < 18.5; normal
weight (BMI > or equal to 18.5 but < or equal to 24.9); at risk for obesity (BMI > or equal to 25
but < or equal to 29.9); and obese (BMI > or equal to 30). 7

MEPS panels. However, we found that changes in the BMI index for adolescent children were
quite small over this two year period.
6
We follow the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and use ‘overweight’ to refer to
children who are in the top 5 percent of their gender and age-specific BMI distribution.
7
Missing data on BMI, due to non-response to questions on weight and/or height, ranged from
just over 15 percent for children 12 years of age to less than ten percent for those 15 to 19. We
found that children 17 – 19 years of age sometimes had a value for the variable measuring adult
BMI. For consistency in measuring adolescent BMI and for purposes of minimizing the degree
of missing data, we adopted the following decision rule for these observations: if values existed
for both the child BMI and adult BMI measures, we used the child BMI; if the child BMI was
present and the adult BMI missing, we used the child BMI; if the adult BMI was available and
the child BMI missing, we used the adult BMI.

12
As noted, MEPS BMI data for children and adolescents are based upon parental reports
of height and weight rather than measured values. Consequently, there may be measurement
error due to possible over-reporting of height and under-reporting of weight that could bias
estimates of BMI downward. To assess this possibility, we compared our BMI estimates to
tabulations based on measured BMI from the NHANES for the period 1999 to 2002 (Table 1).
Overall, we find a somewhat lower proportion of overweight adolescents in our sample, 14.2
percent, compared to 16.1 percent from the NHANES (p < 0.05). We find no statistically
significant differences between overweight rates for male adolescents (15.8 percent in the MEPS
and 16.7 percent in the NHANES), but do find a lower percentage for female adolescents in the
MEPS (12.5 percent to 15.4 percent in the NHANES (p < 0.05).
We also examine adolescent overweight rates by race/ethnicity and gender to try to
identify the source of under-reporting. Although there is a 2.8 percentage point difference in
overweight rates between white females in the MEPS and NHANES, this difference is not
statistically significant. While we find no statistically significant differences between MEPS and
NHANES with regard to black males, black females, white males, and black females, published
NHANES tabulations do not provide estimates for adolescents of Hispanic ethnicity (estimates
are only provided for Mexicans). Thus, the difference between the overall MEPS and NHANES
estimates could potentially reflect differences in the prevalence of overweight for Hispanic
females.8

8

Cawley and Burkhauser (2006) use the NHANES to regress data on measured weight (height)
on reported weight (height) and use the resulting equations to predict height and weight (and thus
BMI) corrected for reporting error. Unfortunately, the NHANES does not contain both reported
and measured data on weight and height for children less than age 18 so we are unable to apply
such an adjustment procedure. Goodman, Hinden and Khandelwal (2000) find that self reports of
height and weight by adolescents provide accurate estimates of BMI for classifying adolescents

13
Data on economic factors: Income data reported in the MEPS, expressed as a percent of the
federal poverty line, serves as our measure of household economic status. We use data from the
2002 Economic Census: Accommodation and Food Services, Geographic Area Series to obtain
information on the average state price for limited-service restaurants and full-service restaurants
in the adolescent’s state of residence. 9 These data are produced every five years so that the 2002
data are most appropriate for our study. Since the price data are reported as specific intervals, we
apply weights to price interval mid-points where the weights are the percent of each type of
restaurant in each interval (as in Chou, Grossman, and Saffer 2004). We attempted to use the
ACCRA Grocery Items Price Index for selected metropolitan statistical areas to measure the
price of food prepared at home (ACCRA 2005). However, since data for this index was missing
for half our sample, we decided not add it to our analysis. Finally, we also include measures of
the average price per pack of cigarettes in a state (2003 dollars) as reported in The Tax Burden on
Tobacco (Orzechowski and Walker 2006).
Parental characteristics and family circumstances: We classify each parent as employed or not
employed, and for mothers we classify them, if employed, as working full or part time (where
full-time work is defined as 35 or more hours per week). Other family and parental
characteristics, such as family size, parents’ bodyweight, education, health and smoking status
are also obtained from the MEPS.
Data on geographic locale and neighborhoods: We incorporate several measures of an
adolescent’s geographic location that may have relevance for bodyweight and the likelihood of

as overweight. However, we are not aware of studies that compare parental reports of children’s
height and weight to measured data for purposes of identifying overweight adolescents.
9
These data were accessed via the American Fact Finder web site at
http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/IBQTable?_bm=y&-geo_id=&-ds_name=EC0272SXSB02&_lang=en last accessed on May 10, 2006.

14
being overweight. We include data on census tract population density derived from the 2000
Census and expect that individuals residing in more densely populated tracts may have less
incentive to use motorized transportation for daily activities. We also use census tract data on
the percent of households on public assistance, the percent of vacant households, and the median
value of housing to characterize neighborhood material deprivation. We expect such
neighborhoods to lack adequate recreational facilities, have poorer environmental quality, and
lack access to higher quality and more nutritious food products than more affluent
neighborhoods.10
Our analysis also includes variables characterizing county crime rates as an indicator of
neighborhood safety and hence, the ability to engage in outdoor and recreational activities
without feeling threatened. We obtained county-specific crime data from the US Department of
Justice Uniform Crime Reporting Program Data for the year 2002. In our analysis, we focus on
crimes against individuals (murders and aggravated assaults) rather than crimes against property.
Finally, we also include county-based measures of types of food outlets per capita. These
include convenience and snack food stores (the latter include confectionary and nut shops, ice
cream, soft serve, and frozen yogurt stores, and doughnut, bagel, and cookie shops), fish and
seafood markets, fresh vegetable markets, supermarkets, and full-service restaurants and limitedservice restaurants. Since convenience stores, snack food outlets, and restaurants are generally
considered to serve high caloric and energy-dense foods compared to food prepared at home, we
expect that a greater presence of such food outlets will be associated with increased adolescent
BMI and the likelihood of being overweight. In contrast, we expect the greater availability of
fish and vegetable markets to be associated with the reduced likelihood of overweight and a
10

Our exploratory analyses included additional neighborhood characteristics. Since these

variables did not attain statistical significance, our final model includes the above subset.

15
lower BMI. These data are also obtained from the 2002 Economic Census: Accommodation and
Food Services, Geographic Area Series compiled by the Bureau of the Census.
Data for health care expenditure modeling: We estimate models of adolescent medical
expenditures (in 2003 dollars) and include indicators of an adolescent’s health insurance status,
specifically whether an individual is insured by either private or public insurance for all or part
of the year (adolescents uninsured all year represent the reference group). Our expenditure
models, estimated separately by gender, also include information on the characteristics of
adolescents (e.g., their age, race/ethnicity, region of residence), family characteristics (including
family size, family income as a percent of the federal poverty line, and whether the adolescent
resides in a single or two-parent family).
We also include parental characteristics that may affect an adolescent’s use of medical
care and health status. These include parents’ educational attainment, whether parents smoke,
and the employment status of each parent. Parents with higher educational attainment are more
likely to have children in better health than those with lower education (Grossman 2005).
However, while better educated parents may be more efficient and knowledgeable producers of
child health, the implications for health expenditures are not clear and depend upon their relative
use of parental time and medical care resources in producing child health compared to parents
with lower educational attainment. Adolescents residing with parents who smoke may be subject
to illnesses associated with second-hand smoking and thus require more medical care than those
residing with non-smoking parents. Additionally, parental smoking may also reflect attitudes
regarding health and preventive behaviors that can also affect the demand for medical care.
Parental employment (especially full-time employment) may impose greater time costs on

16
parents and thus constrain the number of medical care visits during the year compared to parents
working part-time or who are not employed.
Finally, we also include the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ hospital wage
index to control for cross-sectional variation in medical care costs. The wage index expresses the
hospital wage level in the geographic area of the hospital compared to the national average
hospital wage level for hospital labor market areas.11
Empirical specification: We estimate an OLS model for adolescents’ BMI and probit models for
the likelihood of being overweight and also for the combined category of the likelihood of being
at risk for overweight or overweight. 12 To model medical expenditures, we estimate a probit
model for the probability of any expenditure and a GLM model for persons with positive
expenditures. The GLM model is characterized by a logarithmic link function and by a variance
function that is proportional to the mean squared (represented as a gamma distribution).
Expected expenditures are predicted for all adolescents in our sample (spenders and nonspenders) by combining predictions from the probit and GLM models.
In selecting the two-part GLM model, we examined alternative functional forms
including a standard two-part model (probit in the first stage and log-linear conditional
expenditure function) and a one-part GLM model. We focused on comparisons of the two part
models since we view the decision to obtain any medical care and the decision regarding the
level of care obtained (as summarized by expenditures) as qualitatively different processes
warranting separate estimation. We selected the two-part GLM model for the following reasons.
11

See http://www.cms.hhs.gov/AcuteInpatientPPS/03_wageindex.asp for a full description (last
accessed on 4 April 2007).
12
We also considered modeling adolescent bodyweight as an ordered logit model with categories
based the weight classes defined above. However, only the cutoff point for overweight was was
consistently statistically significant in preliminary analyses so that we focused on the
dichotomous outcome “overweight or not overweight.”

17
First, our estimates of the conditional log-linear model in the standard two-part model displayed
evidence of heteroskedasticity. As Manning and Mullahy (2001) have noted, such
heteroskedasticity can yield biased estimates unless separate smearing estimators are applied, a
process that can be quite cumbersome when residuals are correlated with several explanatory
variables. By contrast, estimates of the conditional GLM model were consistent with evidence
of normally distributed residuals (kurtosis estimates of 2.98) and with a gamma variance function
(Park’s test statistic was approximately 2). Next, when we examined predicted expenditures by
adolescent bodyweight class, mean estimates from the standard two-part model were far below
actual mean values. The two-part GLM model yielded mean expenditure estimates that
compared favorably to observed mean expenditures in each adolescent bodyweight class.
Finally, we applied a variant of the Hosmer-Lemeshow test to examine the goodness-of-fit of our
GLM model across our bodyweight classes. We ran a regression of the residuals from the GLM
model on our four bodyweight classes (run without a constant). The results indicated that the
coefficients on the bodyweight class variables were not statistically significant, suggesting that
our functional form fit the data well.
Omitted health conditions and endogeneity issues: As specified, our model of adolescent health
expenditures excludes specific health conditions that are associated with adolescent overweight.
The presence of such conditions may lead to higher expenditures for overweight adolescents
compared to adolescents of normal weight. As a result, one could argue that our model ignores
an important source of endogeneity: the correlation between our bodyweight variables and these
omitted health condition variables. However, we have purposely excluded such conditions since
we are interested in the overall association between adolescent overweight and health care
expenditures. Put differently, we want the coefficients on our overweight variables to capture the

18
correlation between being overweight and having these related health conditions. In this way, we
can fully attribute the expenditures associated with such conditions to being an overweight
adolescent. In our empirical work, we examine whether the prevalence of health conditions
attributable to being overweight is in fact greater for our sample of overweight adolescents
compared to those of normal weight. We also examine whether the inclusion of such conditions
directly in our model can explain any differential in predicted expenditures between overweight
adolescents and those of normal weight, and thus, whether expenditure differentials do indeed
reflect the contribution of weight-related health conditions.
Next, there may be other sources of endogeneity that confound our expenditure
estimation. As noted above, MEPS data on adolescent BMI are obtained from parental reports of
height and weight rather than from direct measurement so that the computed BMI may be
reported with error. As noted above, should such unobserved measurement error be correlated
with the observed measure of BMI, we will obtain inconsistent estimates of coefficients on our
explanatory variables. Additionally, there may also be reverse causality or structural endogeneity
between health expenditures and being overweight. For example, high health expenditures
resulting from unobserved health conditions that limit physical activity or from unobserved
medical treatments (e.g., drug therapy) may result in increased bodyweight for some adolescents.
While these sources of endogeneity in measured BMI could be addressed through an
instrumental variables (IV) approach, we are constrained in applying such an approach. Use of
IV will also purge our overweight measure of the unobserved health conditions that are
correlated with being overweight and whose expenditures we wish to attribute to being
overweight.

19
IV. Findings

Results from the empirical models of adolescent bodyweight are reported in Tables 2 and
3 for males and females, respectively. Each table presents results for our three models: our OLS
model of continuous BMI (column 1); our probit model for adolescents who are at risk of
becoming overweight or who are overweight compared to those who are of normal weight or are
underweight (column 2); and our probit model for adolescents who are overweight versus being
in the other weight classes (column 3). We focus on these alternative outcome measures to
provide a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of family, economic, and neighborhood
factors on adolescent bodyweight.
Male adolescents:
The most striking finding in our models of adolescent bodyweight is the strong
relationship between parent’s bodyweight class and adolescent weight outcomes. In particular,
male adolescents whose parents are obese or at risk for obesity (compared to those whose parents
are of normal weight) have increased BMI scores and are more likely to be overweight or at risk
for overweight. For example, having a mother (father) who is obese increases the likelihood that
a male will be overweight by 13.7 (7.4) percentage points.13 As noted, this relationship is likely
to reflect an adolescent’s genetic predisposition to increased bodyweight and/or parental attitudes
toward nutrition, exercise, and healthy lifestyles.

Marginal effects were obtained for discrete variables by first assuming each observation to
have the characteristic of interest, predicting the probability of the adolescent being overweight
or at risk for overweight and then averaging. The same procedure was used assuming each
observation did not have the characteristic of interest. The difference between predicted mean
probabilities with and without the characteristic of interest represents the marginal effect
associated with that characteristic. For continuous variables, the marginal effect was calculated
for a change of one standard deviation in the variable. Standard errors were obtained for the
marginal effects using the balanced repeated replication method.

13

20
Somewhat surprisingly for male adolescents, we find that father’s education rather than
mother’s education has a more consistent impact on our outcome measures. Males whose fathers
have at least a high school education have lower BMI scores and lower probabilities of becoming
overweight or at risk of overweight. We find that males whose mothers attended but did not
graduate from college have lower BMI levels and lower likelihoods of being overweight (p <
0.10 in both models). While the difference in statistical significance for each parent’s education
may reflect the correlation between the mother’s and father’s education levels, it may also reflect
a greater influence of fathers on male adolescent behavior.14 Finally, we find that parental
smoking status is positively associated with adolescent bodyweight. Males whose mothers
smoke have higher BMI scores and are 3.6 percentage points (p < 0.10) more likely to be
overweight and 5.5 percentage points more likely to be at risk for overweight or overweight.
Mother’s employment status attains statistical significance in the male BMI and
overweight/at risk regressions although in ways contrary to our expectations. While we expected
work activity, especially full-time employment, to result in increased adolescent bodyweight, we
find just the opposite effect: male adolescents with part-time working mothers exhibit lower BMI
scores than those without employed mothers, and males having a full- or part-time working
mother are less likely to be at risk/overweight (column 2) than those with stay-at-home mothers
(the former result is significant at p < 0.10). This finding contrasts with results in Anderson et al.
2003 who found a positive relationship between maternal employment and children’s weight.
Our results may differ from their study due to our use of cross-sectional rather than longitudinal
data. Below, we examine some sensitivity tests regarding the relationship between mothers’

14

Excluding the father’s education increased the statistical significance on some of the mother’s
education coefficients but they were not as consistently statistically significant as those for the
father.

21
employment and male bodyweight. Finally, given the large proportion of fathers who are
employed in our data (91 percent among two parent families), we find no impact of fathers’
employment status on any of our bodyweight outcome measures.
We do find evidence that male adolescents in households with incomes in excess of four
times the poverty level are more likely to be overweight/ at risk for overweight than other
adolescents. Since there is no income effect in the overweight equation, this likely reflects the
impact on the risk of being overweight. We find that increased family size is associated with
reductions in bodyweight for each of the outcome measures. This finding may reflect the
inability of some income-constrained households to provide adequate meals for their family
members or to limit discretionary spending on snack foods. Finally, we find some differences in
adolescent bodyweight according to race and ethnicity. Male adolescents who are Hispanic have
higher bodyweight outcomes for all measures than white males and are 6.5 percentage points
more likely to be overweight (10.8 percentage points more likely to be either at risk for or
overweight).
We find very little evidence that neighborhood and geographic factors have an impact on
male adolescent bodyweight with two noteworthy exceptions. First, we find that higher state
cigarette prices result in increased male BMI (column 1, p < 0.10), consistent with the notion that
higher cigarette prices may induce a substitution of food consumption for smoking. However,
since we find the opposite effect for females (discussed below), these results need to be
interpreted with caution. We also find that male adolescents in counties with greater
snack/convenience food stores per capita are more likely to be overweight, while those in
counties with more fresh food stores per capita are less likely to be overweight. A change of one
standard deviation in these variables from their means yields small changes in the likelihood of

22
being overweight: a 2.1 percentage point increase and a 1.7 percentage point decrease in the
likelihood of being overweight, respectively. Finally, we also find that male adolescents in
neighborhoods with higher percentage of persons on public assistance are more likely to be
overweight (p < 0.10). Such a finding may reflect a correlation between neighborhood economic
status and unobserved indicators of neighborhood amenities (e.g., recreational facilities) that are
conducive to physical activity and reduced bodyweight.
Female adolescents: Female bodyweight outcomes also display the very strong relationship
with parents’ bodyweight that was observed in the male equations, with nearly identical effects
(Table 3). For example, female adolescents whose mothers (fathers) are obese experience a 13.1
(7.2) percentage point increase in the likelihood that they will be overweight. While we find no
impact of parents’ educational attainment, employment, or family income on weight outcomes
for females, we do find that parents’ smoking behavior has some impact. In particular, female
adolescents whose fathers smoke have higher BMI scores, are 4.0 percentage points more likely
to be overweight, and are 7.1 percentage points more likely to be at risk for overweight or
overweight than those whose fathers are non-smokers. Finally, we find that females with mothers
in fair or poor health are more likely to be overweight than those whose mothers are in good or
excellent health (p < 0.10). Mothers in poor health may be less able to take an active role in meal
planning and preparation resulting in greater use of high caloric prepared foods.
We find a different pattern of racial/ethnic disparities in bodyweight for females than for
males. Female adolescents who are Hispanic or black exhibit higher BMI scores compared to
white females. In addition, black adolescent females are 4.7 percentage points more likely to be
overweight and 5.5 percentage points more likely to be at risk for overweight or overweight (p <
0.10 for both) than those who are white.

23
Female adolescent bodyweight displays some association with neighborhood and
geographic characteristics. We find evidence that increases in population density are associated
with lower BMI scores (p < 0.10), a finding that may reflect the ability to do without motorized
transportation in more densely populated areas. Contrary to expectations, we find a non-linear,
positive relationship between a state’s average limited-service restaurant price and the likelihood
of being overweight. Since this variable is not standardized for serving size, the positive
relationship may reflect the impact of larger serving portions on bodyweight. We also find that
an increase in the number of full-service restaurants is associated with a decline in all
bodyweight outcome measures but we do not have an obvious explanation for this finding.
Finally, we find that an increase in the number of county snack and convenience food outlets per
capita is associated with an increased likelihood that an adolescent female will be at risk for
overweight or overweight (a 2.7 percentage point change for a change of one standard deviation
in this variable); we find no evidence of this effect when considering the likelihood of being
overweight.
In contrast to findings for male adolescents, increases in the real price of cigarettes are
negatively related to the likelihood of being an overweight female, a result that is at variance
with expectations. We also find some evidence that neighborhood safety and quality may be
related to overweight in adolescent females. Adolescent females residing in counties in the top
two quartiles of the distribution of murders per capita are more likely to be overweight than those
residing in neighborhoods in the bottom quartile (a 3.6 and 4.9 percentage point increase,
respectively; the former at p < 0.10). Additionally, females residing in neighborhoods in the
second and fourth quartiles of murders were more likely than those in the bottom quartile to be in
the combined category of at risk for overweight or overweight (5.3 and 7.4 percentage points,

24
respectively). We also find that females in neighborhoods with an increased proportion of vacant
housing units are somewhat more likely to be overweight (a change of 1.3 percentage points for
a one standard deviation change in this variable, p < 0.10). Consequently, concern over personal
safety and possible lack of neighborhood amenities (as reflected in increased vacancy rates) may
discourage physical activity and contribute to overweight in adolescent females.
Sensitivity Tests:
Parent’s employment: Since our results with respect to maternal employment differ from those
in prior work, we re-examined this relationship by restricting our sample to adolescents with
working mothers as in the longitudinal analysis of Anderson et al. (2003). By doing so, we
observe a positive relationship between mother’s hours of work and the likelihood of being
overweight but only for males (p < 0.10 for a two-tailed test). Since Anderson et al. found the
impact of mother’s hours to be greatest in high-income families, we examined regressions for
our restricted sample further broken down by family income in relationship to the poverty line.
We found no evidence of a positive relationship between mothers’ hours of work and weight
outcomes for either gender.
Adolescent age group: Since our sample of adolescents between ages 12 and 19 may differ in
their degree of independence regarding food choices and physical activity, we examined
bodyweight regressions for the following age groups: 12 to 14, 15 to 17, and 18 and 19. These
regressions yielded little in the way of new information regarding differences in the correlates of
bodyweight. One interesting finding to emerge for females is that for the oldest and presumably
most independent age group, mother’s hours of work were positively correlated with an
increased likelihood of being at risk for overweight or overweight. However, no effect was found
on the likelihood of being overweight by itself.

25
Adolescent bodyweight and health expenditures:
Male adolescents: In Table 4, we report results of our expenditure models for male and female
adolescents. We find no evidence that males who are overweight, at risk of being overweight, or
underweight have a greater likelihood of incurring an expenditure (probit model in column 1) or
higher conditional expenditures (GLM model in column 2) compared to males of normal
bodyweight. Consistent with these findings, predicted expenditures for each bodyweight class
based on the two-part GLM model reveal no statistically significant differences across
bodyweight classes.
The regression models for males yield a number of plausible results. For example, males
with full-year or part-year insurance coverage have a greater likelihood of incurring expenditures
and have higher conditional expenditures than those uninsured all year. We also find that older
males, blacks and Hispanics (compared to whites), and those in larger families are less likely to
incur an expense. For both the probit and GLM models, we find that mother’s rather than father’s
education is associated with a greater likelihood and level of health care spending. Other findings
from the GLM model indicate that males in high-income households incur greater expenditures
than those who are poor or near poor, and males with time-constrained mothers (those working
full time) have lower expenditures than those whose mothers are not working (both at p < 0.10).
Female adolescents: In contrast to males, we obtain striking expenditure differences for female
adolescents across bodyweight classes (Table 4). We find that overweight females have both a
higher likelihood of incurring expenditures and higher conditional expenditures than those of
normal weight. While females at risk of being overweight are no more likely to incur
expenditures than females of normal weight, they do incur higher conditional expenditures.

26
Finally, underweight females are less likely than those of normal weight to incur health
expenditures but their conditional expenditures are no different than females of normal weight.
As with males, adolescent females insured all or part year are more likely to incur
expenditures and but their conditional expenditures are no different than those uninsured all year.
Hispanic, black, and Asian females are less likely to incur expenditures than whites, with Asians
(p < 0.10) and those of other racial or ethnic groups having lower conditional expenditures than
whites. We find that females incur higher conditional health expenditures if their mothers had
more than a high school education and if their fathers graduated from high school compared to
those not graduating from high school. Finally, females in middle and high income families (with
incomes three or more times the poverty line) have higher conditional health expenditures than
those who are poor or near poor (less than 125 percent of poverty), and those with full-time
working mothers incur lower conditional expenditures than females with stay-at-home mothers.
Predicted health expenditures by female bodyweight:
Our empirical work reveals that overweight females are more likely than those of normal
weight to incur health expenditures and when they do, to have higher expenditures. The findings
also indicate that when female adolescents at risk of being overweight incur health expenditures,
their spending also exceeds that for females of normal weight. Combining results from each part
of the model, we obtain predicted expenditures according to female bodyweight. In doing so, we
derive estimates for each bodyweight class that are based on our full sample of adolescent
females. Using this standard population allows us to obtain expenditure estimates for each
bodyweight class that are not confounded by differences in characteristics by bodyweight.
We find that overweight female adolescents have average annual health expenditures of
$2101 compared to $1311 for those of normal weight, a statistically significant difference of

27
$790 in annual expenditures (p < 0.05). Additionally, female adolescents at risk of becoming
overweight have predicted expenditures of $1778, $467 above expenditures for those of normal
weight (p < 0.10). We find no difference between expected expenditures for underweight and
normal weight females ($1565 and $1311, respectively), nor do we find differences between
overweight and at risk females. Thus for adolescent females, being overweight yields a
substantial increase in annual health spending compared to spending by females of normal
bodyweight.
Adolescent female health expenditures, bodyweight, and health conditions:
In order to determine whether the expenditure differences by bodyweight class are
attributable to weight-related health conditions we applied several empirical tests. First, we
considered whether there were differences in the prevalence of such conditions between females
who were overweight or at risk of overweight and those of normal bodyweight. These conditions
included diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, other circulatory
diseases, mental disorders, and a composite variable consisting of other health conditions
associated with childhood overweight.15 We found that the prevalence of mental disorders for
overweight females exceeds that for females of normal weight (16.5 percent of the former
compared to 10.9 percent of the latter), as did the prevalence of diabetes (1.9 percent compared
to 0.3 percent), and hypertension (2.3 percent compared to 0.06 percent), all differences
statistically significant at p < 0.05. Additionally, overweight females had a higher mean value of
the Columbia Impairment Scale (CIS) than females of normal weight (18.2 to 8.8), where the
CIS measures global impairment derived from 13 questionnaire items defined to assess

15

The conditions noted, along with the composite variable, represent a subset of the health
consequences of overweight in children and youth. For a full listing, see the Institute of Medicine
Fact Sheet (2004).

28
interpersonal relationships, psychopathologies, job or school work, and use of leisure time. When
we compared female adolescents at risk for overweight to those of normal weight, the only
difference found was in mean CIS (14.3 to 8.8 respectively, p < 0.05).
Next, we included these conditions in our conditional expenditure model for females to
examine their effect on the coefficients of our weight class variables and whether they exhibited
an independent effect on expenditures.16 While the coefficients on such conditions (except other
circulatory conditions) were positive, only the coefficients on mental disorders and heart disease
were statistically significant.17 The coefficients on the overweight and at risk for overweight
variables remained statistically significant (p < 0.10 for the latter). However, while their
magnitudes were reduced they were not significantly different from their coefficients in our
initial specification.
As reported in Table 5, the addition of these weight-related conditions and the
consequential change in coefficients reduced predicted expenditure differentials. The differential
between overweight females and those of normal weight declined from $790 to $660, and the
differential between females at risk of overweight and those of normal weight declined from
$467 to $252. However, estimates of these differentials are not precisely measured and must be
treated as suggestive: when compared to the expenditure differential without conditions, the
comparisons fail to attain statistical significance.
Since nearly a fifth of overweight female adolescents and 12 percent of those at risk for
overweight have mental health conditions, we partitioned total expenditures into two components

16

Since the condition variables are primarily collected when medical care encounters are
reported, they are closely correlated with the likelihood of incurring expenditures. Thus, we
restricted the use of the condition data to our conditional expenditure model.
17
The imprecise results for other conditions may reflect their relatively low prevalence in our
sample of adolescents.

29
– (1) expenditures net of mental health spending (excluding inpatient and outpatient services and
prescription drugs) and (2) mental health expenditures – and estimated our model on these two
outcome variables. In the former model, the expenditure differential between overweight and
normal-weight females was $622, and the differential between females at risk for overweight and
those of normal weight was only $68 (Table 5). However, the reduced expenditure differentials
are not significantly different from their initial values. In our mental health expenditure model,
we found that compared to females of normal weight, overweight females incurred an additional
$208 in annual mental health expenditures while those at risk for overweight incurred an
additional $286. Thus, this more direct test is consistent with the hypothesis that differences in
the use of mental health services by bodyweight class may partly explain the disparity in health
expenditures between adolescent females of normal weight and those who are either overweight
or at risk of being overweight.
In sum, these analyses suggest that at least some of the disparities in annual health
expenditures between female adolescents of normal weight and those who are either overweight
or at risk for overweight are related to health conditions associated with excess bodyweight.
While our findings do not explain all of the expenditure differences, this may reflect the fact that
for many weight-related conditions, we lack adequate sample size and hence statistical power to
obtain precise estimates of the reduction in expenditure differentials. Additionally, we lack data
on the intensity of care received for each of the weight-related health conditions that will also
contribute to differences in health expenditures. Nevertheless, the analysis suggests that mental
health problems may contribute to these expenditure differentials and points to the need for more
research on the relationship between adolescent overweight and mental health problems.

30
V. Conclusions and Implications

The increase in the prevalence of adolescents who are overweight during the past four
decades has raised two compelling research questions. First, do an adolescent’s individual
characteristics, family circumstances, and economic and geographic environment help to explain
differences in the likelihood of being overweight? Second, is overweight in adolescents
associated with health care problems that yield higher health expenditures than incurred by
adolescents of normal weight? The latter question is particularly important since nearly half of
all overweight adolescents and children will become obese adults and potentially susceptible to
the health conditions and high health expenditures associated with adult overweight. Our
research explores whether these high health expenditures have their origins among teenagers
who are overweight. Focusing on both questions also recognizes that public policy interventions
to address overweight may be especially compelling for adolescents. They are more likely than
younger children to make independent food choices, may (along with their parents) lack
information on the nutritional implications of such choices, and may fail to recognize the longterm health consequences of poor nutrition.
In addressing the first question, we employed a rich set of data on individual and familylevel characteristics from the 2001-2003 MEPS along with secondary data describing the
availability and price of food purchased outside the home, and the economic status, quality, and
safety of neighborhoods. Our findings in this regard point to the strong relationship between
parental and adolescent bodyweight, a finding that may reflect both an adolescent’s genetic
predisposition to overweight as well as parental behavior and attitudes regarding nutrition and
the value of physical exercise and recreation. We found evidence that greater parental
educational attainment was associated with a reduced likelihood of male adolescent overweight,

31
and that parental smoking behavior (for both male and female adolescents) was associated with
an increased likelihood of adolescent overweight. By contrast, we found little evidence that
parental employment status measured at a point in time contributed to this outcome.
Our results for geographic and neighborhood characteristics varied considerably and were
not always in the expected direction for both genders. We found that unsafe neighborhoods were
related to an increased likelihood that a female adolescent would be overweight and that
neighborhoods of poor quality increased the likelihood of both male and female overweight. The
greater availability of fresh food stores reduced the likelihood of male overweight, while more
snack food outlets increased the likelihood of male overweight and the likelihood that a female
would be at risk for overweight or overweight. Finally, for males, we find some evidence that
higher full-service restaurant prices reduced bodyweight and that higher cigarette prices
increased BMI levels.
These findings suggest that targeting educational efforts at parents who are obese or at
risk for obesity as well as those who engage in poor health habits such as smoking may have
implications for the bodyweight of their children. Additionally, making nutritious food outlets
more widely available might also have an ameliorative effect. Our expenditure results suggest
that such interventions could yield cost savings from reduced medical expenditures, not just in
the future when some of these children become obese adults with costly medical conditions, but
in the short term during their adolescence.
Finally, our finding that female adolescents who are overweight or at risk for overweight
incur higher mental health expenditures than those of normal weight points to the need for a
better understanding of the nature of causality between adolescent mental health problems and
overweight and its implications for health expenditures. Such an understanding is essential to

32
identify the specific channels through which overweight in female adolescents contributes to an
increase in health care spending. Other research that focuses on the type and intensity of health
care use by overweight adolescents can also contribute to understanding expenditure differentials
by bodyweight class.

33
References

ACCRA Cost of Living Index Manual. Revised September 2005.
Anderson, P.M., K.F.Butcher, and P.B. Levine. 2003. “Economic Perspectives on Childhood
Obesity.” Economic Pespectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Third Quarter: 30-48.
Anderson, P.M., K.F.Butcher, and P.B. Levine. 2003. “Maternal Employment and Overweight
Children.” Journal of Health Economics 22: 477-504.
Avertt, S. and S. Korenman. 1999. “The Economic Reality of the Beauty Myth.” Journal of
Human Resources 31(2): 304-330.
Booth, K.M., M.M. Pinkston, W.S. Poston. 2005. “Obesity and the Built Environment.” Journal
of the American Dietetic Association Supplement. May: S110-S117.
Burdette, H.L. and R.C. Whitaker. 2004. “Neighborhood Playgrounds, Fast Food Restaurants,
and Crime: Relationships to Overweight in Low-Income Preschool Children.” Preventive
Medicine. 38(1): 57-63.
Cawley, J. 2004. “An Economic Framework for Understanding Physical Activity and Eating
Behaviors.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 27(3S): 117-1125.
Cawley, J. 2000. Bodyweight and Women’s Labor Market Outcome. Cambridge MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #7841.
Cawley, J. and R. Burkhauser. 2006. “Beyond BMI: The Value of More Accurate Measures of
Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper #12291. June.
Chou, S-Y, M. Grossman, and H. Saffer. 2004. “An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity:
Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” Journal of health Economics
23(2): 565-588.
Chou, S-Y, M. Grossman, and H. Saffer. 2002. “An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity:
Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 9247. October.
Chou, S-Y, I. Rashad, and M. Grossman. 2005. “Fast-Food Restaurant Advertising on Television
and Its Influence on Childhood Obesity.” NBER Working Paper No. 11879. December.
Coate, D. 1983. “The Relationship between Diet, Parent’s Fatness, and Obesity in Children and
Adolescents.” National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper #1072.

34
Conley, D. and R. Glauber. 2005. “Gender, Body Mass, and Economic Status.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 11343. May.
Finkelstein, E.A., I.C. Fiebelkorn, G. Wang. 2003. “National Medical Spending Attributable to
Overweight and Obesity.” Health Affairs Web Release. 219-226.
Ginter, D.,R. Haveman, and B. Wolfe. 2000. “Neighborhood Attributes as Determinants of
Children’s Outcomes: How Robust are the Relationships?” Journal of Human Resources
XXXV(4): 603-642.
Goodman, E., B. R. Hinden, and S. Khandelwal. 2000. “Accuracy of Teen and Parental Reports
of Obesity and Body Mass Index.” Pediatrics 106: 52-58.
Gormaker S.L., A.Must, J.M. Perrin, A.M. Sobol, and W. Dietz. 1993. “Social and Economic
Consequences of Overweight in Adolescence and Young Adulthood.” New England Journal of
Medicine 329(14): 1008-1012.
Grossman, M. 2005. “Education and Non-Market Outcomes.” Cambridge MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 11582. August.
Gruber, J. 2002/2003. “Smoking’s ‘Internalities”. Regulation (Winter): 52-57.
Institute of Medicine Fact Sheet. 2004. “Childhood Obesity in the United States: Facts and
Figures.” September.
Jacobson, Michael F. and Kelly D. Brownell. 2000. “Small Taxes on Soft Drinks and Snack
Foods to Promote Health.” American Journal of Public Health 90 (6): 854-857,
Kandris, S. and G. Liu. 2003. Indianapolis Site-Specific Neighborhood Health Analysis:
Environmental Factors and the Risk of Childhood Obesity. Indiana University-Purdue University
at Indianapolis, Department of Pedicatrics at Indiana University, and the Urban Institute. January
14.
Kinra, S., R.P. Nelder, and G.L. Lewendon. 2000. “Deprivation and Childhood Obesity: A
Cross-Sectional Study of 20,973 Children in Plymouth, United Kingdom.” Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health 54 (6):456-460.
Kim, Daniel and Ichiro Kawachi. 2006. “Food Taxation and Pricing Strategies to ‘Thin Out’ the
Obesity Epidemic.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 30(5): 430-437.
Koplan, J.P., C.T. Liverman, V.A. Kraak (eds.) 2004. Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in
the Balance. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine.
Leicester, Andrew and Frank Windmeijer. 2004. “The ‘Fat Tax’: Economic Incentives to Reduce
Obesity.” Institute for Fiscal Studies, Briefing Note No. 29.

35
Manning, Willard G. and John Mullahy. 2001. “Estimating Log Models: To Transform or Not to
Transform?” Journal of Health Economics 20(2001): 461-494.
National Center for Health Statistics. 2004. Health United States 2004. Hyattsville, Maryland.
September.
O’Donogue, T. and M. Rabin. 2001. “Risky Behavior Among Youths: Some Issues from
Behavioral Economics.” In J. Gruber (ed.) Risky Behavior among Youths. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ogden, C.L., K.M. Flegal, M.D. Carroll, and C.L. Johnoson. 2002. “Prevalence and Trends in
Overweight Among US Children and Adolescents, 1999-2000.” JAMA 288 (14), October 9:
1728 – 1732.
Orzechowski, W. and R. Walker. 2006. The Tax Burden on Tobacco, vol. 41. Orzechowski and
Walker, Arlington VA. 2006)
Rashad, I. and M. Grossman. 2004. “The Economics of Obesity.” The Public Interest. Summer:
104-112.
Sastry, N. and A.R.Pebly. 2003. Neighborhood and Family Effects on Children’s Health in Los
Angeles. Rand Labor and Population Working Paper Series 03-25. April.
Sturm, R. 2002 “The Effects of Obesity, Smoking, and Drinking on Medical Problems and
Costs.” Health Affairs 21(2) March/April: 245-253.
Thorpe, K.E., C.S. Florence, D.H. Howard, and P. Joski. 2004. “The Impact of Obesity on Rising
Medical Spending.” Health Affairs Web Release. 20 October. W4-480 – W4-485.
Vandegrift, D. and Yorked. 2004. “Obesity Rates, Income, and Suburban Sprawl: An Analysis of
US States.” Health and Place 10: 221-229.
Wang, G. and W. H. Dietz. 2002. “Economic Burden of Obesity in Youths Aged 6 to 17 Years:
1979-1999.” Pediatrics 109: 81-86.

36

Table 1. Comparison of MEPS (2001-2003) and NHANES (1999-2002) Estimates of
Adolescent Overweight by Gender and Race/Ethnicity.
MEPS
NHANES
All adolescents
14.2*
16.1
(ages 12-19)
(0.5)
(0.8)
Males
15.8
16.7
(0.7)
(0.9)
Females
12.5*
15.4
(0.7)
(1.2)
White (non-Hispanic)
Males
12.8
14.6
(1.2)
(1.3)
Females
9.9
12.7
(1.2)
(1.8)
Black (non-Hispanic)
Males
18.0
18.7
(2.6)
(1.7)
Females
23.5
23.6
(2.9)
(1.8)
Standard errors in parenthesis. * Significantly different at p < 0.05 for a two-tailed test.

37

Table 2. Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: males
BMI
At risk/Overweight
(1)
(2)
Age
Hispanic
Black
Other race
Asian
Mom under
weight
Mom at risk for
obesity
Mom is obese
Mom BMI is
missing
Mom smokes
Mom education
missing
Mom High
School Only
Mom Some
College
Mom College
Two parent
family
Dad education
missing
Dad high school
only

Overweight
(3)

0.478***
(0.043)
1.080***
(0.298)
0.098
(0.325)
0.544
(0.604)
0.355
(0.409)
-1.851***

-0.068***
(0.013)
0.313***
(0.089)
-0.013
(0.093)
0.142
(0.207)
0.213
(0.131)
-0.366

-0.060***
(0.015)
0.274**
(0.106)
0.029
(0.090)
0.034
(0.227)
0.184
(0.161)
-0.556**

(0.428)
0.823***

(0.241)
0.318***

(0.264)
0.204**

(0.201)
2.321***
(0.240)
1.223**

(0.075)
0.638***
(0.072)
0.374*

(0.087)
0.583***
(0.082)
0.398

(0.596)
0.643**
(0.263)
0.725

(0.205)
0.163**
(0.074)
0.078

(0.252)
0.159*
(0.084)
0.098

(1.841)
-0.300

(0.345)
-0.046

(0.400)
-0.051

(0.401)
-0.801*

(0.104)
-0.181

(0.131)
-0.282*

(0.451)
-0.325
(0.497)
1.656

(0.126)
-0.044
(0.143)
0.348

(0.150)
-0.079
(0.168)
0.343

(2.093)
-0.143

(0.557)
-0.023

(0.550)
0.170

(1.938)
-1.367***

(0.494)
-0.247**

(0.459)
-0.382***

(0.440)

(0.109)

(0.144)

38
Table 2 (continued). Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: males
Dad some college -1.398**
-0.320**
-0.395**
(0.544)
(0.142)
(0.171)
Dad College
-1.250**
-0.291**
-0.376**
(0.494)
(0.141)
(0.171)
Dad smokes
0.210
0.078
0.096
(0.303)
(0.092)
(0.102)
Dad underweight 6.047*
1.055
0.912
(3.327)
(0.671)
(0.652)
Dad at risk for
0.666***
0.262***
0.139
obesity
(0.242)
(0.086)
(0.099)
Dad is obese
1.523***
0.451***
0.324***
(0.317)
(0.097)
(0.116)
Dad BMI missing 1.249
0.435
-0.034
(0.918)
(0.268)
(0.335)
Mom works < 35 -0.856***
-0.245**
-0.158
hours
(0.310)
(0.096)
(0.102)
Mom works 35+
-0.429
-0.148*
-0.028
hours
(0.284)
(0.082)
(0.083)
Dad is employed
-0.362
-0.014
-0.052
(0.384)
(0.111)
(0.126)
Mom in fair/poor 0.218
0.019
0.099
health
(0.348)
(0.085)
(0.091)
Dad in fair/poor
-0.443
-0.047
-0.159
health
(0.373)
(0.104)
(0.123)
Low Income
0.560
0.102
0.123
(0.371)
(0.092)
(0.092)
Middle Income
0.291
0.054
0.027
(0.337)
(0.094)
(0.104)
High Income
0.465
0.230**
-0.001
(0.338)
(0.101)
(0.119)
Family size
-0.227***
-0.045**
-0.067***
(0.062)
(0.019)
(0.024)
Midwest
-0.173
-0.070
-0.046
(0.373)
(0.128)
(0.138)
West
-0.374
-0.033
-0.135
(0.376)
(0.134)
(0.139)
South
0.556
0.186
0.123
(0.379)
(0.131)
(0.157)
MSA (1 = yes)
-0.034
-0.056
-0.105
(0.277)
(0.092)
(0.100)
Population
-4.42e-06
-1.92e-06
-1.76e-07
Density
(1.31e-05)
(3.27e-06)
(3.70e-06)

39
Table 2 (continued). Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: males
Population
0.104
-0.031
-0.231
Density is
missing (1 = yes)
(0.574)
(0.213)
(0.209)
Limited service
11.112*
2.056
2.866
restaurant price
(6.410)
(2.173)
(2.537)
Full service
-1.260**
-0.407**
-0.076
restaurant price
(0.586)
(0.189)
(0.219)
Limited service
-0.855*
-0.153
-0.224
restaurant price
squared
(0.506)
(0.172)
(0.201)
Full service
0.051**
0.017**
0.003
restaurant price
squared
(0.024)
(0.008)
(0.009)
Junk
2.119*
0.433
0.991**
food/convenience
stores
(1.232)
(0.400)
(0.430)
Fresh food outlets -6.802
-1.286
-3.719**
(4.517)
(1.710)
(1.868)
Limited service
0.064
0.057
0.083
restaurants
(0.770)
(0.246)
(0.287)
Full service
-0.201
-0.113
0.059
restaurants
(0.379)
(0.134)
(0.142)
Cigarette Price
0.004*
0.001
0.001
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Crime data
0.129
0.028
0.064
missing (1 = yes)
(0.617)
(0.189)
(0.179)
Assaults - second 0.042
-0.022
0.104
quartile
(0.284)
(0.092)
(0.107)
Assaults - third
-0.148
-0.098
-0.053
quartile
(0.292)
(0.102)
(0.110)
Assaults - fourth
-0.385
-0.086
-0.112
quartile
(0.311)
(0.106)
(0.120)
Murder - second
-0.220
-0.033
-0.129
quartile
(0.272)
(0.090)
(0.111)

40
Table 2 (continued). Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: males
Murder - third
0.110
0.028
0.033
quartile
(0.307)
(0.097)
(0.116)
Murder - fourth
0.016
-0.005
-0.066
quartile
(0.328)
(0.108)
(0.123)
% on public
2.048
0.695
1.753*
assistance
(3.156)
(0.933)
(0.952)
Median value of
2.26e-07
-7.63e-09
-1.20e-07
housing
(1.33e-06)
(4.86e-07)
(5.52e-07)
Vacancy rates
1.021
-0.127
0.034
(1.555)
(0.495)
(0.578)
Year 2
-0.112
-0.111
-0.024
(0.222)
(0.070)
(0.075)
Year 3
0.125
0.018
-0.073
(0.203)
(0.068)
(0.069)
Constant
-15.470
-4.584
-9.087
(20.031)
(6.811)
(7.807)
Observations
3463
3463
3463
R-squared
.1635
Pseudo R-squared
.0792
.0928
Source: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 2001-2003.
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. Standard errors
are in parentheses.

41

Table 3. Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: females
BMI
At risk/Overweight
(1)
(2)
Age
Hispanic
Black
Other race
Asian
Mom under
weight
Mom at risk for
obesity
Mom is obese
Mom BMI is
missing
Mom smokes
Mom education
missing
Mom High
School Only
Mom Some
College
Mom College
Two parent
family
Dad education
missing
Dad high school
only
Dad some

Overweight
(3)

0.360***
(0.043)
0.678**
(0.298)
1.324***
(0.489)
0.450
(0.673)
-0.851*
(0.482)
1.512

-0.066***
(0.015)
0.154*
(0.089)
0.192*
(0.104)
-0.052
(0.219)
-0.219
(0.185)
0.239

-0.071***
(0.017)
0.167
(0.104)
0.260**
(0.132)
0.222
(0.227)
-0.352
(0.234)
0.615**

(2.219)
0.801***

(0.286)
0.214**

(0.308)
0.225**

(0.211)
2.965***
(0.273)
3.413***

(0.086)
0.752***
(0.081)
0.804***

(0.108)
0.742***
(0.092)
0.818***

(1.215)
0.527*
(0.313)
-0.000

(0.188)
0.165*
(0.090)
0.042

(0.235)
0.136
(0.100)
-0.112

(1.549)
-0.405

(0.501)
-0.115

(0.447)
-0.106

(0.442)
-0.601

(0.117)
-0.116

(0.146)
-0.106

(0.525)
-0.444
(0.554)
1.343

(0.137)
-0.132
(0.156)
0.729*

(0.169)
-0.050
(0.173)
0.291

(2.215)
1.467

(0.440)
0.326

(0.454)
0.398

(1.946)
0.283

(0.359)
-0.029

(0.370)
0.017

(0.433)
-0.128

(0.126)
-0.147

(0.139)
-0.122

42
Table 3. Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: females
BMI
At risk/Overweight
(1)
(2)

Overweight
(3)

college
Dad College
Dad smokes
Dad underweight
Dad at risk for
obesity
Dad is obese
Dad BMI
missing
Mom works < 35
hours
Mom works 35+
hours
Dad is employed
Mom in fair/poor
health
Dad in fair/poor
health
Low Income
Middle Income
High Income
Family size
Midwest
West
South
MSA (1 = yes)

(0.591)
-0.007
(0.517)
0.755**
(0.342)
2.425*
(1.340)
0.994***

(0.153)
-0.098
(0.163)
0.247***
(0.093)
1.067***
(0.394)
0.304***

(0.173)
-0.205
(0.181)
0.223**
(0.105)
0.630
(0.506)
0.307**

(0.278)
1.681***
(0.297)
0.932

(0.112)
0.491***
(0.114)
0.588**

(0.141)
0.436***
(0.155)
0.103

(0.960)
-0.240

(0.292)
0.053

(0.355)
-0.016

(0.268)
0.304

(0.089)
0.099

(0.115)
0.075

(0.265)
-0.353
(0.529)
0.742

(0.078)
-0.113
(0.143)
0.078

(0.089)
-0.084
(0.152)
0.213*

(0.461)
0.368

(0.099)
-0.075

(0.116)
0.108

(0.637)
-0.256
(0.370)
0.175
(0.369)
0.081
(0.396)
-0.163**
(0.080)
-0.217
(0.524)
-0.231
(0.527)
-0.427
(0.544)
-0.131

(0.150)
-0.044
(0.107)
-0.029
(0.108)
-0.086
(0.127)
-0.064**
(0.025)
-0.261*
(0.135)
-0.265*
(0.149)
-0.314**
(0.141)
-0.217**

(0.157)
-0.184
(0.118)
-0.040
(0.125)
-0.087
(0.137)
-0.045
(0.031)
-0.088
(0.165)
-0.171
(0.171)
-0.227
(0.173)
-0.099

43
Table 3. Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: females
BMI
At risk/Overweight
(1)
(2)

Population
Density
Population
Density is
missing (1 = yes)
Limited service
restaurant price
Full service
restaurant price
Limited service
restaurant price
squared
Full service
restaurant price
squared

Overweight
(3)

(0.425)
-1.65e-05*

(0.101)
-2.82e-06

(0.117)
-3.37e-06

(9.13e-06)
-0.605

(3.29e-06)
-0.364

(3.96e-06)
-0.132

(0.890)
11.381

(0.336)
1.237

(0.339)
6.840**

(8.081)
0.443

(2.481)
0.304

(3.470)
0.059

(0.805)
-0.873

(0.219)
-0.096

(0.241)
-0.536*

(0.627)
-0.014

(0.195)
-0.010

(0.276)
0.001

(0.009)
1.000**

(0.010)
0.321

(0.434)
1.744

(0.484)
1.331

(1.996)
0.289

(2.290)
0.359

(0.266)
-0.383***

(0.358)
-0.442**

(0.141)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.062

(0.185)
-0.003**
(0.001)
0.194

(0.160)
0.111

(0.184)
0.115

(0.111)
0.078

(0.133)
0.023

(0.033)
Junk
0.732
food/convenience
stores
(1.466)
Fresh food
7.302
outlets
(8.314)
Limited service
0.934
restaurants
(1.025)
Full service
-0.924**
restaurants
(0.446)
Cigarette Price
-0.005
(0.003)
Crime data
0.996
missing (1 = yes)
(1.290)
Assaults - second 0.139
quartile
(0.394)
Assaults - third
-0.199
quartile

44
Table 3. Estimates from models of adolescent overweight: females
BMI
At risk/Overweight
(1)
(2)

Assaults - fourth
quartile
Murder - second
quartile
Murder - third
quartile
Murder - fourth
quartile
% on public
assistance
Median value of
housing
Vacancy rates
Year 2
Year 3
Constant

Overweight
(3)

(0.388)
-0.269

(0.123)
-0.030

(0.146)
-0.004

(0.452)
0.488

(0.133)
0.198*

(0.150)
0.181

(0.341)
0.557

(0.102)
0.095

(0.123)
0.230*

(0.425)
0.319

(0.109)
0.267**

(0.131)
0.301**

(0.358)
3.780

(0.120)
-0.335

(0.137)
0.197

(2.798)
-8.11e-07

(0.788)
1.04e-06**

(0.863)
9.65e-08

(1.34e-06)
2.723
(1.848)
0.302
(0.243)
0.454**
(0.227)
-25.124
(23.848)
3275
.1636

(5.07e-07)
0.676
(0.512)
0.019
(0.069)
0.033
(0.066)
-5.996
(7.617)
3275

(5.33e-07)
1.240*
(0.649)
-0.038
(0.083)
-0.011
(0.074)
-22.405**
(10.636)
3275

Observations
R-squared
Pseudo R.1304
.1441
squared
Source: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 2001-2003.
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. Standard errors
are in parentheses.

45

Table 4. Estimates from Expenditure Models
Males
Probit
GLM
Child is
overweight
Child is at risk for
/overweight
Child is
underweight
Insured all year
Insured part year
Age
Two parent family
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Other race
Low income
Middle income
High income
MSA
Midwest
West
South
Mom smokes
Mom education
missing

Females
Probit

GLM

-0.043

0.093

0.215**

0.445***

(0.091)
-0.087

(0.098)
0.164

(0.096)
-0.064

(0.148)
0.314**

(0.086)
-0.004

(0.101)
0.161

(0.090)
-0.459***

(0.122)
0.267

(0.176)
0.879***
(0.096)
0.614***
(0.117)
-0.063***
(0.016)
0.513
(0.415)
-0.211**
(0.101)
-0.541***
(0.096)
-0.164
(0.184)
-0.002
(0.220)
0.091
(0.105)
0.134
(0.105)
0.166
(0.142)
-0.085
(0.094)
-0.016
(0.119)
-0.322***
(0.122)
-0.110
(0.099)
-0.162*
(0.092)
-0.459

(0.214)
0.865***
(0.160)
0.543***
(0.202)
-0.017
(0.016)
-0.231
(0.824)
-0.222**
(0.101)
-0.401***
(0.119)
-0.638***
(0.161)
0.330
(0.318)
-0.012
(0.145)
0.121
(0.126)
0.290*
(0.151)
-0.135
(0.109)
0.048
(0.108)
-0.286**
(0.129)
-0.102
(0.130)
-0.060
(0.100)
1.195**

(0.173)
0.653***
(0.106)
0.551***
(0.126)
-0.007
(0.015)
0.250
(0.656)
-0.502***
(0.100)
-0.886***
(0.124)
-0.426**
(0.178)
-0.285
(0.359)
-0.120
(0.091)
0.035
(0.102)
0.186
(0.125)
0.083
(0.085)
-0.055
(0.135)
-0.305**
(0.118)
-0.140
(0.113)
-0.114
(0.091)
-0.758

(0.206)
0.191
(0.162)
0.029
(0.140)
0.009
(0.015)
-1.078***
(0.229)
-0.269*
(0.153)
-0.348
(0.218)
-0.262*
(0.156)
-0.571***
(0.219)
0.010
(0.118)
0.316**
(0.134)
0.486***
(0.136)
0.081
(0.113)
0.453***
(0.108)
0.125
(0.087)
0.199**
(0.098)
0.019
(0.075)
0.020

(0.333)

(0.503)

(0.508)

(0.520)

46
Table 4. Estimates from Expenditure Models
Males
Probit
GLM
Mom - high school
only
Mom - some
college
Mom - college
Dad smokes
Dad employed
Mom works part
time
Mom works full
time
Dad education
missing
Dad high school
only
Dad some college
Dad college
Family size
Year Two
Year Three
Hospital Wage
Index

Females
Probit

GLM

0.122

0.339*

0.315**

0.457***

(0.128)
0.276*

(0.205)
0.232

(0.159)
0.263

(0.171)
0.478**

(0.144)
0.388**
(0.165)
-0.112
(0.103)
0.037
(0.127)
0.155

(0.212)
0.555***
(0.198)
0.143
(0.128)
-0.135
(0.168)
-0.084

(0.194)
0.359*
(0.183)
-0.194*
(0.108)
-0.065
(0.135)
0.111

(0.233)
0.545**
(0.213)
-0.294**
(0.130)
-0.190
(0.175)
-0.103

(0.109)
0.001

(0.131)
-0.181*

(0.106)
0.067

(0.098)
-0.254**

(0.094)
0.401

(0.099)
-0.122

(0.083)
0.305

(0.107)
-1.092***

(0.405)
-0.042

(0.797)
-0.116

(0.632)
0.235

(0.274)
0.340**

(0.137)
-0.097
(0.159)
0.101
(0.182)
-0.113***
(0.024)
-0.081
(0.094)
-0.080
(0.090)
--

(0.279)
0.023
(0.310)
0.136
(0.282)
0.050
(0.044)
-0.096
(0.120)
0.042
(0.116)
0.815**

(0.149)
0.336*
(0.197)
0.257
(0.162)
-0.122***
(0.023)
0.275***
(0.091)
0.186**
(0.087)
--

(0.171)
0.281
(0.200)
0.080
(0.174)
-0.006
(0.031)
0.008
(0.095)
-0.120
(0.086)
0.481

(0.326)
(0.294)
1.318**
5.874***
0.814
6.796***
(0.534)
(0.740)
(0.715)
(0.618)
Observations
3463
2708
3275
2711
Pseudo R-Squared .1436
.1740
Source: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 2001-2003.
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. Standard errors
are in parentheses.
Constant

47

Table 5: Sensitivity of female expenditure differentials to alternative strategies
Expenditure Differentials
Overweight vs. normal
At risk for overweight vs.
weight
normal weight
No health conditions
$790 (315)
$467 (242)
Strategy:
Add weight-related conditions $660 (301)
$252 (175)
Expenditures net of mental
$622 (278)
$68 (118)
health spending (no
conditions)
Mental health expenditures
$208 (91)
$286 (131)
Source: Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 2001-2003.

48

Appendix Table A: Means and Standard Deviations of Independent Variables
Variable

Female
Standard
Deviation
15.386
2.242
0.147
0.131
0.021
0.044
0.019
0.278
0.289
0.025
0.204
0.003
0.457
0.245
0.237
0.748
0.256
0.310
0.154
0.229
0.160
0.001
0.355
0.211
0.261
0.208
0.538
0.681
0.116
0.065
0.120
0.336
0.378
4.335
1.453
0.243
0.228
0.342
0.827
4598.180
11637.610
0.006

Mean
Age
Hispanic
Black
Other race
Asian
Mom under weight
Mom at risk for obesity
Mom is obese
Mom BMI is missing
Mom smokes
Mom education missing
Mom High School Only
Mom Some College
Mom College
Two parent family
Dad education missing
Dad high school only
Dad some college
Dad College
Dad smokes
Dad underweight
Dad at risk for obesity
Dad is obese
Dad BMI missing
Mom works < 35 hours
Mom works 35+ hours
Dad is employed
Mom in fair/poor health
Dad in fair/poor health
Low Income
Middle Income
High Income
Family size
Midwest
West
South
MSA
Population Density
Population Density is
missing (1 = yes)
Limited service
restaurant price
Full service restaurant

Male
Mean
15.371
0.144
0.135
0.022
0.043
0.016
0.272
0.280
0.027
0.219
0.003
0.445
0.244
0.241
0.758
0.244
0.336
0.163
0.212
0.161
0.001
0.358
0.216
0.252
0.194
0.563
0.684
0.108
0.078
0.130
0.358
0.338
4.375
0.238
0.228
0.355
0.810
4277.030
0.008

Standard
Deviation
2.255

1.449

10345.750

6.186

0.390

6.182

0.396

11.332

1.933

11.277

1.908

49
Appendix Table A: Means and Standard Deviations of Independent Variables
Variable
Mean
price
Junk food/convenience
stores
Fresh food outlets
Limited service
restaurants
Full service restaurants
Cigarette Price
Crime data missing (1 =
yes)
Assaults - second
quartile
Assaults - third quartile
Assaults - fourth
quartile
Murder - second
quartile
Murder - third quartile
Murder - fourth quartile
% on public assistance
Median value of
housing
Vacancy rates
Year 2
Year 3

Female
Standard
Deviation

Male
Mean

Standard
Deviation

0.188

0.094

0.187

0.093

0.018
0.658

0.021
0.150

0.018
0.653

0.022
0.164

0.657
390.638
0.031

0.308
64.238

0.651
390.462
0.039

0.278
63.432

0.249

0.229

0.239
0.240

0.248
0.241

0.233

0.241

0.246
0.248
0.034
139340.900

0.249
0.228
0.036
130236.600

0.067
0.340
0.336

0.042
103614.200
0.061

0.069
0.341
0.334

0.040
86119.140
0.062

