NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEOUS IMPACT OF THE "SEGURO POPULAR" PROGRAM ON THE
UTILIZATION OF OBSTETRICAL SERVICES IN MEXICO, 2001-2006: A MULTINOMIAL
PROBIT MODEL WITH A DISCRETE ENDOGENOUS VARIABLE
Sandra G. Sosa-Rubi
Omar Galarraga
Jeffrey E. Harris
Working Paper 13498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2007

We acknowledge the research assistance of Edson Serván Mori. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Sandra G. Sosa-Rubi, Omar Galarraga, and Jeffrey E. Harris. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneous Impact of the "Seguro Popular" Program on the Utilization of Obstetrical Services
in Mexico, 2001-2006: A Multinomial Probit Model with a Discrete Endogenous Variable
Sandra G. Sosa-Rubi, Omar Galarraga, and Jeffrey E. Harris
NBER Working Paper No. 13498
October 2007
JEL No. I1,I18,I38,O12,O22,O38,O54
ABSTRACT
Objective: We evaluated the impact of Seguro Popular (SP), a program introduced in 2001 in Mexico
primarily to finance health care for the poor. We studied the effect of SP on pregnant women's access
to obstetrical services.
Data: We analyzed the cross-sectional 2006 National Health and Nutrition Survey (ENSANUT), focusing
on the responses of 3,890 women who delivered babies during 2001-2006 and whose households lacked
employer-based health care coverage.
Methods: We formulated a multinomial probit model that distinguished between three mutually exclusive
sites for delivering a baby: a health unit accredited by SP; a clinic run by the Department of Health
(Secretaría de Salud, or SSA); and private obstetrical care. Our model accounted for the endogeneity
of the household's binary decision to enroll in the SP program.
Results: Women in households that participated in the SP program had a much stronger preference
for having a baby in a SP-sponsored unit rather than paying out of pocket for a private delivery. At
the same time, participation in SP was associated with a stronger preference for delivering in the private
sector rather than at a state-run SSA clinic. On balance, the Seguro Popular program reduced pregnant
women's attendance at an SSA clinic much more than it reduced the probabilityof delivering a baby in the
private sector. The impacts of the SP program at the individual and population levels varied with the
woman's education and health, as well as the assets and location (rural versus urban) of the household.
Conclusions: The SP program had a robust, significantly positive impact on access to obstetrical services.
Our finding that women enrolled in SP switched from non-SP state-run facilities, rather than from
out-of-pocket private services, is important for public policy and requires further exploration.
Sandra G. Sosa-Rubi
Centro de Investigación en Sistemas de Salud
Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública
Cuernavaca, Morelos 62508, México
srubi@insp.mx

Jeffrey E. Harris
Department of Economics and NBER
MIT, Room E52-252F
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
jeffrey@mit.edu

Omar Galarraga
Centro de Investigación en Evaluación y Encuestas
Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública
Cuernavaca, Morelos 62508, México
ogalarraga@insp.mx

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

1.

Page 4

Introduction
This paper contributes to three important strands in the health economics

literature. First, we add to the emerging body of knowledge on the impacts of novel
public policies to finance the health care of the poor in developing economies (Gaviria,
Medina et al. (2006); Trujillo, Portillo et al. (2005); Wagstaff (2007); Wagstaff, Lindelow
et al. (2007)), including recent innovative interventions in Mexico (Knaul and Frenk
(2005); Frenk, Sepulveda et al. (2003); Gakidou, Lozano et al. (2006); Sepúlveda,
Bustreo et al. (2006)). We find that the recently established “Seguro Popular” (or
“People’s Insurance”) program in Mexico has had a robust, significantly positive effect
on the access of poor women to obstetrical care, an important outcome measure of
maternal and infant health.
Second, we add to the growing literature on the use of multinomial discrete choice
models of the selection of health care providers, including Schwartz, Akin et al. (1988) in
the setting of the Philippines, Akin, Guilkey et al. (1995) in Nigeria, Bolduc, Lacroix et
al. (1996) in Benin, and Leonard (2007) in Tanzania, as well as recent path-breaking
work on multi-equation models involving discrete variables (Balia and Jones (2004);
Deb, Munkin et al. (2006)) . We formulate a multinomial probit model that distinguishes
between three mutually exclusive sites for delivering a baby: a health unit specifically
accredited by Seguro Popular (SP); a non-SP-accredited clinic run by the Department of
Health (Secretaría de Salud, or SSA); and private obstetrical services. In what appears to
be the first instance of such a technique, we then modify the standard multinomial probit
model to explicitly account for the possible endogeneity of the household’s binary
decision to participate in Seguro Popular. Women in households that participated in the

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 5

SP program, we find, had a much stronger preference for having a baby in a SPsponsored unit rather than paying out of pocket for a private delivery. At the same time,
participation in SP was associated with a stronger preference for delivering in the private
sector rather than at an SSA-sponsored clinic. On balance, the Seguro Popular program
reduced pregnant women’s attendance at an SSA-sponsored clinic much more than it
reduced the probability of delivering a baby in the private sector.
Third, we contribute to the nascent but expanding body of work on the
heterogeneous impacts of policy interventions in the developing world, including the
effect of antiretroviral treatment on labor force participation in Western Kenya
(Thirumurthy, Zivin et al. (2006)), the effect of conditional cash transfers on schooling
and nutrition in Nicaragua (Dammert (2007)) and Mexico (Djebbari and Smith (2005);
Chávez-Martín del Campo (2006)). Here, we find that the quantitative impacts of the SP
program at both the individual and population levels varied with the woman’s education
and health, as well as the assets and location (rural versus urban) of the household.
In Section 2, we review the problem of access to obstetric care for poor women in
Mexico, the basic structure of the Mexican health care system, and the introduction of
Seguro Popular in 2001. In Section 3, we describe a discrete household decision-making
model concerning the use obstetrical services, which shows how a demand-side subsidy
such as Seguro Popular can affect the household’s relative ranking of service sites.
Section 4 explicitly converts our model into econometric form, and takes into account the
potential endogeneity of the decision to participate in Seguro Popular, as well as our
strategy for evaluating heterogeneous impacts. Section 5 describes our database, the
2006 National Survey of Health and Nutrition (Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición,

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 6

or ENSANUT; see Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2006)). Section 6 details our
empirical results. Section 7 summarizes our findings, discusses the limitations of our
research, and considers its implications for public policy and future research on health
policy in developing economies.

2.

Mexico’s Health Care System and the “Seguro Popular” Program

2.1.

Health Care Access and Financing in Mexico
Historically, access to health insurance coverage in Mexico was tied to

employment in certain sectors of the formal economy. The principal sources of coverage
for workers in these sectors were the Mexican Social Insurance Institute (Instituto
Mexicano del Seguro Social, or IMSS), the Government Workers’ Social Security and
Services Institute (Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores del
Estado, or ISSSTE), as well as insurance programs for employees of such state-run
enterprises as PEMEX (petroleum) and SEDENA (national defense). Workers outside
these specific sectors and participants in the informal economy had to attend governmentsponsored facilities through the Department of Health (Secretaría de Salud, or SSA) or
pay out of pocket for medical care at private hospitals or doctors’ offices. These private
facilities varied considerably in price, quality, and availability. On the one hand, a
modern network of private health services for the middle and upper classes, located
mainly in urban areas, served those individuals who had insurance coverage or could pay
out of pocket for their health care. On the other hand, lower-priced private health
services of variable quality, including informal providers such as midwives and

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 7

traditional healers, were available to poor urban and rural families (Parker and Wong
(1997); Nigenda, Troncoso et al. (2003); Pagan, Puig et al. (2007)).
The poorest households in the informal sector were thus left with essentially three
options: foregoing health care; seeking whatever care was available from state-sponsored
SSA clinics or other low-cost informal providers; or spending a large part of their income
on private health care. This has, in fact, been the predicament of the poor in many
developing economies (Wagstaff (2007)).
In recent years, Mexico has adopted public policies intended to overcome these
historical inequalities in health care coverage (Frenk, Sepulveda et al. (2003)). One
especially important initiative has been PROGRESA (Program for Education, Health and
Nutrition), later renamed Oportunidades, an incentive-based subsidy program designed to
improve the health, nutrition and education of poor families with children (Behrman and
Skoufias (2006); Gertler (2000); Gertler (2004); Hoddinott and Skoufias (2004); Skoufias
and Parker (2001; Skoufias (2005)). While PROGRESA/Oportunidades has increased
poor families’ demand for preventive health services and some types of primary care,
coverage for more advanced forms of care has remained lacking. For a poor family,
essentially any major illness requiring secondary or tertiary medical care was
catastrophic.
2.2.

Seguro Popular
In 2001, the government of Mexico launched Seguro Popular, a major new effort

to improve access of the poor to qualified public health services. The Seguro Popular
program specifically targeted poor families in both urban and rural areas of Mexico
without access to any other form of private or public coverage (Torres and Knaul (2003)).
02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 8

Under this voluntary insurance plan, a household makes subsidized contributions, based
on ability to pay, to a public fund to prevent catastrophic spending on health care (Frenk,
Sepulveda et al. (2003)). Access to primary, secondary and more advanced medical care
is guaranteed and provided mainly through a publicly sponsored network of ambulatory
health units, general and specialized hospitals. All SP-sponsored health facilities are
certified as providing a minimum level of quality of care. Health centers and hospitals
are accredited on the basis of their infrastructure, equipment, health personnel, range of
medical services and other criteria.
In order to accommodate the lengthy process of health unit accreditation, Seguro
Popular was rolled out gradually during 2001–2005. Five states (Aguascalientes,
Campeche, Colima, Jalisco and Tabasco) were incorporated into the program in 2001 as
part of a pilot study. An additional 15 states were integrated in the program in 2002; four
more states were incorporated in 2003; and the remaining states were incorporated in
during 2004 and 2005. By the end of 2005, all 32 of Mexico’s states had been
incorporated, and approximately 4 million families (comprising approximately 12 million
individuals) had signed up for the voluntary program (Secretaría de Salud (2006)).
2.3.

Maternal Health Services
Access to adequate maternal health care is important for the health of both mother

and infant. During the past two decades, policy makers in Mexico have adopted three
different approaches in pursuit of this objective. One approach has been to enhance
access to services within the existing system of state-run SSA-sponsored clinics. A
second strategy, embodied in the PROGRESA/Oportunidades program, provides specific
economic incentives to poor families for seeking preventive health services, including
02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 9

prenatal care for pregnant women. The third strategy, reinforced by the Seguro Popular
program, entails investment in adequate infrastructure for the provision of the full range
of maternal health services, including gynecologic and obstetric care, to women of low
socioeconomic status.
The first approach has had limited impact. In some cases, those state-run SSAsponsored units that did provide some obstetrical services lacked the full range of drugs
and equipment, hired deficiently trained personnel, and maintained reduced hours of
operation. As a consequence, a significant proportion of pregnant women preferred
delivering their babies in the private sector, even though they had direct contact with
state-run health facilities for their prenatal care, and even though many private-sector
providers were unqualified midwives and traditional birth attendants. This reversal of
preferences has been observed in other developing economies (Schwartz, Akin et al.
(1988)).
The second approach has met with some success. There is evidence that the
PROGRESA/Oportunidades program enhanced the use of formal prenatal health services
by the poorest pregnant women (Gertler (2000); Gertler (2004)). However, the approach
did not clearly improve access to obstetrical care, especially in rural areas. During 1998–
2001, thirty-four percent of births in rural areas were attended by private providers,
including traditional midwives (Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2000)). The
principal explanation for this phenomenon was limited access to modern obstetrical
facilities in rural areas.
The first approach, which focused on improving access to basic reproductive
health services available through the SSA, was associated with decline in maternal

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 10

mortality at the national level since 1993 (Mojarro, Tapia-Colocia et al. (2003)).
However, such improvements in maternal mortality were not seen in the poorest areas of
the country, and substantial regional variations in maternal mortality persisted. During
1997–1999, the national maternal mortality rate was 6.16 per 10,000 live births, with
rates of 5.21 and 7.38 in urban and rural areas, respectively, and rates as high as 10.0 in
the state of Oaxaca, 9.5 in Tlaxcala, and 9.0 in Chiapas (Mojarro, Tapia-Colocia et al.
(2003)). These inequalities in maternal mortality have been attributed to inadequate
provision of maternal health services in the poorest regions of the country.
One objective of the Seguro Popular program has been to remedy these persistent
deficiencies in maternal health services. Apart from subsidizing health insurance
coverage, the program has invested considerable resources in improving the quality and
availability of secondary medical provided in public facilities, including obstetric care.
Accordingly, in the present research, we sought to evaluate whether enrollment in SP has
specifically improved pregnant women’s attendance at SP-accredited obstetrical
facilities. Given poor women’s historical preference for private obstetrical services over
state-run facilities, we therefore distinguished between three different sites of care: an
SP-accredited obstetric facility; a non-SP state-run health unit; and a private provider,
including physicians and midwives delivering in hospitals or at home.

3.

Theoretical Model
We begin with a deterministic model of utility maximization by a single,

representative household. We then address issues of heterogeneity across multiple
households and introduce a stochastic component to our model.
02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

3.1.

Page 11

Deterministic Single-Household Model with Discrete Choice
Although a household may have multiple members, we assume that it makes its

consumption decisions as a unified entity. Furthermore, we assume that one member of
the household is a pregnant woman who must decide where to have her baby. We posit a
strictly quasi-concave household utility function

(1)

U ( z0 , z1 , z2 , x, c )

where ( z0 , z1 , z2 ) denotes the pregnant woman’s consumption of obstetric care at each of
three different sites, where x measures the consumption of other forms of medical care
by any one of the household members, and where c is all other consumption. The three
possible sites of care include: z0 , a site run by the Department of Health (Secretaría de
Salud, or SSA); z1 , a facility specifically accredited by Seguro Popular (SP); or z2 ,
delivery by a physician or midwife in a private facility or at home. While we specify
only three possible sites, our model can be generalized to any larger number of sites. The
household’s budget constraint is
(2)

q0 z0 + q1z1 + q2 z2 + px + c = m

where ( q0 , q1 , q2 ) are the respective prices of obstetric care (net of insurance coverage) at
the three sites, where p is the net price of other medical care, where all other
consumption has a unit price, and where m is household income. We impose the
following non-negativity conditions
(3)

zi ! 0 , x ! 0 , c ! 0 , m > 0 , p > 0 , qi > 0

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 12

In particular, the medical care net prices p and qi are assumed to include time and
transportation costs, so that they remain strictly positive even with full coverage.
We further assume that the three different sites of obstetric care represent
mutually exclusive alternatives. In imposing such a constraint, we focus specifically on
the site of obstetric care where the pregnant woman chooses to deliver her baby, as
opposed to the sites at which she may seek prenatal care or to which she may be
transferred for treatment of postpartum complications. Our constraint on the site of care
converts the standard maximization model into a discrete choice problem.
(4)

z0 z1z2 = 0
The household’s problem is to maximize the utility function (1) subject to the

constraints (2) through (4). The problem is solved in two steps. First, we define the
conditional utility functions
u0 ( z0 , x, c ) = U ( z0 , 0, 0, x, c )

(5)

u1 ( z1 , x, c ) = U ( 0, z1 , 0, x, c )

u2 ( z2 , x, c ) = U ( 0, 0, z2 , x, c )

For each i = 0,1, 2 , we maximize the conditional utility function

(6)

max ui ( zi , x, c )
zi , x,c

subject to the conditional budget constraint
(7)

qi zi + px + c = m

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 13

For each i = 0,1, 2 , let zi* ( qi , p, m ) , xi* ( qi , p, m ) , and ci* ( qi , p, m ) be the
corresponding conditional demand functions, and let

(8)

(

wi* ( qi , p, m ) = u zi* , xi* , ci*

)

be the corresponding indirect utility function conditional upon choosing site i . The

{

}

quantities w0* , w1* , w2* provide a complete ordering among the conditional indirect
utilities for the three obstetric sites. The second step is to choose the site i of obstetric
care that yields the largest conditional indirect utility, that is,

(9)

max wi* ( qi , p, m )
i

This two-step procedure not only yields an unconditional demand for a specific site zi ,
but also a specific quantity x of non-obstetric care. For future reference, we define the
discrete variable y1 as follows:

(10)

{

y1 = i if wi* = max w0* , w1* , w2*

}

where y1 thus depends implicitly on prices q0 , q1 , q2 , p and income m .
3.2.

Effect of Changes in Price
Seguro Popular subsides medical care for the entire household, and not simply for

individual members. Specifically, the program subsidizes non-obstetric medical care x
for all household members, as well as obstetric care, z1 , at a SP-sponsored site.
Equivalently, Seguro Popular reduces in the respective net prices p and q1 . Although

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 14

the effects of these price reductions on the conditional demand functions are
straightforward, the effects on the unconditional demand functions are more complicated.
First consider the effect of changes in prices p and q1 on the conditional demand
functions zi* ( qi , p, m ) and xi* ( qi , p, m ) . If the pregnant woman has chosen Seguro
Popular ( y1 = 1) , then we would ordinarily expect the own-price effects on conditional
demand to be negative, that is,

!x1*
!z *
!z *
< 0 and 1 < 0 . The sign of cross-price effect 1
!p
!p
!q1

will depend on whether SP-sponsored obstetrical care is a complement or substitute for
other types of medical care consumed by the household. For example, if these additional
types of care include pediatric care for newborns, prenatal or postpartum care for the
mother, or medical care for other family members who provide for the newborn child,

!z1*
< 0 . On the other hand,
then we would expect a complementary relationship, that is,
!p
if the additional care represents treatment for an elderly grandparent who does not
provide care for the newborn child, then we might expect to observe the opposite sign,

!z1*
> 0.
that is,
!p
Continuing to focus on conditional demand, we note that if the pregnant woman
has instead chosen another site of obstetric care ( y1 ! 1) , then the cross-price effect of

!zi*
subsidizing care at a SP-sponsored site is necessarily zero, that is,
= 0 . However, the
!q1
cross-price effect of subsidizing other medical care

02-Oct-2007

!zi*
can still be positive or negative.
!p

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 15

Again, the sign depends on whether the additional care is a complement or substitute for
the mother’s obstetric care at site i ! 1 .
Now consider the effects of changes in price on unconditional demand. Here, a
change in the price q1 of SP-sponsored care or in the price p of non-obstetric care can
alter the utility ordering of the alternatives. Since the conditional indirect utility function
w1* ( q1 , p, m ) is a decreasing function of both q1 and p , it is obvious that a reduction in

the price q1 of SP-sponsored care or in the price p of non-obstetric care will increase

wi* . Such price reductions may thus move the SP-sponsored site to a higher relative
position in the household’s utility ordering. However, our model does not require that
these price reductions necessarily place a Seguro Popular-sponsored site at the top of the
household’s ranking.
What is more, a reduction in the price p of non-obstetric care can also affect the
relative ranking of the non-SP-sponsored obstetrical sites. The change in relative ranking
can operate through either the income effect or the substitution effect of a reduction in the
price p . The income effect, in particular, will tend to increase the consumption of those
types of obstetric care that are regarded as normal good and tend to decrease the
consumption of those types of obstetric care that are regarded as an inferior good. To the
extent that households regard SSA-sponsored obstetrical care z0 as an inferior good, a
subsidy of non-obstetric care could thus lower the relative ranking of a delivery at a SSAsponsored site. In concrete terms, SP’s subsidy of medications, doctor visits and
hospitalizations for all household members thus puts money in the family’s pocket, which
is then spent on those types of obstetric care that are normal goods and diverted away
from public SSA-sponsored obstetric care that is regarded as an inferior good.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 16

What is less obvious, however, is that a reduction in the price p can also
influence the relative ranking of the obstetrical sites through the substitution effect,
without any requirement that one form of obstetrical care be an inferior good. Thus, a
decrease in p will not only increase the compensated demand for non-obstetrical care x ,
but it will also increase the consumption of any type of obstetric care that is a
compensated complement and decrease the consumption of any other type of obstetric
care that is a compensated substitute. Hence, SP’s subsidy of non-obstetric care for all
household members can raise the ranking of a private delivery if private obstetrical care
is highly complementary with non-obstetrical care. In concrete terms, Seguro Popular
thus raises the household’s valuation of a private delivery because it subsidizes the
evaluation of the newborn baby by a pediatrician in the hospital immediately after
delivery.
In Appendix A, we illustrate the foregoing effect of a change in the price p of
non-obstetric care by means of a specific utility function.
3.3.

Introducing Heterogeneity and Stochastic Components
We let the binary variable y2 represent the household’s decision to enroll in

Seguro Popular, where y2 = 1 if the household enrolls in SP, and y2 = 0 otherwise.
Since enrollment in Seguro Popular affects the net prices q1 and p , we can write the
household’s conditional indirect utility functions wi* as functions of y2 as well.
Moreover, there are likely to be other observed and unobserved determinants of the
household’s indirect utility. We summarize these considerations in the specification:
(11)

wi* = wi* ( qi , p, m, y2 , X ) + ! i
02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 17

where X is a vector of observed characteristics of the household, and where ! i is an
unobserved stochastic component with zero mean.

4.

Econometric Model
We now specify a formal econometric structure on our theoretical model,

imposing functional forms on the indirect utility functions and making specific
distributional assumptions about the unobserved stochastic components. We address
issues of parameter identification, and display our measures of impact on specific
populations. Finally, we describe tests for heterogeneity of our model.
4.1.

Model Specification and Likelihood Function
For a specific household, we write:

(12)

w0* = X0! " 0 + # 0 y2 + $ 0
w1* = X1!"1 + # 1 y2 + $1 ;
w2* = 0

{

y1 = i if wi* = max w0* , w1* , w2*

}

where ( X0 , X1 ) are vectors of observable explanatory variables, where ( ! 0 , !1 ) are
conformal vectors of unknown parameters, and where (! 0 , ! 1 ) are additional unknown
coefficients of the variable y2 that indicates enrollment in Seguro Popular. For clarity, in
equation (12), we have omitted subscripts that refer to the specific household. Only the
site of obstetric care with the highest indirect utility is observed as the discrete variable

y1 . In addition, we have specified a linear model for the determinants of indirect utility,
subsuming prices and income within the vectors of observable determinants ( X1 , X2 ) .
02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 18

Given that we observed only the choice with the highest indirect utility, we recognize that
we can identify only the differences in indirect utility, and therefore we set the utility of
private obstetric care equal to zero. Finally, we assume that the stochastic terms ! 0 and

!1 are independent unit normal N ( 0,1) variables.
We further specify a probit model of enrollment in Seguro Popular:

(13)

y = X2! " 2 + # 2 ;
*
2

"0, if y2* < 0
y2 = #
*
$1, if y2 ! 0

where y2* is an unobserved latent variable, where X2 is a vector of determinants of the
decision to enroll, where ! 2 is a conformal vector of unknown parameters, and where ! 2
is a stochastic error term.
While the Mexican government has phased in Seguro Popular over time, thus
determining when specific communities will be eligible for the program, the household’s
enrollment nonetheless remains a voluntary decision. Accordingly, we cannot exclude
the possibility that the binary variable y2 is endogenous. This potential endogeneity is
captured by correlations between the error term ! 2 in equation (13) and the error terms

! 0 and !1 in equation (12). We parameterize these correlations as follows:
(14)

! 2 = " 0! 0 + " 1!1 + #

where ! 0 and ! 1 are unknown parameters, and where ! is a unit normal N ( 0,1)
random variable that is distributed independently of ! 0 and !1 . This error structure
admits two types of unobserved heterogeneity. When the parameter ! 0 is non-zero,

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 19

households have unobserved characteristics that influence their decision to enroll in SP
and, at the same time, influence the pregnant woman’s preferences for SSA-sponsored
public clinic over private health care. When the parameter ! 1 is non-zero, households
have unobserved characteristics that influence their decision to enroll in SP and, at the
same time, influence the pregnant woman’s preferences for an SP-sponsored unit over a
private site.
Given (14), the error terms ( ! 0 , !1 , ! 2 ) are joint normally distributed:

(15)

)" 0 % " 1
" !0 %
$ ! ' ~ N +$ 0 ' , $ 0
+$ ' $
$ 1'
+*# 0 & # ( 0
# !2 &

0
(0
%,
'.
1
(1
'.
2
2
( 1 1 + ( 0 + ( 1 & .-

with correlation coefficients Corr ( ! 0 , ! 2 ) = "0 = # 0

$ and Corr ( !1 , ! 2 ) = "1 = # 1

$,

where ! = 1 + " 02 + " 12 . The variance-covariance matrix of the error terms is positive
definite for all values of the parameters ! 0 and ! 1 .
We estimate the parameters ! = ( ! 0 , !1 , ! 2 ) , ! = (! 0 , ! 1 ) , ! = (! 0 , ! 1 ) in the
model of equations (11) through (13) by maximum likelihood. The details of construction
of the likelihood function and parameter estimation are given in Appendix B.
4.2.

Parameter Identification
To identify the parameters of our structural model, we impose exclusion

restrictions on the explanatory variables in X = ( X0 , X1 , X2 ) . Specifically, we took
advantage of the fact that Seguro Popular has been gradually phased in over time in
different states within Mexico. We therefore constructed three dummy variables,

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 20

indicating whether the woman’s locality of residence had been formally incorporated into
Seguro Popular by the years 2002, 2003, and 2004, respectively. In particular, a woman
living in a locality that was not incorporated until 2005 would have zero-values for all
three dummy variables, and thus serves as a reference case. Because SP was only in the
pilot phase during 2001, we did not specify a dummy variable for that year. We included
the three dummy variables in the participation equation (13) but excluded them from the
health care utilization equations (12).
4.3.

Measures of Impact: Individual versus Population

(

)

Given estimates of the parameters !ˆ , "ˆ , #̂ , we can compute the respective

{

}

probabilities Pi! j ( X ) = Pr y1 = i, y2 = j X, "ˆ , #ˆ , $̂ , where i = 0,1, 2 and j = 0,1 , for
any given vector of household characteristics X . Given these joint probabilities, we can
compute the conditional probabilities Pi

P2

1

(X)

X =
j( )

Pi! j ( X )

Pi!0 ( X ) + Pi!1 ( X )

, where, for example,

denotes the predicted probability that a woman in a household with exogenous

characteristics X will choose a private obstetrical site given that the household is
enrolled in Seguro Popular. We can also compute the probability of enrollment in SP,

{

}

that is, P1 ( X ) = Pr y2 = 1 X, !ˆ , "ˆ , #̂ = P0$1 ( X ) + P1$1 ( X ) + P2$1 ( X ) .
At the level of the individual, our measure of the impact of SP on the probability
of choosing site i = 0,1, 2 is difference in conditional probabilities, that is,
(16)

I i ( X ) = Pi

1

( X ) ! Pi 0 ( X )

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 21

We note that, for a fixed vector of maternal and household characteristics X , the three
measures of impact of Seguro Popular necessarily sum to zero, that is,

I 0 ( X ) + I1 ( X ) + I 2 ( X ) = 0 . At the population level, our measure of the impact of SP on
the probability of choosing site i = 0,1, 2 is the difference in joint probabilities
(17)

Ri ( X ) = Pi!1 ( X ) " Pi!0 ( X )

The quantities Ri ( X ) measure the impact of the Seguro Popular program as a policy
intervention, because they account explicitly for the probability of enrolling in SP, and
not simply the individual treatment effect conditional on SP enrollment. Although a
pregnant woman without SP was not legally entitled to have a baby at an SP-sponsored
unit, we did not impose the constraints that P1

0

(X) = 0

and P1!0 ( X ) = 0 .

We took advantage of the asymptotic normality of the maximum likelihood

(

)

ˆ ",ˆ #̂ to compute approximate 95% confidence intervals for the impact
estimates !,

measures I i ( X ) and Ri ( X ) . Specifically, we made repeated random draws from a

(

)

ˆ ",ˆ #̂ and estimated asymptotic
multivariate joint normal distribution with mean !,

variance-covariance matrix V̂ , and with each draw recomputed the impact measures

I i ( X ) and Ri ( X ) for a fixed value of X . The confidence intervals for each impact
measure were then computed from the range of recomputed values of I i ( X ) and Ri ( X ) .
4.4.

Analysis of Heterogeneity of Impact
Because our model is nonlinear, the marginal effects of changes in the principal

treatment variable (that is, affiliation with Seguro Popular, or y2 ) depend on the values of

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 22

the explanatory variables (that is, maternal and household characteristics, or X ).
Although it is commonplace to report these marginal effects at the sample means, we
focused on the extent of heterogeneity in the impact of Seguro Popular at the individual
and population levels. We therefore computed the impact measures I i ( X ) and Ri ( X )
for four prototypical households or “cases,” that is, four different sets of explanatory
variables X .
4.5.

Comparison with Simplified Bivariate Probit Model
We compared our multinomial choice model (12) with a simplified bivariate

probit model, in which a pregnant woman has only two choices: a birth attended at a SPsponsored facility ( y1 = 1) , or a birth elsewhere ( y1 = 0 ) . In place of equation (12), we
write:

(18)

w1* = X1!"1 + # 1 y2 + $1
w =0
*
0

;

{

y1 = i if wi* = max w0* , w1*

}

which is equivalent to a probit specification in which a non-SP obstetric facility is the
reference category. Retaining equation (13) for y2 and setting ! 0 = 0 in equation (14),
we obtain a two-equation probit model with a discrete endogenous variable (that is, y2 )
and an unconstrained correlation coefficient between the error terms. Such a model can
be estimated by maximum likelihood as if it were a simple bivariate probit model without
endogenous variables. (See, for example, p. 183 in Maddala (1983) and p. 853 in Greene
(2000).) For this purpose, we used the “biprobit” routine in Stata (StataCorp (2005)).

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

5.

Data

5.1.

ENSANUT Survey Data and Analytical Sample

Page 23

Our principal source of data is the 2006 Mexican National Health and Nutrition
Survey (Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición, or ENSANUT), conducted during
November 2005 – May 2006 (Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2006)), a nationally
representative cross-section of 48,304 households containing 206,700 individuals.
ENSANUT contained information on respondents’ education, employment,
socioeconomic and demographic characteristics, prevalence of self-reported acute and
chronic illnesses, as well as health care utilization and source of payment.
We focused on the 5,988 female respondents of reproductive age (15–49 years)
who reported having delivered their last baby during 2001–2006. We then excluded
1,900 respondents who reported delivering at a facility sponsored by employer-based
health insurance (IMSS, ISSSTE, and PEMEX), as well as an additional 198 observations
that had missing values of the explanatory variables to be described below. These
exclusions resulted in a sample of 3,890, which served as the principal basis for our
statistical analyses. We refer to this sample as the analytic sample.
Households covered by Mexico’s employer-based plans are not legally entitled to
participate in Seguro Popular. Accordingly, the exclusion of households covered by
employer-based plans permitted us to focus sharply on the target population eligible for
the Seguro Popular program. Given the lack of flexibility in Mexico’s labor market, we
considered it unlikely that our exclusion of women covered by employer-based plans
produced a significant bias of self-selection. Nonetheless, in order to check the
sensitivity of our results to our exclusion criterion, we repeated our analyses with two

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 24

alternative samples that were not drawn on the basis of household insurance coverage:
(1) an enlarged sample of 5,762 adult women who had a baby since 2001 and who had no
missing values for any explanatory variables; and (2) a restricted sample of 1,934 adult
women whose household resided in a locality with a moderately high or very high index
of socioeconomic marginality (“índice de marginación”) (CONAPO (2005)).
5.2.

Dependent Variables
As noted in Section 4, our two discrete dependent variables were: y1 , the site of

obstetric care; and y2 , the binary decision to enroll in Seguro Popular. With respect to
the former, each respondent to ENSANUT who had her last baby during 2001–2006 was
asked where she delivered her baby. (Specifically, question 9.15 of the Adult
Questionnaire inquired: “¿En dónde le atendieron su último parto?” See Instituto
Nacional de Salud Pública (2006).) With respect to the latter, the person in charge of the
household (“la persona responsable del hogar”) was asked about each household
member’s medical coverage. (Specifically, question 2.08 of the Household
Questionnaire inquired: “¿Está [NOMBRE] afiliado o inscrito a algún seguro médico?”)
Table 1 shows the joint distribution of the two dependent variables in our analytic
sample of 3,890 women. Among the households who did not participate in SP, nearly
half paid out of pocket for obstetrical services in the private sector, while the other half
had their babies in clinics sponsored by the Secretaría de Salud. Among the households
that did participate in SP, the great majority of women (72 percent) had their babies in an
SP-sponsored unit, but nearly 21 percent still paid out of pocket for private obstetrical
services.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 25

Given that the measurement of these dependent variables was based on selfreported survey responses, we performed a number of checks for reliability. To check
whether the decision to participate in Seguro Popular is made at the household level, we
verified that 90 percent of the respondents who reported themselves as enrolled in SP
belonged to households in which the remaining members were likewise enrolled in the
SP program. Moreover, we verified that 95 percent of the women reporting participation
in SP lived in a household where the person in charge reported a date of affiliation in SP
for at least one household member. (Questions 8.03 and 8.04 of the Household
Questionnaire inquired, respectively, “¿Alguna de las personas que componen su hogar
ha estado inscrita en el Seguro Popular de Salud?” and “¿En qué fecha se inscribieron al
Seguro Popular?”)
We also addressed the possibility that some women who reported current SP
participation were not in fact eligible for SP at the time of their delivery. Seguro Popular
was rolled out gradually over time in different states throughout Mexico, with most states
enrolling in 2002–2004 and all states enrolled by 2005. The official dates of
incorporation of each state in SP need to be regarded as approximate, as many localities
may not have complied with legally established deadlines. In a separate sensitivity
analysis, we reclassified a total of 195 women as not enrolled in SP and not delivering a
baby in an SP-accredited facility if the woman reported a date of delivery at an SPsponsored facility before the official year of incorporation of SP in the state or before the
reported date of enrollment reported on the household questionnaire. We then repeated
our analyses on this reclassified sample.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

5.3.

Page 26

Independent Variables and Instrumental Variables
Our independent variables consisted of individual- and household-level data from

ENSANUT, supplemented by data from external sources on the characteristics of the
locality or state of the woman’s residence (Secretaría de Salud (2005)). Individual-level
variables included the woman’s age and age squared, educational attainment, marital
status, parity, primary language (indigenous versus Spanish), and the presence or absence
of three self-reported conditions: depression, diabetes, and high blood pressure. (With
respect to self-reported conditions, adult respondents were asked: “¿Alguna vez le ha
dicho un médico u otro personal de salud que sufre o ha sufrido depresión?” [Question
3.2] “¿Algún médico le ha dicho que tiene diabetes o alta el azúcar en la sangre?”
[Question 4.1] “¿Algún médico le ha dicho que tiene la presión alta?” [Question 5.1] See
Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2006).) Household-level variables included: the
presence of young children; rural versus urban location; the proportion of women in the
locality who had employment-based health insurance (IMSS, ISSSTE, etc.); the density
of public health units in the locality; and an asset index, based upon household
infrastructure, building materials, and ownership of certain durable assets, as a proxy for
household’s wealth (McKenzie (2004)).
Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for the independent variables, as well as
the marginal proportions of the dependent variables, in our analytic sample.
Approximately half of the women had no more than a primary school education, more
than a third lived in a rural area, and nearly a quarter spoke an indigenous language. The
average family in our sample had low assets and lived in a locality where only 1 in 10
families had employment-based health insurance, and where there were fewer than 1

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 27

health center per 100 women. The ratio of the maximum to the minimum density of
health centers was nearly two orders of magnitude, and indicated enormous variability in
access to formal health services.
For instrumental variables, as described in Section 4.2 above, we constructed
dummy variables for each of three years (2002, 2003, and 2004), where the dummy
variable for a particular year indicated whether the Seguro Popular had been officially
incorporated in the woman’s state of residence by that year. The process of incorporation
entailed decisions at the state and federal level, rather than at the level of the individual
client or health center. We know of no evidence that such decisions suffered from
“policy endogeneity,” that is, states with the highest probability of attracting a pregnant
mother to a health center were incorporated earlier. We recognize that the official dates
of incorporation are not exact indicators of program availability, since some health
centers were still undergoing accreditation by the end of the year. We therefore view
these instruments as indicators of likelihood that SP was available to each household in
the survey. Our use of year-of-incorporation dummies as instruments is thus analogous
to Duflo’s use of distance from schools as instruments in her study of impact of school
construction on educational attainment and wages in Indonesia (Duflo (2001)). The yearof-incorporation dummies were thus excluded from the equations (12) determining the
effect of SP enrollment on the site of delivery.

6.

Results
Table 3 presents the results of the simplified bivariate probit model of obstetric

care utilization and enrollment in SP for the analytic sample. We show the estimated

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 28

marginal effects only for the utilization equation on the left (corresponding to equation
(18) above), but not for the enrollment equation on the right (corresponding to equation
(13) above). The estimates in the enrollment equation in Table 3 supported the validity
of our year-of-incorporation dummy variables as instruments. The dummy variables for
all three years were significant. The significant negative coefficient for the year 2003,
during which only four of Mexico’s 32 states were incorporated into SP, implies a lower
rate of enrollment than in the reference year 2005. Moreover, in the utilization equation,
the significantly positive coefficient for enrollment in SP supported the hypothesis that
Seguro Popular has had an effect on obstetric utilization. The estimated marginal effect,
which is equivalent to our measure of the impact of the individual-level impact of SP, is
0.430. That is, controlling for other factors affecting the choice of delivery site, a woman
in a family enrolled in SP had a probability of giving birth at an SP-accredited facility
that was 43 percentage points higher than a woman in a family not enrolled in SP.
In Table 3, the estimated coefficient of correlation of the error terms is negative
and significantly different from zero. While the finding of a non-zero correlation
coefficient might support the conclusion that enrollment in SP is an endogenous variable,
the negative sign is difficult to explain on the basis of the estimates alone. The other
covariates in the enrollment equation do not reveal any related anomalies. In particular,
women in rural localities with a higher availability of health centers are more likely to
enroll in SP. One might conclude that unobserved factors enhanced the probability of
enrollment in SP and, at the same time, diminished the probability of having a baby at an
SP-accredited facility. An alternative interpretation, however, is that the simplified
bivariate model is not correctly specified.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 29

We therefore turn to Table 4, which shows the results of our full multinomial
probit model (equations 12-14) for the analytic sample. The column denoted “SSA vs.
Private” refers to a woman’s preference for giving birth at an SSA-sponsored facility in
comparison to a private facility, which serves as the reference category. It corresponds to
the equation for the latent variable w0* in equation (12) above. The column denoted “SP
vs. Private” refers to a woman’s preference for having a baby at a SP-sponsored facility
in comparison to a private facility. It corresponds to the equation for the latent variable

w1* in equation (12) above. Finally, the column denoted “SP Enrollment” refers to the
household’s preference for enrollment in Seguro Popular, and corresponds to the equation
for the latent variable y2* , that is, equation (13).
In the column “SSA vs. Private,” the estimate of the parameter ! 0 is negative and
highly significant, while in the column “SP vs. Private,” the estimate of the parameter ! 1
is positive and highly significant. Accordingly, women in households that participated in
the SP program had a much stronger preference for having a baby in a SP-sponsored unit
rather than paying out of pocket for a private delivery. At the same time, however,
participation in SP was associated with a stronger preference for delivering in the private
sector rather than at an SSA-sponsored clinic. These results confirm the hypothesis,
posed in Section 3.2, that the household-level subsidy embodied in SP can affect the
relative ranking of all three sites of obstetric care. In the language of our model of
Section 3, reductions in the medical care prices q1 and p increased the household’s
indirect utility w1* ( q1 , p, m ) and decreased the indirect utility w0* ( q1 , p, m ) in relation to
the indirect utility w2* ( q1 , p, m ) .

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 30

The estimated correlation coefficients !0 and !1 in the multinomial probit model
of Table 4 present a different pattern than that observed in the simplified bivariate probit
model of Table 3. The estimate of !0 is significantly positive, while the estimate of !1
is indistinguishable from zero. Accordingly, there were unobserved factors that enhanced
the probability of enrollment in SP and, at the same time, enhanced the probability of
preferring an SSA-sponsored facility to a private delivery. In less formal terms, mothers
in households attracted to Seguro Popular were more likely to have preferred to deliver in
state-run SSA-sponsored facilities than to pay out of pocket for a private delivery. The
ability of our multinomial model to differentiate between two different types of
endogeneity (as specified in equations (14) and (15)) thus permits us to resolve the
apparent paradox of a negative correlation coefficient in the simplified bivariate probit
model of Table 3.
In Table 4, the estimates of the coefficients of the year-of-incorporation dummy
variables in the SP enrollment equation further support the validity of these variables as
instruments. Moreover, in the enrollment equation, residence in a rural locality, a lower
proportion of families enrolled in employment-based insurance, and a higher density of
health centers all had a significant positive effect, while the women’s speaking an
indigenous language had a significant negative coefficient. Self-reported diabetes,
education, and indigenous language had significant effects in the site of delivery
equations as well.
Given the parameter estimates based upon the multinomial probit model in Table
4, we computed the measures of individual-level and population-level impact described
in Section 4.3. At the mean values of the independent variables, the predicted probability

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 31

of enrollment in SP (that is, P1 ( X ) in Section 4.3) was 20.9 percent, and the
corresponding individual-level impact on having a baby at an SP-accredited facility (that
is, I1 ( X ) in equation (16)) was 70.6 percent (95% CI, 65.7–75.0). The latter measure of
impact was significantly larger than the marginal effect of 40.3 percent estimated from
the simplified bivariate probit model in Table 3. In less formal terms, our multinomial
probit model detected an impact of Seguro Popular on the decision to have a baby at an
SP-accredited site that was nearly double the impact estimated from a simplified bivariate
probit model.
Table 5 and Figure 1 show our computations of the individual-level impact of SP
enrollment for four representative cases, that is, four profiles of women based on
different values of the explanatory variables. The details of each profile are shown in the
notes to Table 5. Cases 1 and 2 refer to women residing in rural areas. For Case 1 (a
rural woman without any formal education, who speaks an indigenous language, has low
socioeconomic status and reports all three medical conditions), the probability of
enrollment in SP was P1 ( X ) = 43.65 percent, while the individual-level impact was

I1 ( X ) = 82.09 percent (95% CI, 59.13–84.29). By contrast, for Case 2 (a rural woman
with at least primary school, who speaks Spanish, has comparatively higher
socioeconomic status and does not report medical conditions), the estimated probability
of enrollment in the SP was higher (51.51%), but the individual-level impact was notably
lower (61.24%; 95% CI, 43.00–72.05). The difference between the individual-level
impacts in Case 1 and Case 2 was 20.85 percent (95% CI, -6.96–35.88).
Cases 3 and 4 refer to women residing in urban areas. For Case 3 (an urban
woman with primary education, who speaks Spanish, has low socioeconomic status and

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 32

reports depression, diabetes, and high blood pressure), the probability of enrollment in SP
was 54.43 percent, while the individual-level impact was 78.91 percent. By contrast, for
Case 4 (an urban woman with a university education, who speaks Spanish, has elevated
socioeconomic status and does not report medical conditions), the estimated probability
of enrollment in the SP was 0.16 percent. Among the very few women with this profile
who enroll in SP, the individual-level impact on delivering in an SP-accredited facility
was 65.15 percent.
Table 5 and Figure 1 show not only the individual-level impacts on delivering at a
SP-accredited facility, but also the corresponding individual-level impacts on having a
baby at a SSA-sponsored health unit (that is, I 0 ( X ) ) and a private facility (that is,

I 2 ( X ) ). In each of the four cases, but especially in Cases 1 through 3, the Seguro
Popular program reduced pregnant women’s attendance at an SSA-sponsored clinic much
more than it reduced the probability of delivering a baby in the private sector.
Table 6 and Figure 2 show our computations of the population-level impacts of
SP enrollment for four representative cases. The pattern of heterogeneity in populationlevel impacts differed from the pattern observed for individual-level impacts. While the
individual-level impact I1 ( X ) was largest for Case 1, the population-level impact R1 ( X )
was largest for Case 3, a Spanish-speaking urban woman with primary education, low
socioeconomic status and multiple medical problems. For Case 4, the probability of
enrolling in SP was so low that the population-level impact was negligible.
Appendix C shows estimates of the most important parameters for our three
sensitivity analyses: the extended sample, the restricted sample, and the reclassified
sample. In all cases, our multinomial probit estimates were robust with respect to

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 33

different assumptions about the study population and the definitions of the dependent
variables.
7.

Discussion and Conclusions
In this paper, we found that the recently established Seguro Popular program in

Mexico has had a significantly positive effect on the access of poor women to obstetrical
care, an important outcome measure of maternal and infant health. Women in
households that participated in the SP program, we found, had a much stronger
preference for having a baby in a SP-sponsored unit rather than paying out of pocket for a
private delivery. At the same time, participation in SP was associated with a stronger
preference for delivering in the private sector rather than at an SSA-sponsored clinic. On
balance, the Seguro Popular program reduced pregnant women’s attendance at an SSAsponsored clinic much more than it reduced the probability of delivering a baby in the
private sector. These findings were robust with respect to variations in the population
under study and the classification of subjects’ survey responses.
We formulated a multinomial probit model that permitted us to go beyond the
standard two-way dichotomy between utilization and non-utilization as outcome
measures in the evaluation of policies designed to subsidize and increase access to health
care. We found that the conventional bivariate probit approach suffered from apparent
problems of model misspecification, with a peculiarly negative correlation coefficient
between error terms in the obstetrical utilization and Seguro Popular enrollment
equations. What is more, estimates based the standard two-equation approach
understated the impact of Seguro Popular on obstetrical utilization by 40 percent.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 34

Our modification of the multivariate probit model to account of a discrete
endogenous variable appears to be the first instance of such a model specification. Early
applications of multinomial discrete choice models in the selection of health care
providers include the works of Schwartz, Akin et al. (1988) in the setting of the
Philippines, Akin, Guilkey et al. (1995) in Nigeria, and Bolduc, Lacroix et al. (1996) in
Benin, and most recently Borah (2006) in India and Leonard (2007) in Tanzania.
However, these papers did not explicitly incorporate endogeneity of the treatment or
policy variable into the multinomial choice framework.
Other investigators have employed variations of the now-standard bivariate probit
model, in which an endogenous binary participation variable enters on the right-hand side
of a probit utilization equation. (See Bertranou (1998) in the setting of Argentina;
Cameron, Trivedi et al. (1988) in Australia; Gitto, Santoro et al. (2006) in Sicily; Sapelli
and Vial (2003) in Chile; Suraratdecha, Saithanu et al. (2005) in Thailand; and Waters
(1999) in Ecuador.) Trujillo (2003) specified a binary utilization variable as well as two
endogenous binary variables to represent participation in both public and private
insurance programs in Colombia.
Still other researchers have considered multi-equation models in which one or
more equations entailed a discrete endogenous variable. Munkin and Trivedi (2003)
specified a three-equation model in which one demand equation entailed Poissondistributed count data, the second demand equation contained a continuous exponential
dependent variable, and the third participation equation involved a binary dependent
variable representing self-selection of insurance coverage. Deb, Munkin et al. (2006)
specified a multi-equation model for health care utilization, in which the first equation

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 35

was a probit model of non-zero health-care utilization, the second was conditional loglinear expenditure model, and the third was a multinomial probit model for choice of
insurance coverage. The latter model, like that of Munkin and Trivedi (2003), was
estimated by Markov chain Monte Carlo simulation techniques. Balia and Jones (2004),
in an interesting study of health habits and mortality, specified a recursive multi-equation
model, in which each binary lifestyle variable (such as smoking) served as a dependent
variable in a behavioral equation and as a regressor in a mortality equation. Our model in
this paper can be readily estimated by full maximum likelihood, taking advantage of
now-standard techniques to evaluate three-dimensional probit integrals, such as the GHK
simulator written by Cappellari and Jenkins (2006). (See Appendix B.)
We based our analysis of heterogeneous impacts on four cases, which represented
different profiles of women based on the values of the observed independent variables.
While the simulated confidence intervals around the impact measures were relatively
wide, nonetheless we observed significant variability in individual-level impacts. A
comparison of Cases 1 and 2, both women residing in urban areas, is illustrative. A
woman in Case 1 spoke an indigenous language, had low socioeconomic status and
reported multiple medical conditions, while a woman in Case 2 had a primary school
education, spoke Spanish, had comparatively higher socioeconomic status, and did not
report any medical conditions. In Case 1, the individual-level impact of Seguro Popular
on the probability of having a baby at a SP-accredited facility was 21 percentage points
higher than in Case 2, and the 95% confidence interval of this difference in individuallevel impacts ranged from -7% to +36%.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 36

The pattern of variation in population-level impacts was even greater. An urban
woman in Case 4, with a university education, who spoke Spanish, had average assets
and no health problems had a very small probability of enrolling in SP. As a result, the
population-level impact was negligible. By contrast, an urban woman in Case 3, with a
primary-school education, who spoke Spanish, had minimal assets and reported multiple
medical conditions had a probability of enrollment greater than 50 percent and, as a
result, displayed a very substantial population-level impact.
In our analysis of heterogeneous impacts, we did not specify interaction terms
between treatment variables and other explanatory variables, as would be required in a
purely linear model. Having specified a parametric joint distribution for the error terms

(! 0 , !1, ! 2 ) , we did not explore more generalized non-parametric procedures, such as
quantile treatment effects regression (Djebbari and Smith (2005); Dammert (2007)), and
thus our analysis does not capture the full extent of heterogeneity of program impact due
to variations in unobservables.
We posited a simple theoretical model of household choice, in which the
household was regarded as a unified decision-making unit. This theoretical structure was
sufficient to predict the reversals in relative ranking of obstetrical sites that might result
from SP’s subsidizing medical care at the household level. We did not find it necessary
to posit potentially conflicting interests among household members. Recent work on
game theoretic models of decision making (Harris and González López-Valcárcel (2007))
and resource allocation within the household (Djebbari (2005); Chávez-Martín del
Campo (2006)) would be interesting to pursue in this context.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 37

Our empirical findings on the substantial impact of Seguro Popular confirm the
preliminary results reported by Gakidou, Lozano et al. (2006), who found a positive
relation between hospital discharge rates per capita and the rate of SP enrollment in a
regression analysis of a cross-section of Mexican municipalities. These authors also
reported a positive relation between the probability of using health services and SP
enrollment, conditional on perceived need, based upon a cross-sectional regression study
of the 2006 ENSANUT survey, but details of the methodology were not reported.
This observational study has a number of limitations. We relied upon selfreported data, which inevitably contains response errors. For example, in Table 1, out of
a total of 2,978 households did not report enrollment in Seguro Popular, 49 women (1.65
percent) reported delivering a baby in a SP-accredited facility. Although we performed a
number of reliability checks of our data, uncertainty due to errors in reporting cannot be
eliminated. Nonetheless, our results remained robust with respect to changes in the
sample analyzed and the definitions of the dependent variables. We have no direct
measures of the characteristics of the obstetric facilities selected by the pregnant women
and their families. It is well recognized that such characteristics are a critical determinant
of the choice of site of care (Leonard (2007)). In the case of obstetric services in Mexico,
direct measurement of the level of training of personnel, accessibility of rural sites, and
the state of medical equipment would be very valuable, especially if we are to assess the
adequacy of the accreditation process employed by Seguro Popular. Measurement of the
quality of state-run SSA-sponsored sites would be valuable in determining why SPenrolled women expressed a much stronger preference for SP-accredited sites over SSAsponsored sites.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 38

We distinguished between SP-accredited health units, SSA-sponsored facilities,
and private care. While we excluded women who had employment-based health
insurance from our analytic sample, the category of “private care” nonetheless remains
heterogeneous, ranging from the services of private obstetricians within hospitals to
traditional midwives who work outside the hospital setting. In our ENSANUT analytic
sample, the latter category comprised only 10.36 percent of all reported deliveries
(results not shown.) Increasing the number of sites of obstetric care would have required
additional computational resources to evaluate a four-dimensional probit model in
samples with up to 6,000 observations.
Finally, our analysis covers the time period 2001–2006, during which the Seguro
Popular program was being gradually phased in throughout Mexico. Within the limits of
currently available data, we cannot test the hypothesis that the impact of Seguro Popular
has changed as the Mexican people have come to learn of its advantages, or as the quality
of SP-accredited facilities has further improved.
A number of findings in Table 4 give us cause for concern. The coefficients for
women who speak indigenous language are negative, that is, non-Spanish speaking
women appeared less likely to enroll in and take advantage of Seguro Popular. The
family asset index has a negative coefficient in the equation for SSA versus Private,
suggesting that some poor families were still paying out of pocket for private care. The
coefficient for a rural household is significant in the SP enrollment equation, but is not
significant in the equation for SP versus Private, suggesting that rural households
enrolled in SP but pregnant women within those households did not take advantage of the

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 39

program. These findings suggest a continued focus on the availability of Seguro Popular
for the very poorest indigenous households in rural areas.
Perhaps the most troubling findings, however, are the relative impacts on SSAsponsored and private obstetrical care that we observed in Table 5. On balance,
enrollment in Seguro Popular reduced deliveries at state-run SSA-sponsored facilities
much more than it reduced the use of private obstetrical services. One explanation is that
SSA-sponsored facilities, in which trained staff and adequate equipment are not
guaranteed, are perceived as low quality. There may also be problems of “crowding out,”
whereby SSA-sponsored facilities are simply too limited in availability. There is also the
potential concern that private facilities may be serving as alternatives to SP-sponsored
facilities with inadequate capacity. More research is required to determine why poor
uninsured Mexican women still pay out of pocket for obstetrical care despite the
substantial impacts of Seguro Popular documented in this paper.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 40

Text Tables
Table 1. Obstetric Care in Mexico, by Type of Facility Sponsorship, for Women in
Families with and without Seguro Popular (SP), 2001–2006*
With SP
Childbirth in a Facility Sponsored by:
Secretaría de Salud (SSA)
Seguro Popular (SP)
Private Facility
Total

Without SP

N

(%)

N

(%)

65
657
190

7.13
72.04
20.83

1,514
49
1,415

50.84
1.65
47.52

912

100.00

2,978

100.00

*Based upon all women who reported their most recent birth during 2001–2006, exclusive of
all women whose households reported insurance through IMSS, ISSSTE, PEMEX, SEDENA
or other form of Seguridad Social (Social Security).
Source: Calculations based on ENSANUT (Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2006)).

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 41

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics
Analytic Sample (N = 3,890)*
Mean
SD
Min
Max
Individual characteristics of woman
Age
Educational attainment: No education ¶
Educational attainment: Primary school ¶
Educational attainment: High school ¶
Educational attainment: Professional/University ¶
Married ¶
Speaks indigenous language ¶
Parity
Childbirth in a facility sponsored by:
Secretaría de Salud (SSA) ¶
Seguro Popular ¶
Private ¶
Reported depression ¶
Reported diabetes ¶
Reported high blood pressure ¶
Household characteristics
Family with Children < 7 years old ¶
Asset Index
Access to Seguro Popular program by the family ¶
Household in rural locality ¶
Municipality and state characteristics
Proportion of households with Seguridad Social §
Health centers per 100 women †
State incorporated into SP program by 2002 ¶
State incorporated into SP program by 2003 ¶
State incorporated into SP program by 2004 ¶

29.80
0.06
0.43
0.31
0.20
0.82
0.23
3.43

6.49
0.23
0.50
0.46
0.40
0.38
0.42
2.19

18
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

49
1
1
1
1
1
1
18

0.41
0.18
0.41
0.11
0.01
0.11

0.31
0.10
0.31

0
0
0

1
1
1

0.92
-0.25
0.23
0.36

0.27
0.91
0.42
0.48

0
-1.99
0
0

1
1.58
1
1

0.10
0.84
0.64
0.79
0.92

0.08
0.62

0
0.08

0.67
5.17

* Based upon all women who reported their most recent birth during 2001–2006, exclusive
of all women whose households reported insurance through Seguridad Social.
¶ Binary variable.
§ Seguridad Social includes: IMSS, ISSSTE, PEMEX, SEDENA or other form of Social
Security.
† 1,010 observations were imputed at the sample mean value.
Source: Calculations based on ENSANUT (Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2006);
Secretaría de Salud (2005); Secretaría de Salud (2006)).

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 42

Table 3. Bivariate Probit Model of Obstetric Care Utilization and Enrollment in Seguro Popular
Childbirth in SP-sponsored
facility

Enrollment in
Seguro Popular
(SP)

Coefficient

Marginal
Effect †

Coefficient

-0.038
[0.462]
-0.006
[0.074]
-0.186
[0.157]
-0.286
[0.168]+
-0.195
[0.188]
0.170
[0.105]
-0.103
[0.106]
-0.009
[0.021]
0.086
[0.112]
0.163
[0.261]
-0.055
[0.112]

-0.003
[0.037]
-0.0004
[0.006]
-0.014
[0.012]
-0.021
[0.011]+
-0.014
[0.012]
0.012
[0.007]+
-0.008
[0.007]
-0.001
[0.002]
0.007
[0.010]
0.015
[0.027]
-0.004
[0.008]

0.159
[0.296]
-0.023
[0.047]
0.267
[0.105]*
0.298
[0.112]**
-0.115
[0.127]
0.085
[0.064]
-0.287
[0.059]**
0.009
[0.010]
0.099
[0.078]
0.453
[0.201]*
0.107
[0.074]

2.153
[0.319]**
0.005
[0.103]
-0.096
[0.121]
-0.042
[0.051]

0.430
[0.117]**
0.0004
[0.008]
-0.008
[0.011]
-0.003
[0.004]

0.323
[0.057]**
-0.082
[0.084]
-0.012
[0.034]

2.950
[0.537]**
-0.020
[0.064]

0.234
[0.0523]**
-0.002
[0.005]

Individual characteristics
Age/10
(Age/10)2
Primary education ¶
Secondary education ¶
University education ¶
Married ¶
Speaks indigenous language ¶
Parity
Reported depression ¶
Reported diabetes ¶
Reported high blood pressure ¶
Household characteristics
Enrollment in Seguro Popular ¶
Household in rural locality ¶
Family with children < 7 years old ¶
Asset Index
Locality and state characteristics
Proportion of households with
Seguridad Social §
Health centers per 100 women
State incorporated into SP by 2002 ‡
State incorporated into SP by 2003 ‡
State incorporated into SP by 2004 ‡

02-Oct-2007

-2.386
[0.378]**
0.204
[0.038]**
0.296
[0.065]**
-0.158
[0.084]+
0.414
[0.120]**

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 43

Table 3. Continued
Childbirth in SP-sponsored
facility
Constant

-2.218
[0.730]**

Coefficient of correlation of error terms
Observations

3,890

3,890

Enrollment in
Seguro Popular
(SP)
-1.745
[0.484]**
-0.537
[0.232]*
3,890

¶ Binary variable.
† Marginal effects evaluated at the mean values of the independent variables (as given in Table 2).
Marginal effects correspond to discrete changes of dummy variables from 0 to 1.
§ Seguridad Social includes: IMSS, ISSSTE, PEMEX, SEDENA or other form of Social Security
‡ Instrumental variable.
Standard errors in brackets; + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 44

Table 4. Multinomial Probit Model
SSA vs.
Private

SP vs.
Private

SP
Enrollment

0.316
[0.270]
-0.072
[0.043]+
0.226
[0.097]*
0.168
[0.103]
-0.387
[0.111]**
-0.206
[0.059]**
-0.321
[0.055]**
-0.001
[0.009]
0.067
[0.071]
0.549
[0.233]*
0.202
[0.071]**

0.783
[0.466]+
-0.120
[0.074]
-0.328
[0.164]*
-0.314
[0.176]+
-0.613
[0.197]**
-0.021
[0.104]
-0.260
[0.099]**
-0.034
[0.022]
-0.141
[0.120]
0.593
[0.301]*
0.094
[0.117]

0.149
[0.401]
-0.020
[0.064]
0.338
[0.154]*
0.372
[0.163]*
-0.184
[0.173]
0.105
[0.088]
-0.372
[0.103]**
0.011
[0.013]
0.140
[0.109]
0.613
[0.290]*
0.176
[0.109]

-0.072
[0.080]
-0.143
[0.031]**
0.169
[0.061]**
0.297
[0.391]

-0.126
[0.130]
-0.070
[0.052]
0.030
[0.102]
1.828
[0.595]**

-0.146
[0.119]
-0.041
[0.048]
0.417
[0.108]**
-3.420
[0.858]**

0.204
[0.039]**

0.104
[0.064]

-0.060
[0.426]

-2.828
[0.748]**

0.270
[0.071]**
0.384
[0.106]**
-0.324
[0.135]*
0.588
[0.194]**
-2.110
[0.733]**

Individual characteristics
Age/10
(Age/10)2
Primary education ¶
Secondary education ¶
University education ¶
Married ¶
Speaks indigenous language ¶
Parity
Reported depression ¶
Reported diabetes ¶
Reported high blood pressure ¶
Household characteristics
Family with children < 7 years old ¶
Asset Index
Household in rural locality ¶
Proportion of households with
Seguridad Social §
Locality and state characteristics
Health centers per 100 women
State incorporated into SP by 2002 ‡
State incorporated into SP by 2003 ‡
State incorporated into SP by 2004 ‡
Constant

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 45

Table 4. Continued
SSA vs.
Private
-1.988
[0.165]**

!0

SP vs.
Private

SP
Enrollment

2.792
[0.286]**

!1
0.901
[0.390]*

!0

-0.143
[0.259]

!1
0.666
[0.159]**

Coefficient of correlation !0

-0.106
[0.187]

Coefficient of correlation !1
Observations

3,890

3,890

3,890

¶ Binary variable.
§ Seguridad Social includes: IMSS, ISSSTE, PEMEX, SEDENA or other form of Social Security
‡ Instrumental variable.
Standard errors in brackets; + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 46

Table 5. Individual-Level Impacts of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Care Utilization in
Mexico, by Rural versus Urban Area, Health and Socioeconomic Status*
Probability (%)
Mean
[95% C.I.]
Case 1: Rural Area, Low Health & SES
Probability of enrollment in Seguro Popular
Impact of SP on Probability of Delivering a Baby at:
Secretaría de Salud (SSA)
Seguro Popular
Private
Case 2: Rural Area, Medium Health & SES
Probability of enrollment in Seguro Popular
Impact of SP on Probability of Delivering a Baby at:
Secretaría de Salud (SSA)
Seguro Popular
Private
Case 3: Urban Area, Medium Health & SES
Probability of enrollment in Seguro Popular
Impact of SP on Probability of Delivering a Baby at:
Secretaría de Salud (SSA)
Seguro Popular
Private
Case 4: Urban Area, High Health & SES
Probability of enrollment in Seguro Popular
Impact of SP on Probability of Delivering a Baby at:
Secretaría de Salud (SSA)
Seguro Popular
Private

43.65
-62.56
82.09
-19.52

-72.31
59.13
-41.98

-41.20
84.29
-0.69

-59.03
43.00
-26.19

-39.61
77.05
4.46

-75.33
53.29
-25.22

-54.04
84.33
4.25

-62.25
21.41
-50.74

5.51
78.54
-5.26

51.51
-49.32
61.24
-11.91
53.43
-68.80
78.91
-10.11
0.16
-39.77
65.15
-25.38

* Derived from multivariate probit estimates at different values of explanatory variables, described below:
Case 1: A 30-year-old woman, without primary education, speaks an indigenous language, parity 5, married in a
household with a minimum asset index and with young children at home, lives in a rural locality with an average
density of health centers but no households enrolled in Social Security, and reports depression, diabetes, and high
blood pressure.
Case 2: A 30-year-old woman, with secondary education, speaks Spanish, parity 3, married in a household with an
average asset index and young children at home, lives in a rural locality with an average density of health centers
but no households enrolled in Social Security, and does not report depression, diabetes or high blood pressure.
Case 3: A 30-year-old woman, with primary education, speaks Spanish, parity 5, married in a household with a
minimum asset index and young children at home, lives in an urban locality with an average density of health
centers but no households enrolled in Social Security, and reports depression, diabetes or high blood pressure.
Case 4: A 30-year-old woman, with university education, speaks Spanish, parity 1, married in a household with a
mean asset index and young children at home, lives in an urban locality with an average density of health centers
and the highest density of households enrolled in Social Security, and does not report depression, diabetes or high
blood pressure.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 47

Table 6. Individual-Level versus Population-Level Impacts of Seguro Popular on
Obstetric Care Utilization in Mexico*
Probability of
Individual Impact on
Population Impact on
Enrollment in SP
SP Utilization
SP Utilization
(%)
(%)
(%)
Case Median
95% CI
Median
95% CI
Median
95% CI
1
44
29
63
81
64
84
34
21
53
2
51
44
61
62
43
77
32
22
43
3
53
32
72
79
53
84
40
23
59
4
0
0
5
60
21
79
0
0
4
*Based upon multinomial probit estimates in Table 4 and formulae for P1 ( X ) , P1 ( X ) and
P1 ( X ) in Section 4.3.

02-Oct-2007

Page 48

50

100

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Private

-50

Impact (Percent)
0

SSA

-100

SP

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Figure 1. Individual-Level Impact of Seguro Popular on the Probability of
Delivering a Baby at a Site Run by the Department of Health (SSA), a Unit
Sponsored by Seguro Popular (SP), and a Private Facility.
Source: Table 5.

02-Oct-2007

Page 49

Population Level

20

Impact (Percent)
40
60

80

100

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

0

Individual Level

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Figure 2. Population-Level versus Individual-Level Impacts of Seguro Popular on
the Utilization of a SP-Accredited Obstetrical Unit.
Source: Table 6.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 50

Appendices
Appendix A. Illustrative Example of Preference Reversals as a Function of Price
To illustrate the effect of a change in the price p of non-obstetric care on
household rankings of obstetric care, we specify the household utility function

2

zi x
+ ln c
i = 0 ! i zi + " i x

(A.1) U ( z0 , z1 , z2 , x, c ) = #

where ! i ," i > 0 , and where U ( 0, 0, 0, 0, c ) = ln c . Each of the terms in the summation is

(

a CES utility function of the form fi ( zi , x ) = ! i zi" #i + $ i x " #i

)

"1 #i

, where !i = 1 . The last

term is an additively separable component that implies diminishing marginal utility of
income.
The corresponding conditional demand functions are:

(A.2) ci* ( qi , p, m ) = ! i ,

where ! i =

(

" i qi + # i p

xi* =

)

2

!i $ m '
# 1) ,
p &% " i
(

zi* =

!i $ m '
# 1)
qi &% " i
(

for i = 0,1, 2 . These conditional demand functions hold so

long as m > ! i . Otherwise, when m ! " i , the solution is ci* = m and xi* = zi* = 0 , so that
the household spends all its income on the numeraire good. For each i = 0,1, 2 , the
conditional indirect utility is:

(A.3) wi* =

m
" 1 + ln ! i
!i

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 51

which is a decreasing function of ! i so long as m > ! i .
For the utility function in equation (A.1), a reduction in the price p of nonobstetrical care can alter the relative ranking of private care ( i = 2 ) and SSA-sponsored
care ( i = 0 ) . Specifically, there exist values of the parameters {! i ," i } such that the
differential utility w0* ( q0 , p, m ) ! w2* ( q2 , p, m ) is a strictly increasing function of p with a
2

% " 0 q0 # " 2 q2 (
*
*
root p! = '
* > 0 , that is, w0 ( q0 , p!, m ) " w2 ( q2 , p!, m ) = 0 . If we
$2 # $0 )
&

assume that the net price of private obstetrical care exceeds that of SSA-funded
obstetrical care, that is, q2 > q0 , these conditions imply that ! 2 q2 < ! 0 q0 and ! 2 > ! 0 .
Our example is illustrated in Figure A.1, which plots w0* , w1* , and w2* as a
function of the price p of non-obstetrical care. A woman will choose a private obstetric
facility (where w2* > w0* > w1* and y1 = 2 ) when p is sufficiently low, while a woman will
choose an SSA public facility (where w0* > w2* > w1* and y1 = 0 ) when p is high. Our
example shows that coverage by Seguro Popular can result in preference reversals even
though each of the three obstetric sites is conditionally a normal good, that is,

!zi*
> 0.
!m

What matters is that private obstetrical care has a strong complementary relation with
non-obstetrical care.
[Figure A.1 is on the following page.]

02-Oct-2007

Page 52

Indirect Utility (w)
40
50

60

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

w2*

30

w0*

20

w1*
0

.2

.4
.6
of Medical Care (p)

Price
w
0

.8

1

Figure A.1. A change in the price p of non-obstetric care can reverse the ordering of the
indirect utility functions for the three delivery sites: Secretaría de Salud ( i = 0 ) ; Seguro
Popular ( i = 1) ; and private obstetrical care ( i = 2 ) . The specific parameters in this
example are: m = 200 , ( q0 , q1 , q2 ) = (1,1, 5 ) , (! 0 , !1 , ! 2 ) = ( 20, 25, 2, ) , and

(! 0 ,!1,! 2 ) = ( 2,12,16 ) .

There is a reversal of preferences at price p! = 0.257 .

Appendix B. Construction and Estimation of Log Likelihood Function
Here, we derive the contribution to the log likelihood for two of the six possible
cases

{( y , y )
1

2

y1 = 0,1, 2; y2 = 0,1} , leaving remaining cases to the reader.

First, consider an observation where y1 = 2, y2 = 0 , that is, where the pregnant
woman chooses a private site to deliver her baby, and where the household decides not to
enroll in Seguro Popular. From equations (12) and (13), we conclude that

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 53

w0* < 0, w1* < 0, y2* < 0 . Given the error structure in equation (14), we conclude that the
contribution of this observation to the log likelihood is

(B.1)

L20 = ln Pr { y1 = 2, y2 = 0 X, ! , " , # }

' ' % X0& ! 0 * ' 1
= ln $ 3 ) ) % X1&!1 , , ) 0
))
, )
)( ( % X & ! + ( #
2 2
0

0
1

#1

#0**
#1 , ,
,,
- + ,+

In (B.1), the term ! 3 ( v, " ) denotes Pr {V < v} , where V is a 3-dimensional vector of
random variables with a trivariate normal distribution with zero means and 3 ! 3
variance-covariance matrix ! .
Next, consider an observation where y1 = 0, y2 = 1 , that is, where the pregnant
woman chooses an obstetric site sponsored by the Secretaría de Salud, and where the
household decides to enroll in Seguro Popular. From equations (12) and (13), we
conclude that !w0* < 0, w1* ! w0* < 0, ! y2* < 0 . The contribution of this observation to the
log likelihood is therefore

(B.2)

L01 = ln Pr { y1 = 0, y2 = 1 X, ! , " , # } =
&&
X0" # 0 + $ 0
) & 1
(
(
ln ! 3 X0" # 0 + $ 0 % X1"#1 % $ 1 + , ( 0
((
+ (
(' '
X2" # 2
* ',0

0
2

, 0 % ,1

,0 ))
, 0 % ,1 + +
++
- * +*

The individual terms of the log likelihood function entail three-dimensional probit
integrals, which we evaluated by means of the GHK simulator written by Cappellari and
Jenkins (2006).

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 54

Appendix C. Results for the Enlarged, Restricted and Reclassified Samples
Table C.1 shows the estimated values of the parameter (! 0 , ! 1 , "0 , "1 ) for each of
the alternative samples in our sensitivity analyses. Also shown for each case are the
sample size ( N ) and the estimated individual-level impact I1 ( X ) in Case 1.
Table C.1 Estimates of Multinomial Probit Model Parameters and Individual-Level
Impact (Case 1) for Enlarged, Restricted and Reclassified Samples
Parameter

Enlarged
Sample §
-1.819
[0.182]
2.815
[0.281]
0.646
[0.163]
-0.177
[0.174]

Restricted
Sample ¶
-2.202
[0.126]
2.843
[0.265]
0.931
[0.093]
-0.200
[0.201]

Reclassified
Sample ‡
-2.374
[0.114]
2.716
[0.237]
0.750
[0.076]
-0.001
[0.142]

N

5,762

1,934

3,891

I1 ( X )
Case 1

72.0%

67.4%

72.6%

[42.4-81.4]

[34.5-81.2]

[38.4-86.0]

!0

!1

!0
!1

§ Enlarged Sample: Adult women who had given birth since 2001, including those who
had Social Security (IMSS/ISSSTE/PEMEX/SEDENA), exclusive of responses with
missing values for any explanatory variables.
¶ Restricted Sample: Observations in the enlarged sample, restricted to those women
whose households resided in a locality with a moderately high or very high index of
socioeconomic marginality (“índice de marginación”) (CONAPO (2005)).
‡ Reclassified Sample: Observations in the analytic sample, after reclassification of 195
women as not enrolled in SP and not delivering a baby in an SP-accredited facility if the
woman reported a date of delivery at an SP-sponsored facility before the official year of
incorporation of SP in the state or before the reported date of enrollment reported on the
household questionnaire.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 55

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the research assistance of Edson Serván Mori.

References
Akin, J. S., D. K. Guilkey, et al. (1995). "Quality of services and demand for health care
in Nigeria: a multinomial probit estimation." Soc Sci Med 40(11): 1527-37.
Balia, S. and A. M. Jones (2004). Mortality, Lifestyle and Socio-Economic Status. York,
United Kingdom, University of York, Department of Economics, Working Paper.
Behrman, J. R. and E. Skoufias (2006). "Mitigating Myths about Policy Effectiveness:
Evaluation of Mexico’s Antipoverty and Human Resource Investment Program."
Annals Am Acad Political Social Sci 606(1): 244-275.
Bertranou, F. (1998). "Health care services utilization and health insurance coverage:
evidence from Argentina." Revista de Análisis Económico (Universidad Alberto
Hurtado Chile) 13: 25-52.
Bolduc, D., G. Lacroix, et al. (1996). "The choice of medical providers in rural Benin: a
comparison of discrete choice models." J Health Econ 15(4): 477-98.
Borah, B. J. (2006). "A mixed logit model of health care provider choice: analysis of NSS
data for rural India." Health Econ 15(9): 915-32.
Cameron, A. C., P. K. Trivedi, et al. (1988). "A microeconometric model of the demand
for health care and health insurance in Australia." Review of Economic Studies
55(1): 85-106.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 56

Cappellari, L. and S. P. Jenkins (2006). Calculation of multivariate normal probabilities
by simulation, with applications to maximum simulated likelihood estimation.
Colchester UK, University of Essex, Institute for Social and Economic Research,
Working Paper 2006-16.
Chávez-Martín del Campo, J. C. (2006). Does Conditionality Generate Heterogeneity and
Regressivity in Program Impacts? The Progresa Experience. Ithaca NY, Cornell
University, Department of Applied Economics and Management, Working Paper
2006-09.
CONAPO (2005). Índice de marginación a nivel localidad, 2005 Distrito Federal,
Mexico, Consejo Nacional de Población (CONAPO),
http://www.conapo.gob.mx/publicaciones/indice2005xloc.htm.
Dammert, A. C. (2007). Heterogeneous impacts of conditional cash transfers: Evidence
from Nicaragua. Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, McMaster University, Department
of Economics Working Paper,
http://socserv.mcmaster.ca/dammert/nicaragua_APRIL07.pdf.
Deb, P., M. K. Munkin, et al. (2006). "Bayesian analysis of the two-part model with
endogeneity: application to health care expenditure." Journal of Econometrics
21(7): 1081-99.
Djebbari, H. (2005). The Impact on Nutrition of the Intrahousehold Distribution of
Power. Bonn, Germany, IZA Discussion Paper No. 1701,
http://ftp.iza.org/dp1701.pdf.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 57

Djebbari, H. and J. Smith (2005). Heterogeneous program impacts: Experimental
evidence from the PROGRESA program. Ann Arbor, Michigan, University of
Michigan, Department of Economics, Working Paper.
Duflo, E. (2001). "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment." American Economic
Review 91(4): 795-813.
Frenk, J., J. Sepulveda, et al. (2003). "Evidence-based health policy: three generations of
reform in Mexico." Lancet 362(9396): 1667-71.
Gakidou, E., R. Lozano, et al. (2006). "Assessing the effect of the 2001-06 Mexican
health reform: an interim report card." Lancet 368(9550): 1920-35.
Gaviria, A., C. Medina, et al. (2006). Evaluating The Impact Of Health Care Reform In
Colombia: From Theory To Practice. Bogotá, Colombia, Universidad de Los
Andes-CEDE, Documento CEDE 2006-06.
Gertler, P. J. (2000). Final Report: The Impact of PROGRESA on Health. Washington
DC, International Food Policy Research Institute,
http://www.ifpri.org/themes/progresa/pdf/Gertler_health.pdf.
Gertler, P. J. (2004). "Do conditional cash transfers improve child health? Evidence from
PROGRESA’s control randomized experiment." American Economic Review
94(2): 336-341.
Gitto, L., D. Santoro, et al. (2006). "Choice of dialysis treatment and type of medical unit
(private vs public): application of a recursive bivariate probit." Health Econ
15(11): 1251-6.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 58

Greene, W. H. (2000). Econometric Analysis, Fourth Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ,
Prentice Hall.
Harris, J. E. and B. González López-Valcárcel (2007). "Asymmetric Peer Effects in the
Analysis of Cigarette Smoking among Young People in the United States, 1992 –
1999." J Health Econ In Press.
Hoddinott, J. and E. Skoufias (2004). "The Impact of PROGRESA on Food
Consumption." Economic Development and Cultural Change 53: 37–61.
Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2000). Encuesta Nacional de Salud. Cuernavaca,
México, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, http://www.insp.mx/ensa/.
Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública (2006). Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición
(ENSANUT). Cuernavaca, México, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública,
http://www.insp.mx/ensanut/.
Knaul, F. M. and J. Frenk (2005). "Health insurance in Mexico: achieving universal
coverage through structural reform." Health Aff (Millwood) 24(6): 1467-76.
Leonard, K. L. (2007). "Learning in Health Care: Evidence of Learning about Clinician
Quality in Tanzania." Economic Development and Cultural Change 55: 531-555.
Maddala, G. (1983). Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. New
York, Cambridge University Press.
McKenzie, D. J. (2004). "Measuring inequality with asset indicators." Journal of
Population Economics 18(2): 229-260.
Mojarro, O., G. Tapia-Colocia, et al. (2003). Mortalidad materna y marginación
municipal. Distrito Federal, Mexico, Conjeso Nacional de Población (CONAPO),
http://www.conapo.gob.mx/publicaciones/2003/09.pdf.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 59

Munkin, M. K. and P. K. Trivedi (2003). "Bayesian analysis of a self-selection model
with multiple outcomes using simulation-based estimation: an application to the
demand for healthcare." Journal of Econometrics 114: 197 – 220.
Nigenda, G., E. Troncoso, et al. (2003). Mezcla público-privada en el sector salud.
Reflexiones sobre la situación en México. Caleidoscopio de la salud: De la
investigación a las políticas y de las políticas a la acción. F. M. Knaul and G.
Nigenda. Distrito Federal, México, Fundación Mexicana para la Salud: 229–242.
Pagan, J. A., A. Puig, et al. (2007). "Health insurance coverage and the use of preventive
services by Mexican adults." Health Econ.
Parker, S. W. and R. Wong (1997). "Household income and health care expenditures in
Mexico." Health Policy 40(3): 237-55.
Sapelli, C. and B. Vial (2003). "Self-selection and moral hazard in Chilean health
insurance." J Health Econ 22(3): 459-76.
Schwartz, J. B., J. S. Akin, et al. (1988). "Price and income elasticities of demand for
modern health care: The case of infant delivery in the Philippines." World Bank
Economic Review 2(1): 49-76.
Secretaría de Salud (2005). Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud (On-line
Database). Distrito Federal, México, Secretaría de Salud (SSA),
http://sinais.salud.gob.mx/.
Secretaría de Salud (2006). Sistema de Protección Social en Salud. Vols. 1-3. Distrito
Federal, México, Secretaría de Salud (SSA), Gobierno de México.
Sepúlveda, J., F. Bustreo, et al. (2006). "Improvement of child survival in Mexico: the
diagonal approach." Lancet 368(9551): 2017-27.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 60

Skoufias, E. (2005). PROGRESA and Its Impacts on the Welfare of Rural Households in
Mexico (Summary). Washington DC, International Food Policy Research
Institute, Research Report 139,
http://www.ifpri.org/pubs/abstract/139/rr139toc.pdf.
Skoufias, E. and S. W. Parker (2001). "Conditional Cash Transfers and Their Impact on
Child Work and Schooling: Evidence from the PROGRESA Program in Mexico."
Economia 2(1): 45-96.
StataCorp (2005). Stata Statistical Software: Release 9. College Station TX, StataCorp
LP.
Suraratdecha, C., S. Saithanu, et al. (2005). "Is universal coverage a solution for
disparities in health care? Findings from three low-income provinces of
Thailand." Health Policy 73(3): 272-84.
Thirumurthy, H., J. G. Zivin, et al. (2006). The economic impact of AIDS Treatment:
Labor supply in Western Kenya. Hatfield, South Africa, Southern Africa Regional
Poverty Network, http://www.sarpn.org.za/documents/d0001904/ImpactAids_Jan2006.pdf.
Torres, A. C. and F. M. Knaul (2003). Determinantes del gasto de bolsillo en salud e
implicaciones para el aseguramiento universal en México: 1992–2000.
Caleidoscopio de la salud: De la investigación a las políticas y de las políticas a la
acción. F. M. Knaul and G. Nigenda. Distrito Federal, México, Fundación
Mexicana para la Salud: 209–225.
Trujillo, A. J. (2003). "Medical care use and selection in a social health insurance with an
equalization fund: evidence from Colombia." Health Econ 12(3): 231-46.

02-Oct-2007

Impact of Seguro Popular on Obstetric Utilization

Page 61

Trujillo, A. J., J. E. Portillo, et al. (2005). "The impact of subsidized health insurance for
the poor: evaluating the Colombian experience using propensity score matching."
International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 5(3): 211-39.
Wagstaff, A. (2007). Health insurance for the poor : initial impacts of Vietnam's health
care fund for the poor. Washington DC, World Bank Impact Evaluation Series
No. 11, Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS4134, http://wwwwds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2007/02/05/00
0016406_20070205110453/Rendered/PDF/wps4134.pdf
Wagstaff, A., M. Lindelow, et al. (2007). Extending Health Insurance to the Rural
Population: An Impact Evaluation of China’s New Cooperative Medical Scheme.
Washington DC, World Bank Impact Evaluation Series No. 12, Policy Research
Working Paper No. WPS4150, http://wwwwds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2007/02/22/00
0016406_20070222160135/Rendered/PDF/wps4150.pdf.
Waters, H. R. (1999). "Measuring the impact of health insurance with a correction for
selection bias--a case study of Ecuador." Health Econ 8(5): 473-83.

02-Oct-2007

