                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MIGRATION CREATION, DIVERSION, AND RETENTION:
                    NEW DEAL GRANTS AND MIGRATION: 1935-1940

                                           Todd Sorensen
                                          Price V. Fishback
                                            Samuel Allen
                                          Shawn E. Kantor

                                        Working Paper 13491
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13491


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Todd Sorensen , Price V. Fishback, Samuel Allen, and Shawn E. Kantor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Migration Creation, Diversion, and Retention: New Deal Grants and Migration: 1935-1940
Todd Sorensen , Price V. Fishback, Samuel Allen, and Shawn E. Kantor
NBER Working Paper No. 13491
October 2007
JEL No. J61,N32

                                             ABSTRACT

During the 1930s the federal government embarked upon an ambitious series of grant programs designed
to counteract the Great Depression. The amounts distributed varied widely across the country and
potentially contributed to population shifts. We estimate an aggregate discrete choice model, in which
household heads choose among 466 economic subregions. The structural model allows us to decompose
the effects of program spending on migration into three categories: the effect of spending on keeping
households in their origin (retention), the effect of pulling non-migrants out of their origin (creation),
and the effect of causing migrants to substitute away from an alternative destination (diversion). An
additional dollar of public works and relief spending increased net migration into an area primarily
by retaining the existing population and creating new migration into the county. Only a small share
of the increase in net migration rate was caused by diversion of people who had already chosen to
migrate. AAA spending contributed to net out migration, primarily by creating new out migrants and
repelling potential in migrants. A counterfactual analysis suggests that the uneven distribution of New
Deal spending explains about twelve percent of the internal migration flows in the United States between
1935 and 1940.

Todd Sorensen                                       Samuel Allen
University of Arizona                               Virginia Military Institute
sorensen@email.arizona.edu                          341 Scott Shipp Hall
                                                    Lexington, VA 24450
Price V. Fishback                                   allensk@vmi.edu
Department of Economics
University of Arizona                               Shawn E. Kantor
Tucson, AZ 85721                                    School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts
and NBER                                            University of California, Merced
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu                         P.O. Box 2039
                                                    Merced, CA 95344
                                                    and NBER
                                                    skantor@ucmerced.edu
1     Introduction

What is the impact of federal government programs on internal migration pat-

terns? There is a large literature in regional economics and public economics

on Tiebout models where people migrate across states and counties to take ad-

vantage of di¤erences in taxation and spending policies. Much of the literature

focuses on the impact of state and local government …scal choices and the impact

of policy competition among localities.1 Yet, the federal government’s distrib-

ution of funds across districts can also be extremely important. Locations of

federal highways and military bases in‡uence patterns of migration. One of the

greatest experiments with federal spending in local areas occurred during the

1930s, when a wide range of New Deal grants programs were established to com-

bat the problems arising from the Great Depression. A large literature on the

political economy of that spending shows that there was substantial variation

in federal grants across states and counties (see Fishback, Kantor and Wallis,

2003 for a summary).

    In a recent study Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor [FHK] (2006) examined

the impact of federal grants on net migration for over 3000 counties. They …nd

that New Deal public works and relief grants stimulated net in-migration into

counties and that the Agricultural Adjustment Administration’s payments to

farmers to take land out of production was associated with net out-migration.

The FHK study, however, was limited to the study of a summary measure, net

migration, and thus was unable to examine the ‡ows of people from location to

location. In this paper we use information from the 1940 Census on locations

of households in 1935 and 1940 to estimate a model in which households are

choosing among 466 state economic areas (SEAs). We build an aggregate dis-
   1 See Rhode and Strumpf (2003) for a summary of the literature and results that do not

…nd much Tiebot sorting over long time periods in response to state and local government
goods provision.




                                           3
crete choice model from a random utility model of locational choice to estimate

the impacts of spending on these programs on migration patterns.

   When we combine the structure of the model with the information on ‡ows

of migration between the SEAs, we are able to derive a series of inferences about

the impact of New Deal programs on the substitution patterns of migrants be-

tween locations. We compute marginal e¤ects of program spending that are

decomposed into three distinct e¤ects. The …rst is migration creation. A mi-

grant is "created" by a program when program spending causes a household

that would otherwise have remained in its 1935 location to migrate to a given

location. The second, a retention e¤ect, occurs when a migrant is "retained"

because program spending causes a household that would have out-migrated

otherwise to remain in the 1935 location. Finally, migration diversion results

when a migrating household is diverted to another location.

   The structural nature of our model also allows us to estimate counterfactuals

to identify the overall e¤ect of New Deal spending on migration, an analysis that

FHK (2006) could not perform. We estimate counterfactuals for the absence of

each of two major categories of New Deal spending, as well as a counterfactual

for the absence of all New Deal spending. The results show that an additional

dollar of public works and relief spending at the margin increased net migra-

tion into an area primarily by retaining the existing population and creating

new migration into the county. Only a small share of the increase in the net

migration rate was caused by diverting people who were already migrating to

another place into the location. A similar story can be told about the magni-

tudes of the marginal e¤ects of an added dollar of per capita AAA spending,

except the direction of the e¤ect was negative as AAA spending served to stim-

ulate out-migration in all three ways. A counterfactual analysis that examines

what would have happened had there been no New Deal spending during the



                                       4
1930s suggests that the uneven distribution of New Deal public works and relief

spending explains about twelve percent of the internal migration ‡ows in the

United States between 1935 and 1940, while the uneven distribution of AAA

spending accounted for about one percent.



2     New Deal Programs

We consider two categories of per capita New Deal grants that may have a¤ected

the desirability of a location: AAA farm grants and public works and relief

grants. The AAA grants were made to farmers who voluntarily removed land

from production for designated crops.2 The goal of the program was to increase

the incomes of farmers, both directly through bene…t payments and indirectly

by raising market prices to pre World War I levels (1920s levels for tobacco),

through the curtailment of the output of speci…c crops.3 The AAA programs
   2 Prior to 1936, the …rst version of the AAA made rental and bene…t payments to farmers

who removed land from the production of designated crops. After the program was struck
down as unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1935, the AAA was redesigned,
to make "soil conservation payments" through the Soil Domestic Allotment Act (SDAA).
In the original AAA the bene…t payments were …nanced from special processing taxes on
the commodity being curtailed. There was a general belief that most of the burden of the
processing taxes would be passed on to consumers of farm products. After the Supreme Court
declared the processing taxes unconstitutional, the SDAA eliminated the processing taxes and
the funds were appropriated from the general budget.
   3 The AAA was administered by the Department of Agriculture, which established state and

local committees or associations of producers to help administer the act. The administration of
the Act was often done through a series of programs speci…c to the household crops. Thus the
geographic distribution of the AAA funds across counties was determined by the crop choices
made prior to the AAA involvement and by the parameters set for each of the crops. For
each crop the actual distribution of funds was determined by a complex interaction between
federal administrators, local committees, local extension agents, and the farmers who decided
to join the program. Since this was a voluntary program, farmers had to agree to sign up
for the acreage reduction program. For signing up to reduce acreage, their payments were
based on multiplying the national price set for acreage reduction and their average yield per
acre over a base period. Thus, the program had to be made attractive enough for farmers to
agree to join. The federal decision makers in‡uenced the attractiveness of the program by the
national price they set for acreage reduction and by the acreage that they asked the farmers to
take out of production. In the case of tobacco and cotton the federal decision-makers added a
degree of coercion to the system by levying heavy taxes on any production beyond designated
limits. The local administrators in‡uenced the attractiveness of the program through decisions
on base-year yields for the household farmer and the acreage the farmers would be allowed
to produce. In addition, the e¤ort they put into marketing the program and cajoling their
neighbors helped determine the sign-up rates.




                                              5
likely had con‡icting e¤ects on migration. The farmers who received payments

from the AAA were likely to stay in farming and, thus, less likely to migrate.

In contrast, farm workers and tenants might have been pushed out by the AAA

because the AAA payments led to reductions in acreage under cultivation, which

was likely to lead to a decrease in the demand for farm workers (Alston 1981;

Holley, Winston, and Woofter 1971; Saloutos 1974; Mertz 1978; Whatley 1983;

Biles 1994, 39-43, Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor 2006).

   New Deal funds also were distributed to local economies through public

works and relief grants. Relief grants were primarily distributed under the

auspices of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) from 1933

through mid 1935, the Civil Works Administration (CWA) from November 1933

through March 1934, the Works Progress Administration (WPA) from mid 1935

through 1942, and the Social Security Administration’s Aid to the Blind, Aid to

Dependent Children, and Old-Age Assistance programs after 1935. The princi-

pal goal of these programs was to provide immediate relief to unemployed and

low-income people, as 85 percent of the grants were used to hire the unemployed

on work relief jobs. These relief jobs ranged from make-work activities to main-

tenance activities to the building of sidewalks, post o¢ ces, schools, local roads,

and other additions to local infrastructure.

   The public works grants included expenditures by the Public Works Ad-

ministration (PWA), Public Buildings Administration, and the Public Roads

Administration. These grants were also used largely to employ workers. Many

of the workers were hired directly from the relief rolls, but the public works

programs had more freedom to hire a broader class of workers who were not

on relief. The public works programs were said to be more focused on build-

ing larger scale projects such as dams, roads, schools, and sanitation facilities.

Both public works and relief grants were likely to attract migrants to local areas



                                        6
because they provided either work opportunities on federal projects or support

for the unemployed. This e¤ect was mitigated to the extent that local relief

administrators imposed residency requirements

   The major relief and public works programs had the potential to stimulate

migration across counties, as the unemployed sought work in areas with new

relief and public works projects. The economics literature on the impact of

welfare bene…ts on locational choice in the modern era is mixed, some …nd

that movement of low-income people is positively correlated to di¤erences in

states’ welfare bene…t levels (Gramlich and Laren 1984, Blank 1988, Mo¢ t

1992), while others …nd a small or negligible e¤ect (Allard and Danziger 2000;

Kau¤man and Kiesling 1997, and Levine and Zimmerman 1999). We should

note that our measure of relief and public works spending is total spending

per capita, so it combines both di¤erences in the number of people obtaining

funds and the monthly payments to recipients of emergency jobs or direct relief.

There were federal e¤orts to establish a certain minimum level of bene…ts, but

the eventual compromise between o¢ cials at all levels was to pay attention to

prevailing wage levels. Faced with extraordinary unemployment rates, relief

o¢ cials were forced to make trade-o¤s between providing adequate bene…ts and

…nding work for as many unemployed workers as possible (see Brown 1940,

Howard 1943, Williams 1968, Wallis and Benjamin 1981). Given the large

number of unemployed workers, access to bene…ts might have been as important

as the actual level of bene…ts.

   Since the public works and relief projects involved not only relief of eco-

nomic distress, but also led to expansions in civil infrastructure that potentially

promoted economic activity in a deeply depressed national economy, we might

expect to see more of a migration response in the 1930s than we would for fed-

eral welfare programs in the modern era. The migration response during the



                                        7
Depression, however, might have been limited by a complex web of residency

requirements for relief eligibility. Unlike modern federal welfare programs that

have largely eliminated residency requirements since 1970 (Gramlich and Laren

1984, 490), the residency requirements of the Depression-era relief programs

were determined largely by state and local governments, sometimes in ways that

seemed to violate the spirit of federal statements. Donald Howard (1943, 332-7)

noted that the o¢ cial WPA policy as of 1939 was that eligible people could

not be refused certi…cation for work relief jobs on the basis of non-residence

in the area. At the same time, the WPA did not want families moving for

the “sole purpose” of obtaining a relief job. Most of the barriers to movement

were erected by state and local bureaucracies, which created elaborate proce-

dures for transferring workers’records from one state to another and required

that workers reestablish their eligibility in new places, among other factors. An

unemployed worker took an additional risk by moving because state and local

length-of-residency requirements for direct relief and public assistance may have

di¤ered. The de facto result might have been limits on non-residents’abilities to

qualify for the WPA positions. On the other hand, to the extent that work relief

projects stimulated the local economy, there may have been increased private

opportunities for migrants.

   The FERA policies for most types of relief were similar to the later WPA

policies, although the FERA explicitly provided a small portion of its funds for

the transient population. Josephine Brown (1940, 250) noted that federal FERA

policy forbade discrimination against non-residents, blacks, aliens, and veterans,

“yet the fact remained that the actual administration of relief was in the hands of

local authorities and the promulgation of a rule by the FERA was not su¢ cient

in many cases to overcome sectional traditions and prejudices in a comparatively

short time.”Aware of this problem, the FERA formulated a transient program



                                        8
for workers with less than a year’s continuous residence (Williams 1968, 172-

3). The program was funded by the federal government and administered by

the states. It typically provided aid to the transient unemployed who could

not have obtained aid under the legal settlement or residency requirements of

the states (Webb 1936, 1-4, 16). The transient program accounted for about

2 percent of the total obligations of FERA programs (Federal Works Agency,

Works Progress Administration 1942, 74 and 81), so in the …nal analysis the

impact of FERA spending on migration patterns may not have di¤ered much
                           4
from that of the WPA.



3     Migration and the Location Choice Literature

Sjaastad (1962) viewed migration as an investment in obtaining access to a labor

market with higher wages. The moving costs are treated as the …xed costs of

the investment while the gain in earnings is the return. A household chooses to

migrate if the present value of the migration is less than the cost of undertaking

it. In his adaptation of the Roy (1951) model, Borjas et al.(1992) develops a

theoretical model predicting that households will sort themselves into regions

paying the highest return to their skills. They …nd that individuals who face

a mismatch between their skills and rewards to their skills are more likely to

migrate, i.e. highly educated individuals living in states with a relatively low

return to education will migrate to a state with higher returns to education.

    Later papers in the literature apply discrete choice models to location choice

among migrants. A seminal paper in this literature was Bartel (1989), which

studies the secondary migration choices of international migrants. In the con-

text of a location choice model, she estimates the e¤ects of ethnicity, population,
   4 The Civilian Conservation Corps often moved young men across states, but we do not

have county level information on the CCC and, thus, cannot measure its impact in this study.




                                             9
social welfare programs, and distance on the probability of moving to a partic-

ular destination. She …nds that the level of general assistance payments in a

destination is positively and signi…cantly correlated with a migrants probability

of choosing the destination.

    Schaefer (1989) analyzes location choices in the southern United States in the

1850’s to examine non-slave owners’preferences over the racial composition of

a destination county. Jaeger (2000) studies the location choice of newly arrived

international migrants. He …nds that migrants are more likely to locate in areas

with disproportionately high foreign born populations. Herzog and Schlottmann

(1986) used a binary logit model to study how amenities weigh in the decision

to migrate or stay. Cragg and Kahn (1997) also use a conditional logit model of

the destination choice of migrants. The structural nature of this model allows

them to calculate migrants’willingness to pay for climate characteristics.

    The common thread of these papers is the estimation of a discrete choice

model that leads to a structural interpretation of the parameters, allowing the

researcher to answer various questions, which could not be addressed in non-

structural models. In this paper we estimate structural model of migration in

order to calculate e¤ects of New Deal spending on migration patterns which

would not be computed for a linear model of net migration.



4     Data

The data set is built up from a variety of sources, but we will focus on two sources

here. The U.S. O¢ ce of Government Reports (1940) reported the distribution

of New Deal grants for public works, relief programs, and AAA payments across

counties. Meanwhile, the 1940 Population Census was the …rst decennial census

to ask respondents about their place of residence in preceding years, in this case

1935. While information on previous county of residence is not available from


                                        10
the IPUMS, we are able to identify the "state economic area" (SEA) where the

respondent resided in 1935.5 Our sample consists of all native households for

which location variables were available, giving us a total of 337,803 observa-

tions. We observe 466 SEA’s that fully cover the continental states, excluding

Washington, D.C, and the Alaska and Hawaii territories. In order to measure

rates of migration, we construct a Markov transition matrix using the IPUMS

extract of the 1940 Census 5 percent microsample.6

    Figures 1 through 3 show that there is a signi…cant amount of variation in

migration rates and New Deal programs that can be used to identify the e¤ects

of the New Deal grants. Figure 1 plots the in-migration and out-migration

per 100 people in 1930 for each of the SEAs. The …gure shows quite a bit of

variation in both types of migration rates and only hints at the information we

use in estimating the model because it does not show the ‡ows between SEAS,

which are a key part of our model. Figures 2 and 3 plot the net-migration

rates against public works and relief grants per capita and AAA grants per

capita. Net migration rates range from -20 percent to nearly 40 percent of the

1930 population in the SEAs, while public works and relief spending per capita

varies from close to zero in some SEAS to over $300 per capita in some locations.

The AAA distribution of grants was not as dispersed, but there still remains an

extensive spread.
   5 The SEAs were developed by Donald Bogue to combine “relatively homogeneous”counties

within a state (See Bogue and Beale (1953) and Bogue (1951). Bogue led a research team
that analyzed how individual characteristics in‡uenced the migration patterns across these
regions. For example, see Bogue, et. al. (1957).
   6 A complete description of the sources of the New Deal spending variables and demo-

graphic, geographic, and economic characteristics of SEAs can be found at Price Fish-
back’s website, http://www.u.arizona.edu/~…shback/ in the information on the construction
of varaibles for the Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005a, 2005b, 2006) migration and retail
sales papers. The county-level data underlying the SEA aggregates for this study can be found
there.




                                             11
5     Identifying Program E¤ects

Our evaluation of the impact of New Deal spending is built up from a struc-

tural model of household choice. We start with a model of individual household

choices and then show how an aggregate discrete choice model-one that uses

shares of households making a decision rather than discrete decisions of individ-

ual households-can be used to estimate the parameters of this model.


5.1     Household Decision Model (CLOGIT)

Each household in our sample resided in one of 466 "State Economic Areas" in

1935. Between 1935 and 1940, each of these households decided where to locate

in 1940: in the 1935 location, or in one of the 465 other SEAs in the country.

Consider the following utility function for households.


                               Uij = Xoj +           oj   + "ij                (1)


The term Uij represents the utility to the ith household of residing in the j th

location in 1940. The utility for households from origin o is determined by the

characteristics of the location j to households from origin o, Xoj . The product

Xoj     represents the utility the household receives from these characteristics,

where     is a vector of marginal utilities.

    The purpose for including the subscript o is that characteristics of locations,

such as distance, will di¤er across origins. For example, the distance between

Southern California and Northern California is signi…cantly lower than the dis-

tance between Florida and Northern California. If we assume that the utility

of distance traveled,   Distance ,   is negative, then



                XN orCal;SoCal       Distance   > XF lorid;SoCal   Distance    (2)



                                                12
Thus, because one of the characteristics of Southern California as a migration

destination (distance), varies between two di¤erent origins, Northern California

and Florida, the utility of the location will di¤er across origins.      Note how-

ever, that this utility does not di¤er among households from a common origin:

the term Xoj    assigns the same level of utility of locating in location j to all

households from origin o.

    Simply specifying the utility of the location as Xoj     is unreasonable in two

ways. First, it assumes that all characteristics that in‡uence the decision of the

household are observed by the econometrician. This assumption can be relaxed

by introducing an error term that represents the utility of the location derived

from characteristics observed by the household but not by the econometrician,

 oj .

    While the introduction of the     oj   term eliminates the "omnipotent econome-

trician" assumption, the model still has one unreasonable property. It predicts

that households from a common origin will all make the same location deci-

sion because the term Xoj +      oj   does not vary among households within the

origin.   The common way to relax this assumption is to introduce a random

error term "ij that varies across both households and locations. These " terms

can be thought of as random draws from a distribution of consumer tastes in

a population.      Because these draws introduce heterogeneity into the model,

all households from a common origin will no longer make the same locational

choice.   For example, suppose household 1 has a high unobservable taste for

location 6, while household 2 does not. The di¤erence implies that "16 > "26 ,

thus U16 > U26 .

    The standard assumption about these error terms is that they are identically

and independently distributed across both i and j. The " terms are assumed

to be from a Type One Extreme Value Distribution, which we discuss further



                                            13
below.   This framework allows us to address the utility maximization prob-

lem in a way that is econometrically convenient while still making reasonable

assumptions about consumer preferences.

   The household chooses from the set of 466 destinations the location which

provides the highest level of utility. Location j will be the utility maximizing

location if



                                    Uij > Uik 8 j 6= k                              (3)


In terms of our model, we can express this term as


                 Xoj +        oj   + "ij > Xok +      ok   + "ik 8 j 6= k           (4)


Isolating the "idiosyncratic taste" terms " on the left hand side



                  "ij    "ik > Xok         Xoj +      ok        oj 8j   6= k        (5)



   The probability that the household will choose location j is then




                   Pr(Uij      >     Uik ) 8 j 6= k                                 (6)

              Pr("ij    "ik    >     Xok      Xoj +        ok     oj )   8 j 6= k


   The payo¤ to the distributional assumption about " comes from the result

that the di¤erence between two draws from the Type One Extreme Value Dis-

tribution takes the logistic distribution. De…ne the indicator variable Yij as a

variable that takes on a value of 1 if household i chooses location j and 0 oth-

erwise. McFadden (1973) shows that by integrating out over the distribution



                                            14
of the logistic distribution, we can obtain the following probabilities:

                                     exp(Xoj + oj )
                     Pr(Yij = 1) = PJ                                                 (7)
                                    J=1 exp(Xoj + oj )


Using this property of the model, we can construct the following likelihood

function for :

                                 N X
                                 X J
                                               exp(Xoj + oj )
              ln L( jY; X; ) =           Yij PJ                                       (8)
                                 i=1 j=1      J=1 exp(Xoj + oj )

This is equivalent to McFadden’s choice model (Conditional Logit) with one

important distinction: McFadden does not consider the                term.     If the true

value of   were known, it could be treated as an observable. However, because

  is an unknown stochastic term, like the " terms, we must integrate out over

its distribution:

                              N X
                              X J             Z    1     exp(Xoj + oj )
           ln L( jY; X; ) =             Yij            PJ                  @          (9)
                              i=1 j=1              1    J=1 exp(Xoj + oj )

   One important distinction between the                 and " terms is that we cannot

obtain an analytical integral over the distribution of both variables.             Hence

we would have to compute the integral over                using numeric methods.     This

is most commonly accomplished through simulation. Taking simulation draws

s = 1; 2:::; N S from the distribution of , we can compute the average of the

likelihood function at these simulated draws and then estimate the parameters

by maximizing the analytical portion of the likelihood function:

                              NS X
                              X    N X J
                                          Yij            exp(Xoj + soj )
           ln L( jY; X; ) =                            PJ                            (10)
                              s=1 i=1 j=1
                                          N S           J=1 exp(Xoj + soj )




                                              15
5.1.1   Relaxing the i.i.d.       Assumption in the Household Decision

        Model (NLOGIT):

One problematic assumption made in this type of model is that the " terms

are i:i:d: across j: This assumption implies that the idiosyncratic taste for one

option in the choice set contains no information about the idiosyncratic tastes

for other locations.   This would be an unreasonable assumption if we believe

that a household with a strong taste for a location such as Southern Arizona

would not also be likely to have a high taste for a similar neighboring region, such

as Central Arizona. If this assumption is violated, the integration McFadden

uses to obtain the probabilities used in the likelihood function is invalid, and

the model is mispeci…ed.

   One way to address this problem is to create a set of choices among which

we expect there to be correlated tastes. For example, individuals who have

a high unobservable utility from migrating to an SEA in one state may be

more likely to have a high unobservable utility draw to migrating to any other

SEA within the same state. Here, to account for this issue, we group choices

by state.   While the model maintains the assumption that the households’ "

draws are independent among locations in di¤erent states, we allow there to be

correlation among locations within a given state.

   Cardell (1997) develops a model based on a random utility function that

allows for "within group" correlation while maintaining the assumption of i:i:d:

draws outside of the groups. Cardell expresses the idiosyncratic utility term as

a weighted average of a term that is i:i:d over j, and a term which is common

among choices in a group gj (a given state).



                       Uij = Xoj +    oj   +    igj   + (1   )"ij              (11)


   For notational convenience in the following example, de…ne the total idio-


                                           16
syncratic utility of the choice as.


                                 'ij =         igj   + (1        )"ij                           (12)


    The natural interpretation of the term                      is a measure of how strong the

"within" state correlation among the ' terms are. When                           is equal to 1, the

idiosyncratic utility term is identical among all locations within the state.

    If   is equal to zero, there will be no within group correlation in the ' terms.

A    close to zero suggests that there is no correlation between unmeasured and

stochastic factors in the same state; therefore, a household will be almost equally

likely to choose a location outside the state as one inside the state, conditional

upon observables. In other words, there is little reason to nest the choices at

the state level in a conditional logit.

    Consider how this model allows for correlation in the ' terms for two loca-

tions in the same state:




 Cov('ij ; 'ik jjk   2    g \ j 2 g])                                                           (13)

                     = Ef[         ig   + (1          )"ij ][   ig   + (1    )"ik ]jk 2 g \ j 2 g]g
                                 2 2
                     = Ef          ig g

                             2    2
                     =


    Note, however, that there is no covariance between two terms that are not

in the same state:


Cov('ij ; 'ik jjk    2
                     =   g \ j 2 g])                                                            (14)

                     = Ef[       ig   + (1           )"ij ] [    ig   + (1    )"ik ]jk 2
                                                                                       = g \ j 2 g]g

                     =   0


                                                 17
   The probability of observing household i choosing location j now becomes

the product of two terms. The …rst is the probability of household i choosing

location j conditional upon choosing one of the locations in the same state as j,

while the second term is the probability of the household choosing any SEA in

the state to which SEA j belongs. Note that for a        value of 0, this likelihood

function is identical to that of the equation 10.


         Pr(Yij   =      1) = Pr(Yijjgj = 1) Pr(Yigj = 1)                      (15)
                                  X            P            X
                             exp( 1 ij )      [ j2Gj exp( 1 ij )]1
                  =      P            Xij   PG P              Xij
                            j2gj exp( 1   )   g=1 [  j2gj exp( 1   )]1




5.1.2   Complications to the Household Decision Model:

There are a number of signi…cant challenges to implementing this estimator,

particularly when trying to resolve problems with potential endogeneity of the

New Deal programs; therefore, we identify the parameters of the random utility

function using the aggregate discrete choice model, rather than household data.

   One problem with using individual households as the unit of observation is

the sheer number of observations. The census data we use contains observa-

tions on the location choice of 337,803 households choosing between 466 SEAs.

At each iteration of the MLE estimation, this would require over 150 million

computations of the location speci…c utility for each household. For each of

these 150 million calculations, our model would also require us to numerically

integrate out over the     term using simulation methods. Clearly, this approach

to estimation involves signi…cant computational burdens.

   An additional issue we must address is the possible endogeneity of New

Deal program spending. From a statistical standpoint, it would be ideal if the


                                         18
New Deal grants were distributed on a random basis and, thus, could serve

as a natural experiment. Of course, there is plenty of evidence that the New

Deal grants were not distributed in a random fashion across areas. More per

capita relief grants were distributed to areas with higher unemployment and

greater drops in economic activity between 1929 and 1933 (Fishback, Kantor

and Wallis 2003). Although we control for some of these factors, we still need

to worry about potential endogeneity bias in the coe¢ cients if the New Deal

grants were distributed in response to unmeasured characteristics of the location

that in‡uenced the attractiveness of the location to migrants. Instrumenting for

program spending in the household based model would involve fully specifying

the data generating process for       and integrating out over its distribution. A

signi…cant advantage of the aggregate discrete choice model is that it will allow

us to instrument for New Deal grants using two-stage-least-squares (2SLS).


5.2      Using an Aggregate Discrete Choice Model

An alternative to estimating the household discrete choice model is the use of an

aggregate discrete choice model, which is free of the complications of the prior

model. The seminal paper developing this methodology is Berry (1994). Over

the last ten years, the "Berry Inversion" has become common in the empirical

industrial organization literature.

   Recall the probabilities in the likelihood function for the conditional logit

model:


                                     exp(Xoj + oj )
                     Pr(Yij = 1) = PJ                                        (16)
                                    J=1 exp(Xoj + oj )



Note that the the right hand term varies across o, but not across i. In this model

individuals from the same origin have equal chances of migrating to location j.



                                         19
Accordingly, the probability that an individual from o moves to j can also be

interpreted as the share of individuals from o moving to j. De…ne soj as the

share of households from origin o moving to location j.


                                         exp(Xoj + oj )
                   soj = Pr(Yij = 1) = PJ                                  (17)
                                        j=1 exp(Xoj + oj )

Similarly, we can de…ne the share of households from origin o who remain in the

origin, soo , as

                                         exp(Xoo + oo )
                   soo = Pr(Yio = 1) = PJ                                  (18)
                                        j=1 exp(Xoj + oj )


    The log of the ratio of the terms in 17 and 18 is then


                                       0                            1
                                             exp(Xoj + oj )
                                           PJ
                        soj          B      j=1 exp(Xoj + oj )      C
                   ln         =   ln @      exp(Xoo + oo )          A      (19)
                        soo                PJ
                                            j=1 exp(Xoj + j )

                                       exp(Xoj +             oj )
                              =   ln
                                       exp(Xoo +             oo )
                              =   (Xoj          Xoo )   +(    oj    oo )




    We observe choices made by households in 466 SEAs. Each of these house-

holds chooses between the 466 locations in their choice set. The information

needed to construct our dependent variable is essentially a transformation of a

Markov transition matrix, (represented below) summarizing the movement of

households among 466 locations between 1935 and 1940. Rather than requiring

over 150 million computations (excluding the simulations over ) we now have

466*465=216690. The 466 cells along the diagonal of the matrix are the soo

terms used in the normalization. Note that the model is now invertible in ;


                                           20
this is a key result which will allow us to estimate the parameters of the random

utility function using conventional linear methods, such as 2SLS to instrument

for endogenous X variables.

   Migration Markov Transition Matrix
   0                                              1
      s1;1   s2;1   s3;1 : : : s465;1     s466;1
   B                                              C
   B                                              C
   B s1;2    s      s     : : :  s        s466;2 C
   B          2;2    3;2          465;2           C
   B                                              C
   Bs        s2;3   s3;3 : : : s465;3     s466;3 C
   B 1;3                                          C
   B                                              C
   B                                              C
   B :         :      :   :        :        : C
   B                                              C
   B                                              C
   B :         :      :     :      :        :     C
   B                                              C
   B                                              C
   B :         :      :       :    :        : C
   B                                              C
   B                                              C
   B                                              C
   Bs1;465 s2;465 s3;465 : : : s465;465 s465;466 C
   @                                              A
     s1;466 s2;466 s3;466 : : : s466;465 s466;466

5.2.1   Relaxing the i.i.d.      Assumption in the Aggregate Discrete

        Choice Model:

Berry (1994) also derives an inversion of the nested logit model, whose likeli-

hood function is given in equation 15. In his paper, the inversion relies upon

an assumption that the "outside alternative" is a group to itself. In our model

groups are states and the households’"outside alternative" is to choose not to

migrate. Berry’s assumption does not hold in our case as the option of staying

in the home SEA is just one of several choices available for the household that

chooses to remain in the home state (the group containing the "outside alter-

native"). In Appendix I we invert the nested likelihood model without relying

upon this assumption, arriving at the same result as Berry.         The additional

term is the log of the share of the households from origin o choosing location j,

conditional upon choosing one of the SEAs in the same state as j.


                 soj
            ln         = (Xoj   Xoo )   +    ln(sojjgj ) + (   oj   oo )      (20)
                 soo


                                        21
5.2.2   Instrumenting for New Deal Spending:

Because migration ‡ows, or unobserved variables correlated with migration,

might have in‡uenced the distribution of New Deal grants, there might be en-

dogeneity bias in the coe¢ cients on the New Deal variables. A priori, it is

di¢ cult to predict the direction or magnitude of the endogeneity bias. If out-

migration was associated with economic distress during the 1930s, local o¢ cials

may have sought greater New Deal funds from the federal government to alle-

viate the local unemployment situation and to stave o¤ a continuing exodus of

the workforce. Roosevelt’s "relief, recovery, and reform" mantra would suggest

that federal o¢ cials targeted funds to alleviate such economic problems. In

fact, Fleck (1999a, 1999b, 2001a) and Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis (2003) …nd

that both relief and public works spending were positively related to unemploy-

ment in 1930. To the extent that out-migration was a symptom of unmeasured

unfavorable economic conditions, we might expect federal o¢ cials to have dis-

tributed more funds to areas where people were more likely to leave than to

arrive. Thus, the endogeneity bias might have been negative, causing the OLS

coe¢ cient to understate a positive e¤ect that public works and relief spending

might have had in attracting migrants.

   Alternatively, the endogeneity bias could have gone the other way. Increased

in-migration placed greater pressure on public facilities, such as schools and san-

itation and water systems, which would have encouraged local o¢ cials to lobby

for New Deal projects that would have alleviated these population pressures. In

addition, if migrants into a county misestimated the employment opportunities

in their new homes, their arrival might have contributed to greater unemploy-

ment and the need for federal New Deal assistance. However, the tendency for

local relief o¢ cials to restrict non-residents’relief certi…cation was likely to have

mitigated this e¤ect.



                                         22
   It is also likely that the AAA variable is endogenous, but the direction of

the bias is unclear. Unlike the relief programs, the objective of the AAA was

to limit national production of various commodities to raise farm-gate prices.

The parameters were designed with national prices and production in mind and,

therefore, were not explicitly tied to local problems. The o¢ cials’ parameter

choices, however, might have been indirectly in‡uenced by local conditions be-

cause national AAA parameters depended on the need to raise prices for speci…c

crops. Since crop mix varied substantially across the country and the distress

in speci…c crops may have been felt more heavily in some areas than in others,

local agricultural conditions may have indirectly in‡uenced the policy parame-

ters that determined the distribution of AAA funds. Thus, to the extent AAA

o¢ cials were seeking to raise prices by reducing production, they may have seen

reductions in production caused by the out-migration of farmers as a means

in itself to limit supply and, thus, saw less of a need to provide AAA funds.

Under these conditions, the OLS coe¢ cient of the AAA variable is likely biased

in a positive direction. On the other hand, federal o¢ cials may have seen out-

migration as a sign of distress and, thus, more reason to …nd ways to prop up

farmers in those areas. In this case the OLS coe¢ cient would be biased in a

negative direction.

   One of the key advantages of the share-based model is that we can instrument

for endogenous variables using the standard Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS)

procedure. Relevant and valid instruments are correlated with the level of New

Deal spending but uncorrelated with unobservables a¤ecting the utility of the

location.

   There is an extensive literature on the political economy of the supply of

New Deal program spending.7 Robert Fleck (1999a), Fishback, Haines, and
   7 For discussions of the determinants of New Deal spending, see Reading 1973; Wright

1974; Wallis 1987, 1998, and 2001; Anderson and Tollison 1991; Couch and Shughart 1998;
Couch, Atkinson, and Wells, 1998; Fleck 1999a, 1999b, 2001a, 2001b; Couch and Williams



                                          23
Kantor (2001), and Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005b, 2006) have had suc-

cess using some of these political supply variables as instruments in studies of

unemployment statistics, birth and death rates, retail sales growth, and net

migration. Based on these studies, the political supply equation for New Deal

spending includes quite a few factors that likely in‡uenced the household’s choice

to migrate to a location. These might include the typical party a¢ liations, the

long-term structural features of the economy, the size of the population, the

ethnic structure of the population, opportunities for home ownership and other

socioeconomic factors. These factors are already incorporated in the vector of

attributes associated with locations in the migration share analysis. There are

other factors, however, that either would not be expected to in‡uence the attrac-

tiveness of locations to migrants, or would have in‡uence only indirectly through

incomes and the other socioeconomic factors already included as attributes in

the migration analysis.

   There are two New Deal political supply factors that potentially in‡uenced

public works and relief spending but would have only indirectly in‡uenced the

choice to migrate to a location, the land area in the SEA and the standard

deviation of the percent voting for the Democratic presidential candidate over

the period 1896 through 1928. Land area and population were key factors

in the formula for distributing road funding and larger counties and states in

terms of square mileage tended to receive larger Public Works Administration

grants (Fleck 2001b, Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis, 2003). The size of the SEAs

in square miles is determined by the counties’ geographic boundaries, which

were typically set long before the 1930s, and Bogue’s (1951) combination of

counties into relatively homogeneous SEAs. After controlling for a wide variety

of socioeconomic factors and for in-variant state e¤ects, there is no apparent
1999; Stromberg 2004. Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003. The last paper summarizes the
results of all of the studies and provides new estimates for a broad range of programs..




                                          24
reason why migrants would have additional reasons to care about the amount

of land in the county boundaries and then how many were grouped into the

SEAs. Since county boundaries (and thus economic sub-region boundaries)

often extended well beyond populated areas, the land area of the county would

not be an e¤ective measure of the population density of a city and thus would

not be expected to appear in the migration decision.

   Nearly all of the studies of the distribution of New Deal funds …nd that the

Roosevelt administration spent more in areas where there was greater swing

voting in presidential elections. Wright (1974), Wallis (1987, 1998, 2001), Fleck

(2001, 1999a), Couch and Shughart (1998) and several other scholars use the

standard deviation of the percent voting Democrat for president over a prior

period as a measure of swing voting. There is already temporal distance between

the migration decisions from 1935 to 1940 and the standard deviation measure

from 1896 to 1928. In the …nal migration equation we have already controlled for

political attitudes using the mean voting Democrat for president from 1896-1928

and state …xed e¤ects of the destination, and subregion of origin …xed e¤ects,

as well as a variety of other socioeconomic dimensions. It seems unlikely that

people would be paying attention to the swing voting issue in their migration

decisions once we have controlled for these factors.

   In addition, we include a key political supply variable that in‡uenced AAA

spending but at best would have in‡uenced migration decisions only indirectly

through other channels that we have controlled for in the analysis: average

farm size in 1929. Average farm size strongly in‡uenced the AAA distribution

at the county level (Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor 2006; Fishback, Kantor,

and Wallis 2003). The AAA has always been focused on large farms. The

average farm size measure is for the period prior to the New Deal and thus

farmers had no opportunity to change this size in anticipation of obtaining New



                                       25
Deal funds. Farm size, per se, would not have been a factor that would have

attracted or repelled migrations. It would have in‡uenced migration patterns

by in‡uencing the distribution of AAA funds, farm income, crop failures, and

farm productivity. These are all factors that we control for in the estimation of

the migration equation. We control for measures of income and wealth using the

level and growth rate of retail sales per capita, the home ownership percentage,

racial and ethnic shares of the population, and layo¤s and unemployment. We

control for farm productivity and farm success using crop output per person,

and crop failures. We also control for the extent of farming with the percentage

of the rural population on farms. In addition, we incorporate a series of state

e¤ects and subregion of origin e¤ects that control for a variety of characteristics

of soil, climate, and other factors that might have in‡uenced farm size and

migration decisions.

   Since the true errors in the migration share equation are unknown by de…n-

ition, we can never be sure that these identifying instruments are uncorrelated

with the error term. We can, however, use the Hansen J-statistic to test for

correlation between the identifying instruments and the estimated error term in

the migration share equations.

   The …rst-stage equations in Table 2 show that the coe¢ cients of all of the

identifying instruments have the expected sign. Larger SEA land area and the

standard deviation of the percent voting Democrat for president were associated

with higher than average per capita public works and relief spending in the SEA.

Larger average farm size in 1929 was associated with higher AAA spending. The

coe¢ cient on the swing vote measure was a positive and signi…cant determinant

of public works and relief spending. The F-statistics in the …rst stage are 4.73

for public works and relief and 8.63 for the AAA variable, both statistically

signi…cant at the 99.9% level. The Hansen J-statistic shows that we cannot



                                        26
reject the hypothesis of no relationship between the identifying instruments as

a group and the estimated error term in the …nal migration share equation.


5.2.3      Instrumenting for the Within-Group Term in the Nested Logit

           Speci…cation:

The inversion of the nested logit model introduces an additional endogenous

variable into the model. The term ln(sojjgj ) is endogenous if it is correlated with

 . This will be the case when unobservables a¤ecting the share of individuals

choosing location j also a¤ect the share of individuals who choose j conditional

upon choosing one of the locations within the same state of j, that is, when

ln(sojjgj ) is correlated with .

       Berry (1994) suggests that the number of choices within the nested group

might work as an instrument for the endogenous within group term. The va-

lidity of this instrument hinges upon the assumption that the number of SEAs

in a state is exogenously determined by the historical drawing of geographic

boundaries. Given that the number of counties was set many years before and

that Bogue combined counties into SEAs based primarily on factors that we

have already controlled for in the share equation, this seems to be a reasonable

assumption.8

       The intuition for the relevancy of this instrument is best understood with

a simple example. When there are only two SEAs a1 and b1 in state g1 the

probability that a1 is the utility maximizing choice is the probability that a1 >
             exp(Xa1 )
b1 :    exp(Xa1 )+exp(Xb1 )   When state g2 contains three SEAs: a2 , b2 , and c2 , the

probability that a2 is the utility maximizing choice, holding all else constant,
                                                                     exp(Xa2 )
is the probability that a2 > b2 and a2 > c2 :              exp(Xa2 )+exp(Xb2 )+exp(Xc2 )

   8 This is a relatively stronger assumption to make in the context of the IO literature. It

essentially means assuming that unobserved product characteristics will have no impact on
entry. However, in a geographic context, it is easier to believe that high draws of the term
does not cause new geographic entities to "enter" the choice set.




                                             27
a smaller number:                Thus, we anticipate that the ln(sojjgj ) variable would be

negatively related with the number of SEAs in a state. Are instrument is positive

and highly signi…cant in the …rst stage estimation.


5.2.4   Further Controls for Unmeasured Heterogeneity Across SEAs:

There may be features of the SEAs that are observable to the migrants for

which we have no measures, denoted                           in the model. We observe households

from many origins o choosing whether or not to migrate to each SEA. By taking

the means for all observations for an SEA that have that SEA origin, we can use

a mean-di¤erencing approach to control the unobservable features that in‡uence

the utility of staying in that SEA ( oo). Recall the econometric equation given

for the inversion of the conditional logit.

                                     soj
                                ln         = (Xoj          Xoo )    +(    oj      oo )                (21)
                                     soo

                                                                                                       1
   For each origin o, we sum this expression over locations j and scale by                            J 1

(465, the number of locations outside of the origin):



            1       X            soj               1       X
                           ln              =                      (Xoj    Xoo )     +(    oj   oo )
        J       1                soo           J       1
                    j6=o                                   j6=o

                                 soj
                           ln              =   Xoj          Xoo      +(   oj       oo )               (22)
                                 soo




   Subtracting this term from equation the 21 results in the econometric spec-

i…cation for …xed e¤ects estimation:




                                                           28
      soj           soj
ln             ln          =   [(Xoj    Xoo )     +(      oj        oo )]   [ Xoj   Xoo        +(   oj   oo )]
      soo           soo
                           =   (Xoj    Xoj ) +       oj        oj                                        (23)


The mean di¤erencing operation results in elimination of both observables and

unobservables of the origin from the speci…cation.                   This operation helps ob-

tain consistent estimates of the        parameters because one possible source of

endogeneity, correlation between       oo   and Xoo has been eliminated.

      The …xed e¤ects estimator for the nested logit inversion is nearly identical to

the …xed e¤ect estimator for the conditional logit inversion. The only di¤erence

is that we must also include a mean di¤erenced within group share term.



        soj         soj
 ln            ln         = (Xoj   Xoj ) +        [ln(sojjgj ) ln(sojjgj )]+        oj    oj   (24)
        soo         soo

5.2.5       Heteroscedasticity and Clustering:

It can be shown that there is covariance between the error terms that share a

common origin.       Because of this, our estimates of the standard errors on the

parameters of our model may be inconsistent.                   To address this problem, we

cluster standard errors for observations sharing a common origin.


5.2.6       Dealing with "Zero Shares":

One issue of concern in the estimations is the prevalence of origin-destination

pairs for which no migrations are observed. This is problematic in our model,

because we must take the log of the share of individuals choosing this destina-

tion, and natural log of zero is unde…ned.           To avoid this problem, the value

0.0000001 was added to all of the shares before they were logged.


                                             29
6    Results

The nested logit speci…cation of the model is estimated using both Ordinary

Least Squares (OLS) and Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS). The results are re-

ported in the …rst two columns of Table 2. The attractiveness of the di¤erent

New Deal Grants are quite di¤erent for the AAA farm payments and the pub-

lic works and relief expenditures. In both the OLS and the IV estimations,

an increase in AAA spending per farm population in the SEA has a negative

and statistically signi…cant impact on the utility of living there. On the other

hand, IV estimates of the e¤ect of an increase in public works and relief grants

increased the SEA’s attractiveness. These results are similar to the …ndings

by Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2006) in analysis of net-migration between

1930 and 1940 at the county level. Their analysis was tightly constrained by

the absence of information on ‡ows between locations and jurisdictions, which

limited what they could say about in-migration and out-migration decisions.

    The OLS estimate of the      parameter measuring the correlation of the

terms for choices in a given state is .233, which is statistically signi…cant. Al-

though this would imply that the CLOGIT model is not the correct speci…cation,

a positive bias in the OLS estimate of        is anticipated because the share of in-

dividuals choosing to locate in destination SEA j, conditional upon migrating

to that state is expected to be positively correlated with the overall share of

individuals moving to SEA j. Additionally, we would expect that unobservables

that increase the share of individuals choosing j conditional upon choosing j’s

state would also positively e¤ect the overall share of people choosing j. When

we instrument for the within state share term, the estimate of sigma is cut

sharply to a value of 0.016, which is not statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from

0. Therefore, when performing the computation for the marginal e¤ects and

counterfactuals, we insert a value of zero in for sigma while using the remaining


                                         30
NLOGIT parameters.9

    Many of the socioeconomic features of the SEAs have the expected in‡uence

on the SEA’s attractiveness. Households were more likely to choose SEAs that

were nearer, had experienced less of a downturn between 1929 and 1933, had

greater economic activity in the form of retail sales purchases and crop values

per capita in the peak year of 1929, experienced fewer layo¤s per capita in 1930,

had higher populations in 1930 and experienced greater population growth in

the 1920s. The main surprises were the positive e¤ect of greater unemployment

in 1930 and the absence of a strong e¤ect of the Dust Bowl.10


6.1     Marginal E¤ects of Program Spending on Migration
        Patterns

The point estimates in this model provide intuition about whether the charac-

teristics make the SEA more or less attractive to households. Given the logistic

character of the model and the large number of ‡ows between SEAS, the point

estimates cannot be read as marginal e¤ects. The parameters of the random

utility function instead can be used to examine three types of marginal e¤ects of

the spending of an additional dollar of New Deal spending per capita: retention,

creation, and diversion. People who otherwise would have migrated are retained

in origin area o if the increase in program spending in area o causes them to

remain in area o rather than to migrate. Migration to area o is created when

the increase in spending causes people who otherwise would have remained in

their origin SEA j to choose instead to migrate to area o. Finally, migration
     9 When the value of sigma is not statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from 0, the NLOGIT

speci…cation is essentially the same as the CLOGIT speci…cation with the inclusions of an
additional irrelevant variable. Thus the CLOGIT results do not di¤er signi…cantly from the
NLOGIT results, and are available upon request from the authors.
   1 0 We have performed the analysis on migration patterns for blacks as well as for people

living on farms in 1935. Similar to the …ndings for all people, the qualitative results for
these groups showed that public works and relief spending promoted in-migration and AAA
spending promoted out-migration.



                                            31
is diverted to area o when the spending increase in area o causes people who

otherwise were migrating to another destination k to move instead to destina-

tion o. Thus, if we consider the overall e¤ect of program spending on the level

of net migration to an SEA, retention is a decrease in out-migration, while the

sum of diversion and creation is an increase in in-migration.

   Table 1 shows the formulas for calculating the marginal retention, creation,

and diversion e¤ects associated with a one dollar per capita increase in spending

by a New Deal program. Consider the e¤ects for the Boston SEA, denoted with

subscript o in Table 1. The retention e¤ect is associated with people who would

have normally migrated from Boston but now stay in Boston due to a change

in program spending. This is a reduction in out-migration as people substitute

staying at home for migration. The marginal retention e¤ect varies for each SEA

based on the share of people in the SEA choosing to stay home. Speci…cally, the

share of people retained is calculated as the coe¢ cient    of New Deal spending

per capita multiplied by the share of people from Boston staying in Boston (soo )

multiplied by one minus that same share (1    soo ). This value is then multiplied

by the number of people in Boston in 1930 (No ) to convert the change in share

into the change in the number of people retained.

   The increase in the number of in-migrants Boston from any given SEA k

as a result of a dollar increase in per capita program spending in Boston is

calculated by multiplying the New Deal coe¢ cient          by the share of people

from SEA k moving to Boston (sok ), by one minus that same share (1          sok ),

and by the number of people in SEA k in 1930 (Nk ). To get the total increase

in the number of in-migrants to Boston from all other SEAS, sum the number

from each SEA k across all of the SEAS except Boston.

   The increase in in-migrants is the sum of the creation and diversion e¤ects.

The creation e¤ect captures people who would not have migrated without the



                                       32
increase in spending, but who are pulled out of their home SEAs and choose

to migrate to Boston in response to the rise in New Deal spending there. The

share of in-migrants created is found by multiplying the New Deal coe¢ cient

by the share of people from k who choose to stay in k (skk ) and by the share of

people in k who choose to move to Boston (sko ). By multiplying this number by

the population of SEA k (Nk ), we obtain the total number of migrations from

k to Boston. Summing this term over all SEAs beside Boston gives the total

number of migrants to Boston who would have stayed home in the absence of

the additional spending in Boston.

     Migration diversion to Boston consists of people who were already migrating

to another SEA (say Providence) but switch to Boston in response to the rise

in New Deal spending there. To compute the share of individuals from origin

k who are diverted from Providence to Boston, the New Deal coe¢ cient                      is

multiplied by the share of individuals from SEA k who choose to migrate to

Providence and by the share of individuals from SEA k who choose to migrate

to Boston. Multiplying this number by the population of SEA k, we obtain

the total number of migrants from SEA k who are diverted from Providence to

Boston. After calculating this …gure for origin k for all SEAs other than Boston

and k, we sum over all those SEAs to obtain the total number of households

from origin k who are diverted to Boston. To …nd the total amount of diversion

to Boston for people migrating out of all origin SEAs, we compute the preceding

…gure for all SEAs other than Boston and sum across all those origins.11

     Since the marginal e¤ects are determined in part by the migration shares, the

marginal e¤ects are di¤erent for each SEA. A list for each SEA is available from

the authors. Table 3 and Figures 4 and 5 show the averages of the marginal
  1 1 If
      we sum the creation e¤ect for all SEAs and sum the retention e¤ect for all SEAs, the
two sums will be equal. This occurs because of adding up restrictions caused by the fact that
internal migration ‡ows are zero-sum. Flows out of one SEA become ‡ows into another SEA.
For a mathematical proof see Appendix II.




                                             33
e¤ects on migration ‡ows as a percentage of the population for the SEAs in

each of the nine Census sub-regions for Public Works and Relief, as well as the

average of the raw e¤ect on population ‡ows into these regions. Table 4 and

Figures 6 and 7 present the same …gures for the e¤ect of the AAA.

   The regions where migration rates were most responsive to a marginal dollar

of New Deal spending were New England, the Mid Atlantic Region, the East

North Central Region, the East South Central Region, and South Atlantic Re-

gion (see Figure 4 and the top part of Table 3). An additional dollar of public

works and relief spending per capita in the average SEA in these …ve regions kept

0.053 to 0.069 percent of the 1930 population from out-migrating, created new

in-migration from other SEAs of 0.037 to 0.091 percent of the population, and

diverted enough migrants from other SEAs to these ones to raise in-migration

by another 0.003 to 0.009 percent of the 1930 population. The total e¤ect on net

migration was between 0.092 to 0.166 percent. The e¤ects in these …ve census

regions stand in contrast to the e¤ects in the other four more western regions,

where a marginal increase in public works and relief spending only reduced out-

migration from 0.013 to 0.033 percent, created in-migrants from 0.029 to 0.032

percent, diverted migrants at a rate from 0.001 to 0.002 percent, and had a total

e¤ect on net migration of between 0.045 to 0.067 percent.

        We focus on migration rates because di¤erences in population in the

subregions in‡uence the migration ‡ows. Figure 5 and the middle section of

Table 3 give a sense of how big the average migration ‡ow was created, diverted

or prevented by an additional dollar per capita in public works and relief spend-

ing. The largest average e¤ect for sub-regions was in the Middle Atlantic region,

which includes New York, Pennsylvania and Delaware. An additional dollar per

capita of public works and relief spending increased prevented an average of 215

people from out-migrating from the typical Mid-Atlantic sub-region, diverted



                                       34
25 migrants into that sub-region and attracted 315 new migrants from other

sub-regions. The ‡ows in the western states were much lower, both because of

lower migration rates and lower base populations.

   In contrast to the e¤ect of public works and relief, the AAA e¤ects on net-

migration are negative. The relative impact of AAA spending on migration

creation, diversion, and retention rates are shown in Figures 6 and 7 and Table

4. As was the case with the public works, the creation and retention e¤ects are

substantially larger than the diversion e¤ects of migration. The national means

in Table 4 and Figures 6 and 7 show that the negative AAA retention e¤ect in

this case contributed to out-migration of 146 people or 0.06 percent of the base

population. The negative mean creation e¤ect implies that an added dollar per

capita of AAA spending stopped 146 people or 0.071% of the base population

from migrating into the region (Todd: why are the percentages di¤erent when

the ‡ows are the same). The added AAA dollar,diverted another 11 people, or

-.005 percent of the population away from the typical sub-region.

   There is a similar East-West divide in the magnitude of the marginal impact

of AAA spending per capita on migration rates, although the AAA e¤ect was

negative.. An additional dollar of AAA spending per person on farms in the four

western regions decreased net migration rates between 0.066 to 0.097 percent,

while decreasing net migrations rates in the more eastern regions from 0.134 to

0.241 percent in Table 4.

   The East-West contrast in the …ndings for net migration rates suggest that

eastern households considered the remaining SEAs in their region to be closer

substitutes to their own SEA than did households in SEAs in the west. Actual

in-migration and out-migration rates in the eastern SEAs were lower than those

of western SEAs: of the nine census regions, the four western regions had the

four highest rates of in-migration, and the three highest out-migration rates.



                                      35
These two sets of facts are consistent with a situation where people in the east

considered many SEAs to be similar to their own 1935 SEA and thus saw little

reason to move unless there was an external policy change that would widen

the di¤erential between SEAs. In the west, on the other hand, there was much

greater variation in the unobservables that caused people to be more likely to

move, so that a single dollar change in New Deal spending did not generate as

much of a response.


6.2    Policy Simulations

In addition to estimating the marginal e¤ects of a change in a variable on mi-

gration ‡ows, we can also estimate what migration patterns would have looked

like under various counterfactuals. In such a simulation, we can set Xoj to a

counterfactual value, and compute estimated out-migration ‡ows for each SEA

o to each destination j.



                                    exp(Xjo ^ )
                            sjo = PJ                                       (25)
                                                ^
                                   j=1 exp(Xjo )

   By multiplying the estimated shares by the population and then summing

across all destinations we …nd the number of out-migrants for each SEA. And

then sum across all SEAs to obtain the total number of households out-migrating

for the entire country.

                                   J X
                                   X J
                             M=              sjo No                        (26)
                                   j=1 o=1

   Since all out-migrants are in-migrants elsewhere, this would also be equal

to the total number of in-migrants. We then obtain the number of migrants in

each of the three counterfactual settings by inserting zero for the relevant New

Deal spending. The benchmark for our counterfactual analysis is the number of


                                      36
migrations predicted by the model at the actual levels of New Deal spending.

    Table 5 presents the results of our counter factual estimations. While the

migration rates in the IPUMS 5% sample imply a total of over 9 million total

migrations between SEAs from 1935 to 1940, the model with actual New Deal

spending predicts a total of 6.5 million out-migrations of households. Removing

only the AAA grants leads to a modest increase of about 63,000 migrations, or

a 1% increase in migrations. Removing public works and relief spending, on

the other hand, leads to a prediction of only 5,802,387 migrations, a decrease of

12% from the predicted amount with all New Deal spending. Nearly an eighth

of all migrations that took place in the in the United States from 1935 to 1940

were a direct result of the way in which public works and relief grants were

distributed. Had these programs not existed, or had policy makers distributed

funds in such a way that per-capita levels of funding were equal across SEAs,

only 88% of migrants would have continued to move.

    If New Deal spending on both the AAA and public works and relief had

been completely eliminated, there would have been 5,807,415 migrations, which

is 12 percent fewer migrations than the predicted number with the full amount

of New Deal spending. Note that the highly interactive nature of the ‡ows of

households between SEAs leads to a combined e¤ect of New Deal grant spending

that is di¤erent from the sum of the separate AAA and public works and relief

e¤ects.



7     Conclusion

The simulations from a structural model of migration ‡ows between state eco-

nomic areas during the Second New Deal show that the uneven distribution

of New Deal grant spending helps account for approximately 12 percent of the

migration ‡ows witnessed between 1935 and 1940. The majority of the e¤ect


                                       37
is associated with the broad range in per capita spending on public works and

relief by the federal government. As found by Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor

(2006) in studies restricted to net migration rates by county, public works and

relief tended to increase migration into a state economic area and reduce out-

migration from the area. The AAA programs designed to restrict farm acreage

contributed to a small degree of out-migration. The overall e¤ect of the AAA

on mobility was relatively small and positive.

   These e¤ects appear to be large relative to the e¤ects found for modern mi-

gration in response to di¤erences in welfare spending. There are several potential

reasons for these di¤erences. First, the distribution of spending in the 1930s was

much less tightly tied to matching formulas that force states to spend more to

obtain more welfare funding. The negotiations between Congress and the Roo-

sevelt administration in passing the Social Security Act of 1935 ensured that the

permanent federal/state public assistance programs, like old-age assistance, aid-

to-the-blind, and aid to dependent children required matching formulas. This

matching grant feature imposed constraints on di¤erences across states, as a

state who sought higher expenditures had to dip into their own revenues as

well. The compromise meant that the Roosevelt administration obtained much

greater control over the emergency relief funds distributed under the WPA and

public works programs that ended during World War II (Wallis, Fishback, and

Kantor 2006). Studies at the time show that despite the presence of de jure

matching formulas in the WPA, the formulas appear to have been ignored in

fact (Howard, 1943). Thus, the range in spending per capita was much larger.

Second, the unemployment and underemployment rates during the 1930s were

several orders of magnitude larger than in the modern era and the standard of

living was lower. Therefore, the same amount of federal spending in the 1930s

as in the modern era was a larger share of the person’s average income. Much



                                       38
of the spending was designed to put people explicitly back to work and in the

case of public works spending required movement by some people to relatively

less populated areas.




                                     39
References
 [1] Allard, Scott; Danziger, Sheldon (2000). "Welfare magnets: myth or real-
     ity?", The Journal of Politics, 62: 350-368.
 [2] Alston, Lee (1981). "Tenure choice in Southern agriculture", Explorations
     in Economic History, 18: 211-232.
 [3] Anderson, Gary M.; Robert D. Tollison (1991). "Congressional in‡uence
     and patterns of New Deal spending, 1933-1939", Journal of Law and Eco-
     nomics, 34: 161-75.
 [4] Bartel, Ann P (1989). "Where do the new U.S. immigrants live?", Journal
     of Labor Economics, 7: 371-391.
 [5] Berry, Steven T (1994). "Estimating discrete-choice models of product dif-
     ferentiation", The RAND Journal of Economics, 25: 242-262.
 [6] Biles, Roger (1994). The South and the New Deal. University of Kentucky
     Press, Lexington, KY.
 [7] Blank, Rebecca (1998). "The e¤ect of welfare and wage levels on the loca-
     tion decisions of female-headed households", Journal of Urban Economics,
     24: 186-211.
 [8] Bogue, Donald (1951). State economic areas: A description of the procedure
     used in making a functional grouping of the counties of the United States.
     U.S. Bureau of the Census. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing O¢ ce.
 [9] Bogue, Donald ; Beale, Calvin (1953). "Economic Subregions of the United
     States", Farm Population. Series Census-BAE, No. 19. Washington, D.C.
     Government Printing O¢ ce.
[10] Bogue, Donald.J.; Shyrock Jr., H.S.; Hoermann, S.A; (1957) Subregional
     migration in the United States, 1935-40. Volume I, Streams of Migration
     Between Subregions. Scripps Foundation, Oxford, OH.
[11] Borjas, George J.; Bronars, Stephen G.; Trejo, Stephen J (1992). "Self-
     Selection and Internal Migration in the United States." Journal of Urban
     Economics, 32: 159-185.
[12] Brown, Josephine Chapin (1940). Public Relief, 1929-1939 Henry Holt and
     Company, New York, NY.
[13] Cardell, Scott (1997). "Variance components structures for extreme-value
     and logistic distributions with application to models of heterogeneity",
     Econometric Theory, 13: 185-213.
[14] Couch, Jim, Atkinson, Keith E.; Wells, William H. (1998). "New Deal agri-
     cultural appropriations: a political in‡uence", Eastern Economic Journal,
     24: 137-48.

                                      40
[15] Couch, Jim; Shughart II, William (1998). The political economy of the New
     Deal. Edward Elgar, New York, NY.
[16] Couch Jim; Williams, Peter M. (1999). "New Deal or same old shu- e? The
     distribution of New Deal dollars across Alabama", Economics and Politics,
     11: 213-223.

[17] Cragg, Michael; Kahn, Matthew (1997). "New estimates of climate de-
     mand: evidence from location choice", Journal of Urban Economics, 42:
     261-284.
[18] Federal Works Agency, Work Projects Administration. Final Statistical
     Report of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (Washington, DC:
     GPO, 1942).
[19] Fishback, Price V., Haines, Michael R.; Kantor, Shawn (2001). "The impact
     of New Deal programs on black and white infant mortality in the South",
     Explorations in Economic History, 38: 93-122.
[20] Fishback, Price V.; Horrace, William C.; Kantor, Shawn (2006). "Do fed-
     eral programs a¤ect internal migration? The impact of New Deal expendi-
     tures on mobility during the Great Depression", Explorations in Economic
     History, 43: 179-222.
[21] Fishback, Price V.; Horrace, William C.; Kantor, Shawn (2005a). "Do fed-
     eral programs a¤ect internal migration? The impact of New Deal expen-
     ditures on mobility during the Great Depression", NBER Working paper
     No. w8283. Jan 2005.
[22] Fishback, Price V.; Horrace William C.; Kantor, Shawn (2005b). "The im-
     pact of New Deal expenditures on local economic activity: an examination
     of retail sales, 1929-1939", Journal of Economic History, 65: 36-71
[23] Fishback, Price V., Kantor, Shawn; Wallis, John Joseph (2003) "Can the
     New Deal’s Three Rs be rehabilitated? A program-by-program, county-by-
     county analysis", Explorations in Economic History, 40: 278-307.
[24] Fleck, Robert Kenneth (1994). "Essays on the political economy of the New
     Deal", unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University.
[25] _____(2001a). "Inter-party competition, intra-party competition, and
     distributive policy: a model and test using New Deal data", Public Choice,
     108 : 77-100.
[26] _____(2001b). "Population, land, economic conditions, and the alloca-
     tion of New Deal spending", Explorations in Economic History, 38: 296-
     304.
[27] _____(1999a). "The marginal e¤ect of New Deal relief work on county-
     level unemployment statistics", Journal of Economic History, 59: 659-87.

                                      41
[28] _____(1999b). "The value of the vote: a model and test of the e¤ects of
     turnout on distributive policy", Economic Inquiry, 37: 609-23.
[29] Gramlich, Edward; Laren, Deborah (1984). "Migration and income redis-
     tribution responsibilities", Journal of Human Resources, 19: 489-511.
[30] Herzog, Henry W., Jr.; Schlottmann, Alan M.(1986). "The metro-rating
     game: what can be learned from recent migrants?" Growth and Change,
     17: 37-50.
[31] Holley, William C.; Winston, Ellen; Woofter, Thomas Jackson (1971). The
     Plantation South, 1934-1937. Freeport, NY, Books for Library Press.
[32] Howard, Donald S (1943). The WPA and Federal Relief Policy. Russell Sage
     Foundation, New York, NY.
[33] Jaeger, D.A. (2000). "Local Labor Markets, Admission Categories, and
     Immigrant Location Choice" Mimeo, Hunter College and Graduate School
     of CUNY, New York and IZA, Bonn.
[34] Kau¤man, Kyle; Kiesling, Lynne (1997). "Was there a nineteenth entury
     welfare magnet in the United States? Preliminary results from New York
     City and Brooklyn.", The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 37:
     439-448..
[35] Levine, Phillip; Zimmerman, David (1999). "An empirical analysis of the
     welfare magnet debate using the NLSY", Journal of Population Economics,
     12: 391-409.
[36] McFadden, Daniel (1973). "Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice
     behavior", in P.Zarembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic Press,
     New York.
[37] Mertz, Paul E (1978). New Deal policy and Southern rural poverty.
     Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge, LA.
[38] Mo¢ tt, Robert (1992). "Incentive e¤ects of the U.S. welfare system: a
     review", Journal of Economic Literature, 30: 1-61.
[39] Reading, Don C. (1973). "New Deal activity and the states, 1933 to 1939",
     Journal of Economic History, 1973: 792-810.
[40] Roy, A. D. (1951). "Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings." Oxford
     Economic Papers, 3: 135-146.
[41] Rhode, Paul; Strumpf, Koleman (2003). "Assessing the importance of
     Tiebout sorting: local heterogeneity from 1850 to 1990", American Eco-
     nomic Review, 93: 1648-77.
[42] Saloutos, Theodore (1974). "New Deal agricultural policy: an evaluation",
     The Journal of American History, 61: 394-416.

                                      42
[43] Schaefer, Donald F (1989). "Location Choice in the Antebellum South",
     The Journal of Economic History, 49: 145-165.
[44] Sjaastad, Larry A (1962). "The costs and returns of human migration",
     The Journal of Political Economy, 70: 80-93.

[45] Strömberg, David (2004). "Radio’s Impact on Public Spending". Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 119: 189-221.
[46] U.S. O¢ ce of Government Reports, Statistical Section, 1940. Report No.
     10, Volume 1, "County reports of estimated federal expenditures" March
     4, 1933 - June 30, 1939’. Mimeo.

[47] Wallis, John; Fishback, Price; Kantor, Shawn (2006). "Politics, relief, and
     reform: Roosevelt’s e¤orts to control corruption and political manipulation
     during the New Deal.” in Corruption and Reform Edward Glaeser and
     Claudia Goldin eds. NBER Volume. Chicago: University of Chicago Press:
     343-372.
[48] Wallis, John Joseph; Benjamin, Daniel K (1981). "Public relief and private
     employment in the Great Depression", Journal of Economic History, 41:
     97-102.
[49] Wallis, John (1987). "Employment, politics, and economic recovery during
     the Great Depression", Review of Economics and Statistics, 69: 516-20.
[50] _____(1998). “The political economy of New Deal spending revisited,
     again: with and without Nevada", Explorations in Economic History, 35:
     140-70.
[51] ____(2001). “The political economy of New Deal spending, yet again: a
     reply", Explorations in Economic History, 38: 305-14.
[52] Webb, John N (1936). "The transient unemployed", Monthly Report of the
     Federal Emergency Relief Administration January 1 through January 31,
     1936 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1936), 1-25.
[53] Whatley, Warren C (1983). "Labor for the picking: the New Deal in the
     South", The Journal of Economic History, 45: 905-929.
[54] Williams, Edward Ainsworth (1968). Federal Aid for Relief. AMS Press,
     New York.
[55] Wright, Gavin (1974). "The political economy of New Deal spending: an
     econometric analysis", Review of Economics and Statistics, 56: 30-38.




                                      43
  Appendix I: Inversion of Nested Logit in Our Model

   Berry derives the inversion of the nested logit model as follows:

                                   soj = sojjgj        sgj                                  (27)

                                             exp( 1 oj )
                                  sojjgj =                                                  (28)
                                                  Dgj

                                          Dg1j
                                 sgj = P                                                    (29)
                                       [ j2Gg Dg1j ]
                                         X                 j
                                                               )
                                 Dgj =            exp( 1                                    (30)
                                         j2Gg

    There are two key simplifying assumptions Berry makes to derive the inver-
sion of the nested logit model:
    a)     The utility of the outside good is normalized to 0, which does not
hold for our model
    b)     The outside good is the sole member of its group, which does not hold
for our model

   These assumptions imply:


                                                 1
                         soo = sg0       1= P                                               (31)
                                            [ j2Gg Dg1j ]


   The share ratios can then be expressed as:

          sj   exp( 1 j )    Dg1j                   1            exp( 1 oj )
             =             P                 =[ P            ] =                            (32)
          so     Dgj      [ j2Gg Dg1j          [ j2Gg Dg1j ]        Dg

                                                      oj
                      ln(soj )    ln(soo ) =                       ln(Dgj )                 (33)
                                                  1

   Going back to equation 29, we see


          Dg1j
 sgj = P              = Dg1j       soo ) ln(sgj ) = (1                 ) ln(Dgj ) + ln(soo ) (34)
       [ j2Gg Dg1j

   Solving for ln(Dg ) and plugging into equation (7)



                                             44
                         ln(soj )        ln(soo ) =           j   +        ln(sjjg )                                (35)

   Because there is more than one choice in the outside good’s group (also we
do not normalize the utility of the outside good to 0, but that is not the key
di¤erence between Berry and the migration problem):


                                             D1
                                    sgo = P o 1                                                                     (36)
                                          [ j2Gg Dgj ]

                                                   exp( 1 o0 )           D1
                  soo = sgo         sojg0 =                            P 0 1                                        (37)
                                                        D0            [ j2Gg Dg            ]
   So equation 32 now becomes:


soj   exp( 1 oj )    Dg1                      exp( 1 oo )           D1                         exp( 1 oj )         Dgj
    =              P                     =[                       P o 1                ]=                      (       )
soo      Dg       [ j2Gg Dg1         ]             Do            [ j2Gg Dg         ]           exp( 1doo   )       Do
                                                                                                                    (38)
   Taking logs,

                                              oj        oo
             ln(soj )    ln(soo ) =                                    [ln(Dgj )       ln(Do )]                     (39)
                                               1

   Taking the log of equation 30 and 10, respectively, we now have
                                   P
                               ln([ j2Gg Dg1 ]) + ln(soj )
                    ln(Dgj ) =                                                                                      (40)
                                         1

                                         P
                                     ln([ j2Gg Dg1j ]) + ln(soo )
                        ln(Do ) =                                                                                   (41)
                                                             1

   Subtracting these two terms,


                                                             ln(sgj )       ln(soo )
                        ln(Dgj )         ln(Do ) =                                                                  (42)
                                                                   1

   Which gives us (as the di¤erencing of the deltas is equivalent to normalizing
the utility of the outside good to 0) the same results at Berry:


                    ln(soj )    ln(soo ) =           oj           oo   +       (lnjjgj )                            (43)



                                                    45
   Appendix II: Symmetry of Creation and Retention
    One complication we face in reporting marginal e¤ects is the choice of which
marginal e¤ect to report. As the s variable varies across observations, a di¤erent
estimation of the marginal e¤ect can be computed at each observation One
natural solution to this problem would be to report the mean of all estimated
marginal e¤ects. However, as we show below, this approach also results in a
serious complication.
    Consider again the migration retention term in Table 1. Table 1 expresses
the number of migrants retained in location o as the number of individuals in the
o who substitute to location o when a characteristic of o changes (own e¤ects):

                       retentiono = No (1       soo ) soo                    (44)
Another way in which we can think of this term is as the number of people in
o who substitute away from every other possible choice when a characteristic of
o changes (summing over cross e¤ects)
                                      X
                         retentiono =    No soo soj                       (45)
                                         j6=o

   Now consider the measure of creation in Table 1.
                                   X
                      creationo =     Nj sjj sjo                             (46)
                                      j6=o

    Suppose that we want to …nd the average amount of retention. This would
entail computing retentiono for each o. To do so, we simply sum over o and
divide by the number of choices in the set:
                                      P P
                                        o    j6=o N0 soo soj
                        retention =                                            (47)
                                                 J
    To …nd the average amount of creation, we do the same operation to creationo :
                                   P P
                                     o    j6=o Nj sjj sjo
                      creation =                                               (48)
                                                J
    Note this symmetry: the set containing the Nj sjj sjo term for every possible
j and o will be identical to the set containing N0 soo soj for every possible value
of o and j. Thus, the average e¤ects of retention and creation will be identical
if we sum over all observations. To obtain more intuitive results, we instead
estimate averages of the marginal e¤ects for each of the 9 census regions.




                                       46
     Table 1: Marginal E¤ects Decomposed By Parts
     Migration Retention by o              N
     Total Increase in In-Migration to o




47
        Migration Diversion to o                       N [ k6=j;o sjk sjo   ]
                                           Po (1 soo ) soo


        Migration Creation to o                 j6 = o Nj   sjj sjo
                                             P
                                             j6=o Nj (1 Psjo )sjo




     Increase in Net Migration to o          j N   j   (1 sjo )sjo
                                             Pj6=o j
                                           P
                                             Table 2: Nlogit Fixed Effects Estimation With Robust Standard Errors
                                                     OLS         IV Main Equation First Stage PW Relief     Frist Stage AAA       First Stage Within Group
                                              Coeff.    t-stat.   Coeff.    t-stat.   Coeff.     t-stat.    Coeff.    t-stat.     Coeff.         t-stat.
     Log of share choosing SEA conditional
     on migrating out of state
                                                 0.233     30.45     0.016     0.75
     Per Capita AAA Spending 1935-1939          -0.008     -2.88    -0.011     -2.07
     Per Capita Relief and Pub Works 1935-
     1939                                       -0.001     -1.74     0.008     2.02
     Land Area of SEA                                                                    0.006         3.19     0.000      0.04      0.000             -0.40
     Average Farm Size                                                                   0.062         1.57     0.094      4.04      0.003             3.64
     Standard Deviation of Votes for
     Democratic Candidate in Presidential
     Elections 1896-1928                                                                 0.910         2.03     0.076      1.03      0.031             4.02

     Number of SEAs in State of Origin L                                                 -0.485       -1.65    -0.002     -0.04     -0.202            -31.13
     Log of Distance Between SEA
     Centroids                                  -1.934    -50.99    -1.523    -30.82     -0.253       -0.55    -0.082     -1.05      1.870            47.52
     % Change in Per Capita Retail Sales,
     1929-1933                                   0.810      5.64     0.807     4.60     -22.323       -2.22    -3.677     -2.31     -1.005             -4.79
     Retail Sales Per-Capita, 1929               0.001      3.37     0.001     2.40      -0.047       -0.93    -0.002     -0.35     -0.001             -1.78
     Unemployed As % of Pop Aged 10+,
     1930                                        0.135      3.58     0.110     2.30      -0.854       -0.20     0.080      0.24     -0.139             -2.55
     % Layed off 1930                            3.905      0.84    -8.180     -1.76   400.183         1.07   -87.548     -2.44      2.149             0.37

     % of Families Owning Their Home             0.015      5.91    -0.002     -0.67     0.342         1.44    -0.168     -3.97     -0.024             -5.78

     % of Farm Acres with Failures, 1929         0.019      1.76    -0.007     -0.51     1.698         2.17    -0.008     -0.05     -0.009             -0.50
     Dummy for Dustbowl County                  -0.303     -0.90     0.098     0.19     41.720         2.59    66.746      4.98      0.564             1.45

     Crop Value per Farm Population              0.002      4.53     0.001     2.01      -0.116       -2.73     0.003      0.33     -0.005             -6.46
     % of Adult Pop in Manufacturing




48
     Employment                                  0.002      0.45     0.008     1.27      -1.342       -4.12    -0.072     -2.34     -0.012             -2.49

     % Change in Population, 1920-1930           0.481      3.26     1.165     3.68     -49.907       -3.40     9.352      4.78      0.699             3.20
     Population, 1930                            0.000      3.73     0.000     2.84      0.000        -0.45     0.000     -0.97      0.000             3.46
     % Black in 1930                             0.005      1.86     0.006     2.27      -0.238       -1.25     0.007      0.28     -0.005             -1.64
     % Urban in 1930                            -0.004     -1.74    -0.003     -0.95     -0.161       -0.66    -0.010     -0.50      0.009             2.73
     % Rural Farm 1930                          -0.514     -1.88     1.215     1.71    -143.584       -4.04    24.968      5.07      1.068             2.53
     % Foreign Born in 1930                      0.027      4.17     0.007     0.69      0.799         1.57    -0.003     -0.04     -0.075             -7.79
     % Illiterate Over Age 10, 1930              0.011      1.33    -0.011     -1.06     0.800         1.18    -0.285     -2.48     -0.029             -2.53

     % Population Church Members in 1930        -0.002     -1.78     0.004     1.96      -0.345       -2.76     0.070      3.30      0.008             3.49
     Mean of Dem % Vote for President,
     1896-1928                                  -0.001     -0.61    -0.003     -0.84     0.306         1.48    -0.006     -0.20      0.004             1.22
     Dummy for Atlantic Coast                   -0.050     -0.49     0.096     0.70     10.500         1.15     1.359      1.53     -0.393             -2.19
     Pacific Coast                               0.858      3.19     0.445     1.30     16.857         0.99     2.407      1.28     -0.621             -1.86
     Great Lakes                                -0.002     -0.02    -0.240     -2.17    12.505         1.81    -1.097     -1.61      0.304             2.27
     Gulf Coast                                 -0.109     -0.68     0.335     1.99     -18.354       -1.83     3.479      3.44      0.138             0.43
     Dummy for SEA Containing River
     Running Through 11 to 20 Counties           0.008      0.17    -0.020     -0.40     1.217         0.27     0.203      0.41     -0.048             -0.59
     River Running Through 21 to 50
     Counties                                   -0.036     -0.61     0.035     0.63      -2.706       -0.58    -0.762     -0.68      0.071             0.99
     Dummy for River Running Through
     More than 51                               -0.293     -4.45    -0.315     -3.99    13.483         2.34     1.894      2.34      0.102             1.10
     Latitude of SEA                            -0.070     -6.40    -0.022     -1.57     0.945         1.16     0.414      3.68      0.108             6.83
     Longitude of SEA                            0.039     10.53     0.027     5.15      0.332         1.35    -0.070     -2.46     -0.047             -9.31
     N                                         216690              216690               216690                216690                216690
     F-Stat on Relevence of Instruments                                                    4.73                  8.63               254.07
     Partial R-2 of Instrumentes                                                        0.0599                 0.3471               0.0788
     P-Value on Hanson J                       0.43564
                                                                      Table 3: Marginal Effects for PW and Relief
                                                                                        East      West            East                                                               West
                                                                     New       Middle North       North  South South                                                                 South
                                                            National England Atlantic Central Central Atlantic Central                                                               Central           Mountain Pacific
        Effect on Migration Rates
            Migration Retention                                 0.044%            0.067%           0.069%           0.053%           0.033%          0.053%            0.053%           0.031%              0.013%            0.014%
         Increase in Immigration                                0.053%            0.099%           0.066%           0.065%           0.034%          0.074%            0.039%           0.031%              0.032%             0.035%
                 Migration Diversion                            0.004%            0.009%           0.006%           0.005%           0.002%          0.006%            0.003%           0.002%              0.002%             0.001%
                 Migration Creation                             0.049%            0.091%           0.061%           0.060%           0.032%          0.068%            0.037%           0.029%              0.031%             0.033%
            Net Migration Effect                                0.097%            0.166%           0.136%           0.118%           0.067%          0.126%            0.092%           0.061%              0.045%             0.049%

                  Raw Effect
              Migration Retention                                     100               210               215              115               68             100               112               62                  16                 24




49
            Increase in Immigration                                   108               137               340              137               62              94                70               53                  32                 35
                   Migration Diversion                                  8                12                25               10                4               7                 5                3                   2                  1
                   Migration Creation                                 100               125               315              127               58              86                65               50                  30                 34
              Net Migration Effect                                    208               347               556              252              130             193               182              115                  48                 59

                  Decomposition
                     Retention                                  48.15%            60.48%           38.77% 45.55%                     52.51% 51.67%                     61.49%           53.94%              33.53%             40.70%
                     Diversion                                   3.71%             3.58%            4.53%  4.01%                      2.75% 3.78%                       2.75%            2.46%               3.19%              2.19%
                     Creation                                   48.15%            35.95%           56.70% 50.45%                     44.74% 44.56%                     35.76%           43.60%              63.28%             57.11%
     The symmetry property between retention and creation at the national level, explained in Appendix II, holds only for the raw effect, not for the share effect. This is due to the nonlinear nature of the transformation of the
     marginal effect that occurs which the raw effect is divided by the population of each SEA and then averaged over all SEAs.
                                                                          Table 4: Marginal Effects for AAA
                                                                                      East      West            East                                                                 West
                                                                     New     Middle North       North     South South                                                                South
                                                            National England Atlantic Central Central Atlantic Central                                                               Central           Mountain Pacific
        Effect on Migration Rates
            Migration Retention                                -0.064%           -0.097%          -0.100%          -0.077%          -0.048%         -0.077%           -0.076%          -0.045%             -0.019%            -0.020%
         Increase in Immigration                               -0.077%           -0.144%          -0.096%          -0.094%          -0.049%         -0.107%           -0.057%          -0.044%             -0.047%            -0.050%
                 Migration Diversion                           -0.005%           -0.012%          -0.008%          -0.007%          -0.003%         -0.008%           -0.004%          -0.002%             -0.002%            -0.002%
                 Migration Creation                            -0.071%           -0.132%          -0.088%          -0.087%          -0.046%         -0.099%           -0.053%          -0.042%             -0.045%            -0.049%
            Net Migration Effect                               -0.141%           -0.241%          -0.197%          -0.171%          -0.097%         -0.183%           -0.134%          -0.089%             -0.066%            -0.070%

                  Raw Effect




50
              Migration Retention                                    -146              -305              -313            -167              -99             -145             -162               -90                 -23                 -35
            Increase in Immigration                                  -157              -199              -494            -199              -90             -136             -102               -77                 -46                 -51
                   Migration Diversion                                -11               -18               -37             -15               -5              -11               -7                -4                  -2                  -2
                   Migration Creation                                -146              -181              -457            -185              -84             -125              -94               -73                 -44                 -49
              Net Migration Effect                                   -302              -504              -807            -366             -189             -281             -264              -167                 -70                 -86

                  Decomposition
                     Retention                                  48.15%            60.48%           38.77% 45.55%                     52.51% 51.67%                     61.49%           53.94%              33.53%             40.70%
                     Diversion                                   3.71%             3.58%            4.53%  4.01%                      2.75% 3.78%                       2.75%            2.46%               3.19%              2.19%
                     Creation                                   48.15%            35.95%           56.70% 50.45%                     44.74% 44.56%                     35.76%           43.60%              63.28%             57.11%
     The symmetry property between retention and creation at the national level, explained in Appendix II, holds only for the raw effect, not for the share effect. This is due to the nonlinear nature of the transformation of the
     marginal effect that occurs which the raw effect is divided by the population of each SEA and then averaged over all SEAs.
     Table 5: Counterfactuals
                                    o
                                    M             New Deal E¤ect
                                                  Raw    %
     Actual                         9; 062; 751




51
     Estimated with New Deal        6,496,915
     Counterfactuals
       No Public Works and Relief   5,802,387     694,528   11.97%
       No AAA                       6,434,350     62,565    0.97%
       No New Deal                  5,807,445     689,470   11.87%
                                                Figure 1: In Migration and Out Migration Rates

                           35.00%




                           30.00%




                           25.00%




                           20.00%




52
                           15.00%




     Out Migration Rates
                           10.00%




                           5.00%




                           0.00%
                               0.00%   10.00%         20.00%            30.00%          40.00%   50.00%   60.00%
                                                                   In Migration Rates
                                         Figure 2: Net Migration Rates and Public Works and Relief Spending

                          40.00%




                          30.00%




                          20.00%




                          10.00%




53
                           0.00%




     Net Migration Rate
                                0.00   50.00      100.00       150.00        200.00         250.00       300.00   350.00   400.00


                          -10.00%




                          -20.00%




                          -30.00%
                                                           Per Capita Public Works and Relief Spending
                                               Figure 3: AAA Spending and Net Migration Rates

                          40.00%




                          30.00%




                          20.00%




                          10.00%




54
                           0.00%




     Net Migration Rate
                                0.00   20.00           40.00            60.00            80.00   100.00   120.00


                          -10.00%




                          -20.00%




                          -30.00%
                                                               Per Capita AAA Spending
                  Figure 4: Relative Magnitudes of Marginal Effects of Public Works and Relief on Migration
                                            Rates into SEAs, Average by Region


     0.100%


     0.090%


     0.080%


     0.070%


     0.060%
                                                                                                                            Retention




55
     0.050%                                                                                                                 Diversion
                                                                                                                            Creation

     0.040%


     0.030%


     0.020%


     0.010%


     0.000%
              National    New      Middle     East North West North    South     East South West South Mountain   Pacific
                         England   Atlantic    Central    Central     Atlantic    Central    Central
                      Figure 5: Relative Magnitudes of Marginal Effects of Public Works and Relief on Migration
                                                Flows into SEAs, Average by Region

     350



     300



     250



     200
                                                                                                                              Retention




56
                                                                                                                              Diversion
                                                                                                                              Creation
     150



     100



     50



      0
           National       New      Middle     East North West North    South     East South West South   Mountain   Pacific
                         England   Atlantic    Central    Central     Atlantic    Central    Central
                    Figure 6: Relative Magnitudes of Marginal Effects of AAA on Migration Rates into SEAs,
                                                      Average by Region

                           New      Middle     East North West North    South     East South West South
               National   England   Atlantic    Central    Central     Atlantic    Central    Central   Mountain   Pacific
     0.000%



     -0.020%



     -0.040%




57
     -0.060%
                                                                                                                             Retention
                                                                                                                             Diversion
                                                                                                                             Creation
     -0.080%



     -0.100%



     -0.120%



     -0.140%
                       Figure 7: Relative Magnitudes of Marginal Effects of AAA on Migration Flows into SEAs,
                                                         Average by Region

                          New      Middle     East North West North    South     East South West South
            National     England   Atlantic    Central    Central     Atlantic    Central    Central     Mountain   Pacific
       0


      -50


     -100


     -150




58
     -200

                                                                                                                              Retention
     -250                                                                                                                     Diversion
                                                                                                                              Creation
     -300


     -350


     -400


     -450


     -500
