                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WAGES, VIOLENCE AND HEALTH IN THE HOUSEHOLD

                                               Anna Aizer

                                         Working Paper 13494
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13494


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2007




The author thanks Janet Currie, Pedro Dal Bó, Mark Duggan, Emily Oster, Michael Grossman, Ted
Joyce, Bob Kaestner, Melissa Kearney, Jens Ludwig, Cynthia Perry and seminar participants at Brown
University, the University of Maryland, Princeton University, Northwestern, the BU/Harvard/MIT
joint seminar in health economics and CUNY/NBER for helpful comments and suggestions. This work
was supported by grant number 1R03HD051808-01A2 from the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD) and grant number 0648700 from the National Science Foundation
(NSF). Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
official views of the NICHD or the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Anna Aizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wages, Violence and Health in the Household
Anna Aizer
NBER Working Paper No. 13494
October 2007
JEL No. I12,J12,J13,J16

                                             ABSTRACT

Three quarters of all violence against women is perpetrated by domestic partners. I study both the
economic causes and consequences of domestic violence. I find that decreases in the male-female
wage gap reduce violence against women, consistent with a household bargaining model. The relationship
between the wage gap and violence suggests that reductions in violence may provide an alternative
explanation for the well-established finding that child health improves when mothers control a greater
share of the household resources. Using instrumental variable and propsensity score techniques to
control for selection into violent relationships, I find that violence against pregnant women negatively
affects the health of their children at birth. This work sheds new light on the health production process
as well as observed income gradients in health and suggests that in addition to addressing concerns
of equity, pay parity can also improve the health of American women and children via reductions in
violence.

Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu
I.      Introduction
Everyday 14 thousand women in the US are battered and four are killed by their intimate

partners, with poor and disadvantaged women disproportionately affected. The estimated

costs of domestic violence in terms of medical care and declines in productivity exceed $5.8

billion annually (CDC, 2003), prompting former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop to label

domestic violence “the single most important health issue in the US.” In this paper I examine

some of the economic causes and consequence of domestic violence, analyzing both the

impact of women’s wages on domestic violence and the impact of domestic violence on child

health. This work makes two contributions to the existing literature. First it establishes a

negative causal relationship between women’s wages and violence. Second, it identifies

external costs associated with violence against women not previously considered and

quantified: that the children of women who are the victims of violence suffer worse birth

outcomes. Given the importance of birth outcomes in determining adult education and

income (Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2007), these results suggest that the higher levels of

violence against poor women may contribute to the intergenerational transmission of

economic status.

Violence and Women’s Wages

        Existing empirical research based on survey data has generally found that women

with lower wages experience more violence. However, this work is limited in three respects.

First, these studies fail to establish a causal relationship between domestic violence and

women’s wages by, for example, failing to account for the potential for omitted variable bias

or reverse causality. Second, these studies focus largely on the woman’s own wage when a

household bargaining model suggests not only that women’s relative wage matters but that

potential, not actual, wages determine bargaining power and levels of violence. Third, they

are based on data from household surveys which are prone to non-random underreporting.

                                               2
       To overcome these shortcomings, I employ two strategies. First, when using

individual survey data, I instrument for women’s income with characteristics of the local

labor market conditions. To do so I take advantage of the fact that certain industries have

traditionally been dominated by women (e.g., services) and others by men (e.g.,

construction). I create measures of local labor market conditions for men and women based

on the industrial structure of the county and wage changes in the industries dominant in each

county. Based on these measures, I find that as local labor market conditions for women

improve, violence against them declines. I follow this with an analysis based on a new source

of data on violence: administrative data on female hospitalization for assault. These data

represent an improvement over individual level survey data because they do not rely on self-

reports of violence and include the universe of all women in California (roughly 15 million

individuals). I find that the improvement in local labor market conditions faced by women

over the period 1990-2003 explains ten percent of the decline in violence against women

witnessed over this period.

       These findings are consistent with a simple model of household bargaining in which

an increase in a woman’s relative income increases her bargaining power and leads to a

reduction in violence against her. The findings are inconsistent with models of “male

backlash” developed by sociologists that predict that as women’s wages increase, violence

against them increases because men feel their traditional gender role threatened. They are

also inconsistent with the model of exposure reduction developed by criminologists that

predicts that as the labor force participation of women in creases, violence against them may

decline because women spend less time with their violent partners. I find that the reductions

in violence are most likely to occur during non-working hours, which is inconsistent with

exposure reduction.



                                               3
Violence and Child Health

        Based on these findings I explore the impact of violence against women on child

health at birth. Previous work based on developing countries has shown that child health

improves when mothers control a greater share of the household resources (Thomas, 1990).

This finding has been largely attributed to women’s greater preferences for children and

increased material investments in them, though there is little empirical support for this

mechanism. The research presented here suggests another potential mechanism: reductions

in violence. Violence during pregnancy can adversely affect the developing fetus via blunt

trauma to the maternal abdomen (Silverman et al, 2006). Using a unique dataset that

includes birth outcomes for all women in California and admissions to the hospital for an

assault while pregnant, I explore the importance of violence as a mechanism behind the link

between maternal resources and child well-being. Using instrumental variable and

propensity score techniques to account for non-random selection into violent relationships, I

find that reductions in violence against women result in improved birth outcomes. These

results provide evidence of important externalities associated with domestic violence not

previously quantified. In addition, given that poor women suffer more violence, this work

sheds new light on observed income gradients in health.

        The rest of this paper is laid out as follows: in section II I review the existing

literature on domestic violence, discuss the shortcomings of existing empirical work and

describe a bargaining model that incorporates violence, in section III I present the

analysis of the impact of female income on domestic violence based on individual survey

data, in section IV I present the analysis of the impact of women’s relative labor market

conditions on violence using administrative data on hospitalizations, section V contains

the analysis of the impact of violence on birth outcomes, and section VI concludes.


                                               4
    II.      Background on Domestic Violence

    A. Prevalence of Domestic Violence and Risk Factors

     Most estimates of domestic violence in the US come from the National Violence

Against Women (NVAW) survey fielded in 1994. These data reveal an annual incidence

of 2 percent, a lifetime incidence of 25 percent and that intimate partners are responsible

for three fourths of all violence against women over the age of 18 (Tjaden and Thoennes,

1998). Disadvantaged women face much higher risks of abuse. Women with income

below $10,000 annually report rates of domestic violence that are five times those with

annual income greater than $30,000 (BJS, 1994). In addition, black women are at

significantly greater risk of violence and conditional on violence are subject to more

severe attacks (Rennison and Welchans, 2000). Also at greater risk are young women

between the ages of 20 and 34.

    The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is the only survey that has allowed

tracking over time and findings suggests that the rates of domestic violence against

women declined by 50 percent between 1993 and 2001.1



    B. Theories of the Relationship Between Economic Status and Violence

    Most of the existing research on domestic violence has been conducted by

criminologists and sociologists. Criminologists have developed a theory of the

relationship between employment and domestic violence referred to as exposure

reduction. This theory posits that the increase in employment among either men or




1
  Intimate partner violence against men has also dropped over this period. Criminologists have suggested
that the decline among men may be attributable to declines in the number of women in abusive
relationships who kill their partners/abusers in defense (Dugan, Nagin and Rosenfeld, 1999).
Due to a change in survey design, estimates prior to 1993 are not comparable to those obtained post 1993.
                                                    5
women will reduce domestic violence simply by reducing the time partners spend

together, (Dugan, Nagin and Rosenfeld, 1999).

       Two theories prominent in the sociological literature predict that as women’s

financial independence increases, violence against them should increase. The first theory

is one of male backlash against increasing female independence associated with their

increased employment and personal income. According to Macmillan and Gartner

(1999), a wife’s independence “signifies a challenge to culturally prescribed norm of

male dominance and female dependence. Where a man lacks this sign of dominance,

violence may be a means of reinstating his authority over his wife.” The second theory

derives from exchange theory and views domestic violence as one of the two sides of a

reward/punishment approach to influence (Molm, 1989). Under this scenario, individuals

possess two sources of power: transferring resources (rewards) and violence

(punishment). As a husband’s ability to influence his wife’s behavior by transferring

resources (rewards) diminishes when his income decreases relative to hers, he is more

likely to rely on punishment which may include violence.

       Theories of male backlash and exchange theory which predict that increases in

women’s wages lead to an increase in violence are problematic because they ignore the

individually rational constraint faced by women in abusive relationships. That is, as their

income increases, women are more likely to end the partnership if transfers decline and

abuse continues or escalates.

       Economic theories of household bargaining are consistent with the individually

rational constraint but generally do not incorporate violence. Exceptions are Bloch and

Rao (2002) and Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997). Bloch and Rao (2002) incorporates

asymmetric information and signaling in a model of noncooperative bargaining to explain

                                             6
why a woman from a wealthy family in India is subject to greater violence by her

husband in an effort to extract more resources from her family. This model, however,

does not fit the experience of women in the US. Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997) present

a particular case of a non-cooperative model of domestic violence in which men have all

the bargaining power.

         In the appendix I present a model that is a generalization of the model of Farmer

and Tiefenthaler (1997) and states some of the assumptions crucial for the result that are

not indicated in Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997). The model is a straightforward Nash

bargaining model in which utility is a function of consumption and violence with the

man’s utility is increasing in violence and the woman’s decreasing in violence. The

results illustrate how changes in a woman’s wage affect her bargaining power and thus

the level of violence by affecting her outside option. Two implications of the model are

worth highlighting as they inform the empirical analysis. First, relative wages matter, not

absolute wages. Second, it is the potential wage that determines one’s outside option, not

necessarily the actual wage (Pollak, 2005).2 This suggests that one should focus on

relative labor market conditions for women, not necessarily actual wages in this analysis.

This also implies that improving labor market conditions for women will decrease

violence even in households where women do not work.

         In the next section I review the results of previous empirical work that examines

the relationship between income and violence.




2
 This is due to the fact that a woman’s earnings at her threat point determine her bargaining power and
earnings at the bargaining equilibrium do not necessarily equal earnings at the threat point. Pollak (2005)
provides an example of a married woman who does not work (zero wages) at the cooperative equilibrium
but who would work in the event of the dissolution of the marriage.
                                                     7
C. Previous Empirical Work on the Relationship Between Wages and Violence

         Existing empirical research based on survey data has generally found that women

with lower wages experience more violence. However, this work is limited in three respects.

First, these studies fail to establish a causal relationship between domestic violence and

women’s wages by, for example, failing to account for omitted variable bias or reverse

causality. Second, these studies focus largely on the woman’s own wage when a household

bargaining model suggests not only that the relative wage matters but that potential, not

actual, wages determine bargaining power and levels of violence. Third, they are based on

data from household surveys which are prone to non-random underreporting (Ellsberg,

2001).

         The pioneering study of the relationship between women’s income and violence is

Gelles (1976) who finds that the fewer resources a woman has, the less likely she is to

leave an abusive relationship. More recently, Bowlus and Seitz (2005) using structural

estimation methods find that female employment has a large negative and significant

effect on abuse. Interestingly, they also find that men are more responsive to policies

designed to reduce the gains to repeat abuse than women are to policies reducing the cost

of leaving violent marriages. Other work includes Macmillan and Gartner 91999) and

Dugan, Nagin and Rosenfeld (1999).

         Some studies have utilized panel data on women who were victims of domestic

violence to examine the impact of changes in income over time on violence for a given

woman (Tauchen, Witte and Long, 1991; Farmer and Tiefenthaler, 1997). While this

approach enables one to overcome the potential for omitted variable bias (assuming it is

time-invariant), it does not rule out the potential for reverse causality - that declines in

abuse may increase a woman’s productivity and earnings.


                                               8
           The only experimental evidence on the impact of women’s economic status on

domestic violence comes from a randomized intervention that combined microfinance

with an education program among South African women. Women randomized to receive

the intervention experienced a 55 percent drop in domestic violence relative to the control

group (Pronyk et al, 2006).

           Other related work on domestic violence more generally but not the relationship

between violence and income include Stevenson and Wolfers (2003), Dee (2003), Fertig,

Garfinkel and Mclanahan (2004), and Nou and Timmins (2005).

           In the next section, I estimate the impact of women’s resource on violence using

individual survey data. Because of the limitations inherent in an analysis based on

individual survey data, I complement it with an analysis of the impact of labor market

conditions on violence against women using aggregate administrative data, overcoming

some of the shortcomings of individual survey data.



    III.      Analysis of the Impact of Income on Domestic Violence: Individual
              Survey Data

    A. Data and Empirical Methods

    Using individual level survey data from the California Women’s Health Survey

(CWHS) 1998-2003, I estimate the impact of women’s personal income on the

probability of reporting any domestic violence. The CWHS is an annual cross sectional

survey of 4000 California women. The CWHS includes a question on whether she has

experienced intimate partner violence in the past year (slapping, hitting, getting beaten

up, use of a weapon, threatened with a weapon).3 The survey does not include

3
 In 2002, only a single question about experiencing any violence in the past year was included, separate
questions about the type of violence were not included. As a result, the estimate of the proportion of
women reporting any violence in 2002 is roughly half of what it is in 2001 and 2003. All analyses include
                                                    9
information about the resources of her male partner so that one cannot estimate the

impact of women’s relative income (as predicted by theory) but only the absolute level of

her income. In addition, women’s personal income in the CWHS is not provided as a

continuous measure but rather as ten ranges from less than $10,000 a year to more than

$100,000 per year, in increments of $10,000. To create a continuous measure each

woman was assigned the midpoint of the range of income she reported, introducing

substantial measurement error and attenuation bias which instrumental variable methods

can reduce.

    Characteristics of women in the CWHS reporting abuse and trends in abuse over this

period are consistent with other survey data (see section IIA). The share of women

reporting domestic violence declined from 6.2 percent in 1998 to 4.7 percent by 2003, a

decline of 25 percent over five years (Appendix Table 1). In the second panel of the table

is the probability of violence and mean annual income by race, education, age and marital

status. Violence is highest among Black women (7.2 percent) and lowest among Asian

women (3.5 percent). Violence varies inversely with education: 7.2 percent of high

school drop outs report violence as opposed to 2.9 percent of college graduates. Violence

also declines with age. The correlation between race, education, age and violence

underscore the importance of controlling for omitted variables that may bias estimates of

the impact of income on violence.

        To estimate the impact of income on domestic violence in individual data, the

following is estimated with a probit model:

DV = δ1INCOME + δ2RACE + δ3AGE + δ4EDUCATION +                                                   (1)

                                   γYEAR + θCOUNTY + ε


year fixed effects and because of this change in question wording were run a second time excluding 2002,
with no change in the results.
                                                   10
DV is an indicator equal to one if she reports that she was the victim of domestic violence

in the past year. INCOME is her personal income, RACE is a vector of five race

dummies (Black, White, Hispanic, Asian and Other), AGE is a vector of four age

dummies (<25, 25-30, 31-39, 40-49, 50-64), EDUCATION is a vector of education

dummies (HS drop out, HS graduate, College), YEAR is a vector of year dummies to

control for secular trends in violence and COUNTY is a vector of six dummy variables

for the six largest counties in California (Los Angeles, San Diego, Alameda, Sacramento,

and Fresno) that represent 45 percent of the sample.4 The distribution function of the

error term is a standard normal.

         I instrument for women’s income with a measure of local labor market conditions

to both overcome the bias generated by the endogeneity of women’s income and to

account for the fact that potential wages (as reflected in local labor market conditions)

and not actual wages should affect the level of violence. To create this measure I take

advantage of the history of sex-segregation by industry to construct a measure of local

labor market conditions faced by women that is based on wage changes in industries

dominated by women.5 Gender and racial segregation by industry is well-established

(Bayard et al, 1999; Tomasovik-Devey, 1993). For example, data for California reveal

that 72% of service industry employees are women while 90% of those employed in the

construction industry are men.

         Average annual wages are thus calculated separately by gender and race in each

county as follows:

                     w grcy = ∑ γ grcj wcyj                                                           (2)
                               j


4
  Including dummy variables for each of the 58 counties in California is infeasible given the small sample
sizes in most counties outside the 6 largest ones.
5
  This assumes an upward sloping labor supply curve. Fixed costs of migration would give rise to such a
curve. The existence of persistent wage differences across local markets supports this assumption.
                                                    11
where c indexes county, g gender, r race, y year and j industry. Wcyj is the annual wage in

industry j in county c year y from the Bureau of Economic Analysis annual survey of

employers. γgrjc is the proportion of women (or men) with no more than a high school

degree of a given race working in industry j in county c (from the 1990 census). I focus

on the low-skilled as violence is much more prevalent among this group. This proportion

is fixed over this period so that changes in the wage do not reflect selective sorting across

industries over this period. However, there appears to be very little redistribution

between 1990 and 2000 (see Appendix Figure 1). This measure is arguably exogenous as

it is driven primarily by changes in the demand for labor in industries dominated by

women relative to men – not by changes in their underlying productivities which might

independently affect violence. Similar measures of labor demand were used by Hoynes

(2000) in her study of the impact of demand conditions on welfare participation among

low income women in California.6



B.      Results

        In Table 1 are probit estimates of equation (1) and marginal effects. A woman’s

personal income has a negative and significant effect on the probability of experiencing

any domestic violence, but the impact is small. An increase in personal income of

$10,000 annually, for example, reduces domestic violence by only 2 percent. In contrast,

the marginal effects of education and age are considerably larger.

        However, as noted previously, it is potential wages, not actual wages, that

determine one’s bargaining power and the level of violence. For this reason and for issues

related to endogeneity and measurement error in the income variable, I instrument for

6
 Hoynes (2000) uses county-level wages and employment in the retail and service industries as measures
of the demand for low-skilled women workers.
                                                  12
women’s income using the measure of the local demand for women’s labor defined in

equation (2). Estimates from the first stage are presented in Table 2. The estimated

coefficient of 52 on female labor market conditions suggests that a 10 percent increase in

wages paid in industries dominated by women leads to a four percent increase in female

personal income. The instrumental variable probit results are presented in columns (3)

and (4) of Table 1. When instrumented, the impact of a woman’s own income on

domestic violence increases considerably, as expected – a $10,000 annual increase in her

own personal income leads to a 21 percent reduction in the probability of violence against

her (a reduction of 1.1 percentage points on a baseline percentage of 5.3).

         But as previously noted, results based on individual survey data are limited. To

overcome these limitations I conduct an analysis based on a new source of administrative

data on violence described in the next section.



   IV.      Analysis of the Impact of Income on Domestic Violence: Administrative
            Data on Hospitalizations

   A. Data

For the aggregate analysis, I develop an alternative measure of violence: the number of

women admitted to the hospital for an assault. This measure is derived from hospital

discharge data from the state of California for 1990-2003. These data include external

cause of injury data for all hospital admissions and medical personnel classify injuries as

assaults, accidents or self-inflicted injuries. For each county, I calculate annual race-

specific rates of hospitalization for assault for women age 15-44 for the period 1990-




                                             13
2003.7 The final dataset consists of a panel of 2261 observations (41 counties x 14 years

x 4 racial groups).8 Summary statistics are presented in Appendix Table 2.

         This measure of violence against women has two drawbacks. First, it will include

assaults against women not inflicted by an intimate partner. To the extent that most

violence against women is perpetrated by intimates (estimates range from 76 to 87

percent) and I can control for levels of non-intimate violence in the analysis, I limit any

bias from such misclassification.9 A second drawback is that this measure will only

include those assaults so severe as to require hospitalization (seven percent of injured

women, according to the NVAW survey). Thus results based on hospitalizations may not

be generalizeable to less severe acts of violence. In addition, because black women are

both more likely to be abused and, conditional on abuse, subject to more severe violence

they will be over-represented in the hospitalization data.



B. Hospitalization for Assaults 1990 -2003

         The downward trend in domestic violence evident in the CWHS and the Bureau

of Justice Statistics’ NCV survey is likewise evident in California’s hospitalization data.

The rate of female hospitalization for assault declines by nearly 70 percent over this

period from 39 per 100,000 to 12 per 100,000 (Figure 1A). This trend mirrors trends in

intimate partner homicide in California derived from death certificates (Figure 1B). In


7
  Rates are calculated by combining these data with data on annual population counts by county, gender,
race and age provided by the California Department of Finance. I limit the analysis to women age 15-44
because evidence based on surveys suggests that domestic violence is most prevalent among young women
and the assault data reflect this as well. California is the largest state in the US with a population of 34
million. Of the state’s 58 counties, 25 have populations in excess of 250,000 and eight have populations in
excess of 1 million.
8
  Only the largest 41 counties are identifiable in the census data, and in those counties, some races are not
well represented (there 35 cells with no observations.)
9
  Estimates from the NVAWS suggest 76 percent while evidence from a medical chart review of pregnant
women admitted to the hospital for assault and presented by Goodwin and Breen (1990), suggests 87
percent.
                                                     14
addition, many of the risk factors for domestic violence identified in survey data are also

apparent in the hospital discharge data. Black women, young women and poor women

are all at higher risk for domestic violence and are much more likely to be admitted to the

hospital for an assault than others (see Appendix Table 2). The rate at which women are

admitted to the hospital for an assault is highly correlated with other measures of

domestic violence such as arrests for domestic violence (0.77) and intimate partner

homicide (0.89).

       However, two other factors unrelated to declines in domestic violence could be

responsible for the downward trend in female hospitalization for assault: declines in

hospitalization and declines in violent crime. To explore the former, I display trends in

hospitalization for assaults and non-assault injuries in Figures 1C and 1D. Both are

declining considerably over this period, but hospitalizations for assaults proportionately

more so. And to address the possibility that the decline in violent crime over this period

may be responsible for the trend in female hospitalization for assault, I compare

hospitalization for assault for males and females over this period in Figure 1E, assuming

the decline for males captures declining rates of violent crime (Figure 1F). Over this

period, assaults for males do decline, but at a slower rate (20 percent) compared to

females (30 percent). While this suggests that underlying trends in both hospital

utilization and violent crime explain some of the decline in the measure of domestic

violence, they do not explain all. However, this underscores the need to control for such

underlying trends over this period to identify the effects of the wage ratio on domestic

violence, a point to which I return in the analysis.



       C. Empirical Estimation Strategy

                                             15
         The panel structure of the administrative data enables identification of the impact

of relative wages on domestic violence from changes within each county over time which

implicitly controls for all differences (observed and unobserved) between counties and

avoids identification from comparisons across different counties. The following equation

is estimated:



DVcry = α + β1WAGERATIOcry + β2UNEMPcy + β3INCcy + β4RACEr +                                        (3)

         β5VIOLENCEcry + β6LN(IMMIGRATION)cy + β7LN(INCARCERATION)cry

                  + γYEARy + θCOUNTYc+εcry



         In this equation, c indexes county, r race and y year. DV refers to the measures of

domestic violence derived from the hospitalization data and defined by year, county and

race (for the base specification this is the hospitalization rate for assaults per 100,000

women age 15-44). WAGERATIO is the ratio of female to male earnings within race

with wages constructed according to equation (2), though alternative measures (the linear

difference between male and female wages and the log of the wage ratio) are also

considered.10 Using wage constructed according to equation (2), the female/male wage

ratio increases six percentage points between 1990 and 2003 from 0.84 to 0.90. This

measure of the wage ratio understates the true difference in earnings as it only captures

wage differences due to industry segregation, failing to capture other differences due to

occupational segregation, discrimination, differences in labor force participation, or

differences in skill. The trend in the earnings ratio from the annual March CPS for low



10
  Examining the impact of relative wages within racial groups is justified given that inter-racial
relationships are still relatively rare over this period: 14% for 18-19 year olds, 12% for 20-21 and 7% for
34-35 year olds (Joyner and Kao, 2005).
                                                     16
skilled (a high school degree or less) in California follows a similar upward trend over

this period rising from 0.52 to 0.62.

         Additional covariates that capture changes in the business cycle and trends in

violent crime more generally are also included. UNEMP is the annual unemployment rate

in the county and INC is per capita income in the county and year. These are included so

that the impact of relative income can be identified separately from the impact of general

economic conditions in the county. RACE is a vector of race dummies (Black, Asian and

Hispanic – white is excluded) and their inclusion controls for the substantial differences

in rates of violence across races. VIOLENCE is the non-intimate homicide rate by

county, race and year and is included to control for trends in underlying violence.

         To control for changes in the supply of low-skilled labor that may affect the wage

ratio, I include measures of the number of new immigrants and the incarceration rate:

IMMIGRATION is the number of immigrants in the county calculated by the California

Department of Finance and INCARCERATION is the flow of newly incarcerated men

(those incarcerated – those released). 11 Finally, year and county fixed effects are

included to control for any unobserved fixed differences between counties and state-wide

secular trends in domestic violence, respectively. The latter will control for all state-wide

policy changes such as welfare reform, expansions in the EITC, changes in Medicaid

eligibility or state laws regarding the prosecution of domestic violence that may affect

rates of domestic violence. All regressions are weighted by cell size (female population

15-44 by race, county and year).

         I argue that the weighted average female/male earnings ratio is a good measure of

the local labor market conditions based by women relative to men as it primarily reflects

11
  I take the natural log of these two variables due to the difficulty defining appropriate denominators to
calculate a ratio.
                                                     17
changes in the demand for female and male unskilled labor and not the underlying

productivities of females and males in a particular labor market that may independently

affect rates of violence. However, to control for other possible supply-side factors that

could influence this ratio (in addition to the influx of immigrants and incarceration rates),

I reconstruct the wage ratio to further limit the possibility that the ratio reflects changes in

underlying productivities of women over this period. The alternative measure of wage is

average wage for women (or men) in a given county*year*race cell constructed as above

except that the industry wage is based on the average industry wage in the rest of the state

(all counties except the given county).

                                w grcy = ∑ γ grcj w−cyj                                 (4)
                                          j



Constructed in this way, the measure does not reflect changes in industry wages that

might be caused by changes in the county’s labor supply. Identifying variation comes

solely from the industrial composition of each county: counties with many workers in

industries characterized by large (state-wide) wage growth will experience larger

increases in average wages than counties with workers in low wage-growth industries.

Identification does not arise from variation in industry-level wage growth across counties.

This measure is similar to other exogenous measures of demand for labor developed by

Bartik (1991) and used by Blanchard and Katz (1992) and Autor and Duggan (2003).



D. Results


        Estimates of equation (3) are presented in Table 3. In the first panel of the table

are estimates of the impact of the female/male wage ratio on multiple measures of

assault. The coefficient estimate in the first panel of -28.43 suggests that the increase in

                                                18
the wage ratio from 0.84 to 0.90 over this period led to a decline in the rate of female

hospitalizations of 4.4 percent. Female hospitalizations for assaults declined by 70

percent over this period, suggesting that the increase in the wage ratio accounts for 6.3

percent of this decline.

       However, as previously noted the number of women admitted to the hospital for

an assault also captures changes in patterns of hospitalization over this period (see Figure

1C). To account for this, I present estimates of the impact of the wage ratio on violence

as measured by the share of all hospitalizations for injuries that are the result of an assault

in column (2). This measure also mitigates against potential measurement error

introduced by imprecision of the population counts. Again, as the wage ratio increases,

the proportion of hospitalizations due to an assault declines. The observed increase in the

wage ratio explains roughly 6.6 percent of the decline.

       To address the concern that the decline in hospitalizations for assaults also reflects

dramatic declines in violent crime more generally over this period (Figures 1E and 1F), I

further refine the measure of violence. I assume that the decline in violent crime more

generally over this period is reflected in the decline in hospitalizations for assaults among

males. In column (3) of Table 4 I include the rate of male hospitalizations for assaults as

a regressor. In column (4) I redefine the measure of domestic violence to be the share of

all injuries that results from an assault for women relative to the same measure for males.

This measures declines from 0.31 to 0.21 over this period, or 30 percent, very similar to

the 27 percent decline in intimate partner homicides among women in California

witnessed over this period. The regression coefficient of -0.173 in column (4) suggests

that the decline in the wage gap of six percentage points explains ten percent of the

decline in domestic violence witnessed over this period. In column (5) are estimates of

                                              19
the impact of the wage ratio on the ratio of female assaults to male assaults, controlling

for the ratio of female non-assault injuries to male non-assault injuries. The estimate is

very similar to that in column (4).



E.       Robustness

Redefining the Wage Gap

         To explore whether the results are sensitive to the definition of the wage gap, I

redefine the wage gap to be the log of the wage ratio and the linear difference of male and

female wages in the second and third panels of Table 4, respectively. Regardless of the

way that the wage difference is measured, the results are qualitatively the same: closing

the wage gap leads to a decline in the rate of female hospitalization for assaults.12

Violence against Men

         To compare how the wage ratio affects female assaults compared to male assaults,

I redefine the outcome measure to be the natural log of assaults. In the first column of

Table 4A, I present estimates of the impact of the wage gap on the natural log of female

hospitalizations for assault, and in the second column I do the same for the natural log of

male assaults. For these regressions, because of small cell with zero hospitalizations for

assault, I restrict the analysis to cells with at least 15,000 women (or men). These results

suggest that a six percentage point increase in the female/male wage gap would lead to a

7.8 percent decline in female hospitalizations for assault but only a 2.2 percent decline in

male hospitalizations for assault.13 In the third column, I present the results of a

regression of the impact of the wage gap on female hospitalizations controlling for male

12
   When male and female wages are entered separately, women’s wages reduce the rate of female assaults
(coefficient -.161 that is statistically significantly different from 0 at the 1 percent level) while male
assaults have a positive but insignificant effect on assaults (coefficient of .106).
13
   The 2.2 percent decline among men may reflect reductions in the number of women in battering
relationships who assault their male partners in self-defense as suggested by some criminologists.
                                                    20
hospitalizations. The results suggest that an increase in the wage gap of 6 percentage

points leads to a 6.7 percent decline in violence.

Zipcode-Level Analysis

       One possible reason why we find that as increase in women’s wages is associated

with declines in violence is that as women earn more, they move to “safer”

neighborhoods and thus are less likely to be the victim of crime. To rule this possibility

out, I create zipcode level measures of violence and examine the impact of changes in the

wage ratio on violence within zipcode. Because population by race, gender and age is

not available at the zipcode level (except from the decennial census), the outcome

examined is the ratio of female assaults to male assaults (as in column 5 of Table 4).

       The results (Table 4B) are not directly comparable to the previous analysis

because the five digit zipcode is only available for years 1991 and 1994-2000 in the

hospital discharge data and is missing for 25,000 discharges. This non-random sampling

results in important differences in the outcome measure: for the zipcode sample, the ratio

of female to male assault is .076 whereas in the full sample the ratio is .131 and the

decline in violence is also smaller, from .094 to .061. Thus, even though the coefficient

estimates are one third the value of estimates based on the full sample, the interpretation

is similar: the increase in the ratio of female to male wages still explains ten percent of

the decline in violence over this period.

Falsification Tests

       I also estimate the impact of the wage difference on two outcomes for which I

expect small or no effects: female hospitalizations for attempted suicide and car crashes.




                                             21
There does not appear to be any significant effect of the wage ratio on either of these

measures.14

Exogeneity of Wages

         To address the possibility that the measures of the female- male wage gap may

not just reflect an increase in demand for female labor but an increase in the productivity

of local area women which may be correlated with propensity for domestic violence, I

use county level wage gap as calculated in equation (4). Recall that this measure is based

on the industrial structure of the county, but the wage in the rest of the state (excluding

the county). These estimates are presented in Table 5. The estimates are precise and

similar to the estimates based on the previous county-level measure of wages.

Exposure Reduction

     The findings thus far provide evidence in favor of a marital bargaining model in

which an increase in women’s relative wage increases her bargaining power, thereby

decreasing violence against her. However, these findings do not rule out the possibility

of an alternative explanation - exposure reduction. Because an increase in women’s

wages is likely to be accompanied by an increase in female employment, finding that

violence falls as wages rise may be evidence of either a bargaining story or exposure

reduction. In order to test whether exposure reduction is responsible for these findings, I

estimate the impact of changes in the wage ratio on assaults that occurred during the

weekday vs. the weekend. If exposure reduction explains the findings then I should see a

larger decrease in assaults during the weekday than the weekend. Only 5 years of data

(1990, 1992, 1993, 1995 and 1996) include information on day of week of admission and

are used for this analysis.

14
  The coefficient estimate for suicide is 0.0083 with a standard error of 0.0152; the coefficient estimate on
car crashes is -0.0067 with a standard error of 0.0199.
                                                     22
       In Table 6 I present estimates based on these five years of data. In the first two

columns I present estimates of the impact of the female/male wage ratio on the share of

hospitalizations for an injury that are the result of an assault on weekends (column 1) and

weekdays (column 2). In the next two columns I present estimates of the impact of the

linear difference in wage rates. Most of the decline in violence resulting from an

increase in the wage ratio occurs during the weekend, which I argue is inconsistent with

the exposure reduction hypothesis.

       Based on the finding that an increase in women’s relative wages reduces violence

against her, I revisit previous work establishing a positive relationship between women’s

share of household resources and child health and well-being. While previous work has

largely assumed that this relationship is attributable to increases in women’s material

investment in children, in the next section I explore whether an alternative mechanism

(reductions in violence) may also play a role.



V. Women’s Wages, Violence and Child Health

       A. Background

       A marital bargaining model that incorporates children yields important

predictions regarding women’s income and the allocation of household resources to

children. In bargaining models, if mothers exert stronger preferences for their children

than do fathers, then as women’s income (and bargaining power) increase, household

allocations to children should likewise increase. Previous empirical work on intra-

household allocation has largely supported bargaining models over common preference

models. Seminal work by Thomas (1990) based on survey data from Brazil found that

unearned income in the hands of a mother has a bigger effect on her family’s health than

                                            23
income under the control of a father. The positive relationship is often attributed to

increased expenditures on children: given equal increases in maternal and paternal

income, the former results in larger expenditures on children than the latter. More recent

work by Duflo (2000) found that an increase in pension payments among women in

South African households led to improvements in the health of girls in the household (as

measured by height and weight for height), but not boys. In contrast, an increase in

pension payments among men did not have any affect on the health of children.

       The mechanism behind this relationship, however, is not well-established.

Previous work linking the distribution of resources in the household to improvements in

child health often assumes that an increase in material investment is responsible. Some

evidence that a reallocation of resources from the father to the mother results in an

increase in material investments in children is provided by Lundberg, Pollak and Wales

(1997). They find, based on data from the UK, that an exogenous increase in maternal

income leads to an increase in expenditures on women and children’s clothing.

       The relationship between women’s relative resources and violence established in

the first part of this paper, however, suggests that reductions in violence provide an

additional explanation for why an increase in women’s relative income results in

improved child outcomes. This mechanism has not previously been considered. In the

rest of this paper I explore the relationship between violence and birth outcomes and

provide the first estimates of a causal relationship.



       B. Previous Literature on Violence and Birth Outcomes

       Previous studies have provided estimates of the prevalence of domestic violence

among pregnant women in the US that range from 0.9% to 20.1% (Gazmararian, et al

                                              24
1996).15 A number of studies have found that violence often initiates or escalates during

pregnancy (Stewart and Cecutti, 1993; Helton, McFarlane and Anderson, 1987; Amaro,

Fried, Cabral and Zuckerman, 1990). Psychologists have offered one possible

explanation for the increase in violence during pregnancy: sexual jealousy inspired by the

uncertainty of paternity. In an interview of 258 men convicted of spouse abuse, Burch

and Gallup (2004) found that the frequency and severity of abuse directed toward

pregnant partners was double that directed toward partners who were not pregnant and

that sexual jealousy was also greater for men with pregnant partners.

        Medical studies have documented a negative correlation between domestic abuse

during pregnancy and birth outcomes. Valladeras (2002) found that 22 percent of mothers

with low birth weight (LBW) infants experienced physical abuse as opposed to five

percent of full weight infants, controlling for potential confounders such as age, parity,

socio-economic status and smoking. In a meta-analysis of eight studies, Murphy el al

(2001) found that women who reported abuse during pregnancy were more likely than

nonabused women to give birth to a baby with LBW (OR 1.4).

        Violence affects pregnancy outcomes via multiple mechanisms. Abuse resulting

in blunt trauma to the maternal abdomen can cause abruptio placentae, fetal fractures,

rupture of the maternal uterus, liver, spleen and antepartum hemorrhage. Non-abdominal

trauma can also cause uterine contractions, premature rupture of membranes and

infection. Finally, abuse may also lead to the exacerbation of chronic illnesses such as

hypertension, diabetes or asthma which can negatively affect the fetus.



15
  Examples include Hillard (1985) who found that 3.9 % of 742 prenatal women reported abuse during
pregnancy; Helton, McFarland and Anderson (1987) found that 8% of 290 pregnant women reported
violence. Berenson, Stiglich, Wilkinson and Anderson (1991) found that 5.5% reported abuse during the
current pregnancy and in a postpartum sample of 488 women, Campbell, Poland, Waller and Ager (1992)
found that 8.3% of the women reported abuse during the pregnancy.
                                                  25
         While biological pathways linking violence to poor birth outcomes exist, previous

studies have not effectively isolated the impact of violence on birth outcomes from other

maternal characteristics such as poverty and risk taking behavior (smoking, drinking) that

are correlated with both violence and birth outcomes. I use propensity score and non-

linear instrumental variable methods to establish the first causal estimate of the impact of

violence on low birth weight.



         C. Data on Violence during Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes

         To estimate the impact of violence on birth outcomes I use a unique dataset that

links maternal hospitalizations in the nine months prior to birth with detailed natality data

that includes information on birth outcomes from California for the period 1991-2002

(excluding 1998).

         Of the more than 5 million births over this period, only 1656 women were

admitted to the hospital for an assault while pregnant – roughly 3 per 100,000. However,

the rate is much higher among disadvantaged women: 50 per 100,000 for those on

Medicaid and 164 per 100,000 black women. Sample means for these data presented in

Table 7 columns (1) and (2) illustrate how women who are admitted to the hospital for an

assault are more likely to suffer worse birth outcomes and are more likely to come from

disadvantaged backgrounds (poorer, less educated, younger and more likely to be black)

and engage in risky behavior such as using drugs and smoking which may independently

affect birth outcomes.16 In columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 are average birth outcomes and

maternal/paternal characteristics of women who suffered unintentional injuries and car

crashes. These women suffer worse birth outcomes than women with no injuries, but not
16
  Smoking and drinking variables are under-reported and measured with considerable error in the
California natality data because unlike most states, California only requires reporting if the behavior
resulted in a complication.
                                                     26
as bad as those who have been assaulted. In addition, they are not nearly as

disadvantaged as victims of assault, suggesting significant negative selection into violent

relationships.

         While these data represent the universe of California births, they exclude women

who miscarried or aborted. How this might bias estimated effects depends on from what

part of the distribution we believe these women are drawn. One might reasonably argue

that these women suffer (or expect to suffer) the most extreme violence and the worst

birth outcomes, suggesting that estimates that exclude these women will be biased

downward.



         D. Empirical Estimation Strategy and Results

         To estimate the impact of violence on birth outcomes, I first estimate probit

models of the impact of admission to the hospital for an assault on the probability a child

is born LBW including controls for maternal background. This is followed by propensity

score matching estimates and bivariate probit estimates that account for the non-random

selection into violent relationships.

         The probit model of the impact of violence on the probability a child is born LBW

is as follows: let the indicator LBWi=1 if mother I gives birth to a LBW infant and

LBWi=0 otherwise. The birth production function is described by the latent variable

model:

         LBWi* = βXi + δVi + εi

Where LBWi* is the underlying health of the child, Xi is a vector of individual maternal

characteristics and Vi is an indicator for whether the birth mother was admitted to the




                                             27
hospital for assault while pregnant. The probability that a baby is born LBW is Prob

[LBWi=1]= Φ [βXi + δVi ] where Φ is a standard normal cdf.

         In Table 8 column (1) and (2) are probit estimates and marginal effects of the

impact of assault on LBW.17 Women who are assaulted are 3.7 percent more likely to

have a LBW infant. This effect is considerably larger than that of other maternal

characteristics that have been shown to affect birth outcomes (such as poverty and

maternal education) with the exception of being black which has roughly the same

negative impact on birth weight as assault.

         For the propensity score/matching estimator, I match women who were assaulted

with women who were not based on propensity score methods.18 The estimates derived

from propensity score matching methods suggest that women who are the victim of

violence are 8.5 percent more likely to have a LBW birth relative to similar women who

have not been assaulted and their babies weigh on average 180 grams less. The estimates

are significant at the 1 percent level. That this estimated effect is larger than the effect

based on the probit model is attributable to the weighting scheme employed in matching:

women most likely to be assaulted (ie, have the highest propensity score) receive a higher

weight in the matching estimate. Figure 2 which displays matching estimates of the

impact of assault on LBW by propensity score illustrates this point. The estimated

impact of assault is much higher for women with higher propensity scores – as high as 22

percent. If estimates based on these women receive greater weight in the matching

estimator, then this would explain the source of difference in the probit and matching

estimates. One can argue that an estimate that reflects the impact of violence on birth

17
  Estimates of the impact of violence on infant mortality were positive but not significant.
18
  I estimated the probability of assault (propensity score) based on all control variables included in Table
12, then matched women who were assaulted with those who were not with a very similar propensity score
(within the same bin – for 150 bins). Matching was done without replacement and the matching estimator
was weighted by the propensity score.
                                                    28
outcomes for those most likely to be the victim of violence is more useful than one that

gives equal weight to women at very low risk of abuse.

           As a final estimation strategy, I estimate the impact of assault on the probability

of LBW using a bivariate probit model. In this model, the birth production function is

described by the latent variable model as before, but now suppose that the process by

which women are hospitalized for an assault is described by the latent variable model:

           Vi*= τXi + γZcry-1 + μi

where Vi* is the amount of violence, Xi is a vector of individual characteristics and Zcry-1

is a variable not contained in Xi that affects violence against women. To allow for the

possibility that the unobserved determinants of birthweight are correlated with

unobserved determinants of violence, assume that E[εi] = E[μi] = 0, var [εi] = var [μi] = 1

and cov[εi, μi] = ρ. The instrument for violence in this case (Zcry-1 ) is a measure of the

strictness of prosecutorial policies towards domestic violence in the previous year and is

defined at the county-year-race level. In California, as elsewhere, laws regarding the

prosecution of domestic violence are determined at the state level. However, prosecution

of domestic violence falls to the local (county) prosecutors offices. Local county

prosecutors in California have wide discretion over the prosecution of spousal assault.

They vary in terms of whether they have separate offices/prosecutors who specialize in

domestic violence, the amount of training their prosecutors receive and the presence of

advocates assigned to women bringing charges. Unfortunately, data on police and

prosecutorial policies are not available on a consistent basis.19 Instead, I proxy for

prosecutorial policies by calculating the proportion of all men arrested for domestic

violence who are sentenced to jail for each race in each county and year. If either the


19
     Data on such policies are only available for the 7 largest counties in California and only up until 1996.
                                                        29
deterrent or incapacitation effects of incarceration are strong (Levitt, 1996), the

proportion of offenders who go to jail in the previous year (referred to here as the lagged

incarceration rate) may serve as an appropriate instrument for the level of violence

witnessed today: as the incarceration rate in the previous period increases, violence

should decline.

       Table 8 columns 3-5 contain coefficient estimates and marginal effects from the

bivariate probit model. In column (3) are estimates of the impact of violence on the

probability LBW, column (4) contains the marginal effects and in column (5) are

coefficient estimates of the determinants of violence. Increasing the percentage of men

who go the jail for domestic violence conditional on arrest for domestic violence

significantly decreases the probability that a pregnant woman will be admitted to the

hospital for an assault in the next year. Over this period, the incarceration rate increased

from 20 percent to 74 percent. An increase of this magnitude leads to a very small (2

percent) decline in the probability of assault on average, a point to which I return.

       Based on estimates from the bivariate probit, women who are admitted to the

hospital for an assault face an 18 percent increase in the probability of LBW birth – a

considerably larger effect than was found via probit and also larger than estimates from

the matching/propensity score methods. To understand this discrepancy, I examine

whether there is heterogeneity in the effect of the lagged incarceration rate (Zcry-1) on

violence. In figure 3 are coefficient estimates of the impact of Zcry-1 on whether the

woman was hospitalized for assault by propensity score. It appears that the lagged

incarceration rate is most negatively related to assault among those with the highest

propensity score for assault. We know from Figure 2 that the impact of assault on

birthweight is likewise higher among those with the highest propensity score, suggesting

                                             30
that a local average treatment effects (LATE) interpretation can explain the increase in

magnitude of the bivariate probit estimates over the probit and propensity matching score

estimates. In sum, the results presented here suggest that assault during pregnancy leads

to an increase in the probability of a low birth weight birth of 4 to 18 percent. This range

reflects considerable heterogeneity in the impact with the children of those women most

disadvantaged and most likely to be the victim of violence suffering the most.



       VI. Conclusion

Over the past fifteen years, violence against women has declined as their employment

and earnings have increased. A model of household bargaining that incorporates

violence is consistent with these trends. I find empirical support for a causal relationship

between labor market conditions for women and violence using both individual survey

data and administrative data: recent improvements in labor market conditions for women

relative to men have led to a ten percent reduction in violence against them. This finding

suggests that in addition to more equitable redistribution of resources, policies that serve

to narrow the male-female wage gap also reduce violence and the costs associated with it.

The estimates imply that if women were equally represented in high wage industries

erasing this source of the wage gap, violence against them would decline by an additional

16 percent.

       Based on this finding, I revisit previous work establishing a positive relationship

between women’s share of household resources and child health and well-being. While

previous work has largely assumed that this relationship is attributable to increases in

women’s material investment in children, I provide evidence that a reduction in violence,

at least in the case of birth weight, is also an important determinant. These results

                                             31
suggest that in addition to addressing concerns of equity, improved pay parity can have

positive effects on the health of American women as well as important intergenerational

effects.




                                           32
                                      References

Autor, David and Mark Duggan (2003). “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
in Unemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 2003, 157-206

Bartik, Timothy (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development
Policies? (Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research).

Bayard, Kimberly, Hellerstein, Judith, Neumark, David and Kenneth Troske (1999)
“New Evidence on Sex Segregation and Sex Differences in Wages From Matched
Employee-Employer Data” NBER Working Paper #7703.

Black, Sandra, Devereux, Paul and Kjell Salvanes (2007) “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes” Quarterly Journal of
Economics

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, I (1992), 1 – 75.

Bloch, Francis and Vijayendra Rao (2002) “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case
Study of Dowry Violence in Rural India.” American Economic Review. 92 (4).

Bowlus, Audra and Shannon Seitz (2005) “Domestic Violence, Employment and
Divorce.” Mimeo University of Western Ontario.

Burch, Rebecca, and Gordon Gallop (2004) "Pregnancy as a Stimulus for Domestic
Violence." Journal of Family Violence Vol 2. No. 21

Bureau of Justice Statistics (1994). “Domestic Violence: Violence Between Intimates,
Selected Findings.” NCJ-149259.

CDC - National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Costs of Intimate Partner
Violence Against Women in the United States. Atlanta (GA): Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; 2003.

Dee, Thomas (2003) “Until Death do you Part: the Effects of Unilateral Divorce on
Spousal Homicides,” Economic Inquiry 41(1), January 2003, pages 163-182.

Dugan, Laura, Daniel Nagin and Richard Rosenfeld (1999). “Explaining the Decline in
Intimate Partner Homicide; The Effect of Changing Domesticity, Women’s Status and
Domestic Violence Resources.” Homicide Studies. Vol 3, No 3, August, 1999.

Ellsberg, Mary, Heise, Lori, Pena, Rodolfo, Agurto, Sonia and Anna Winkvist (2001).
“Researching Domestic Violence Against Women: Methodological and Ethical
Considerations.” Studies in Family Planning, 32(1).

Farmer, Amy and Jill Tiefenthaler, (1997) “An Economic Analysis of Domestic
Violence,” Review of Social Economy, Vol. 55, No. 3, 337-358.

                                          33
Fertig, Angela, Garfinkel, Irwin and Sara McLanahan (2004). “Child Support
Enforcement and Domestic Violence Among Non-Cohabiting Couples.” Princeton
University Center for Research on Child Wellbeing Working Paper 2002-17-FF.

Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb (2006). “Household Bargaining and Leisure Time.”
Boston College Center for Retirement Research.

Gelles, Richard (1976). “Abused Wives: Why do They Stay?” Journal of Marriage and
the Family. 38(4).

Goodwin, Thomas and Michael Breen (1990). “Pregnancy Outcome and Fetomaternal
Hemorrhage After Noncatastrophic Trauma” American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology. Vol 162, no 3.

Hoynes, Hilary Williamson (2000) “Local Labor Markets and Welfare Spells: Do
Demand Conditions Matter?” The Review of Economics and Statistics. LXXXII (3).

Kalai, Ehud (1983). “Solutions to the Bargaining Problem.” Mimeo Department of
Managerial Economics and Decision Sciences, Northwestern University.

Levitt, Steven (1996). “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence
from Prison Overcrowding Litigation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2):
319-351

Lundberg, Shelly, Pollak, Robert and Terence J. Wales (1997) "Do Husbands and Wives
Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the U.K. Child Benefit," Journal of Human
Resources.

Macmillan, Ross and Rosemary Gartner (1999). “When She Brings Home the Bacon:
Labor Force Participation and the Risk of Spousal Violence Against Women.” Journal of
Marriage and the Family. 61.

Milkman, Ruth and Rachel Dwyer (2002) “Growing Apart: The “New Economy” and
Job Polarization in California 1992-2000” The State of California Labor 2004.

Molm, Linda (1989). “Punishment Power: A Balancing Process in Power-Dependence
Relations.” American Journal of Sociology, 94(6).

Nash, John (1950). “The Bargaining Problem” Econometrica 18(2): 155-162.

Nou, Jennifer and Christopher Timmins (2005). “How Do Changes in Welfare Law
Affect Domestic Violence? An Analysis of Connecticut Towns, 1990 – 2000." Journal
of Legal Studies, 34 (2):445-470.

Pollak, Robert A (2005) “Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates, and
Household Production” NBER Working Paper #11239.

                                          34
Pronyk, Paul, Hargreaves, James, Kim, Julia, Morison, Linda, Phetla, Godfrey, Watts,
Charlotte, Busza, Joanna and John Porter (2006) “Effect of a Structural Intervention for
the Prevention of Intimate-Partner Violence and HIV in Rural South Africa: A Cluster
Randomized Trial.” The Lancet .Vol.368 (December 2006), 1973-1983.

Rennison, Callie Marie and Sarah Welchans (2000). “Intimate partner Violence.” US
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. NCJ 178247.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers,(2003) “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law:
Divorce Laws and Family Distress” NBER working paper #10175.

Silverman, Jay, Decker, Michele, Reed, Elizabeth and Anita Raj (2006). “Intimate
Partner Violence Victimization Prior to and During Pregnancy among Women Residing
in the 26 US States: Associations with Maternal and Neonatal Health.” American Journal
of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Vol 195.

Tauchen, Helen V., Witte, Ann Dryden, and Sharon K. Long, “Violence in the Family: A
Non-random Affair,” International Economic Review, Vol. 32, No. 2, (May 1991), 491-
511.

Tauchen, Helen V. and Ann Dryden Witte, “The Dynamics of Domestic Violence,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 2, (May 1995), 414-418.

Tjaden, Patricia and Nancy Thoennes (1998). “The Prevalence, Incidence and
Consequences of Violence Against Women: Findings from the National Violence
Against Women Survey.” Washington DC: US Department of Justice, OJP. Report No:
NCJ 172837.




                                           35
Appendix I: A Model of Household Bargaining with Violence

         In this appendix I develop a simple model of household bargaining that

incorporates violence and shows under what assumptions an increase in women’s relative

income leads to a decline in violence.

         Let Uw (Cw, S) be a woman’s utility which is increasing in her own consumption

(Cw) and increasing in safety (S) and let Um (Cm, V) be a man’s utility which is increasing

in his own consumption (Cw) and in violence (V). Assume that there is an upper bound to

violence (death) V and S= V – V. Both utility functions are assumed to be strictly

concave, monotonically increasing, differentiable and homothetic. I is total household

income and α is the share of income a woman would get if she were not in the

partnership. To focus on partnerships that will experience some violence, assume that the

marginal rate of substitution between consumption and violence is greater for women

than men where V=0 (MRSm ((1- α)I, 0) < MRSw (αI, V )). We denote as T the set of

feasible utility pairs (Um, Uw) that the partners may obtain if they reach an agreement and

the utility each gets from dissolution of the partnership (the disagreement payoff or single

state utility) as (dm, dw) = (Um(1-α)I, 0), Uw (αI, V ) .

         I first show that the domestic violence problem constitutes a Nash bargaining

problem and that a Nash bargaining solution provides a unique solution to the problem.

Lemma 1: Under the above assumptions, the problem is a Nash bargaining problem with

a Nash bargaining solution (Nash, 1950).

Proof:

The following necessary and sufficient conditions are met:

1) The set T is compact. This is satisfied since the set of feasible allocations is compact

and Um and Uw are continuous.

                                              36
2) The set T is convex. This is satisfied since the set of feasible allocations is convex and

Um and Uw are continuous.

3) d= (Um((1- α)I, 0), Uw (αI, V )) is a member of T.

4) For some member (Um, Uw) of T it is the case that Um>dm and Uw>dw. This holds

under the assumption that MRSm ((1- α)I, 0) < MRSw (αI, V ). ▄

To allow for different degrees of bargaining power between partners, we will use Kalai’s

asymmetric Nash bargaining solution. The solution to the asymmetric bargaining

problem (U*m, U*w) maximizes the following expression as shown by Kalai (1983):

(Um-dm)τ (Uw-dw)1-τ

subject to (Um, Uw) ≥ (dm, dw) and (Um, Uw) feasible, where τ is a measure of bargaining

power of the man.

I study next how an increase in the relative wage of women affects utilities of both men

and women.

Lemma 2: An increase in α results in an increase in U*w and a decrease in U*m.

Proof:

Take α and α’ such that α'> α . Then dw(α’)> dw(α) and dm(α’)< dm(α). Therefore,

  τ      (U w − d w (α ' ))      τ     (U w − d w (α ))
                            <
(1 − τ ) (U m − d m (α ' ))   (1 − τ ) (U m − d m (α ))

and by convexity of T we have that U*w (α’) ≥ U*m (α). ▄



This alone does not guarantee that an increase in α results in a decline in violence. This

depends on the shape of the contract curve.

Lemma 3: the contract curve has a positive slope.

Proof:

                                                37
Let (Cm, V) and (Cm’, V’) be points on the contract curve such that Cm’> Cm and V’ < V.

By definition, MRSm(C, V) = MRSw(C, V − V ) since (Cm,V) is a point on the contract

                               C 'm  C        C'w                     Cw
curve. This implies that            > m and                     <
                               V'    V      V −V '                  V −V

By homotheticity and strict concavity of utility functions, MRSm(C’m, V’) < MRSm (Cm,

V) and

MRSw(C’m, V − V ’) > MRSw (Cm,V). This implies that MRSw (C’, V − V ’) > MRSm (C’,

V’) and the point (C’m, V’) cannot be on the contract curve. ▄



Theorem 1: An increase in α results in a decrease in violence.

Proof:

Take α and α’ such that α'> α .

Then U*w(α’) > U*w(α), by lemma 2, which implies that V(α’) < V(α), since the contract

curve has a positive slope by lemma 3.▄



The above simple model of household bargaining shows that under certain reasonable

assumptions (namely strict concavity, differentiability and homotheticity of utility

functions) an increase in a woman’s income leads to a decline in violence against her.20




20
  Incorporating the marriage market should not affect this comparative static result. Rather, the marriage
market simply influences the disagreement payoff (d) which will become the maximum of an individual’s
single state utility and the expected utility from another match. In this paper I do not focus on the marriage
market because there is no data for California on marriages and divorces.
                                                     38
                            Table 1: Probit and IV Probit Estimates and Marginal Effects: Impact of Women's Income on
                                                    Probability of Domestic Violence in Past year

                                                                                   Probit                                 IV Probit
                                                                     Coefficient            Marginal Effect     Coefficient     Marginal Effect
Annual Personal Income/10000                                           -0.010                  -0.001            -0.108             -0.011
                                                                       [-1.93]                                   [-1.77]
White                                                                  -0.300                   -0.028           -0.145             -0.015
                                                                       [-3.39]                                   [-1.15]
Black                                                                  -0.133                   -0.011           -0.041             -0.004
                                                                       [-1.25]                                   [-0.30]
Hispanic                                                               -0.256                   -0.021           -0.119             -0.012
                                                                       [-2.84]                                   [-0.97]
Asian                                                                  -0.482                   -0.031           -0.314             -0.025
                                                                       [-4.35]                                   [-2.12]
<HS                                                                     0.124                   0.012             0.043              0.004
                                                                        [2.58]                                    [0.65]
HS                                                                      0.088                   0.008            -0.012             -0.001
                                                                        [2.27]                                   [-0.18]
Age <=25                                                                0.788                   0.115             0.639              0.093
                                                                       [12.35]                                    [4.74]
Age 25-30                                                               0.724                   0.103             0.656              0.097
                                                                       [10.92]                                    [7.25]
Age 31-39                                                               0.580                   0.067             0.516              0.064
                                                                        [9.26]                                    [6.75]
Age 40-49                                                               0.370                   0.039             0.334              0.039
                                                                        [5.85]                                    [5.06]
Age 50-64                                                               0.018                   0.002             0.011              0.001
                                                                        [1.35]                                    [0.78]
1999                                                                    0.062                   0.006            -0.028             -0.003
                                                                        [1.23]                                   [-0.64]
2000                                                                   -0.019                   -0.002            0.017              0.002
                                                                       [-0.36]                                    [0.30]
2001                                                                   -0.072                   -0.006            0.092              0.010
                                                                       [-1.34]                                    [1.11]
2002                                                                   -0.527                   -0.036            0.072              0.008
                                                                       [-8.21]                                    [0.50]
2003                                                                   -0.142                   -0.012            0.094              0.010
                                                                       [-2.63]                                    [1.23]
Los Angeles                                                            -0.056                   -0.005            0.026              0.003
                                                                       [-1.40]                                    [0.26]
San Diego                                                               0.012                   0.001             0.043              0.004
                                                                        [0.22]                                    [0.83]
Alameda                                                                 0.049                   0.005             0.010              0.001
                                                                        [0.62]                                    [0.19]
San Francisco                                                          -0.018                   -0.002           -0.199             -0.018
                                                                       [-0.14]                                   [-1.99]
Sacramento                                                              0.100                   0.010            -0.643             -0.047
                                                                        [1.29]                                   [-7.65]
Fresno                                                                  0.035                   0.003            -0.271             -0.024
                                                                        [0.35]                                   [-2.96]
Constant                                                               -1.800                                    -1.435
                                                                      [-16.48]                                   [-3.92]
Observations                                                            18636                                    18636
Z statistics in brackets below coefficient estimates
Table 2: First Stage Estimates of Impact of Female Labor Market Conditions
                   on Women's Annual Income - CWHS

Female Labor Market Conditions                               52.206
                                                             [11.35]
White                                                         0.233
                                                              [1.29]
Black                                                        -0.094
                                                             [-0.47]
Hispanic                                                      0.320
                                                              [1.77]
Asian                                                         0.695
                                                              [3.54]
<HS                                                          -0.651
                                                             [-9.06]
HS                                                           -0.773
                                                            [-13.95]
Age <=25                                                     -1.277
                                                            [-16.37]
Age 25-30                                                    -0.413
                                                             [-5.06]
Age 31-39                                                    -0.275
                                                             [-3.87]
Age 40-49                                                    -0.036
                                                             [-0.52]
Age 50-64                                                    -0.047
                                                             [-2.37]
1999                                                          0.189
                                                              [3.45]
2000                                                         -0.037
                                                             [-0.47]
2001                                                          0.211
                                                              [1.89]
2002                                                          0.451
                                                              [2.55]
2003                                                         -0.173
                                                             [-1.55]
Los Angeles                                                  -0.002
                                                             [-0.01]
San Diego                                                    -0.136
                                                             [-1.78]
Alameda                                                       0.163
                                                              [2.11]
San Francisco                                                -1.509
                                                            [-19.49]
Sacramento                                                   -1.426
                                                            [-18.73]
Fresno                                                       -1.429
                                                            [-18.75]
Constant                                                      2.860
                                                              13.12
Observations                                                 18636
Z statistics in brackets below coefficient estimates
                                             Table 4: Estimates of the Impact of Labor Market Conditions on Violence

                                            (1)                       (2)                     (3)                  (4)                   (5)
                                      Female assaults         Female Assaults/        Female Assaults/   (Fem Assault/Injuries)/     Female/
Wage Ratio                                                      Total Injuries          Total Injuries   (Male Assault/Injuries)   Male Assaults
Female/Male Wage                           -28.431                 -0.0339                 -0.0208              -0.1729               -0.1705
                                           [9.1036]               [0.0093]                [0.0089]              [0.0496]             [0.0491]
Male Assaults                                                                               0.1218
                                                                                          [0.0156]
Female/Male Non Assaults                                                                                                               0.0575
                                                                                                                                      [0.0286]
Black                                       47.5185                  0.063                  0.0438               0.0777                0.0739
                                            [4.5636]               [0.0046]                [0.0046]             [0.0179]              [0.0183]
Hispanic                                    -9.6552                 0.0161                  0.0014              -0.1067               -0.0959
                                            [1.6139]               [0.0015]                [0.0023]             [0.0076]              [0.0085]
Asian                                       -8.8909                 0.0019                 -0.0036               0.0096               -0.0142
                                            [0.6324]               [0.0015]                [0.0015]             [0.0136]              [0.0123]
Ln(per capita income)                       -5.8704                 0.0101                  0.008               -0.0948                -0.079
                                           [10.0347]               [0.0102]                [0.0097]             [0.0527]              [0.0521]
non-intimate homicide rate                93,127.69                85.2876                 61.6599             -66.5776              -68.0813
                                         [9,852.7269]              [8.9150]                [7.9142]            [22.4166]             [22.5438]
unemployment rate                          -36.6822                -0.0595                 -0.0562               0.1497                0.0932
                                           [40.6674]               [0.0494]                [0.0479]             [0.4162]              [0.4213]
Ln(immigration)                              4.6829                 0.0071                  0.0064              -0.0096               -0.0088
                                            [1.9165]               [0.0022]                [0.0021]             [0.0156]              [0.0155]
Observations                                  2261                   2261                    2261                 1865                  1853
R-squared                                     0.74                   0.78                    0.79                 0.25                  0.26




Ln(wage ratio)
ln(female wage/male wage)                 -22.9341                 -0.0293                 -0.0179              -0.1492              -0.1481
                                           [7.5461]                [0.0080]                [0.0077]             [0.0428]             [0.0423]
Male Assaults                                                                               0.1217
                                                                                           [0.0155]
Observations                                2229                     2229                    2229                 1861                 1851
R-squared                                   0.74                     0.78                    0.79                 0.25                 0.26




Linear difference of wages
Male wage-female wage                       0.0407                  0.0001                  0.0001               0.0007               0.0007
                                           [0.0351]                [0.0000]                [0.0000]             [0.0002]             [0.0002]
Male Assaults                                                                               0.1232
                                                                                           [0.0156]
Observations                                2261                     2261                    2261                 1865                 1853
R-squared                                   0.77                     0.78                    0.79                 0.25                 0.26

Each observation is a county-year-race cell.
All regressions include county and year dummy variables. All regressions weighted by population.
Robust standard errors clustered on county.
                 Table 4A: Estimates of the Impact of Labor Market Conditions on Assaults - Natural Logs

                                           Ln(female Assaults)        Ln(Male Assaults)        Ln(Female Assaults)
female wage/male wage                            -1.2965                  -0.3707                    -1.1119
                                                 [0.3245]                 [0.1923]                   [0.3067]
Male Assaults                                                                                         0.3353
                                                                                                     [0.0635]
Black                                              1.5026                   1.3507                    1.1918
                                                  [0.1119]                 [0.0806]                  [0.1304]
Hispanic                                           0.4359                   1.2056                    0.0231
                                                  [0.0736]                 [0.0570]                  [0.1021]
Asian                                              0.094                    0.8319                    0.0082
                                                  [0.1271]                 [0.0966]                  [0.1196]
Ln(per capita income)                              0.0344                   0.0165                    -0.049
                                                  [0.2848]                 [0.1637]                  [0.2776]
non-intimate homicide rate                       545.6678                 617.4327                  215.9786
                                                [105.5956]                [86.4992]                 [97.6656]
unemployment rate                                  0.4021                  -0.7642                    0.9405
                                                  [1.4372]                 [0.9887]                  [1.4140]
Ln(immigration)                                   -0.0382                  -0.0175                   -0.0359
                                                  [0.0647]                 [0.0433]                  [0.0625]
nonratio                                          -0.2855                   0.1906                   -0.1689
                                                  [0.1691]                 [0.1283]                  [0.1383]
ln(population)                                      0.14                   -0.2659                    0.1842
                                                  [0.0842]                 [0.0648]                  [0.0777]
ln(non-assault injuries)                           0.8921                   1.3436                    0.5259
                                                  [0.0806]                 [0.0701]                  [0.1049]
Observations                                         965                     1060                       963
R-squared                                           0.96                     0.98                      0.96
Robust standard errors in brackets

Each observation is a county-year-race cell.
All regressions include county and year dummy variables. All regressions weighted by population.
Robust standard errors clustered on county.
        Table 4B: Impact of Relative Wages on Ratio of Female to Male Assaults - zipcode level


female wage/male wage                                         -0.056
                                                              [0.027]
ln(female wage/male wage)                                                      -0.047
                                                                               [0.024]
Male wage-female wage                                                                         0.00023
                                                                                             [0.00014]
Female/Male Non Assault Injuries                                0.008           0.008           0.008
                                                               [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]
Black                                                           -0.06          -0.061           -0.06
                                                               [0.010]         [0.009]         [0.010]
Hispanic                                                       -0.077          -0.077          -0.076
                                                               [0.006]         [0.006]         [0.006]
Asian                                                          -0.118          -0.118          -0.115
                                                               [0.007]         [0.007]         [0.008]
Ln(per capita income)                                          -0.019           -0.02          -0.024
                                                               [0.042]         [0.042]         [0.041]
non-intimate homicide rate                                     78.105          78.494          79.581
                                                              [16.720]        [16.713]        [16.703]
unemployment rate                                               0.159            0.16           0.159
                                                               [0.345]         [0.345]         [0.345]
Ln(immigration)                                                 0.002           0.002           0.001
                                                               [0.012]         [0.012]         [0.012]
Observations                                                    55074           55064           55074
R-squared                                                        0.08            0.08            0.08
Robust standard errors in brackets
Each observation is a zipcode-race-year cell. Regressions weighted by number of total hospitalizations
in each cell.
Note: zipcode fixed effects included; only years 1991 and 1994-2000 included in this analysis due
to lack of 5 digit zipcode in years 1990, 1992-1993 and 2001-2003
                                                  Table 5: Estimates of the Impact of Labor Market Conditions on Violence - Alternative Measure of Wage

                                                      (1)                       (2)                          (3)                         (4)                     (5)                 (6)
                                                Female assaults         Female Assaults/             Female Assaults/         (Fem Assault/Injuries)/     Ln(Female Assaults) Ln(Female Assaults)
                                                                          Total Injuries               Total Injuries         (Male Assault/Injuries)
Female/Male Wage (State wages)                      -36.6386                 -0.0398                       -0.023                     -0.2444                   -1.4714             -1.1246
                                                    [14.6451]               [0.0125]                     [0.0121]                     [0.0605]                  [0.3820]            [0.3804]
Black                                                47.8359                   0.064                        0.044                      0.0822                    1.288               0.4275
                                                     [4.6510]               [0.0047]                     [0.0047]                     [0.0185]                  [0.1297]            [0.0738]
Hispanic                                            -10.4105                  0.0141                      -0.0009                     -0.1035                    0.0916             -0.2234
                                                     [2.0428]               [0.0018]                     [0.0025]                     [0.0092]                  [0.0959]            [0.0708]
Asian                                                 -9.376                  0.0053                      -0.0005                      -0.014                    0.2287             -0.2418
                                                     [0.7604]               [0.0018]                     [0.0019]                     [0.0126]                  [0.1139]            [0.0663]
Ln(per capita income)                                -7.2764                  0.0062                       0.0049                     -0.1027                   -0.0909              0.1155
                                                    [10.2762]               [0.0101]                     [0.0096]                     [0.0545]                  [0.2721]            [0.2594]
non-intimate homicide rate                            92,845                84.9313                      60.3631                     -75.9704                  166.7073             92.7411
                                                      [9,882]               [9.0958]                     [8.0349]                    [22.7912]                 [95.8800]           [91.2645]
unemployment rate                                   -43.7775                 -0.0616                      -0.0528                      0.0451                    0.6365              1.8124
                                                    [39.6944]               [0.0478]                     [0.0465]                     [0.4458]                  [1.3561]            [1.5451]
Ln(immigration)                                       4.9527                  0.0075                       0.0066                     -0.0075                   -0.0274             -0.0266
                                                     [1.9767]               [0.0023]                     [0.0021]                     [0.0164]                  [0.0619]            [0.0640]
Non assault injuries female/Non Assault inju          1.5232                  -0.007                      -0.0072                      0.0611                    0.0993              -0.696
                                                     [1.1165]               [0.0025]                     [0.0030]                     [0.0302]                  [0.2207]            [0.2652]
Male Assaults/total injuries                                                                               0.1266
                                                                                                         [0.0158]
ln(non-assault injuries female)                                                                                                                                 0.379
                                                                                                                                                               [0.2059]
Ln(Male Assaults)                                                                                                                                               0.2909
                                                                                                                                                               [0.0616]
ln (non assault injuries female)/ ln (non assault injuries male)                                                                                                                     1.5895
                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.2101]
Observations                                          2118                    2118                         2118                        1853                      963                  963
R-squared                                             0.74                    0.79                          0.8                        0.26                      0.96                  0.6
Robust standard errors in brackets
                    Table 6: Estimates of Impact of Labor Market Conditons on Female Assaults/Female Injuries
                                             Weekend vs. Weekday Admissions

                                                   Female Wage/Male Wage                   Male Wage-Female Wage
                                                 Weekend          Weekday                 Weekend         Weekday
Relative Wage                                     -0.137            -0.056                 0.0006          0.0002
                                                  [0.060]          [0.018]                 [0.000]         [0.000]
Black                                               0.15             0.132                  0.153            0.132
                                                  [0.014]          [0.006]                 [0.016]         [0.006]
Hispanic                                           0.035             0.026                  0.038            0.027
                                                  [0.009]          [0.004]                 [0.010]         [0.005]
asian                                              0.095              0.05                  0.105            0.054
                                                  [0.029]          [0.009]                 [0.028]         [0.009]
Ln(per capita income)                             -0.093            -0.116                 -0.059           -0.007
                                                  [0.048]          [0.021]                 [0.130]         [0.036]
ln(non-intimate homicide)                          0.014             0.004                  0.013            0.003
                                                  [0.005]          [0.002]                 [0.004]         [0.002]
unemployment rate                                  -0.36             0.056                 -2.695            0.042
                                                  [0.208]          [0.054]                 [0.732]         [0.151]
Ln(immigration)                                    0.009             0.01                  -0.007            0.007
                                                  [0.010]          [0.004]                 [0.012]         [0.004]
Ln(incarceration)                                  0.002             0.006                  0.003            0.007
                                                  [0.010]          [0.002]                 [0.010]         [0.002]
Observations                                        718               816                    718              816
R-squared                                           0.38              0.78                   0.4              0.78
Robust standard errors in brackets
                           Table 7: Birth Outcomes and Maternal/Paternal Characteristics

                             No assault                  Assault              Unintentional Injury   Car Crash
Birth outcomes
LBW                             0.064                      0.149                     0.101             0.080
Fetal Death                     0.006                      0.010                     0.005             0.004
Infant death                    0.006                      0.012                     0.011             0.008

Pregnancy
Drug use                        0.001                      0.009                     0.004             0.001
Tobacco                         0.020                      0.081                     0.046             0.037
Bleeding                        0.005                      0.009                     0.006             0.010

Maternal Characteristics
Teenage                         0.12                       0.22                       0.13             0.16
Over 35 years old               0.10                       0.05                       0.10             0.08
<HS                             0.34                       0.44                       0.31             0.28
HS                              0.30                       0.37                       0.35             0.38
Some college                    0.19                       0.14                       0.21             0.22
College                         0.17                       0.05                       0.12             0.12
Medicaid                        0.43                       0.70                       0.52             0.48
Black                           0.08                       0.43                       0.19             0.17
White                           0.91                       0.56                       0.81             0.82
Hispanic                        0.53                       0.34                       0.39             0.43

Paternal Characteristics
Black                           0.08                       0.40                       0.18             0.18
Hispanic                        0.54                       0.45                       0.44             0.45
White                           0.36                       0.14                       0.35             0.35
<HS                             0.30                       0.28                       0.22             0.21
HS                              0.30                       0.39                       0.38             0.38
Some college                    0.16                       0.10                       0.15             0.17
College grad                    0.17                       0.03                       0.12             0.13

Observations                  5397529                      1656                       3699             5270
                                     Table 8 Impact of Prenatal Assault on LBW: Probit and Bivariate Probit Estimates

                                                        Probit                                                     Bivariate Probit
                                               LBW           Marginal Effects                         LBW        Marginal Effects     Prenatal Assault
Prenatal Assault                               0.267              0.037                               0.879           0.183
                                              [0.040]                                                [0.535]
Lagged Incarceration Rate                                                                                                                   -0.01
                                                                                                                                           [0.005]
Medicaid                                       0.002              0.000                               0.002             0.000               0.169
                                              [0.002]                                                [0.002]                               [0.018]
Black                                          0.263              0.036                               0.262             0.035                0.25
                                              [0.013]                                                [0.013]                               [0.094]
White                                         -0.093              -0.011                             -0.094             -0.011             -0.122
                                              [0.012]                                                [0.012]                               [0.089]
Single                                         0.026              0.003                               0.026             0.003               0.209
                                              [0.003]                                                [0.003]                               [0.021]
Over 35 years old                              0.191              0.025                               0.191             0.025               -0.05
                                              [0.003]                                                [0.003]                               [0.033]
Teenage                                        0.096              0.011                               0.096             0.011                0.01
                                              [0.003]                                                [0.003]                               [0.020]
<HS                                            0.024              0.003                               0.024             0.003                0.08
                                              [0.003]                                                [0.003]                               [0.027]
HS graduate                                    0.021              0.002                               0.021             0.002               0.042
                                              [0.003]                                                [0.003]                               [0.024]
Male child                                    -0.049              -0.006                             -0.049             -0.006              0.011
                                              [0.002]                                                [0.002]                               [0.015]
Twin birth                                     1.649              0.459                               1.649             0.459               0.012
                                              [0.004]                                                [0.004]                               [0.046]
Father Black                                   0.049              0.006                               0.049             0.006               0.114
                                              [0.009]                                                [0.009]                               [0.067]
Father White                                  -0.037              -0.004                             -0.036             -0.004             -0.067
                                              [0.008]                                                [0.008]                               [0.064]
Father Hispanic                               -0.042              -0.005                             -0.041             -0.005             -0.106
                                              [0.008]                                                [0.008]                               [0.062]
Father <HS                                     0.116              0.014                               0.116             0.014               0.159
                                              [0.005]                                                [0.005]                               [0.050]
Father HS                                      0.108              0.013                               0.108             0.013               0.176
                                              [0.004]                                                [0.004]                               [0.047]
Father some college                             0.05              0.006                                0.05             0.006               0.077
                                              [0.005]                                                [0.005]                               [0.050]
Father information missing                     0.232              0.031                               0.232             0.031               0.373
                                              [0.005]                                                [0.006]                               [0.051]
county unemployment rate                       0.087              0.010                               0.085             0.010              -1.008
                                              [0.043]                                                [0.043]                               [0.357]
Real percapita income                          -0.04              -0.005                              -0.04             -0.005             -0.118
                                              [0.004]                                                [0.004]                               [0.034]
Observations                                 4481243                                                4468224                               4468224
Robust standard errors in brackets
                                          Fig 1A: Female Hospitalizations for Assaults per 100,000

      45



      40



      35



      30



      25



      20



      15



      10



       5



       0
           1990      1991       1992      1993      1994     1995     1996    1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002   2003




                                                 Fig 1B: Intimate Partner Homicides by Sex

 3




2.5




 2




                                                                                                                             Female
1.5
                                                                                                                             Male




 1




0.5




 0
       1990       1991   1992      1993      1994     1995     1996    1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002   2003
                                         Fig 1C: Rates of Female Assault and Non Assault Injuries


45                                                                                                                      600



40

                                                                                                                        500

35



30                                                                                                                      400



25
                                                                                                                                   Assault
                                                                                                                        300        Non-Assaults
20



15                                                                                                                      200



10

                                                                                                                        100

5



0                                                                                                                       0
         1990     1991     1992   1993    1994     1995    1996    1997   1998   1999   2000   2001    2002    2003




                                     Fig 1D: Female Assaults as a Proportion of Total Injuries by Race

0.25




 0.2




0.15
                                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                        Black
                                                                                                                                        Hispanic
                                                                                                                                        Asian
 0.1




0.05




     0
           1990     1991      1992     1993      1994     1995    1996    1997   1998   1999    2000    2001     2002       2003
                                  Fig 1E: Assaults as a Proportion of Total Injuries by Sex

0.08                                                                                                                 0.25



0.07

                                                                                                                     0.2
0.06



0.05
                                                                                                                     0.15

                                                                                                                                Female
0.04
                                                                                                                                Male


                                                                                                                     0.1
0.03



0.02
                                                                                                                     0.05

0.01



     0                                                                                                               0
         1990   1991   1992    1993   1994     1995    1996   1997   1998    1999     2000     2001    2002   2003




                                         Fig 1F: Non-Intimate Homicides per 100,000


25




20




15




10




 5




 0
         1990   1991    1992      1993       1994     1995    1996    1997     1998          1999     2000    2001       2002   2003
                                    Figure 2 Propensity Score Estimates of Impact of Assault on LBW
                  .2
Difference in LBW
     0      .1  −.1




                                0                      50                        100                   150
                                                              Propensity Score


                                Figure 3 First Stage Estimates of Impact of Incarceration Rate on Assault
Coefficients From First Stage
 −1     0     1    2      3




                                0                      50                        100                   150
                                                              Propensity Score

                                                                                                             fi
          Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics California Women's Health Survey (CWHS)

                                  Sample Averages: CWHS 1998-2003
                                                                      Mean
Any domestic violence                                                 0.053
Annual Personal Income of Women                                       29881
                                                                     [30886]
Female Labor Market Conditions (weekly wages)                          233
                                                                       [60]
Age                                                                     39
White                                                                 0.546
Black                                                                 0.054
Hispanic                                                              0.305
Asian                                                                 0.068
Other race                                                            0.027
<HS                                                                   0.160
HS                                                                    0.238
<25 years old                                                         0.140
25-30 years old                                                       0.129
31-39 years old                                                       0.267
40-49 years old                                                       0.251
50-64 years old                                                       0.213
Number of children <18                                                1.262
Single                                                                0.180
Separated/Divorced                                                    0.119
Cohabit                                                               0.065
Married                                                               0.669
Standard deviations in brackets below means

        Probability of Violence and Average Income by Race, Education, Age and Marital Status
                                                                     Violence           Income
All                                                                    0.053             29881
White                                                                  0.043             32237
Black                                                                  0.072             26909
Hispanic                                                               0.068             25837
Asian                                                                  0.035             34862
Other race                                                             0.065             17281
<HS                                                                    0.072             24862
HS                                                                     0.063             23905
Some College                                                           0.058             27354
College                                                                0.029             39749
<25 years old                                                          0.092             19306
25-30 years old                                                        0.082             28767
31-39 years old                                                        0.062             29798
40-49 years old                                                        0.038             33174
50-64 years old                                                        0.015             33705
Single                                                                 0.093             21098
Separated/Divorced                                                     0.100             28973
Cohabit                                                                0.090             27564
Married                                                                0.035             32315
        Appendix table 2: California Hospitalization & Employment Data Sample Means

                                                                        by Race
                                            All                White     Black    Hispanic
Wages, Employment
Female Weekly Wage                          217                 241       226         187
Male Weekly Wage                            260                 279       246         251
Unemployment rate                          0.073
Ln(per capita income)                      10.11


Violence (per 100,000)
Female Assaults                             20.3                10.6      99.3        16.8
Female non-Assault Injuries                 450
Arrests                                     692                 446       1700        841
Non Intimate Homicides                      2.16                1.97      4.97        1.8
Car Crashes                                 113                 125       140         88
Female Assaults - Older                      7.1                5.6       23.6        6.3
Male Assaults                               153                  62       574         197
Male non-Assault Injuries                   628
Lagged incarceration rate                   0.37               0.292     0.311        0.502
                                  0
                                             0.1
                                                          0.2



                                      0.05
                                                   0.15
                                                                0.25
               Ag
                    ric
                       ult
                          ure

                     Min
                        ing

                    Uti
                    litie
                         s
         Co
             ns
                tru
                    ctio
       Ma                n
           nu
              fac
                  tur
      Wh               ing
         ole
             sa
               le
                   tra
                        de

                     Re
                          tai
        Tra                   l
            nsp
                  ort
                      ati
                           on
           Inf
                orm
                      ati
                           on
         Fin
             an
                 ce
                      &I
                           ns
           Re
                al
                   Es
                        tat
                             e
          Pro
                fes
                     sio
                         na
                              l
                                                                                     Appendix Figure 1:




        Ad
           mi
                nis
                    tra
                        tion
           Ed
                uc
                   ati
                       on
                            al
           He
               alt
Art                hC
   s&                    a re
         en
                                                                       Share of Women Across Industries - 1990 and 2000




            ter
Ac              tai
   co               nm
                         en
      mo
          da                 t
              tion
                     an
       Oth               ...
           er
Pu              Se
                     rvi
   blic                  ce
        Ad                   s
           mi
                nis
                    tra
                        tion
                                             2000
                                             1990
